These missteps should not be taken lightly – especially in light of China’s high-profile commitment to market-based reforms.
But they are a far cry from the crisis that many believe is now at hand.
China’s Monetary-Policy Surprise
NEW HAVEN – In economic policy, as in most other areas, actions speak louder than words.
By cutting its benchmark policy interest rates on November 21, the People’s Bank of China (PBOC) has underscored the tactical focus of the government’s stabilization policy, which aims to put a floor of around 7% on GDP growth.
Achieving this goal will be no small feat.
China’s economy is caught in the crossfire of structural and cyclical&nbsp;headwinds. Structural pressures have&nbsp;arisen from the shift to a new model of services- and consumer-led growth, and cyclical pressures stem from&nbsp;a tough global environment that has&nbsp;put downward pressure on the old model of&nbsp;export and investment-led growth.
The cyclical challenges, in particular, are proving to be more vexing than anticipated.
Though exports have declined considerably from their pre-crisis peak of 35% of GDP, they continue to account for about 24%, leaving China exposed to the global growth cycle – especially to markets in the developed world, where demand is exceptionally weak.
Indeed, 42% of Chinese exports go to Europe, the United States, and Japan – three economies that are flirting with secular stagnation.
And Europe, China’s largest export market, has struggled the most.
Given that development strategies typically&nbsp;begin to fail when economies reach middle-income status – a threshold that China is rapidly approaching – China cannot afford to allow mounting cyclical risks to undermine its structural transformation.
Modern history shows that the easiest way for a developing country to become ensnared in the dreaded “middle-income trap” is to cling to its old model for too long.
The fact is that only structural transformation can lift a middle-income developing country to high-income developed status.
Fortunately, China’s leaders recognize this, and are committed to achieving it.
President Xi Jinping has been spearheading the effort to press ahead with reform and rebalancing.
A year ago, at the Third Plenary Session of the 18th Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party (CCP), Xi and his team created the country’s most ambitious economic-reform agenda in 35 years.
This, together with the 12th Five-Year Plan that was&nbsp;enacted in 2011, highlights the authorities’ commitment to bolstering the services sector and domestic consumption.
At the same time, China has been shifting responsibility for implementing reform from its antiquated planning apparatus (the National Development and Reform Commission) to a more effective market-based mechanism embedded in the CCP’s structure (the Leading Small Group for Comprehensively Deepening Reforms).
Add to that Xi’s unprecedented anti-corruption campaign, and there is no turning back on China’s road to rebalancing and structural change.
But the risk of cyclical disruptions, such as an unexpected decline in global economic growth, remains.
This raises an important tactical challenge for China.
How can it stay the reform course without being derailed by a significant growth slowdown in the short term?
This is not the first time that China has confronted this challenge&nbsp;–&nbsp;nor will it be the last.
The Great Recession of 2008-2009 also&nbsp;pushed China to the brink of outright&nbsp;recession.
With global trade collapsing and Chinese export demand having plummeted from 26% annual growth in mid-2008 to a 27% contraction by early 2009, the government moved aggressively to inject CN¥4 trillion ($586 billion) into the economy.
Though this enabled growth to recover by the end of 2009, it also contributed to new problems, including excessive debt, a property-market overhang, and mounting local-government financial risk.
The last thing China needs is more fiscal stimulus.
Today’s cyclical disruption pales in comparison to that of 2008-2009, and, unlike the fiscally reckless developed economies, China recognizes excessive government&nbsp;debt as a legitimate&nbsp;threat to sustainable growth and development.
Moreover, unlike major developed economies, most of which have used up all of their conventional monetary-policy ammunition by reducing their policy interest rates to zero, China has plenty of monetary stimulus on reserve to address cyclical disruptions.
In these circumstances, it makes sense for China to lean more on monetary policy than on fiscal expansion.
Nonetheless, the PBOC’s tactical decision is not without potential pitfalls – not least because interest-rate cuts encourage the extension of more credit at a time when China is trying to wean itself from debt-intensive growth.
A key challenge will be to avoid escalating credit risk, which could undermine the process of reform and rebalancing.
From the start, China’s leaders knew that the interaction between structural transformation and the business cycle would be complex.
As former Premier Wen Jiabao noted nearly eight years ago, China’s economy had become increasingly “unstable, unbalanced, uncoordinated, and unsustainable.”
The longer China delayed addressing its problems, the more intractable the solution became.
Xi and his colleagues are resolute in attempting to solve this problem by staying&nbsp;the&nbsp;course to rebalance the Chinese economy, while remaining acutely aware of cyclical risks.
After all, China’s vulnerability to such risks is rooted in its old growth model, which was allowed to remain in place for far too long.
With the recent monetary easing, the Chinese authorities seem to be drawing a line in the sand to prevent an excessive drop in growth.&nbsp;This&nbsp;suggests that they now&nbsp;view a cyclical disruption as a real threat to the country’s longer-term structural-reform agenda.
To the extent that those fears persist, additional monetary easing can be expected.
A Water War in Asia?
BERLIN – Tensions over water are rising in Asia – and not only because of conflicting maritime claims.
While territorial disputes, such as in the South China Sea, attract the most attention – after all, they threaten the safety of sea lanes and freedom of navigation, which affects outside powers as well – the strategic ramifications of competition over transnationally shared freshwater resources are just as ominous.
Asia has less fresh water per capita than any other continent, and it is already facing a water crisis that, according to an MIT study, will continue to intensify, with severe water shortages expected by 2050.
At a time of widespread geopolitical discord, competition over freshwater resources could emerge as a serious threat to long-term peace and stability in Asia.
Already, the battle is underway, with China as the main aggressor.
Indeed, China’s territorial grab in the South China Sea has been accompanied by a quieter grab of resources in transnational river basins.
Reengineering cross-border riparian flows is integral to China’s strategy to assert greater control and influence over Asia.
China is certainly in a strong position to carry out this strategy.
The country enjoys unmatched riparian dominance, with 110 transnational rivers and lakes flowing into 18 downstream countries.
China also has the world’s most dams, which it has never hesitated to use to curb cross-border flows.
In fact, China’s dam builders are targeting most of the international rivers that flow out of Chinese territory.
Most of China’s internationally shared water resources are located on the Tibetan Plateau, which it annexed in the early 1950s.
Unsurprisingly, the plateau is the new hub of Chinese dam building.
Indeed, China’s 13th five-year plan, released this year, calls for a new wave of dam projects on the Plateau.
Moreover, China recently cut off the flow of a tributary of the Brahmaputra River, the lifeline of Bangladesh and northern India, to build a dam as part of a major hydroelectric project in Tibet.
And the country is working to dam another Brahmaputra tributary, in order to create a series of artificial lakes.
China has also built six mega-dams on the Mekong River, which flows into Southeast Asia, where the downstream impact is already visible.
Yet, instead of curbing its dam-building, China is hard at work building several more Mekong dams.
Likewise, water supplies in largely arid Central Asia are coming under further pressure as China appropriates a growing volume of water from the Illy River.
Kazakhstan’s Lake Balkhash is now at risk of shrinking substantially, much like the Aral Sea – located on the border with Uzbekistan – which has virtually dried up in less than 40 years.
China is also diverting water from the Irtysh, which supplies drinking water to Kazakhstan’s capital Astana and feeds Russia’s Ob River.
For Central Asia, the diminished transboundary flows are just one part of the problem.
China’s energy, manufacturing, and agricultural activities in sprawling Xinjiang are having an even greater impact, as they contaminate the waters of the region’s transnational rivers with hazardous chemicals and fertilizers, just as China has done to the rivers in its Han heartland.
Of course, China is not the only country stoking conflict over water.
As if to underscore that the festering territorial dispute in Kashmir is as much about water as it is about land, Pakistan has, for the second time this decade, initiated international arbitral tribunal proceedings against India under the terms of the 1960 Indus Waters Treaty.
The paradox here is that downstream Pakistan has used that treaty – the world’s most generous water-sharing deal, reserving for Pakistan more than 80% of the waters of the six-river Indus system – to sustain its conflict with India.
Meanwhile, landlocked Laos – aiming to export hydropower, especially to China, the mainstay of its economy – has just notified its neighbors of its decision to move ahead with a third controversial project, the 912-megawatt Pak Beng dam.
It previously brushed aside regional concerns about the alteration of natural-flow patterns to push ahead with the Xayaburi and Don Sahong dam projects.
There is no reason to expect a different outcome this time.
The consequences of growing water competition in Asia will reverberate beyond the region.
Already, some Asian states, concerned about their capacity to grow enough food, have leased large tracts of farmland in Sub-Saharan Africa, triggering a backlash in some areas.
In 2009, when South Korea’s Daewoo Logistics Corporation negotiated a deal to lease as much as half of Madagascar’s arable land to produce cereals and palm oil for the South Korean market, the ensuing protests and military intervention toppled a democratically elected president.
The race to appropriate water resources in Asia is straining agriculture and fisheries, damaging ecosystems, and fostering dangerous distrust and discord across the region.
It must be brought to an end.
Asian countries need to clarify the region’s increasingly murky hydropolitics.
The key will be effective dispute-resolution mechanisms and agreement on more transparent water-sharing arrangements.
Asia can build a harmonious, rules-based water management system.
But it needs China to get on board.
At least for now, that does not seem likely.
China in the Debt-Deflation Trap
HONG KONG – In the wake of a global stock-market sell-off triggered by economic turmoil in China, the US Federal Reserve has just decided to postpone raising interest rates.
Indeed, China is facing the huge challenge of dealing with the risk of a global debt-deflation trap.
In 1933, Irving Fisher was the first to identify the dangers of over-indebtedness and deflation, demonstrating their contribution to the Great Depression in the United States.
Forty years later, Charles Kindleberger applied the theory in a global context, emphasizing the problems that arise in a world lacking coordinated and consistent monetary, fiscal, and regulatory policies, as well as an international lender of last resort.
In 2011, Richard Koo used Japan’s experience to highlight the risks of a prolonged balance-sheet recession, when over-stretched debtors deleverage in order to rebuild their balance sheets.
The debt-deflation cycle begins with an imbalance or displacement, which fuels excessive exuberance, over-borrowing, and speculative trading, and ends in bust, with procyclical liquidation of excess capacity and debt causing price deflation, unemployment, and economic stagnation. The result can be a deep depression.
In 2000, the imbalance was America’s large current-account deficit: the world’s largest economy was borrowing heavily on international capital markets, rather than lending, as one might expect.
According to then-Fed Chairman Ben Bernanke, the problem was that countries running large surpluses were buying so many US Treasuries that they were negating the Fed’s monetary-policy efforts.
But, as Claudio Borio, Hyun Shin, and others have pointed out, excessive off-balance-sheet and offshore lending by US and European banks also added procyclical pressure.
As a result, risk-taking and leverage grew, facilitated by inadequate regulation, culminating in the global financial crisis of 2008.
To prevent asset bubbles from collapsing and buy time for more sustainable policy fixes, advanced-country central banks implemented massive monetary easing and cut interest rates to zero.
Unfortunately, policymakers in most countries wasted the time they were given; moreover, so-called quantitative easing had far-reaching spillover effects.
Within China, a second displacement occurred: the government implemented a ¥4 trillion ($680 billion) stimulus package in November 2008 to offset weak demand in its major export markets.
While the Chinese authorities had the right idea, two of the policy’s outcomes have complicated the reform prcoess today.
First, instead of reducing excess capacity and encouraging a structural shift to higher-productivity activities, the authorities’ investment-led strategy increased manufacturing capacity further, along with excess capacity in global commodity production.
Second, the stimulus was funded by a debt binge, especially among state-owned enterprises (SOEs) and local governments.
The private sector, too, built up debt, with its limited access to equity capital driving firms to the shadow banking sector. The result is a debt overhang of 282% of GDP.
In short, China now faces the same debt-deflation challenge that much of the rest of the world must address.
The question, of course, is how.
Some argue that the answer is more of the same: continued monetary easing and additional fiscal stimulus. Accumulating more debt (at lower interest rates) can indeed buy time for economic restructuring.
But it will merely make matters worse if politicians do not use the time to implement effective reforms.
There is no politically painless way out of the debt trap.
Indeed, the first step in that process is to face up to losses, both in accounting and in real terms.
In the short run, even efforts to spur technological progress and innovation, which might generate recovery through new profits, are likely to have a negative overall impact on employment, owing to the creative destruction of obsolete industries.
Recognizing this, some argue that the way to force reform is to allow interest rates to reflect credit risks.
For China, whose net international investment position at the end of last year was a surplus of $1.8 trillion , or 17% of GDP, it will be possible to implement internal debt restructuring through debt/equity swaps at the project level.
Far-reaching governance and structural reforms in the state and private sectors should follow.
According to the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences, the central and local governments’ net assets amounted to ¥93 trillion, or 164% of GDP, at the end of 2013.
Because SOEs and local governments accounted for more than half of the credit issued through the banking system, proper debt restructuring of state-owned assets would strengthen the projects they were funding, by allowing private or professional management teams to improve overall returns.
Such reforms are crucial, because, ultimately, escaping the debt-deflation trap will require China to rejuvenate total factor productivity – an effort that the private sector is better equipped to lead.
As the Scandinavian experience has shown, state ownership need not be an obstacle to productivity growth, provided that public assets are professionally and transparently managed, for example, by placing them in the portfolios of pension funds.
The advanced countries have fallen into the debt-deflation trap because they were unwilling to accept the political pain of real-sector restructuring, relying instead on financial engineering and loose monetary and fiscal policies.
Here, China’s one-party system provides a clear advantage: the country’s leaders can take politically painful decisions without worrying about the next election.
One hopes that they do.
The Great Escape from China
CAMBRIDGE – Since 2016 began, the prospect of a major devaluation of China’s renminbi has been hanging over global markets like the Sword of Damocles.
No other source of policy uncertainty has been as destabilizing.
Few observers doubt that China will have to let the renminbi exchange rate float freely sometime over the next decade. The question is how much drama will take place in the interim, as political and economic imperatives collide.
It might seem odd that a country running a $600 billion trade surplus in 2015 should be worried about currency weakness.
But a combination of factors, including slowing economic growth and a gradual relaxation of restrictions on investing abroad, has unleashed a torrent of capital outflows.
Private citizens are now allowed to take up to $50,000 per year out of the country.
If just one of every 20 Chinese citizens exercised this option, China’s foreign-exchange reserves would be wiped out.
At the same time, China’s cash-rich companies have been employing all sorts of devices to get money out.
A perfectly legal approach is to lend in renminbi and be repaid in foreign currency.
A not-so-legal approach is to issue false or inflated trade invoices – essentially a form of money laundering.
For example, a Chinese exporter might report a lower sale price to an American importer than it actually receives, with the difference secretly deposited in dollars into a US bank account (which might in turn be used to purchase a Picasso).
Now that Chinese firms have bought up so many US and European companies, money laundering can even be done in-house.
The Chinese hardly invented this idea.
After World War II, when a ruined Europe was smothered in foreign-exchange controls, illegal capital flows out of the continent often averaged 10% of the value of trade or more.
As one of the world’s largest trading countries, it is virtually impossible for China to keep a tight lid on capital outflows when the incentives to leave become large enough.
Indeed, despite the giant trade surplus, the People’s Bank of China has been forced to intervene heavily to prop up the exchange rate – so much so that foreign-currency reserves actually fell by $500 billion in 2015.
With such leaky capital controls, China’s war chest of $3 trillion won’t be enough to hold down the fort indefinitely.
In fact, the more people worry that the exchange rate is going down, the more they want to get their money out of the country immediately.
That fear, in turn, has been an important factor driving down the Chinese stock market.
There is a lot of market speculation that the Chinese will undertake a sizable one-time devaluation, say 10%, to weaken the renminbi enough to ease downward pressure on the exchange rate.
But, aside from providing fodder for the likes of Donald Trump, who believes that China is an unfair trader, this would be a very dangerous choice of strategy for a government that financial markets do not really trust.
The main risk is that a big devaluation would be interpreted as indicating that China’s economic slowdown is far more severe than people think, in which case money would continue to flee.
There is no easy way to improve communication with markets until China learns how to produce credible economic data.
It was a huge news story when China’s 2015 GDP growth was reported at 6.9%, just short of the official target of 7%.
This difference ought to be irrelevant, but markets have treated it with the utmost importance, because investors believe that things must be really bad if the government can’t rig the numbers enough to hit its target.
A good place for the authorities to start would be to establish a commission of economists to produce a more realistic and believable set of historical GNP figures, paving the way for more believable GNP figures going forward.
Instead, the government’s immediate idea for relieving exchange-rate pressure is to peg the renminbi to a basket of 13 currencies, instead of just to the US dollar.
This is a good idea in theory; in practice, however, basket pegs tend to have chronic transparency problems.
Moreover, a basket peg shares most of the problems of a simple dollar peg.
True, the euro and yen have fallen against the dollar over the past couple of years.
If the dollar retreats in 2016, however, the basket peg implies a stronger renminbi-dollar rate, which might be unhelpful.
The government has also indicated that it intends to clamp down more heavily on illegal capital flows; but it will not be easy to put that genie back in the bottle.
Life would be a lot easier today if China had moved to a much greater degree of exchange-rate flexibility back when the going was good, as some of us had advised for more than a decade.
Maybe the authorities will be able to hold on in 2016; but it is more likely that the renminbi will continue its rocky ride – taking global markets along with it.
China’s Dangerous Digital Agenda
WASHINGTON, DC/BRUSSELS – When the Chinese e-commerce juggernaut Alibaba listed on the New York Stock Exchange late last year, it became the world's 17th largest publicly traded company overnight, with a market capitalization of $230 billion – larger than Amazon, eBay, or Facebook.
Europe, however, seems to have missed the news.
Indeed, instead of responding to China's digital rise, the European Union has remained fixated on the global success of American platforms like Amazon, Facebook, and Google, even threatening punitive actions against them.
A couple of months after Alibaba's IPO, the European Parliament passed a non-binding resolution to prevent online companies like Google from “abusing" their market position.
The resolution called for “unbundling search engines from other commercial services."
But there is mounting evidence that the real competitive challenge for Europe will come from the East, especially China, which is taking a protectionist and expansionist approach to securing its future digital dominance.
If the European Union and the United States do not collaborate to limit China on this front, they risk leaving the playing field wide open to a regulatory regime based on principles that directly controvert the fundamental values the West's two largest economies share.
There is no doubting China's success in the Internet economy.
With Alibaba, China has 27 so-called unicorns (companies that are valued at $1 billion following an IPO, sale, or publicly declared round of funding), whereas Europe has only 21.
China also boasts four of the world's top ten most visited websites.
Baidu, the country's leading search engine, anticipates that half of its revenues will come from outside of China within just six years.
To be sure, China still lags far behind the US, with its 79 unicorns, in the digital sphere.
But it poses a greater threat to the sector's openness and competitiveness, as its leaders rely on mercantilism and protectionism to further their high-tech goals.
For example, the Chinese State Council's plan to ensure that the country leads the world in semiconductor production by 2030 will involve the provision of at least €20 billion ($22.6 billion) in government subsidies to Chinese-owned firms, as well as discriminatory procurement to shut out their foreign competitors.
Similarly, the Chinese government has committed €640 billion annually for five years to just seven “strategic emerging industries," including information and communications technology.
Moreover, China employs technology standards as a market barrier, while using its anti-monopoly laws to harass US and European companies.
Add to that the theft of valuable European and American intellectual property, including through the government-backed hacking of European companies' computers, and the threat that China poses to open competition could not be clearer.
But the problem is not confined to China's borders.
The “Beijing consensus" – China's statist policy approach, often contrasted with the “Washington consensus" of market-friendly policies broadly favored by Europe and the US – is inspiring a growing number of countries to shower domestic tech champions with privileges and subsidies.
Perhaps more problematic, Chinese influence is fueling support for Internet balkanization – the splintering of the global Internet into smaller, closed national networks – in a number of countries, including key players like Brazil, Russia, and Turkey, and even has sympathizers in Europe.
Such data localization may sound harmless, especially when it is presented as a legitimate response to revelations of far-reaching surveillance by the likes of the US National Security Agency.
And, in promising a “secure" national cloud, this is precisely what policymakers are attempting to do.
But those are weak grounds for undermining one of today's greatest innovations and most effective economic-growth engines, especially given that hacking can, and does, occur from anywhere.
Indeed, the gravest cyber crimes originate from precisely those countries, including China and Russia, that are leading the balkanization movement.
The surest way to accelerate China's digital rise is a transatlantic falling out over relatively small issues.
Whether it is data or copyright, the Internet of Things, or privacy, the EU and the US must agree on a common path – based on shared values like democracy, the rule of law, and freedom of speech.
Otherwise, China will soon be dictating the terms of trade of the world's fastest-growing economic sector.
If open and pluralistic societies do not stand up for an open Internet and market-based trade, who will?
China’s Daring Depreciation
BEIJING – On August 11, the People’s Bank of China (PBOC) lowered the central parity rate of the renminbi by 1.9%, sending shockwaves around the globe.
Many foreign commentators condemned the devaluation as a blatant attempt to boost Chinese exports – a move that would, they warned, spark a new round of currency wars.
But there are good reasons to believe that this was not China’s motivation at all.
In fact, China knows full well that currency wars are self-defeating.
During the 1997 Asian financial crisis, China’s economic situation was much worse than it is today, but the government still resisted the temptation to devalue the renminbi – and the country managed to emerge from the crisis virtually unscathed.
Today, a devaluation would probably do little for China’s trade surplus.
After all, the country already accounts for more than 12% of global exports, so expanding its share further would probably worsen its terms of trade.
The dominance of processing trade in China – the import of raw materials and components and the export of finished goods – makes the effectiveness of devaluation even more dubious.
Moreover, China now holds a massive volume of overseas assets and liabilities; its non-financial corporations have borrowed as much as $1 trillion abroad.
As devaluation causes businesses’ debt burdens to grow in renminbi terms, the risk of non-performing loans and bankruptcies rises.
Beyond an awareness of the short-term risks of competitive devaluation lies the Chinese government’s serious commitment to its longer-term goal of shifting the country’s growth model from one based on investment and exports to one driven by domestic consumption.
Indeed, China plans to shrink its trade surplus – which, to be sure, remains large – and offset the negative impact of that process by increasing domestic demand.
Given these factors, it seems likely that the recent devaluation was driven by a different goal.
And, in fact, an announcement made on the same day as the devaluation – one that has been largely overshadowed by the panic – offers an important indication of what that goal was.
From now on, China’s government declared, the renminbi’s central parity rate will align more closely with the previous day’s closing spot rates.
This suggests that the devaluation was aimed primarily at giving the markets a greater role in determining the renminbi exchange rate, with the goal of enabling deeper currency reform.
As it stands, Chinese exchange rates are allowed to fluctuate by a maximum of 2% on either side of the central parity, which the PBOC fixes daily.
When the moving market rate reaches the edges of the fluctuation band, the PBOC can intervene in the market by buying or selling its foreign-exchange reserves.
Market makers now have been instructed that the offer prices they report to the PBOC should be based on the market’s closing parity rate from the previous day, along with the demand and supply conditions in the foreign-exchange market and the movements of major currencies’ exchange rates.
No one outside the PBOC knows how the market makers will meet these demands.
If the PBOC is now simply moving closer to averaging the offer prices that are not subject to its interference, it is moving closer to an entirely market-based exchange-rate regime.
But this shift carries serious risks.
If the renminbi were to depreciate by, say, 2% every day, it would take very little time for the currency to lose 20% of its value – enough to cause a panic and, regardless of the country’s economic fundamentals, send the exchange rate into a tailspin.
That is why the PBOC has retained the right to influence the reporting of offer prices by market makers and intervene directly in the market.
And this is precisely what the PBOC did on August 12-13, when stronger-than-expected depreciation pressure and surging devaluation expectations raised the risk that the planned one-off exchange-rate adjustment could trigger a rout.
So the PBOC informed the market that the depreciation would not exceed 3% – a credible statement, given abundant official reserves with which to stabilize the exchange rate.
The renminbi rebounded, and calm was restored.
This episode showed that the renminbi is under significant depreciation pressure, which is likely to intensify as the PBOC, amid weak GDP growth, loosens monetary policy (particularly as the US Federal Reserve is gradually tightening its monetary policy).
Add to that efforts to liberalize the capital account and internationalize the renminbi, and some exchange-rate volatility can be expected.
For China’s monetary policymakers, reforming the exchange-rate system, while preventing depreciation from getting out of hand, poses a serious challenge.
For the rest of the world, encouraging China to loosen its grip over the exchange rate, even as the renminbi depreciates significantly, is an equally serious imperative.
Neither side can afford to fail.
Channeling China’s Animal Spirits
HONG KONG – The People’s Bank of China has cut interest rates for the third time in six months, in order to lighten the debt burdens of companies and local governments.
But the PBOC’s monetary easing – accompanied by complementary fiscal and administrative adjustments – has done little to increase demand for new loans.
Instead, it has triggered a sharp rise in China’s stock markets.
The question now is whether that could turn out to be a very good thing.
There is little doubt that China’s economy is shifting gears very quickly.
Official statistics show a slowdown in real growth in the old manufacturing and construction-based economy, reflected in declining corporate profits, rising defaults, and an increase in non-performing loans in poorer-performing cities and regions.
Meanwhile, the government’s policies to tackle corruption, overcapacity, excess local-government debt, and pollution have put downward pressure on investment, consumption, and the government’s capacity to deliver its promised growth rate.
With harder budget constraints imposed by the central government, local officials and state-owned enterprises (SOEs) have curbed their spending on investment, and are now being overly cautious.
In the short run, this restructuring could lead to localized balance-sheet recessions, despite the authorities’ efforts to create a more accommodating macroeconomic environment.
The private sector, by contrast, is picking up steam, with recent administrative reforms having contributed to a 54% rise in business registrations since March 2014.
Increased innovation and the rise of the services sector have helped China move beyond its role as the world’s factory to develop its own version of the Internet of Things, driven by platform companies like Alibaba and Tencent.
Some 14.3 million new stock-market trading accounts were opened in China last year.
And the PBOC’s interest-rate cuts, together with reductions in banks’ mandatory reserve ratios, have fueled a rise in the Shanghai, Shenzhen, and ChiNext indices of 95%, 198%, and 383%, respectively, since January 2013.
Chinese stock-market capitalization grew from 44% of GDP at the end 2012 to 94% of GDP earlier this month.
This has important potential implications – both positive and negative.
On the positive side, the revival of China’s stock market in a low-interest-rate environment represents an important shift in asset allocation away from real estate and deposits.
Roughly 50% of Chinese savings – amounting to as much as half of GDP – lie in real estate alone, with 20% in deposits, 11% in stocks, and 12% in bonds.
To compare, in the United States, real estate, insurance, and pensions each account for about 20% of total savings, with 7.4% in deposits, 21% in stocks, and 33% in bonds.
Rising stock-market capitalization also helps to reduce the real economy’s exposure to bank financing.
The US is much more “financialized” than China, with stocks and bonds amounting to 133% and 205% of GDP, respectively, at the end of 2013.
Those ratios were only 35% and 43%, respectively, in China.
Meanwhile, China’s bank assets amounted to 215% of GDP – more than double America’s 95%.
Finally, China’s surging stock prices increased net wealth by CN¥37 trillion ($6 trillion), equivalent to 57% of China’s GDP, in just 18 months.
If stock prices can be sustained, the implications for consumption, liquidity, and leverage will be profound.
Smart households and entrepreneurs could take profits and reduce their debts.
Similarly, both private enterprises and SOEs could use market buoyancy to raise equity to fund new investments.
But the rapid run-up in equity prices also carries considerable risks – namely, the possibility that the financial sector will misuse the newfound liquidity to finance more speculative investment in asset bubbles, while supporting old industries with excess capacity.
That is what happened in 2008-2009, when a run-up of the Shanghai index (which reached 6,092 in October 2007), together with the government’s CN¥4 trillion stimulus package, sustained overcapacity in traditional industries.
Most of the credit went to real estate and local infrastructure projects, effectively reinforcing the most problematic trends in China’s economy.
This time, one hopes, will be different.
But even if Chinese retail investors begin to channel their money toward innovative ventures, identifying the companies and industries most likely to succeed will be difficult.
In the US, the collapse of the tech bubble in 2000 entailed a $4 trillion loss in market capitalization. But the US managed to avoid a systemic crisis.
If China’s animal spirits are allowed to operate through market mechanisms, distinguishing real value from aspirational prices, China, too, can stay the course toward the new economy, despite the failures and consolidation that will inevitably occur.
As China’s animal spirits are channeled, they will increasingly test the authorities’ resolve to resist price intervention, instead allowing market forces to propel the business cycle.
With animal spirits – not the authorities – guiding it, China can build the high-value-added, high-tech economy it needs to compete in the future.
China’s Economic Identity Crisis
BEIJING – Unlike the West, where former US President George H.W. Bush once mockingly referred to “the vision thing,” China takes economic strategy very seriously.
That much was clear at the recent China Development Forum (CDF) in Beijing, an important gathering held each year since 2000, immediately after the conclusion of the annual National People’s Congress.
Originally conceived by former Premier Zhu Rongji – one of modern China’s most strategy-minded reformers – the CDF quickly became a high-level platform for engagement between senior Chinese policymakers and an international lineup of academics, foreign officials, and business leaders.
It is, in essence, an intellectual stress test – forcing Chinese leaders to defend newly formulated strategies and policies before a tough and seasoned audience of outside experts.
It’s not always easy to distill a singular message from an event like this, especially as the CDF, once a small intimate gathering, has morphed into a Davos-like extravaganza of some 50 sessions spread out over three days.
But, having attended 16 of the 17 meetings (I missed the first one), my sense is that CDF 2016 was especially rich in its strategic implications for China’s daunting economic challenges.
And, as I saw it, the elephant in the room was the core identity of China’s economic model – a producer-led versus a consumer-led model.
China’s 30-year development miracle – 10% real annual GDP growth from 1980 to 2010 – was all about the country’s prowess as the ultimate producer.
Led by manufacturing and construction, China enjoyed a uniquely powerful impetus.
In 1980, exports and investment collectively accounted for 41% of Chinese GDP; by 2010, the combined share was 75%.
The export portion increased the most – by nearly six-fold, from 6% in 1980 to a pre-crisis peak of 35% in 2007 – as new capacity and infrastructure, low-cost labor, and accession to the World Trade Organization made China the world’s greatest beneficiary of accelerating globalization and surging trade flows.
Yet the producer model was not the definitive formula for achieving China’s aspirations of becoming a moderately prosperous society by 2020.
This realization was foreshadowed by the now-famous “Four Uns” critique of former Premier Wen Jiabao, who back in 2007 correctly diagnosed the producer model as “unbalanced, unstable, uncoordinated, and unsustainable.”
Those, of course, were code words for surplus saving, excessive investment, open-ended resource demand, environmental degradation, and mounting income inequalities.
A new model was needed not only to escape such pitfalls, but also to avoid the dreaded “middle-income trap” that ensnares most fast-growing developing economies when they reach income thresholds that China was rapidly approaching.
Wen’s critique triggered an intense internal debate that resulted in a key strategic decision to rebalance the Chinese economy by shifting to a consumer-based model, as framed by the 12th Five-Year Plan of 2011-2015.
This new approach stressed three major components: a shift to services to boost job creation; accelerated urbanization to raise real wages; and a more robust social safety net to provide Chinese families with the security needed to channel their newfound income from fear-driven precautionary saving into discretionary consumption.
The results of the now-completed 12th Five-Year Plan were impressive – especially in light of the formidable challenge that structural change implies for any economy.
But that’s where China’s strategic focus is most effective – providing an over-arching framework to guide the economy from point A to point B.
But this journey is far from complete.
While China’s targets for services and urbanization were exceeded, the end results fell short on many aspects of building a more robust (that is, fully funded) social safety net.
As a result, personal consumption inched up from just 35% of GDP in 2010 to only about 37% in 2015.
Notwithstanding the unfinished business of consumer-led rebalancing, China now appears to be embracing yet another shift in its core economic strategy – driven by a broad array of “supply-side initiatives” that range from capacity reduction and deleveraging to innovation and productivity.
That emphasis was formalized in Premier Li Keqiang’s recent “Work Report,” which outlined the new strategy of the just-enacted 13th Five-Year Plan (covering the 2016-20 period).
In identifying the top “eight tasks” for 2016, Li put supply-side reforms at number two – second only to the government’s focus on economic stability in countering China’s growth slowdown.
By contrast, emphasis on boosting domestic demand – long the focus of China’s consumer-led rebalancing strategy – was downgraded to third place on the so-called work agenda.
In China, where internal debates are carefully scripted, nothing happens by accident.
In the keynote speech at this year’s CDF, Vice Premier and Politburo Standing Committee Member Zhang Gaoli drove this point home, emphasizing the need to direct supply-side initiatives at China’s “main threat.”
By contrast, there were only passing mentions of consumer-led rebalancing.
Maybe I am guilty of splitting hairs.
After all, every economy needs to focus on both the supply and the demand sides of its growth equation.
But this shift in emphasis – in the 13th Five-Year Plan as well as in the debate and messaging at this year’s China Development Forum – appears to be an important signal.
I worry that it could indicate a premature shift away from the consumer-led model back to China’s comfort zone of a producer model that has long been more amenable to the industrial engineering of central planning.
Strategy is China’s greatest strength, lending credibility to its commitment to structural transformation.
Yet much remains to bring the Chinese consumer to life.
Yes, it is a tough challenge.
But de-emphasizing that strategic commitment could call into question a crucial shift now required of China’s core economic identity.
China’s Bumpy New Normal
SHANGHAI – China’s shift from export-driven growth to a model based on domestic services and household consumption has been much bumpier than some anticipated, with stock-market gyrations and exchange-rate volatility inciting fears about the country’s economic stability.
Yet by historical standards, China’s economy is still performing well – at near 7% annual GDP growth, some might say very well – but success on the scale that China has seen over the past three decades breeds high expectations.
There is a basic lesson: “Markets with Chinese characteristics” are as volatile and hard to control as markets with American characteristics.
Markets invariably take on a life of their own; they cannot be easily ordered around.
To the extent that markets can be controlled, it is through setting the rules of the game in a transparent way.
All markets need rules and regulations.
Good rules can help stabilize markets.
Badly designed rules, no matter how well intentioned, can have the opposite effect.
For example, since the 1987 stock-market crash in the United States, the importance of having circuit breakers has been recognized; but if improperly designed, such reforms can increase volatility.
If there are two levels of circuit breaker – a short-term and a long-term suspension of trading – and they are set too close to each other, once the first is triggered, market participants, realizing the second is likely to kick in as well, could stampede out of the market.
Moreover, what happens in markets may be only loosely coupled with the real economy. The recent Great Recession illustrates this.
While the US stock market has had a robust recovery, the real economy has remained in the doldrums.
Still, stock-market and exchange-rate volatility can have real effects.
Uncertainty may lead to lower consumption and investment (which is why governments should aim for rules that buttress stability).
What matters more, though, are the rules governing the real economy.
In China today, as in the US 35 years ago, there is a debate about whether supply-side or demand-side measures are most likely to restore growth.
The US experience and many other cases provide some answers.
For starters, supply-side measures can best be undertaken when there is full employment.
In the absence of sufficient demand, improving supply-side efficiency simply leads to more underutilization of resources.
Moving labor from low-productivity uses to zero-productivity unemployment does not increase output.
Today, deficient global aggregate demand requires governments to undertake measures that boost spending.
Such spending can be put to many good uses.
China’s critical needs today include reducing inequality, stemming environmental degradation, creating livable cities, and investments in public health, education, infrastructure, and technology.
The authorities also need to strengthen regulatory capacity to ensure the safety of food, buildings, medicines and much else.
Social returns from such investments far exceed the costs of capital.
China’s mistake in the past has been to rely too heavily on debt financing.
But China also has ample room to increase its tax base in ways that would increase overall efficiency and/or equity.
Environmental taxes could lead to better air and water quality, even as they raise substantial revenues; congestion taxes would improve quality of life in cities; property and capital-gains taxes would encourage higher investment in productive activities, promoting growth.
In short, if designed correctly, balanced-budget measures – increasing taxes in tandem with expenditures –could provide a large stimulus to the economy.
Nor should China fall into the trap of emphasizing backward-looking supply-side measures.
In the US, resources were wasted when shoddy homes were built in the middle of the Nevada desert.
But the first priority is not to knock down those homes (in an effort to consolidate the housing market); it is to ensure that resources are allocated efficiently in the future.
Indeed, the basic principle taught in the first weeks of any elementary economics course is to let bygones be bygones – don’t cry over spilt milk.
Low-cost steel (provided at prices below the long-term average cost of production but at or above the marginal cost) may be a distinct advantage for other industries.
It would have been a mistake, for example, to destroy America’s excess capacity in fiber optics, from which US firms gained enormously in the 1990s.
The “option” value associated with potential future uses should always be contrasted with the minimal cost of maintenance.
The challenge facing China as it confronts the problem of excess capacity is that those who would otherwise lose their jobs will require some form of support; firms will argue for a robust bailout to minimize their losses.
But if the government accompanied effective demand-side measures with active labor-market policies, at least the employment problem could be effectively addressed, and optimal – or at least reasonable – policies for economic restructuring could be designed.
There is also a macro-deflationary problem.
Excess capacity fuels downward pressure on prices, with negative externalities on indebted firms, which experience an increase in their real (inflation-adjusted) leverage.
But a far better approach than supply-side consolidation is aggressive demand-side expansion, which would counter deflationary pressures.
The economic principles and political factors are thus well known.
But too often the debate about China’s economy has been dominated by naive proposals for supply-side reform – accompanied by criticism of the demand-side measures adopted after the 2008 global financial crisis.
Those measures were far from perfect; they had to be formulated on the fly, in the context of an unexpected emergency.
But they were far better than nothing.
That is because using resources in suboptimal ways is always better than not using them at all; in the absence of the post-2008 stimulus, China would have suffered substantial unemployment.
If the authorities embrace better-designed demand-side reforms, they will have greater scope for more comprehensive supply-side reforms.
Moreover, the magnitude of some of the necessary supply-side reforms will be markedly diminished, precisely because the demand-side measures will reduce excess supply.
This is not just an academic debate between Western Keynesian and supply-side economists, now being played out on the other side of the world.
The policy approach China adopts will strongly influence economic performance and prospects worldwide.
China’s Vicious Growth Circle
LONDON – Most economists have a reason to be worried about China’s economy – whether it be low consumption and large external surpluses, industrial overcapacity, environmental degradation, or government interventions like capital controls or financial repression.
What many fail to recognize is that these are merely the symptoms of a single underlying problem: China’s skewed growth model.
That model is, to some extent, a policy-induced construct, the result of a deep-rooted bias toward construction and manufacturing as the leading drivers of economic development.
This predilection harkens back to the Great Leap Forward of the 1950s, when scrap metal was melted to meet wildly optimistic steel-production targets, thereby advancing Mao’s dream of rapid industrialization.
Today, China’s proclivity for industrial production is manifested in large-scale manufacturing and infrastructure projects, encouraged by direct and indirect government subsidies.
By boosting investment and generating tax revenue for local governments, this approach has a more immediate positive impact on GDP than efforts to develop the service sector.
But the model also carries considerable costs.
Indeed, China is now locked in a vicious economic circle, sustained by seemingly unrelated distortionary policies that are, in fact, deeply interconnected, even symbiotic.
One of the most glaring features of this pattern is the disparity between China’s GDP growth, which has averaged nearly 10% annually over the last few decades, and its employment growth, which has amounted to just 1-2% annually.
Clearly, industrialization and export expansion alone cannot absorb China’s massive labor force.
The problem is that rapid labor-productivity growth in the industrial sector – more than 10% per year over the last two decades – is reducing the need to hire more workers.
The service sector, by contrast, experienced much slower labor-productivity growth (about 5% annually over the same period), meaning that it could be far more effective in generating employment growth.
In the United States, about 80% of the total labor force was deployed in the services sector in 2012.
Another consequence of China’s skewed growth model has been a decline in household income as a share of GDP, from 70% in 1990 to 60% in 2009, whereas in the US, for example, the ratio has remained stable, at around 80% of GDP.
In other words, Chinese households are missing out on the benefits of economic growth.
This phenomenon, too, can be blamed largely on distortionary policies.
In order to cap the rise in labor costs, wages were suppressed, growing by only 5% annually over the last 20 years, even as productivity grew at an annual rate of 8.5%.
Meanwhile, financial repression lowered the cost of capital.
In the last decade, the average real (inflation-adjusted) return on deposits has been near zero.
With about 80% of Chinese household savings deposited in banks, this implicit tax on savings has had a major economic impact, reinforcing Chinese households’ tendency to save and thus undermining consumption growth and exacerbating global imbalances.
In this way, China’s distortionary policies have helped to perpetuate a dysfunctional growth model.
Wage suppression, financial repression, and an undervalued exchange rate subsidize exports and production, at the expense of households, which are thus compelled to save, weakening domestic demand.
In order to achieve growth targets, the government thus must depend on exports and investment – an approach that leads to the accumulation of massive reserves, which subsequently need to be sterilized.
Low interest rates help to contain the cost of sterilization at the national level and reduce costs at the firm level – again at the expense of households.
Breaking the cycle will not be easy, but there is no other way to address many of the most pressing problems confronting China’s economy.
Indeed, the current growth model is also taking a heavy toll on the environment, with pollution threatening the population’s health, especially in urban areas.
Moreover, the bias toward manufacturing and export industries leads to a severe misallocation of capital.
Less efficient industrial sectors have accumulated significant excess capacity, destabilizing the entire economy, while more productive, efficient sectors lack access to the resources they need.
Restructuring the economy is perhaps the most urgent – and most difficult – challenge facing China’s leaders today.
Given that the current distortions are interlinked, they may need to be addressed simultaneously.
China’s gradualist approach may no longer work.
China’s Slow-Growth Opportunity
BEIJING – After four disappointing years, Chinese economists have realized that slowing GDP growth – from a post-crisis peak of 12.8% in 2010 to about 7% today – is mainly structural, rather than cyclical.
In other words, China’s potential growth rate has settled onto a significantly lower plateau.
While the country should be able to avoid a hard landing, it can expect annual growth to remain at 6-7% over the next decade.
But this may not necessarily be bad news.
One might question why GDP in China, where per capita income recently surpassed $7,000, is set to grow so much more slowly than Japan’s did from 1956 to 1970, when the Japanese economy, with per capita income starting from about $7,000, averaged 9.7% annual growth.
Given the difficulty of reversing these trends, it is difficult to imagine how China could maintain a growth rate anywhere close to 10% for another decade, despite its low per capita income.
But there is more.
As the Japanese economist Ryuichiro Tachi has pointed out, Japan also benefited from a high savings rate and a low capital coefficient (the ratio of capital to output) of less than 1.
Though a precise comparison is difficult, there is no doubt that China’s capital coefficient is much higher, implying a larger gap between the growth rate of capital intensity (the total amount of capital needed per dollar of revenue) and that of labor productivity.
At times, a high investment rate can offset a high capital coefficient’s negative impact on growth.
But China’s investment rate is already too high, accounting for almost half of GDP.
With capital intensity increasing significantly faster than labor productivity in China, the inefficiency of investment is clear.
In this context, increased investment would only exacerbate the problem.
Making matters worse, China’s corporate debt is already the highest in the world, both in absolute terms and relative to GDP.
In this context, increasing investment would not only reduce capital efficiency further; it would also heighten the risk implied by companies’ high leverage ratios.
With all major indicators suggesting a significant decline in China’s growth potential, China’s leaders must accept the reality of lower growth and adjust their priorities accordingly.
Succumbing to the temptation of massive monetary and fiscal stimulus, such as that pursued in the wake of the global economic crisis, would not only fail to boost growth in a sustainable way; it would actually undermine growth and stability in the medium to long term.
A better approach would focus on making economic growth more sustainable.
On this issue, Japan has some useful lessons to offer.
In the 1970s, recognizing the inevitability of a slowdown, Japan shelved its ambitious plan to “remodel” the Japanese archipelago.
Policymakers shut down energy-intensive factories in the heavy chemical industry, promoted innovation, and took steps to address air and water pollution.
As a result, the quality of Japan’s economic growth improved considerably, even as its rate fell by nearly half in the decade after the oil shock in 1973.
The good news is that China’s leaders seem intent on adopting a similar approach, including avoidance of monetary and fiscal expansion, unless growth seems set to collapse.
Indeed, at the recently concluded National People’s Congress, Prime Minister Li Keqiang affirmed the authorities’ 7% target for GDP growth this year, while reiterating the importance of deepening reform and carrying out structural adjustments.
For China, accepting lower growth provides a crucial opportunity to support stable and sustainable development.
If China’s leaders stay the course of reform and rebalancing, the entire global economy will be better off.
What Should China Do?
STANFORD – The Chinese government’s heavy-handed efforts to contain recent stock-market volatility – the latest move prohibits short selling and sales by major shareholders – have seriously damaged its credibility.
But China’s policy failures should come as no surprise.
Policymakers there are far from the first to mismanage financial markets, currencies, and trade.
Many European governments, for example, suffered humiliating losses defending currencies that were misaligned in the early 1990s.
Still, China’s economy remains a source of significant uncertainty.
Indeed, although the performance of China’s stock market and that of its real economy has not been closely correlated, a major slowdown is underway.
That is a serious concern, occupying finance ministries, central banks, trading desks, and importers and exporters worldwide.
China’s government believed that it could engineer a soft landing in the transition from torrid double-digit economic growth, fueled by exports and investments, to steady and balanced growth underpinned by domestic consumption, especially of services.
And, in fact, it enacted some sensible policies and reforms.
But rapid growth obscured many problems.
For example, officials, seeking to secure promotions by achieving short-term economic targets, misallocated resources; basic industries like steel and cement built up vast excess capacity; and bad loans accumulated on the balance sheets of banks and local governments.
Nowhere are the problems with this approach more apparent than in the attempt to plan urbanization, which entailed the construction of large new cities – complete with modern infrastructure and plentiful housing – that have yet to be occupied.
In a sense, these “ghost cities” resemble the Russian empire’s Potemkin villages, built to create an impressive illusion for the passing Czarina; but China’s ghost cities are real and were presumably meant to do more than flatter the country’s leaders.
Now that economic growth is flagging – official statistics put the annual rate at 7%, but most observers believe the real number is closer to 5% (or even lower) – China’s governance problems are becoming impossible to ignore.
Although China’s growth rate still exceeds that of all but a few economies today, the scale of the slowdown has been wrenching, with short-run dynamics similar to a swing in the United States or Germany from 2% GDP growth to a 3% contraction.
A China beset by serious economic problems is likely to experience considerable social and political instability.
As the slowdown threatens to impede job creation, undermining the prospects of the millions of people moving to China’s cities each year in search of a more prosperous life, the Chinese Communist Party will struggle to maintain the legitimacy of its political monopoly.
(More broadly, the weight of China’s problems, together with Russia’s collapse and Venezuela’s 60% inflation, has strained the belief of some that state capitalism trumps market economies.)
Given China’s systemic importance to the global economy, instability there could pose major risks far beyond its borders.
China is the largest foreign holder of US Treasury securities, a major trade partner for the US, Europe, Latin America, and Australia, and a key facilitator of intra-Asian trade, owing partly to the scale of its processing trade.
The world has a lot at stake in China, and China’s authorities have a lot on their plate.
The government must cope with the short-term effects of the slowdown while continuing to implement reforms aimed at smoothing the economy’s shift to a new growth model and expanding the role of markets.
Foreign firms are seeking access to China’s rapidly growing middle class, which the McKinsey Global Institute estimates already exceeds 200 million.
But that implies a stable business environment, including more transparency in government approvals, and looser capital controls.
With these goals in mind, China’s government recently engineered a modest currency devaluation – about 3% so far.
That is probably too small to alter China’s trade balance with Europe or the US significantly.
But it signals a shift toward a more market-oriented exchange rate.
The risk on the minds of investors, managers, and government officials is that currency markets – or government-managed currencies buffeted by market forces – often develop too much momentum and overshoot fundamental values.
As China’s government uses monetary policy to try to calm markets, micro-level reforms must continue.
China must deploy new technologies across industries, while improving workers’ education, training, and health.
Moreover, China needs to accelerate its efforts to increase domestic consumption, which, as a share of GDP, is far below that of other countries.
That means reducing the unprecedentedly high savings rate, a large share of which accrues to state-owned enterprises.
If private firms and households are to replace government-led investment as the economy’s main drivers of growth, the state must reduce its stake in major enterprises and allow more profits to be paid directly to shareholders, while providing more of the profits from its remaining shares to citizens.
The shift away from excessive state control should also include replacing price subsidies and grants to favored industries with targeted support for low-income workers and greater investment in human capital.
In addition, China must reduce administrative discretion, introducing sensible, predictable regulation to address natural monopolies and externalities.
Back at the macro level, China needs to reallocate responsibilities and resources among the various levels of government, in order to capitalize on their comparative advantage in providing services and raising revenue.
And the country must gradually reduce its total debt load, which now exceeds 250% of GDP.
Fortunately, in facing the difficult adjustment challenges that lie ahead, China’s $3.6 trillion in foreign-currency reserves can serve as a buffer against unavoidable losses.
But China must also avoid reverting to greater state control of the economy – a possibility glimpsed in the authorities’ ham-fisted response to the correction in equity prices.
That approach needs to be abandoned once and for all, before it does any more damage to China’s quest for long-term stability and prosperity.
Can China Avoid Deflation?
BERLIN – In his speech at the 2015 World Economic Forum meeting in Davos, Chinese Premier Li Keqiang acknowledged that China’s economy is facing strong headwinds.
Annual GDP growth in 2014 was 7.4%, the lowest rate since 1990.
But, to stabilize economic growth, he pledged that China will “continue to pursue a proactive fiscal policy and a prudent monetary policy.”
China’s current economic slowdown was policy-induced.
During the last two years, the government has tightened fiscal and monetary policy, in the hope of offsetting the adverse effects of the large stimulus package implemented in response to the 2008 global financial crisis.
Li’s Davos speech was intended to signal that the Chinese government will not allow the growth rate to slip further.
China’s stimulus package was by far the world’s largest and most effectively implemented.
It stabilized growth in China and moderated the global economic contraction.
But it left in its wake some serious problems for the Chinese economy.
Most important, the country’s economy has become highly leveraged.
Housing prices shot up, real-estate developers borrowed recklessly, and local governments became heavily indebted.
As a result, broad money (M2) increased rapidly, and now stands at more than two times China’s GDP – one of the highest levels in the world.
This flood of money rang alarm bells for Li and President Xi Jinping when they took office in early 2013.
The government has since reined in money-supply growth and started to impose limits on local governments’ borrowing.
Monetary expansion has decelerated.
The budget law has been revised to allow local governments to issue government bonds, and their borrowing from commercial banks is being closely monitored.
These policies have raised capital costs, with monetary tightening, in particular, taking a large toll on local governments and real estate developers.
Because slower growth forces them to borrow new money to pay their maturing debts, interest rates are bid up, and businesses in the real economy are crowded out, creating a further drag on growth.
Meanwhile, producer prices have been falling, while consumer prices are flat.
So, like much of the rest of the world, China is facing the risk of deflation.
Indeed, global deflationary pressure would have emerged much sooner had China not launched its two-year stimulus plan in 2008, which boosted investment demand and thus delayed the fall in world commodity prices.
Now that the fall has arrived, domestic deflation has become a real threat, particularly given slower domestic fiscal expansion.
That is why China’s government would do well to recall the Asian financial crisis of 1997.
In response to Deng Xiaoping’s famous tour to the south, which provided a needed boost to the reform process, investment increased rapidly in the first half of the 1990s.
As a result, China’s annual inflation rate soared to an all-time high of 24% in 1994.
The government’s subsequent measures to curb inflation might have engineered a soft landing; but the financial crisis hit China severely, leading to six years of deflation.
The main lesson of the Asian financial crisis – or, for that matter, of any financial crisis – is that deflation is the ultimate threat to recovery.
Because the 1997 crisis was confined to East Asia, China was able to escape deflation after it joined the World Trade Organization.
But today is different.
The entire world is in the grip of deflationary forces.
If China enters the vortex, its trade partners will not be able to pull it out this time.
So the key question for China’s government is whether the country can do so on its own.
The proactive fiscal policy that Li pledged at Davos will help, but monetary policy also needs to change.
The conundrum facing China’s authorities is that monetary expansion would merely fuel a run-up in asset prices, rather than resulting in higher credit flows to the real economy.
The blockages used to be local governments and zombie real-estate developers.
But that is likely to change this year.
Borrowing by local governments will be strictly monitored, and their new debt financing will come mainly from government bonds.
And, though most observers believe that China’s first-tier cities (Beijing, Shanghai, Guangzhou, and Shenzhen) will still struggle in 2015 to digest the huge housing stock they built up in recent years, some second- and third-tier cities have already reached the bottom, and have started to recover.
China is the largest trading country in the world, prompting calls for Chinese leaders to assume greater responsibility for the overall health of the global economy.
China’s post-crisis stimulus package demonstrated the authorities’ willingness to do so.
Likewise, the government’s anti-deflation effort will help not only China, but the rest of the world as well.
A Window on China’s New Normal
CAMBRIDGE – Every year at this time, China’s government organizes a major conference – sponsored by the Development Research Center, the official think tank of the State Council – that brings together senior Chinese officials, CEOs from major Chinese and Western firms, and a small group of international officials and academics.
The China Development Forum (CDF) occurs just after the annual National People’s Congress.
At the forum, speakers, including the finance minister and the head of the central bank, summarize the Chinese leadership’s current thinking.
Officials then listen to comments and suggestions from Western business and academic participants, including a question and answer session with Premier Li Keqiang.
Although I have been attending the CDF’s meetings for more than a decade, I found this year’s conference substantially different from any in the past.
The key difference was the official Chinese recognition that annual real GDP growth has declined permanently from the past three decades’ average rate of nearly 10%.
The official estimate is that real GDP grew 7.4% in 2014, and that the rate will probably slow further, to 7%, this year.
The Development Research Center presented detailed estimates showing that the growth rate will continue to decline, reaching about 6% by the end of the decade.
Virtually every Chinese official referred to this slowdown as their country’s “new normal.”
They all seemed reconciled to slower growth, which was initially surprising, because officials previously argued that China needed rapid growth to maintain employment and avoid political unrest.
They now appear to understand that the declining growth rate will not lead to unemployment, because the slowdown reflects China’s structural shift from export-oriented heavy industrial production to increased production of consumer services, which require more employment to create the same amount of value.
Stronger growth nevertheless remains necessary, because China is still a relatively low-income country with substantial poverty.
Although China’s total real GDP is second only to that of the United States (and might be larger when measured in terms of purchasing power), its per capita income is only about $7,000, or roughly 15% of the US level.
And consumption remains low – only about 50% of GDP when government spending is included, and just 35% when limited to household consumer spending.
So China has a long way to go to reach its leaders’ goal of achieving a “modern prosperous society.”
The Chinese see that the “new normal” requires a shift in their growth strategy from factor-driven growth to innovation-driven growth.
But it is not clear how that increase in innovation will be achieved.
While officials stress reliance on the market, China does not have the venture capital and “angel financing” that facilitates innovation in the US.
The authorities may hope that their plan to insure bank deposits will shift deposits from the three largest banks to many smaller banks around the country, facilitating local startups’ access to financing.
Many other economic problems loom.