Pressure should be exerted on Israel to end its financial assistance to settlements.
The occupation tax should also include action aimed at ending the virtual impunity enjoyed by the Israel Defense Force.
IDF officials argue that some level of human rights violation is inevitable during occupation, and that the IDF’s record is not much worse than any other occupation army.
They are right; an occupation cannot be sustained without the systematic violation of human rights.
That is precisely why these violations must be made costly: to signal to Israeli voters that the cost of occupation is bound to rise.
This can be done if Europe supports investigations of suspected war crimes and other violations of international humanitarian law committed by the IDF, as well as the establishment of international tribunals when such crimes occur.
Only the US can bring Israelis and Palestinians to a new negotiation process, much less draft a blueprint for a political solution.
Europe and others can support such a process, but mainly by affecting the internal political calculus in Israel.
Such a role would better protect Europe’s broader interests in the Middle East, while allowing it to remain faithful to its values.
Taxing Tissue
Today’s biomedical research is a collaborative research enterprise, requiring the contributions of patients, universities and industry.
Today’s laws, however, allow only universities and industry, which supply basic knowledge and technology, to profit from their contributions; patients, who supply tissue, may not be compensated.
Some consider this unfair, as it allows tissue donated by patients to be wholly appropriated by universities and industry.
Others consider this wise, as compensating individual tissue donors could block scientific progress and technological development.
Is there a way to redress the double standard in biomedical research that is both fair
 and wise?
Ironically, the double standard has both a moral and an economic underpinning.
European law solemnly declares that 
 the human body and its parts shall not give rise to financial gain
 , for reasons of human dignity.
American law denies patients a property right in their tissue for reasons of economic policy.
Recognizing such a right would impose a duty on universities and industry to negotiate fair compensation with every donor of all tissue used in their research.
Moreover, compared with the contributions of universities and industry to the end product, the importance of tissue contributed by patients is minimal.
Finally, why should tissue donors be entitled to compensation, as they or their progeny may benefit in the long run from the technological advances to which they contribute?
Opponents of the double standard draw on principles of fairness, equity, and distributive justice.
They view the double standard as a possible source of public distrust in the biomedical research enterprise.
In fact, patients’ contributions to that enterprise are no longer minimal, as they supply university and industry with crucial compilations of tissue and associated medical data.
Consequently, they have increasingly abandoned altruistic participation and are demanding compensation for their tissue.
However, given current European and American law, these claims require a novel legal underpinning in order to be valid and enforceable.
Various models have been proposed.
Charitable trust model
 .
Donors would transfer their tissue to a charitable trust, and would collectively appoint a trustee, who would have legal fiduciary duties to use the tissue for the benefit of the public.
The trust agreement could allow the donor group to participate in the governance of the trust and thus have a say in the distribution of any benefits.
But, while the model is 
 fair 
 in a number of ways, it implies that parts of the human body can give rise to financial gain.
Moreover, the model is 
 unwise
 to the extent that tissue donors could block the development of knowledge and applications.
And, by definition, it would work only if the trust is funded on a public basis. 
Contract model.
 Tissue can be removed only with donors’ prior consent.
Thus, prior to giving their consent, tissue donors can negotiate acceptable compensation.
Patients suffering from rare disorders have adopted this approach.
Prior to supplying their tissue to universities and industry, these patients negotiate ownership rights in any technology that arises from the research.
This model seems 
 fair 
 enough: if people can exploit such natural endowments as their beauty or scientific genius, then why not their tissue?
It may be 
 unwise
 , though, because the knowledge and applications over which they retain control may have implications for other diseases.
In such circumstances, should they further their own interests by continuing to exploiting their control, or should they further the interests of those other patients by 
 donating
 their tissue? 
Global public good model
 .
In this view, the human genome is a common heritage of humankind and a global public good whose benefits should be shared with all.
This would be 
 fair
 , as it would ensure collective compensation for the use of tissue in general, rather than for individual tissue donors, and it would be 
 wise
 in that it would not block scientific and technological progress.
While universities and industry may be wary of taxation, they might prefer a tissue tax over endless negotiations with countless tissue donors over the sharing of uncertain future benefits.
Moreover, unlike direct compensation schemes, a tissue tax does not exert undue influence on individuals or groups to donate tissue.
And, instead of being arbitrary, a tissue tax would be subject to democratic control: no taxation without representation.
In brief, the introduction of a tissue tax would be both a 
 fair 
 and a 
 wise
 way to redress the double standard that currently governs the collaborative biomedical research enterprise. 
Teaching PIIGS to Fly
NEW YORK – Greece’s fiscal problems are, as I have argued many times, but the tip of a global iceberg.
For the next installment of the recent global financial crisis will be rising sovereign risk, especially in advanced economies that run massive budget deficits and accumulate large stocks of public debt as they socialize private financial losses in order to revive economic growth.
Indeed, history suggests that severe recession and socialization of private losses often lead to an unsustainable build-up of public debt.
Moreover, financial crises triggered by excessive debt and leverage in the private sector are followed after a few years by sovereign defaults and/or high inflation to wipe out the real value of public debts.
Greece is also the canary in the coal mine for the euro zone, where all the PIIGS economies (Portugal, Italy, Ireland, Greece, and Spain) suffer from the twin problems of public-debt sustainability and external-debt sustainability.
Euro accession and bull-market “convergence trades” pushed bond yields in these countries toward the level of German bunds, with the ensuing credit boom supporting excessive consumption growth.
Most of these economies were suffering a loss of their export markets to low-wage Asia.
A decade of wage growth exceeding productivity gains led to real appreciation, loss of competitiveness, and large current-account deficits.
In Spain and Ireland, a housing boom exacerbated external imbalances by reducing national saving, pumping up consumption, and boosting residential investment.
And the euro’s appreciation in recent years – driven in part by the European Central Bank’s excessively tight monetary policy – was the final nail in the competitiveness coffin.
Thus, restoring competitiveness, not just fiscal adjustment, is necessary to revive sustained growth.
There are only three ways to accomplish this.
A decade of deflation would work, but it would be accompanied by economic stagnation, thus becoming – as in Argentina earlier this decade – politically unsustainable, leading to devaluation (exit from the euro) and default.   Accelerating structural reforms that increase productivity while keeping the growth of public and private wages in check is the right approach, but it is likewise politically difficult to implement.
Or a weaker euro could be had if the ECB were willing – quite unlikely – to ease monetary policy further to allow real depreciation.
But a weaker euro would not eliminate the need for structural reforms; otherwise, the benefits would go mostly to countries like Germany that undertook painful reforms to restore competitiveness via a reduction in relative unit labor costs.
A shadow or actual International Monetary Fund program would vastly enhance the credibility of a policy of fiscal retrenchment and structural reforms.
Under the former, the European Commission would impose fiscal and structural conditionality on Greece, while the EU and/or ECB would provide financing, which would be absolutely necessary, because announcing even the best conceived reform program would not be sufficient to restore lost policy credibility.
Markets will remain skeptical, especially if implementation leads to street demonstrations, riots, strikes, and parliamentary foot-dragging.
Until credibility is re-established, the risk of a speculative attack on public debt – reflected in the current rise in credit default swap spreads – would linger, given the ongoing budget deficit and the need to roll over maturing debt.
Since the European Union has no history of imposing conditionality, and ECB financing could be perceived as a form of bailout, a formal IMF program would be the better approach.
The most successful programs undertaken in the presence of a risk of a fiscal and/or external debt financing crisis were those – as in Mexico, Turkey, and Brazil – where a large amount of liquidity/financing support by the IMF beefed up an increasingly credible commitment to adjustment and reform.
Loan guarantees from Germany and/or the EU are less desirable than an IMF program, as it is very hard to design and credibly implement conditionality in such guarantees.
IMF support, on the other hand, is paid out in tranches and is conditional on achieving various policy targets over time.
The Greek authorities and the EU had until recently denied the need for financing, owing to concern that it would signal weakness and create a stigma.
That was a grave mistake.
Fiscal adjustment and structural reform without financing is more fragile and liable to fail without a war chest of liquidity to prevent a run on public debt while the appropriate policies are implemented and gradually gain credibility.
At the same time, if Greece does not fully adjust its policies to restore fiscal sustainability and competitiveness, a partial bailout by the EU and the ECB will still be likely in order to avoid the risk of contagion to the rest of the euro zone and the consequent threat to the monetary union’s survival.
A default by Greece, after all, could have the same global systemic effects as the collapse of Lehman Brothers did in 2008.
Sovereign spreads are already pricing the risk of a domino effect from Greece to Spain, Portugal, and other euro-zone members.
The EU and the ECB are worried about the moral hazard of any “bailout.”
But that is precisely why a credible IMF program that ties financial support to the progressive achievement of fiscal and structural reform goals is the right way to teach Greece and the other PIIGS how to fly.
Tea Time in America
NEW YORK – Ever since the first “Tea Party” convention was held last month in Nashville, Tennessee, with Sarah Palin as one of the keynote speakers, America’s political and media establishments have been reacting with a combination of apprehension and disdain.
The Speaker of the US House of Representatives, Nancy Pelosi, has called the Tea Party adherents Nazis, while the mainstream media tend to portray them as ignorant and provincial, a passive rabble with raw emotion but little analytical skill, stirred up and manipulated by demagogues to advance their own agendas.
To be sure, the Tea Party’s brand of aggrieved populism – and its composition of mostly white, angry, middle-class voters – has deep roots in the United States, flaring up during times of change.
But observers who have drawn comparisons to the Know-Nothings, the racist, paranoid, anti-Catholic, and anti-immigrant party that surged in the 1850’s, are reading the movement far too superficially.
Indeed, those who deride and dismiss this movement do so at their peril.
While some Tea Partiers may be racist or focused on eccentric themes – such as the validity of Barack Obama’s birth certificate – far more of them, those who were part of the original grass-roots effort, are focused on issues that have merit.
If you actually listen to them, instead of just reading accounts transmitted through the distorting mirror of the mainstream media, you hear grievances that are profound, as well as some proposals that are actually ahead of their time.
For example, Tea Party activists, using a group called End the Fed, were among the first to focus critical attention on the unelected and unaccountable US Federal Reserve Board.
Now legislation is being put forward to establish greater transparency at the Fed – surely a laudable outcome.
While those attracted to the Tea Party movement are a diverse group, some common themes emerge.
They see a struggle for the soul of the Tea Party between true libertarians, who are worried about individual liberties, and traditional conservatives.
Many who spoke to me directly in my Facebook community believe that Congress is utterly broken and regard faith in either of America’s major parties as naïve.
They view the Democrats and the Republicans alike as obstacles to change, drowning out the voices of the people as they kowtow to special interests.
They are concerned about concentrated Federal control, spiraling debt, and the loss of individual rights.
Are they really wrong?
After all, the movement took shape following the US government’s massive – and bipartisan – bailout of Wall Street banks.
And, at a time when the Chinese government, America’s main creditor, has begun sending clear signals about its preferences for US domestic policy – even as it ignores American criticism of its human rights record – are the Tea Partiers merely being paranoid?
As little as I like Sarah Palin, the fact is that entrenched lobbying and other special interests mean that a “changing of the guard” in Washington is too often only a change in branding.
As Barack Obama submits to the pressures of a US Department of Defense in which private contractors comprise 65% of the staffing budget, proposes preventive detention of Guantánamo detainees, and perpetuates the status quo in myriad other ways, her question – “So how’s that whole hopey-changey thing workin’ out for ya?” – is not the wrong question.
Indeed, for nearly a decade, concentration of executive power has threatened America’s system of checks and balances and given the Federal government the authority to spy on citizens, withhold information, and aggressively arrest and even Taser protesters – or to hire private contractors to do so.
In these circumstances, the Tea Party activists’ focus on supporting states’ autonomy – and even on property rights and the right to bear arms – can seem like a prescient effort to constrain overweening corporate and military power in national government.
That is why the elites in general are so quick to ridicule this movement. A movement that is genuinely populist in origin poses a threat to their own position in the power structure.
For once, a grassroots movement has arisen that is composed of people – some with Ivy League degrees, but many without – who are taking seriously the Internet-age promise that you don’t have to yield leadership to an established class of politicians and pundits.
This is also why the Republicans are seeking to capture the Tea Party movement’s energy for partisan purposes, overrunning it with well-paid operatives, particularly from former Representative Dick Armey’s fundraising and advocacy organization.
Moreover, Tea Party gatherings have increasingly become a platform for Republican candidates seeking the support of a highly mobilized electoral base.
I hope that the Republican establishment does not succeed in co-opting the Tea Party – and that the Democratic establishment does not, either.
And I hope that the movement captures the imagination of progressives, who are equally disgusted with the corruption of the status quo, and who can agree on many thematic goals, even if their policy proposals might be different.
At its worst, any populist movement can descend to demagoguery.
But the Tea Party movement at its best (or in its origin) is constitutionalist.
That is an awakening – and long overdue – sentiment in America, and one that spans the political divide.
The Tea Party movement’s adherents are angry – and, in many respects, justifiably so – but most of them are not crazy.
That diagnosis better suits those who prefer to ignore them.
The Tech Literacy Imperative
DAVOS – In many parts of the world, young children grow up surrounded by technology.
At their fingertips – literally – lies a limitless amount of entertainment, gaming, learning, and social networking.
Their world has always been connected.
They learn to scroll before they can walk.
And yet, as confident as they may be using technology, too many children have no idea how it all works.
Nor do they fully appreciate how it underpins their lives – or how it will shape their futures.
I think of this as the tech literacy paradox.
Today’s children may be great consumers of technology, but rarely are they truly tech literate.
They may look like savvy digital natives, but their knowledge is only screen-deep.
They are passive users, not active creators.
And most of them have little real interest in finding out how the technology on which they depend actually functions.
This has important implications.
Economies are undergoing radical shifts in terms of how they produce, distribute, and consume goods and services.
Every aspect of life and work is changing.
Greater tech literacy will be essential to ensure that the human implications of the ongoing Fourth Industrial Revolution are positive.
If young people are to participate fully in our increasingly tech-enabled world, greater numbers of them will have to be tech literate.
If they are to be empowered citizens, not just beguiled consumers, they will need to understand how technology affects their lives and prospects.
Not only will there be more tech jobs in the future; increasingly, more jobs will have a tech dimension to them, especially as scientific advances play a major role in solving some of society’s biggest challenges – climate change, health care, poverty, and inequality.
That is why BT has made a long-term commitment to use our skills and capabilities to help build a culture of tech literacy.
We want young people to know that they will be the creators and builders of our future – in every sense.
We want them to get excited about looking beyond the screen, to make and do stuff.
That means learning to code, of course.
But it also means becoming fluent in computational thinking and problem solving.
And, perhaps most important, it means becoming an engaged tech citizen.
For example, all young people should understand who has access to their personal data, how it is being used, and why that matters.
Accomplishing this will not be easy.
It will take more than simply making sure that children have access to iPads.
Any initiative to boost tech literacy must focus on three areas.
First, kids must be inspired to learn about the technology they use every day; they must “connect” with tech concepts and find them exciting.
At BT, we are collaborating with tech entrepreneurs and education thinkers to develop fresh and creative ways to engage young people’s innate curiosity.
Second, teachers must be supported, as many do not feel confident to teach tech literacy.
We can help with that.
Already, we have engaged with thousands of teachers in the United Kingdom; in the last school year, we reached nearly 350,000 primary-school children, and we aim to reach five million by 2020.
We have also collaborated with education innovators at MIT to bring new coding tools into classrooms.
Third, schools must be properly equipped.
Making sure students have access to the latest technology is a challenge even for advanced countries.
In the UK, we are working to ensure that our high-speed fiber broadband connects the hardest-to-reach schools.
And we are using our expertise to help teaching professionals who are eager to make tech an integral part of schools’ everyday life.
A successful tech literacy program requires a long-term, sustained commitment to all three pillars of this approach.
We expect it will take a school generation to realize the cultural shift we believe is necessary.
Previous industrial revolutions unlocked social progress only when they were accompanied by changes in education – in particular, concerted efforts to boost literacy and numeracy.
If we want everybody to benefit from the radical upheavals transforming the world’s economies, further changes in education will be needed.
Among the most important of these will be those that build a strong culture of tech literacy.
Technological Cooperation
In early February, the United States National Academy of Engineering released a report on “Grand Challenges for Engineering in the 21st Century.”
The goal is to focus attention on the potential of technology to help the world address poverty and environmental threats.
The list includes potential breakthroughs such as low-cost solar power, safe disposal of CO2 from power plants, nuclear fusion, new educational technologies, and the control of environmental side effects from nitrogen fertilizers.
The report, like the Gates Foundation’s similar list of “Grand Challenges” in global health, highlights a new global priority: promoting advanced technologies for sustainable development.  
We are used to thinking about global cooperation in fields such as monetary policy, disease control, or nuclear weapons proliferation.
We are less accustomed to thinking of global cooperation to promote new technologies, such as clean energy, a malaria vaccine, or drought-resistant crops to help poor African farmers.
By and large, we regard new technologies as something to be developed by businesses for the marketplace, not as opportunities for global problem solving.
Yet, given the enormous global pressures that we face, including vastly unequal incomes and massive environmental damage, we must find new technological solutions to our problems.
There is no way, for example, to continue expanding the global use of energy safely unless we drastically alter how we produce electricity, power automobiles, and heat and cool our buildings.
Current reliance on coal, natural gas, and petroleum, without regard for CO2 emissions, is now simply too dangerous, because it is leading to climate changes that will spread diseases, destroy crops, produce more droughts and floods, and perhaps dramatically raise sea levels, thereby inundating coastal regions.
The National Academy of Engineering identified some possible answers.
We can harness safe nuclear energy, lower the cost of solar power, or capture and safely store the CO2 produced from burning fossil fuels.
Yet the technologies are not yet ready, and we can’t simply wait for the market to deliver them, because they require complex changes in public policy to ensure that they are safe, reliable, and acceptable to the broad public.
Moreover, there are no market incentives in place to induce private businesses to invest adequately in developing them.
Consider carbon capture and sequestration.
The idea is that power plants and other large fossil fuel users should capture the CO2 and pump it into permanent underground storage sites, such as old oil fields.
This will cost, say, $30 per ton of CO2 that is stored, so businesses will need an incentive to do it.
Moreover, public policies will have to promote the testing and improvement of this technology, especially when used at a large scale. 
New kinds of power plants will have to be built to make carbon capture economical, new pipelines will have to be built to transport the CO2 to storage sites, and new monitoring systems will have to be designed to control leaks.
Likewise, new regulations will be needed to ensure compliance with safety procedures, and to assure public support.
All of this will take time, costly investments, and lots of collaboration between scientists and engineers in universities, government laboratories, and private businesses. 
Moreover, this kind of technology will be useful only if it is widely used, notably in China and India.
This raises another challenge of technological innovation: we will need to support the transfer of proven technologies to poorer countries.
If rich countries monopolize new technologies, the goal of worldwide use to solve worldwide problems will be defeated.
Thus, technological developments should involve a collaborative international effort from the start.
All of this will require a new global approach to problem solving.
We will need to embrace global goals and then establish scientific, engineering, and political processes to support their achievement.
We will need to give new budgetary incentives to promote demonstration projects, and to support technology transfer.
And we will have to engage major companies in a new way, giving them ample incentives and market rewards for success, without allowing them to hold a monopoly on successful technologies that should be widely adopted.
I believe that this new kind of global public-private partnership on technology development will be a major objective of international policy making in the coming years.
Look for new global cooperative approaches to clean energy systems, medicines and vaccines, improved techniques for fish farming, drought-and-temperature resistant crop varieties, high-mileage automobiles, and low-cost irrigation techniques. 
Rich countries should fund these efforts heavily, and they should be carried out in collaboration with poor countries and the private sector.
Successful technological breakthroughs can provide stunning benefits for humanity.
This will be an exciting time to be a scientist or engineer facing the challenges of sustainable development.      
The Age of Adaptation
GENEVA – The world needs to stop looking backward.
Since the 2008 financial crisis, we have wasted far too much energy trying to return to the days of rapid economic expansion.
The flawed assumption that the post-crisis world's challenges were only temporary has underpinned policies that have yielded only lackluster recoveries, while failing to address key problems like high unemployment and rising inequality.
The post-crisis era is over, and the “post-post-crisis world" is upon us.
It is time to adopt a new framework of realistic solutions that promote shared prosperity within the global economy of today and tomorrow.
In this new era, economic growth will occur more slowly – but potentially more sustainably – than it did before the crisis.
And technological change will be its driving force.
Indeed, just as the Industrial Revolution transformed the productive potential of societies in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, a new wave of technological breakthroughs is reshaping economic and even social dynamics today.
The difference is that this revolution's impact will be even greater.
One outstanding feature of this revolution is the scope and scale of its disruptiveness.
The Industrial Revolution occurred relatively slowly, like long waves in the ocean; though it began in the 1780s, its impact was not really felt until the 1830s and 1840s.
The current technological revolution, by contrast, hits economies like a tsunami, with little warning and inexorable force.
The pace of change has been accelerated by the interconnected nature of today's world.
Technological progress is occurring within a complex and deeply integrated ecosystem, meaning that it simultaneously affects economic structures, governments, security arrangements, and people's daily lives.
In order to prepare a country to reap the benefits of rapid, far-reaching change, policymakers must account for the entirety of the ecosystem in which it is taking place, ensuring that government, business, and society all adjust to every shift.
In other words, competing in the twenty-first century economy will require relentless adaptation.
Nothing is off limits.
Every practice and standard will have to be rethought.
Every industry will be at risk of being turned on its head.
The car-sharing service Uber, for example, has not only changed how people get around; it also appears to be leading a retail revolution in which goods and services are “Uberized" – customers pay to use them, not own them.
The manufacturing industry, meanwhile, will be similarly transformed by 3D printing technology.
Supply chains will be eliminated or reshaped – an expectation that the CEO of a major aluminum manufacturer recently described.
He knows that, in order to succeed, firms will have to anticipate and respond to such trends.
Gone are the days of big fish eating small fish.
In the post-post-crisis world, fast fish will dominate – and slow fish will die.
But the current technological revolution is not just reshaping what we produce and how we produce it; it is fundamentally reshaping who we are – our habits, interests, and worldviews.
Consider the vast difference between the way young people and older generations interpret privacy in the Internet age.
It is also extending our lifespans, with one in two babies born today in Switzerland expected to live more than 100 years.
On balance, the impact of technological progress will be positive.
But that does not negate the massive challenge it will pose.
For example, job automation will ultimately propel more people toward higher-paying, more productive employment that is better suited to the new era of “talentism," when human imagination and innovation, not capital or natural resources, drive economic growth.
But, if workers fail to acquire the skills to fill these new positions, they will be left behind.
Government, more than any other sector, can shape the impact of technological change, ensuring that challenges are addressed and opportunities are seized.
Indeed, it should be at the forefront of such change, by creating an environment that encourages private-sector innovation and creativity, while ensuring that citizens are equipped to compete.
Of course, governments cannot always be ahead of the curve.
They will also have to react and respond to new needs and demands, such as the expectation that public services meet the same level of high-tech efficiency and convenience that private companies offer.
Change may be frightening, but it is inevitable.
And, in fact, it is an important source of opportunity to improve our systems, our strategies, and ourselves.
The latest wave of technological change is far from cresting.
We should be excited – and filled with hope – by where it could take us.
Inovasi dan Ketidakpuasan Atasnya
CAMBRIDGE – Inovasi teknologi sering dipuji atas kemampuannya mengatasi tantangan-tantangan terbesar dalam pembangunan, meningkatkan pertumbuhan ekonomi, dan mendorong kemajuan masyarakat.
Akan tetap inovasi juga sering menghadapi hambatan dalam penerapannya, terkadang pemerintah dengan cepatnya melarang teknologi baru – walaupun teknologi tersebut bisa sangat berfaedah.
Contohnya mesin cetak.
Teknologi baru adalah salah satu anugerah bagi agama-agama di dunia, yang seketika membuat produksi dan penyebaran teks-teks suci keagamaan menjadi efisien.
Namun Kesultanan Ottoman melarang pencetakan Al-Qur’an selama hampir 400 tahun.
Pada tahun 1515, Sultan Selim I menetapkan bahwa “pencetakan akan dikenakan hukuman mati”.
Kenapa teknologi yang sedemikian bermanfaat begitu dikecam?
Sebagaimana saya tuliskan dalam buku berjudul Innovation and Its Enemies: Why People Resist New Technologies, jawabannya bukan karena seseorang takut akan hal-hal yang tidak diketahuinya.
Sebaliknya, penolakan terhadap kemajuan teknologi biasanya bersumber dari ketakutan bahwa gangguan status quo akan mengancam lapangan kerja, pendapatan, kekuasaan, dan identitas.
Pemerintah seringkali memutuskan lebih baik melarang teknologi baru daripada beradaptasi.
Dengan melarang pencetakan Al-Qur’an, pemimpin Ottoman menunda hilangnya pekerjaan ahli-ahli kitab suci dan kaligrafi (mayoritas diantaranya adalah perempuan yang dimuliakan atas penguasaan mereka terhadap seni).
Tetapi melindungi lapangan kerja bukanlah dorongan utama para pemimpin tersebut; bagaimanapun juga, sejak tahun 1727, mereka mengizinkan pencetakan naskah-naskah non-keagamaan, meskipun diprotes ahli kaligrafi yang menanggapi fatwa tersebut dengan aksi menempatkan botol tinta dan pensil mereka ke dalam peti mati dan melakukan marching ke High Porte di Istanbul.
Pengetahuan agama adalah urusan berbeda.
Pengetahuan itu bagaikan lem yang merekatkan masyarakat dan sebuah pilar dalam kekuasaan politik, jadi mempertahankan monopoli atas penyebaran pengetahuan dinilai penting dalam menjaga kekuasaan pemimpin Ottoman.
Mereka khawatir akan mengalami seperti paus di Gereja Katolik yang kehilangan otoritasnya pada masa Reformasi Protestan, ketika mesin cetak memainkan peran kunci dalam menyebarkan ide-ide baru pada pemeluk agama.
Tentu saja, munculnya hambatan-hambatan terhadap inovasi teknologi tidak selalu dimulai oleh pemerintah.
Kelompok tertentu yang memiliki vested interest dalam status quo akan mendorong pemerintah untuk memberlakukan larangan.
Mereka bisa juga melakukan demonstrasi, seperti yang dilakukan ahli kaligrafi pada masa Kesultanan Ottoman, dan penentang produk kentang hasil rekayasa genetika pada tahun 2012 di Irlandia, yang melakukan aksi marching di kota Dublin guna menunjukkan penolakannya atas “akhir dari makanan enak” (death of good food).
Pesaing teknologi baru juga menyebarkan fitnah, informasi yang salah, dan bahkan mendiskreditkan – sebuah pendekatan yang jelas berhasil di masa lalu.
Pada tahun 1674, kaum perempuan Inggris mengajukan petisi melawan kopi, menuduh bahwa kopi menyebabkan kemandulan sehingga hanya layak dikonsumsi orang yang berusia di atas 60 tahun – pasar yang sangat terbatas pada saat itu.
Tahun berikutnya, Raja Charles II memerintahkan penutupan kedai-kedai kopi, meskipun beliau mungkin lebih terdorong oleh keinginan untuk melindungi pangsa pasar minuman lokal, seperti minuman beralkohol dan teh sebagai minuman baru, daripada sebuah rumor tentang kemandulan.
Pada tahun 1800an, industri produk olahan susu (dairy) memprakarsai kampanye informasi yang salah tentang margarin, mengklaim bahwa margarin menyebabkan kemandulan, gangguan pertumbuhan/stunting, dan kebotakan pada pria.
Dicemooh sebagai “bull butter”, penentangnya menyatakan bahwa margarin terbuat dari “daging sapi berpenyakit dan busuk, kuda tiren, babi tiren, anjing tiren, anjing terkena rabies, dan domba sakit”.
Sebagai tanggapan, pemerintah federal menetapkan pembatasan terbaru atas margarin, meliputi banyak hal mulai dari pelabelan (seperti pada produk makanan hasil rekayasa genetika), penggunaan pewarna buatan, dan gerakan antar negara bagian.
Pajak baru juga semakin menegaskan keunggulan mentega.
Pada tahun 1886, seorang anggota Kongres asal Wisconsin menyatakan secara tegas “niatnya untuk memusnahkan pembuatan bahan-bahan berbahaya melalui pajak yang sedemikian tinggi hingga produksinya tidak lagi menguntungkan atau orang tidak lagi ingin membelinya (taxing it out).”
Resistensi terhadap traktor di awal tahun 1900an terjadi dalam bentuk agak berbeda.
Produsen dan pedagang binatang pengangkut (draft animals) takut akan mekanisasi, yang bisa mengancam kehidupan mereka.
Namun mereka tahu bahwa mereka tidak mampu menyempurnakan produknya lebih cepat dibandingkan para insinyur, sehingga memberhentikan penyebaran traktor dipandang mustahil.
Sebaliknya, mereka berupaya mencegah penghapusan hewan ternak dengan memulai kampanye yang menggembar-gemborkan keunggulan hewan ternak.
The Horse Association of America menerbitkan selebaran bertuliskan “keledai adalah satu-satunya traktor paling andal yang pernah diciptakan.”
Kelompok ini juga menyatakan bahwa kuda bisa berkembang biak, sementara traktor justru susut nilainya.
Masyarakat umumnya tidak pernah menolak kemajuan teknologi karena ketidakpedulian semata.
Justru masyarakat berjuang melindungi kepentingan dan penghidupan mereka, baik itu menjalankan suatu peternakan atau pemerintahan.
Seiring dengan kita terus berusaha mengoperasikan teknologi-teknologi terbaru untuk memperbaiki kesejahteraan manusia dan lingkungan hidup, pembedaan ini penting untuk dipahami.
Untuk menghindari timbulnya hambatan-hambatan terhadap kemajuan teknologi, kita perlu memahami dan mengatasi segala kelemahannya.
Contohnya, ketika mesin menjadi semakin cakap, robot bisa menggantikan sejumlah pekerja.
Hanya sejenak sebelum robot-robot tersebut mampu tidak sekadar menjalankan pekerjaan-pekerjaan rumit, tapi juga belajar lebih cepat daripada pekerja yang dilatih.
Asumsi bahwa tenaga kerja manusia tidak akan bernasib sama seperti binatang pengangkut tidaklah logis.
Tetapi jika kita mengakui kelemahan-kelemahan tersebut dan menanggulanginya secara terbuka, kita bisa menghindari reaksi buruk akibat inovasi teknologi yang berpotensi menguntungkan, termasuk segala kemajuan dalam robotik.
Kuncinya adalah fokus pada “inovasi yang inklusif”, menjamin bahwa siapapun yang mungkin merugi akibat penghapusan teknologi lama akan mendapat peluang besar untuk memperoleh manfaat dari teknologi baru.
Hanya dengan melakukan itu kita bisa mengoptimalkan kreativitas manusia.
Humanizing an Inhuman Future
WASHINGTON, DC – The impact that groundbreaking technological advances like artificial intelligence will have on the functioning of our economies and labor markets has been a hot topic for a long time.
But Jerry Kaplan’s recent book Humans Need Not Apply: A Guide to Wealth and Work in the Age of Artificial Intelligence has impressed upon me the true size of the socioeconomic stakes.
One relatively well-known example of the digital revolution’s impact on the workings of markets is the ability to earn huge returns in high-speed trading by being a microsecond “ahead” of everyone else.
Another is the capacity for price discrimination by new electronic market makers like Uber, which thus appropriate every penny of the old “consumer surplus” of microeconomic theory.
Soon a new kind of enhanced Uber could emerge, integrating car, bus, ship, airplane travel, and hotel rooms into one super-app.
In fact, some car manufacturers are now working on exactly that.
A key question is why good old competition does not whittle away these profits rapidly.
The answer often lies in the business model.
Companies borrow a lot to start up, accumulate large fixed costs, and offer such low prices at first that they lose money.
This enables them to expand their businesses virtually competition-free until they have established what is essentially a monopoly.
At that point, they can hike prices and engage in price discrimination relatively freely.
As Kaplan points out, that is precisely what Amazon has done.
It first achieved massive scale, enabling it to store unordered products at diffuse locations and thereby reduce transport costs.
Now it can offer fast and free delivery, which smaller companies cannot beat.
Add to that complex algorithms that set prices in a way that maximizes profits, and the company’s dominance seems relatively secure.
As this approach facilitates the rise of global super-firms, it creates serious problems for labor markets and societies, because it destroys mid-level jobs based on old skills faster than comparable jobs based on new skills can be created.
Equally serious, it contributes to shocking levels of income inequality, with a few households not only enjoying massive wealth, but also wielding considerable political influence.
If income becomes too concentrated too quickly, desired investment will tend to fall short of available savings, creating a Keynesian macroeconomic imbalance.
(Contrary to popular belief, what matters is not the actual amount of income flowing toward top earners, but the changes in that income.)
As it stands, the impact of these technological disruptions remains relatively small in the advanced countries.
But it could affect some 20% of GDP and 40% of jobs by 2030.
That is a huge shift, happening at an unprecedented speed.
Though we are becoming accustomed to breaking records – in 2013, more than 90% of all data ever accumulated in human history had been accumulated in the previous two years – the reality is that the speed and scale of this transformation pose major challenges.
If we fail to address them adequately, the outcome is unlikely to be a safer and more prosperous society, but rather one in which frustration and hopelessness increase, potentially leading to extreme behaviors.
One proposal, made by Kaplan, is to create a “job mortgage.”
Companies with a future need for certain skills would become a kind of sponsor, involving potential future job offers, to a person willing to acquire those skills.
The worker could secure a loan against their projected future income to finance their studies.
The loans would be repaid once the job began.
If no job materialized, the individual would be held responsible for repaying only a fraction of the loan, with the balance absorbed by the company, which thus bears a share of the risk.
There would also be a cap on repayments as a percentage of income.
Other proposals focus on reforming legal frameworks to reflect more accurately new ways of working.
For example, those who are partly self-employed and partly employed by a third party would have to be better incorporated into social policies.
Such changes would undoubtedly be useful.
But none of these proposals reflects the scale of the transformation that we are confronting.
What we really need is fundamentally to transform the way our societies function – and fast.
France Stratégie, which advises the French government, and the American entrepreneur Nick Hanauer have proposed social-policy reforms that share a similar conceptual foundation.
Individuals earn “claims” over their lifetimes, first by being legal residents, and then by, say, obtaining educational degrees, earning professional certifications, performing community service (including military service), and making money.
These claims can be exchanged for various benefits, such as family leave, retraining, or supplementary retirement income.
The system would include all residents and be completely portable, with plenty of room for people to choose how and when to use their claims.
Complementary arrangements – with, say, potential employers offering additional credits for retraining – could also be implemented.
At the same time, governments must upgrade competition policy to protect against the emergence of global monopolies.
Here, new mega-regional trade deals, such as the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership and the Trans-Pacific Partnership, should prove invaluable, provided that today’s powerful players are not permitted to dictate terms that advance only their interests.
International cooperation should also be strengthened to prevent multinationals from avoiding taxes by shifting profits among jurisdictions.
Such tax avoidance has reached hundreds of billions of dollars.
Tinkering with existing systems will not be enough to prepare us for the technology-driven transformation that we are facing.
We need a comprehensive strategy aimed at making markets – and politics – truly competitive, and ensuring that public policy works for the benefit of all.
Біздің экономикалық болашағамыз артта қалды ма?
ЧИКАГО – жаһандық экономика 2008 жылғы экономикалық дағдарыстан қалпына қайта келуіне әлі де уақыт керек, ал болашақ туралы алаңдаушылық, әсіресе озық экономикалардың болашағы туралы уайым үлкейе түсуде. Менің Солтүстік-Батыс университетіндегі әріптесім Роберт Гордон өзінің  Американдық дамудың гүлденуі мен құлдырауы атты соңғы кітабында, өткен  бір жарым ғасыр ішідегі өнімділікті арттыратын үлкен инновациялар теңдессіз деген көптеген экономистердің ойын ашып көрсетеді.
Егер бұл шын болса, озық экономикалар алдағы жылдарда баяу өсу мен тоқырауды күткендері жөн.
Бірақ болашақ  шыныменде соншалықты мұңды болады мы?
Бәлкім ондай болмас.
Шын мәнінде, пессимизм ғасырлар бойы экономистердің болашақ туралы болжамдарына басты тақырып болған.
1830 жылы британдық либерал тарихшы Томас Маколей айтып өткендей, «[Меніңше] қандай заманда болмасын, әркім өз уақытына дейін, прогрессивті жетілдіру орын алғанын біліп, ешкім келесі жас буын заманында жақсарту болады деп сенбейді».
Неге, адамдар «нашарлаудан басқа ештеңені» күтпейді? - деп те толғанды.
Көп ұзамай, Mаколейдің болжамы теміржол дамуының уақытында расталды.
Болат, химиялық заттар, электр және машина өндірудегі түбегейлі өзгерістер де көп ұзамай орын алды.
Біздің технологиялық болашаққа келгенде, мен ұқсас нәтижені күтер едім.
Шынында да, мен «Біз әлі ештеңе көрмедік»-деп айтуға дейін барар едім.  Технологиялық жетістіктер әлемдегі ең озық экономикалар үшін дауыл сияқты ауқымдағы ілеспе желді жасайды.
Менің оптимизмім болашаққа деген әлдебір жалпылама сенімге негізделген емес,  бірақ ғылым (немесе «дескриптивтік білім») және технологияның ( «нұсқаулық білім») бір-бірін қолдау негізінде жасалып отыр. Ғылыми жаңалықтар технологиялық инновацияларды жеңілдете алады, сол сияқты технологиялық жетістіктер көп технологиялық өзгерістерге жетуге мүмкіндік беретін ғылыми жетістіктерді де дамытады.
Басқаша айтқанда, ғылыми және техникалық прогресс арасында оң кері байланыс тізбегі бар.
Технология тарихы осындай кері байланыс тізбегінің мысалдарынв толы.
Он жетiншi ғасырдағы ғылыми революция телескоп, барометр және вакуумдық сорғылар сияқты жаңа технологиялық озық құралдар арқылы ішінара мүмкін болды.
Микроскоптың дамуы туралы айтып өтпей, 1870 жылы бактериологиялық теорияның пайда болуын талқылау мүмкін емес.
Розалинд Франклин пайдаланылған рентген кристаллографиялық әдістері ДНК құрылымын ашу үшін маңызы болды, сондай-ақ 20-дан астам Нобель жүлдесін әкелген ашылулар үшін де басты себеп болды.
Бүгінде ғылым үшін қолжетімді құралдар тіпті ширек ғасыр бұрын мүмкін еместей болған ескі құралдардың заманауи нұсқаларын қамтиды.
Телескоптар адам  ойлағанннан мүлдем өзгеше ғаламды ашу үшін, ғарыш кеңістігіне жіберіліп, жоғары өнімді бейімделген оптикалық компьютерлерге қосылды.
2014 жылы, Betzig-hell микроскопты жасаған ғалымдар бұрын еңсерілмейтіндей саналған кедергіні жеңіп, оптикалық микроскопияны наноөлшемдікке әкелгені үшін Нобель сыйлығына ие болды.
Бұның бәрі технологиялық пессимизмді жеңуге жеткіліксіз болса, тіпті бірнеше онжылдықтар бұрын армандамаған құрылғылар - соңғы жылдары пайда болған революциялық құралдар мен құрылғыларды қарастырайық.
Компьютерден бастаңыз.
Экономистер тауарлар мен қызметтерді өндіруге компьютерлердің әсерін бағалау үшін, сондай-ақ, олардың өнімділікке қосқан үлестерін өлшеу үшін айбынды күш жұмсады.
Бірақ осы əрекеттердің бірде біреуі компьютерлердің ғылыми зерттеулер үшін әкелген сансыз жеңілдіктер мен мүмкіндіктерін толықтай есепке ала алмайды.
Оларды қолданбайтын әлемде бірде-бір зертхана жоқ.In silico термині эксперименттік жұмыста in vivo және in vitro  терминдерімен бір қатарда тұр.
Және «Есептеу физикасы» мен «Есептеу биологиясы»  тәрізді жаңа салалар жоқ жерден пайда болды.
Мур заңына сәйкес, кем дегенде кванттық есептеудің пайда болғанының арқасында ғылыми жетістіктер әлі де көптеген жылдар бойы жалғасады.
Тағы бір жаңа құрал лазер болып табылады.
Ең бірінші лазерлер пайда болған кезде, олар қолдануын іздеген құрал болды.
Қазіргі уақытта, олар құжатты сканерлеуден офтальмологияға дейін қолданылатын, компьютерлер дерлік ретінде жаппай  құрал болып кетті.
Бүгінде лазерлерді қолданатын салалар биология, химия, генетика және астрономия тәрізді өте ауқымды.
LIBS (лазерлік тесумен ықпаландырылған  спектроскопия) молекулярлық биохимия зерттеулерінің көбі негізделген  ақуыз талдауы үшін маңызды болып табылады.
Физикадағы қасиетті ұғымдардың бірі - гравитациялық толқындардың бар екені жақында лазерлер арқылы расталды.
Сонымен қатар, ғылымды түрлендіре түскен тағыда бір технологиялық инновация гендік өңдеу құралы CRISPR Cas9 болып табылады.
Қазірдің өзінде, геномдарды секвендеу жылдам және салыстырмалы түрде арзан процесс болып табылады, оның құны 2007 жылы бір геном үшін 10 млн доллардан  1,000 долларға дейін төмендеді.
CRISPR Cas9  адам геномын өңдеп және өзгертуге мүмкіндік бере тұрып, бұл ғылымды жаңа, шын мәнінде революциялық деңгейге дейін жеткізді.
Бұл идея кейбір адамдарға ұнамаса да, технологияның тиімді қолданыстары, мысалы климаттың өзгеруі және сортаңдауға төтеп беретін маңызды дақылдарды жетілдіру, сөзсіз, өте маңызды болып табылады.
Сонымен қатар, цифрландыру зерттеушілер үшін  ақпаратқа қол жеткізуде айтарлықтай көп шығындарын төмендетті.
Барлық ғылыми зерттеу қолданыстағы білімге қол жеткізуге сүйенеді; біз бәріміз біздің алдымызда болған алыптардың (және тіпті орташа деңгейдегі қайраткерлердің) иығында тұрғандаймыз. Біз олардың жаңалықтарын, идеялары мен инновацияларын жаңа, тіпті кейде революциялық ағында өңдейміз.
Бірақ, осы уақытқа дейін, ғылыми және технологиялық инновацияларды ойлап табу үшін керекті ақпаратты табу, кітапханаларда отырып, энциклопедиялар томдарын саралауда жұмсалған сансыз сағатты талап етті.
Қазіргі уақытта, зерттеушілер Монтана өлшеміндегі  маяда ине тәрізді нанөлшемді ақпаратты таба алады.
Олар үлгілер және эмпирикалық заңдылықтады табуға болатын мега-дерекқорларға кіре алады.
Он сегізінші ғасырдағы таксономия ғалымы Карл Линус бұған қатты қызып, қызғанар да еді.
Біздің ғылым сансыз жаңа жетістіктерге жеткізіп, алға ұмтылуда.
Сондай-ақ технология да күтілетін және күтпеген салаларда орын алуда да ұтылмай, алға басатынында күмәніміз жоқ.
Олар бізге экономикалық өсуді әкеледі, бірақ ұлттық табысты есепке алуда қолданылатын ескірген стандарттарға арқа сүйесек,  оны толықтай тіркей алмай қалатынымыз мүмкін.
How Inequality Found a Political Voice
MILAN – It took a long time for widening inequality to have an impact on politics, as it suddenly has done in recent years.
Now that it is a central issue, national economic priorities will need to shift substantially to create more equitable, inclusive economies and societies.
If they do not, people could embrace explosive alternatives to their current governments, such as the populist movements now sweeping many countries.
Political leaders often speak of growth patterns that unfairly distribute the benefits of growth; but then they do relatively little about it when they are in power.
When countries go down the path of non-inclusive growth patterns, it usually results in disrespect for expertise, disillusionment with the political system and shared cultural values, and even greater social fragmentation and polarization.
Acknowledging the importance of how economic benefits are distributed is of course not new.
In developing countries, economic exclusion and extreme inequality have always been unconducive to long-term high-growth patterns.
Under these conditions, pro-growth policies are politically unsustainable, and they are ultimately disrupted by political dislocations, social unrest, or even violence.
In the United States, rising inequality has been a fact of life at least since the 1970s, when the relatively equitable distribution of economic benefits from the early post-World War II era started to become skewed.
In the late 1990s, when digital technologies began to automate and disintermediate more routine jobs, the shift toward higher wealth and income inequality became turbocharged.
Globalization played a role.
In the 20 years before the 2008 financial crisis, manufacturing employment in the US rapidly declined in every sector except pharmaceuticals, even as added value in manufacturing rose.
Net jobs loss was kept roughly at zero only because employment in services increased.
In fact, much of the added value in manufacturing actually comes from services such as product design, research and development, and marketing.
So, if we account for this value-chain composition, the decline in manufacturing – the production of tangible goods – is even more pronounced.
Economists have been tracking these trends for some time.
Massachusetts Institute of Technology economist David Autor and his colleagues have carefully documented the impact of globalization and labor-saving digital technologies on routine jobs.
More recently, French economist Thomas Piketty’s international bestseller, Capital in the Twenty-First Century, dramatically widened our awareness of wealth inequality and described possible underlying forces driving it.
The brilliant, award-winning young economists Raj Chetty and Emmanuel Saez have enriched the discussion with new research.
And I have written about some of the structural economic shifts associated with these problems.
Eventually, journalists picked up on these trends, too, and it would now be hard to find anyone who has not heard of the “1%” – shorthand for those at the top of the global wealth and income scales.
Many people now worry about a bifurcated society: a thriving global class of elites at the top and a stressed-out class comprising everyone else.
Still, despite these long trends, the political and policy status quo remained largely unchallenged until 2008.
To understand why it took politics so long to catch up to economic realities, we should look at incentives and ideology.
With respect to incentives, politicians have not been given a good enough reason to address unequal distribution patterns.
The US has relatively weak campaign-finance limits, so corporations and wealthy individuals – neither of which generally prioritizes income redistribution – have contributed a disproportionate share to politicians’ campaign war chests.
Ideologically, many people are simply suspicious of expansive government.
They recognize inequality as a problem, and in principle they support government policies that provide high-quality education and health-care services, but they do not trust politicians or bureaucrats.
In their eyes, governments are inefficient and self-interested at best, and dictatorial and oppressive at worst.
All of this began to change with the rise of digital technologies and the Internet, but especially with the advent of social media.
As US President Barack Obama showed in the 2008 election cycle – followed by Bernie Sanders and Donald Trump in the current cycle – it is now possible to finance a very expensive campaign without “big money.”
As a result, there is a growing disconnect between big money and political incentives; and while money is still a part of the political process, influence itself no longer belongs exclusively to corporations and wealthy individuals.
Social-media platforms now enable large groups of people to mobilize in ways reminiscent of mass political movements in earlier eras.
Such platforms may have reduced the cost of political organizing, and thus candidates’ overall dependence on money, while providing an efficient alternative fund-raising channel.
This new reality is here to stay, and, regardless of who wins the US election this year, anyone who is unhappy with high inequality will have a voice, the ability to finance it, and the power to affect policymaking.
So, too, will other groups that focus on similar issues, such as environmental sustainability, which has not been a major focus in the current US presidential campaign (the three debates between the candidates included no discussion of climate change, for example), but surely will be in the future.
All told, digital technology is shuffling economic structures and rebalancing power relationships in the world’s democracies – even in institutions once thought to be dominated by money and wealth.
A large, newly influential constituency should be welcomed.
But it cannot be a substitute for wise leadership, and its existence does not guarantee prudent policies.
As political priorities continue to rebalance, we will need to devise creative solutions to solve our hardest problems, and to prevent populist misrule.
One hopes that this is the course we are on now.
Is Traditional Banking Unbreakable?
NEW YORK – It is a rare industry nowadays that is not at risk of being upended by digital technology.
Amazon, having swept away bookshops, is now laying siege to the rest of the retail sector.
In transportation, Uber is outrunning traditional taxi companies, while Airbnb is undermining the foundations of the hotel industry.
Meanwhile, smartphones are transforming how we communicate and revolutionizing the way we discover and patronize businesses.
So it is no surprise that banking and financial-services companies are not safe from the immense transformations wrought by technological innovation.
Indeed, for the last decade, digital startups have been penetrating areas traditionally dominated by the financial industry.
But there is reason to believe that finance will prove resilient.
Today, money can be sent to the other side of a country – or the world – simply by tapping an app, without ever interacting with a traditional financial-services company.
Migrants’ remittances alone, which the World Bank estimates will total $586 billion this year, represent a tremendous growth opportunity for companies competing with banks to move money.
Meanwhile, would-be disrupters are offering opportunities to save and invest – the very heart of traditional banking institutions’ operations.
Startups such as Acorns – an app that automatically allocates a proportion of everyday purchases to a pre-selected investment portfolio – are making rapid inroads into a very competitive marketplace.
Acorns, launched in 2014, already manages more than 650,000 investment accounts.
The company – and others like it – are not just moving into the market; the simplified investment and savings processes they offer are expanding and transforming it.
According to research by the digital ad agency Fractl, approximately 85% of millennials are saving a portion of their paycheck – a larger percentage than their predecessors.
Lending, too, is being transformed by technology.
Crowdsourced funding and peer-to-peer lending schemes give borrowers the opportunity to circumvent many of the hurdles of traditional banking – including, in some cases, collateral requirements and credit ratings.
According to the research firm Massolution, the crowdfunding market has grown exponentially, from $880 million in 2010 to $16.2 billion in 2014.
Global crowdfunding volumes are expected to double this year, surpassing $34 billion.
In 2016, crowdfunding is expected to provide more funding than traditional venture capital.
Even financial services traditionally characterized by face-to-face dealings with clients, such as investment banking advisory services, have been affected.
When Google conducted its initial public offering in 2004, it chose to bypass the investment banking industry, which traditionally underwrites the process of taking a company public.
Instead, the company opted for an electronic auction in which anyone could participate.
Other companies – like the financial research firm Morningstar – have followed suit.
While these attempts to revolutionize the equity capital markets have yet to gain widespread traction, their very existence is evidence of the opportunities for disruption in this sector.
But it would be premature to conclude that traditional banking has yielded to new financial platforms.
Many of the new entrants have benefited from advantages that would be difficult to maintain were they to scale up in size and importance.
Traditional banking is subject to intense oversight, and regulations have only become more onerous in recent years, as regulatory authorities reacted to the 2008 global financial crisis by tightening rules on leveraging ratios and know-your-customer requirements.
Many upstarts in the sector have carved out a competitive advantage by avoiding thresholds beyond which they would face substantial regulatory scrutiny and requirements.
This places a significant constraint on the size and type of financial transactions these new companies can offer.
By steering clear of services that might draw the scrutiny of financial authorities, digital startups face a natural limit to the size of their market.
Indeed, this arrangement – albeit informal – can be viewed as the way regulators manage the systemic risk posed by new entrants.
As the digital revolution evolves, much of the financial terrain in which technology companies are making the deepest inroads will come into much sharper regulatory focus.
This will favor the established players.
As a result, the digital revolution’s assault on the traditional banking industry is by no means overwhelming.
In finance, at least, technology firms should not be viewed simply as a threat, but as a source of productivity-boosting innovation.
Where Will All the Workers Go?
NEW YORK – Technology innovators and CEOs seem positively giddy nowadays about what the future will bring.
New manufacturing technologies have generated feverish excitement about what some see as a Third Industrial Revolution.
In the years ahead, technological improvements in robotics and automation will boost productivity and efficiency, implying significant economic gains for companies.
But, unless the proper policies to nurture job growth are put in place, it remains uncertain whether demand for labor will continue to grow as technology marches forward.
Recent technological advances have three biases: They tend to be capital-intensive (thus favoring those who already have financial resources); skill-intensive (thus favoring those who already have a high level of technical proficiency); and labor-saving (thus reducing the total number of unskilled and semi-skilled jobs in the economy).
The risk is that robotics and automation will displace workers in blue-collar manufacturing jobs before the dust of the Third Industrial Revolution settles.
The rapid development of smart software over the last few decades has been perhaps the most important force shaping the coming manufacturing revolution.
Software innovation, together with 3D printing technologies, will open the door to those workers who are educated enough to participate; for everyone else, however, it may feel as though the revolution is happening elsewhere.
Indeed, the factory of the future may be 1,000 robots and one worker manning them.
Even the shop floor can be swept better and cheaper by a Roomba robot than by any worker.
For the developed countries, this may seem like old news.
After all, for the last 30 years, the manufacturing base in Asia’s emerging economies has been displacing that of the old industrial powers of Western Europe and North America.
But there is no guarantee that gains in service-sector employment will continue to offset the resulting job losses in industry.
For starters, technology is making even many service jobs tradable, enabling them to be offshored to Asia and other emerging markets.
And, eventually, technology will replace manufacturing and service jobs in emerging markets as well.
Today, for example, a patient in New York may have his MRI sent digitally to, say, Bangalore, where a highly skilled radiologist reads it for one-quarter of what a New York-based radiologist would cost.
But how long will it be before a computer software can read those images faster, better, and cheaper than the radiologist in Bangalore can?
Likewise, in the next decade, Foxconn, which produces iPhones and other consumer electronics, plans to replace much of its Chinese workforce of more than 1.2 million with robots.
And soon enough voice recognition software will replace the call centers of Bangalore and Manila.
Job-reducing technological innovations will affect education, health care, government, and even transportation.
For example, will we still need so many teachers in the decades to come if the cream of the profession can produce increasingly sophisticated online courses that millions of students can take?
If not, how will all of those former teachers earn a living?
Governments, too, are shedding labor – particularly governments burdened by high deficits and debts.
And, by transforming how services are provided to the public, the e-government trend can offset the employment losses with productivity gains.
Even transportation is being revolutionized by technology.
In a matter of years, driverless cars – courtesy of Google and others – may render millions of jobs obsolete.
And, of course technological innovation that is capital-intensive and labor-saving is one of the factors – together with the related winner-take-all effects – driving the rise in income and wealth inequality.
Rising inequality then becomes a drag on demand and growth (as well as a source of social and political instability), because it distributes income from those who spend more (lower- and middle-income households) to those who save more (high-net-worth individuals and corporate firms).