Its citizens do not receive unemployment checks from Brussels the way that, say, Californians do from Washington, DC, when California experiences a recession.
Nor, given linguistic and cultural barriers, can unemployed Greeks move just as easily across the border to a more prosperous European state.
And Greek banks and firms lose their creditworthiness alongside their government if markets perceive the latter to be insolvent.
The German and French governments, for their part, have had little say over Greece’s budget policies.
They could not stop the Greek government from borrowing (indirectly) from the European Central Bank (ECB) as long as credit rating agencies deemed Greek debt creditworthy.
If Greece chooses default, they cannot enforce their banks’ claims on Greek borrowers or seize Greek assets.
Nor can they prevent Greece from leaving the eurozone.
What all this means is that the financial crisis has turned out to be a lot deeper and its resolution considerably messier than necessary.
The French and German governments have grudgingly come up with a major loan package, but only after considerable delay and with the IMF standing at their side.
The ECB has lowered the threshold of creditworthiness that Greek government securities must meet in order to allow continued Greek borrowing.
The success of the rescue is far from assured, in view of the magnitude of belt-tightening that it calls for and the hostility that it has aroused on the part of Greek workers.
When push comes to shove, domestic politics trumps foreign creditors.
The crisis has revealed how demanding globalization’s political prerequisites are.
It shows how much European institutions must still evolve to underpin a healthy single market.
The choice that the EU faces is the same in other parts of the world: either integrate politically, or ease up on economic unification.
Before the crisis, Europe looked like the most likely candidate to make a successful transition to the first equilibrium – greater political unification.
Now its economic project lies in tatters while the leadership needed to rekindle political integration is nowhere to be seen.  
The best that can be said is that Europe will no longer be able to delay making the choice that the Greek affair has laid bare.  If you are an optimist, you might even conclude that Europe will therefore ultimately emerge stronger.
A Blueprint for Greece’s Recovery
ATHENS – Months of negotiations between our government and the International Monetary Fund, the European Union, and the European Central Bank have produced little progress.
One reason is that all sides are focusing too much on the strings to be attached to the next liquidity injection and not enough on a vision of how Greece can recover and develop sustainably.
If we are to break the current impasse, we must envisage a healthy Greek economy.
Sustainable recovery requires synergistic reforms that unleash the country’s considerable potential by removing bottlenecks in several areas: productive investment, credit provision, innovation, competition, social security, public administration, the judiciary, the labor market, cultural production, and, last but not least, democratic governance.
Seven years of debt deflation, reinforced by the expectation of everlasting austerity, have decimated private and public investment and forced anxious, fragile banks to stop lending.
With the government lacking fiscal room, and Greek banks burdened by non-performing loans, it is important to mobilize the state’s remaining assets and unclog the flow of bank credit to healthy parts of the private sector.
To restore investment and credit to levels consistent with economic escape velocity, a recovering Greece will require two new public institutions that work side by side with the private sector and with European institutions: A development bank that harnesses public assets and a “bad bank” that enables the banking system to get out from under their non-performing assets and restore the flow of credit to profitable, export-oriented firms.
Imagine a development bank levering up collateral that comprises post-privatization equity retained by the state and other assets (for example, real estate) that could easily be made more valuable (and collateralized) by reforming their property rights.
Imagine that it links the European Investment Bank and the European Commission President Jean-Claude Juncker’s €315 billion ($350 billion) investment plan with Greece’s private sector.
Instead of being viewed as a fire sale to fill fiscal holes, privatization would be part of a grand public-private partnership for development.
Imagine further that the “bad bank” helps the financial sector, which was recapitalized generously by strained Greek taxpayers in the midst of the crisis, to shed their legacy of non-performing loans and unclog their financial plumbing.
In concert with the development bank’s virtuous impact, credit and investment flows would flood the Greek economy’s hitherto arid realms, eventually helping the bad bank turn a profit and become “good.”
Finally, imagine the effect of all of this on Greece’s financial, fiscal, and social-security ecosystem: With bank shares skyrocketing, our state’s losses from their recapitalization would be extinguished as its equity in them appreciates.
Meanwhile, the development bank’s dividends would be channeled into the long-suffering pension funds, which were abruptly de-capitalized in 2012 (owing to the “haircut” on their holdings of Greek government bonds).
In this scenario, the task of bolstering social security would be completed with the unification of pension funds; the surge of contributions following the pickup in employment; and the return to formal employment of workers banished into informality by the brutal deregulation of the labor market during the dark years of the recent past.
One can easily imagine Greece recovering strongly as a result of this strategy.
In a world of ultra-low returns, Greece would be seen as a splendid opportunity, sustaining a steady stream of inward foreign direct investment.
But why would this be different from the pre-2008 capital inflows that fueled debt-financed growth?
Could another macroeconomic Ponzi scheme really be avoided?
During the era of Ponzi-style growth, capital flows were channeled by commercial banks into a frenzy of consumption and by the state into an orgy of suspect procurement and outright profligacy.
To ensure that this time is different, Greece will need to reform its social economy and political system.
Creating new bubbles is not our government’s idea of development.
This time, by contrast, the new development bank would take the lead in channeling scarce homegrown resources into selected productive investment.
These include startups, IT companies that use local talent, organic-agro small and medium-size enterprises, export-oriented pharmaceutical companies, efforts to attract the international film industry to Greek locations, and educational programs that take advantage of Greek intellectual output and unrivaled historic sites.
In the meantime, Greece’s regulatory authorities would be keeping a watchful eye over commercial lending practices, while a debt brake would prevent our government from indulging in old, bad habits, ensuring that our state never again slips into primary deficits.
Cartels, anti-competitive invoicing practices, senselessly closed professions, and a bureaucracy that has traditionally turned the state into a public menace would soon discover that our government is their worst foe.
The barriers to growth in the past were an unholy alliance among oligarchic interests and political parties, scandalous procurement, clientelism, the permanently broken media, overly accommodating banks, weak tax authorities, and a weighed-down, fearful judiciary.
Only the bright light of democratic transparency can remove such impediments; our government is determined to help it shine through.
Asia’s View of the Greek Crisis
SEOUL – Asian countries have been watching the Greek crisis unfold with a mixture of envy and schadenfreude.
When they experienced their own financial crisis in 1997, they received far less aid, with far harsher conditions.
But they also recovered much more strongly, suggesting that ever-growing bailouts may not be the best prescription for recovery.
Since the onset of the crisis, Greece has received massive financing from the so-called “troika”: the European Commission, the European Central Bank, and the International Monetary Fund.
It received bailout packages in 2010 and 2012 totaling €240 billion ($266 billion), including €30 billion from the IMF, more than triple Greece’s cumulative limit for IMF borrowing.
The latest deal promises up to another €86 billion.
By contrast, South Korea’s 1997 bailout package – which was larger than those received by Indonesia, Thailand, or the Philippines – totaled $57 billion, with $21 billion coming from the IMF.
At the time, South Korea’s annual GDP was $560 billion; in 2014, Greek GDP amounted to less than $240 billion.
The IMF seems to have lent Greece such a large amount for political reasons.
For starters, at the onset of the crisis, then-IMF Managing Director Dominique Strauss-Kahn was a leading candidate to become President of France.
More generally, major IMF shareholders, the European Union, and the United States have a vital interest in stabilizing Greece to safeguard French and German banks and preserve NATO unity.
Desmon Lachman, a former deputy director of the IMF’s policy department, has called the institution a slush fund, abused by its political masters during the Greek crisis.
To be sure, the economic mess created in Greece – the result of government profligacy, official corruption, and widespread tax evasion – merited some international assistance.
And the IMF did impose conditions on its loans to Greece – including fiscal austerity, privatization, and structural reform of its pension and tax systems – most of which were necessary to address the country’s insolvency.
The requirements of the latest rescue deal are the toughest yet – even tougher than those that Greek voters overwhelmingly rejected in a referendum earlier this month.
But the scale of the aid remains massive, especially when one considers how little progress Greece has made in implementing the reforms it promised in the past.
This contrasts sharply with Asia’s experience in 1997.
Unlike Greece, Asia’s problem was not an insolvency crisis, but a liquidity crisis, caused by a sudden reversal of capital flows.
In South Korea, net private-capital inflows of 4.8% of GDP in 1996 swung to net outflows of 3.4% of GDP in 1997.
Though the accumulation of substantial short-term debts in the financial system and corporate sector did amplify the shocks, the primary factors fueling the crisis were the lack of international liquidity, panicked behavior by investors, and financial contagion.
Yet the IMF imposed even tougher conditions on Asia than it has on Greece, including fiscal austerity, monetary tightening, and financial restructuring.
Some of these requirements were clearly unnecessary, as evidenced by Malaysia, which recovered quickly from the crisis without IMF assistance.
In any case, the actions were temporary.
Once confidence began to recover and market conditions stabilized, the East Asian economies shifted their monetary and fiscal policies toward expansion and embraced large-scale exchange-rate depreciation – efforts that enhanced their export competitiveness.
Structural reforms, including the immediate closing of financial institutions and the elimination of non-performing loans, also helped to bolster recovery.
In South Korea, for example, real GDP growth quickly rebounded from -6.7% in 1998 to 9.5% in 1999.
By mid-2003, some 776 of the country’s financial institutions were closed.
And the authorities’ strong commitment to reform restored investor confidence, reviving inflows of private capital and reactivating foreign trade.
Greece, by contrast, has utterly failed to engineer a recovery.
Instead of dropping to 110% as planned, the public debt-to-GDP ratio has increased to 170%.
Annual per capita real income contracted 4.8%, on average, over the last six years.
Unemployment stands at 26%, and hovers around 50% among young people.
Against this background, it was not shocking that Greece, unable to come up with €1.5 billion at the end of June, became the first developed country to miss a payment to the IMF.
Belatedly, the Fund acknowledged that its lending and policy advice had failed in Greece.
Greece’s government then demanded more financial support with less stringent conditions.
But, as its creditors have now recognized, providing more money will not address Greece’s insolvency.
That is why the new deal requires that the government immediately cut pensions, hike taxes (beginning with the value-added tax), liberalize the labor market, and adhere to severe spending constraints.
At the same time, a write-down of official debt, like the “haircut” given to private creditors in 2012, will be necessary.
Many have questioned whether agonizing reforms are entirely necessary; if the country returned to the drachma, they suggest, it could implement interest-rate cuts and devalue its exchange rate, thereby engineering an export-led recovery.
But, given Greece’s small export sector, not to mention the weakness of the global economy, such a recovery may be impossible.
Greece’s best bet is reform.
So far, Greece has shown itself to be unwilling to implement a painful internal-wage adjustment and reform measures forced by outsiders.
Perhaps the latest deal, which was reached with Greece on the brink, will prove to be a turning point, with Greece finally committing actively to economic and fiscal reform.
Otherwise, Greece’s exit from the eurozone – with all the concomitant social and economic strife – seems all but inevitable.
Asians watch with sympathy the fall from grace of the birthplace of Western civilization.
But perhaps Greece should look to Asia for proof that, by taking responsibility for its own destiny, a country can emerge stronger from even the most difficult trials.
The Greek Time Bomb
ATHENS – Much is at stake in Greece’s upcoming election.
Indeed, the outcome could determine whether the country remains in the eurozone, with far-reaching implications for the rest of the monetary union.
Syriza, a radical left-wing party whose popularity has skyrocketed amid the country’s economic crisis, is the favorite to win, though it is unlikely to gain enough parliamentary seats to govern alone.
Instead, it will probably lead a coalition government, though with which other parties remains unclear.
Fundamental to Syriza’s platform is its economic program, designed to counteract the impact of the excessively strict austerity that Greeks have endured for the last four and a half years, in exchange for bailouts from the “troika” of the European Central Bank, the International Monetary Fund, and the European Commission.
Pensions have been reduced by 40%, on average, while the middle class is suffering under the weight of crippling new property taxes.
As a result, Greece has fallen into a deep and prolonged recession, with output down 25% from pre-crisis levels.
Worse, unemployment stands at nearly 26% – and more than 50% among young people.
Yet most unemployment benefits are now being eliminated after 12 months, with the long-term unemployed often losing access to the state health-care system.
Add to this a 30% increase in prices for prescription drugs, and it is easy to see why Greek society is unraveling.
Of course, these sacrifices might be worthwhile were they helping Greece reduce its public debt to manageable levels.
But, at the end of 2014, public debt amounted to 175% of GDP, having increased from its 2009 level of 127%.
Servicing that debt would require primary budget surpluses equal to at least 4% of GDP until 2022 – an outcome that would require a surge in growth.
Under the weight of relentless fiscal austerity, however, such growth is out of the question.
That is why Syriza has promised to launch a massive new spending program – including free electricity and food coupons for the poor and an increase in state pensions to pre-crisis levels – that would cost about 6.5% of GDP.
Tax hikes for high-income earners and large property owners would help to finance these expenditures, while increases in the minimum wage would round out income redistribution efforts.
Syriza has also promised to repeal labor-market liberalization and suspend privatization.
Finally, it plans to renegotiate Greece’s debt with lenders, in the hope of writing off the bulk of its liabilities.
Syriza’s economic program neglects the important fact that fiscal consolidation and structural measures not only form part of Greece’s commitments; they also serve the country’s long-term interest.
Given this, they cannot – and should not – be abolished.
Instead, the problems in their design and implementation should be addressed, in order to improve their effectiveness within current economic circumstances.
Such an approach would strengthen Syriza’s position in debt-relief negotiations.
Nonetheless, official statements suggest that the troika would not be inclined to accept Syriza’s negotiating framework, intending instead to complete the talks that it had launched with the outgoing center-right government, the goal being to securing further budget cuts and initiate new labor-market and pension reforms.
In short, the troika will insist that Greece honors its prior commitments.
If negotiations stall, financial and liquidity stress, resulting from Greece’ inability to borrow at current interest rates – ten-year bond yields have reached 9.5 % – will weaken the fiscal position and banking system further.
This could lead to a collapse in confidence, triggering financial upheaval and, in turn, forcing the country to seek a third bailout – one that would require Greece to leave the eurozone and introduce a new, devalued currency.
In that case, Greece’s geopolitical position would be weakened, its economy would sink further into recession, and social tensions would rise.
Moreover, instability would become chronic, because the eurozone would no longer offer a backstop for fiscal and financial laxity.
Eurozone authorities may claim that a Greek exit no longer poses a systemic risk, given the introduction in recent years of various instruments for fighting financial crises, including government-backed rescue funds, a partial banking union, tougher fiscal controls, and the European Central Bank’s new role as lender of last resort.
But a member’s exit would still indicate that the eurozone’s integrity is not guaranteed – a message that the markets are unlikely to miss.
A Greek exit may serve as a warning to countries like Spain, Italy, and France, where strong anti-Europe or anti-establishment parties are on the rise.
But it would do nothing to address the real problem: the increasing economic divergence among eurozone countries.
So long as performance gaps continue to widen, voters will continue to challenge European integration.
Only further unification, underpinned by growth-oriented policies in the struggling countries, can reverse this trend.
Such an outcome is still possible – but only if the relevant actors recognize the risks associated with a Greek exit from the eurozone.
A Syriza-led government must moderate its approach and promise that it will continue to pursue reform and limit spending in exchange for a substantial reduction to its debt burden – a reduction that the troika must be willing to grant.
Revolusi Hijau yang Dimotori Pemerintah
LONDON – Diskusi tentang membangun masa depan yang hijau cenderung berfokus pada perlunya meningkatkan produksi energi dari sumber-sumber energi terbarukan, namun itu baru awalnya saja.
Menemukan mekanisme yang lebih baik untuk menyimpan dan melepaskan energi – ketika matahari tidak bersinar, angin tidak bertiup, atau mobil listrik sedang bergerak – juga penting.
Dan berlawanan dengan kepercayaan umum, justru sektor publik yang memimpin jalan menuju solusi yang efektif.
Sejak pengembangan baterai lithium-ion secara komersial – baterai isi ulang yang umum terdapat pada barang elektronik yang digunakan sehari-hari – di awal tahun 1990-an, isu mengenai penyimpanan dan pelepasan tenaga secara efektif agar sumber energi terbarukan bisa menggantikan bahan bakar fosil masih menjadi tantangan yang menyulitkan.
Berbagai upaya dilakukan pengusaha-pengusaha miliarder seperti Bill Gates dan Elon Musk untuk mengatasi tantangan ini telah menjadi fokus spekulasi media yang terlalu heboh.
Jadi sebetulnya berapa banyak miliarder yang diperlukan untuk mengganti baterai?
Ternyata jawabannya adalah nihil.
Minggu ini, Ellen Williams, Direktur Advanced Research Projects Agency-Energy (ARPA-E), bagian dari Departemen Energi Amerika Serikat, mengumumkan bahwa kantornya telah mendahului para miliarder ini.
ARPA-E menurut pernyataannya telah menemukan “cawan suci dalam baterai” yang memungkinkan kita “merancang pendekatan baru dalam teknologi baterai, membuatnya berfungsi, menjadikannya layak secara komersial.”
Meskipun memuji prestasi Musk, Williams menarik perbedaan tajam antara kedua pendekatan.
Musk berperan dalam produksi skala besar “teknologi baterai terkini yang bertenaga kuat.”
Sebaliknya ARPA-E mengupayakan inovasi teknologi dalam artian murni: “menemukan cara-cara baru melakukan pekerjaan”.
Keduanya “cukup yakin” bahwa teknologi mereka “berpotensi menjadi lebih baik”.
Bagi banyak orang perkembangan ini tampak mengejutkan.
Bagaimanapun juga, sejak dahulu sektor swasta dipandang sebagai sumber utama inovasi dalam perekonomian.
Tetapi persepsi ini tidak sepenuhnya benar.
Bahkan, tokoh-tokoh pengusaha besar dalam sejarah sering berdiri di bahu negara sebagai pelaku usaha/ekonomi (standing on the shoulder of the entrepreneurial state).
Almarhum Steve Jobs, pendiri dan CEO Apple, adalah pengusaha yang cerdas namun teknologi yang menjadikan iPhone “ponsel cerdas” dikembangkan dengan dana publik.
Itu sebabnya Gates mengatakan hanya negara, dalam bentuk lembaga publik seperti ARPA-E, yang dapat memimpin cara menuju terobosan dalam energi.
Penting untuk dipahami bahwa disini bukan negara sebagai pengatur yang berperan; tapi negara sebagai pelaku ekonomi (entrepreneurial state) yang bertindak dan menciptakan pasar, bukan sekedar memperbaikinya.
Melalui pendekatan berorientasi pada misi dan kebebasan bereksperimen – dengan memahami bahwa kegagalan tidak dapat dihindari dan bahkan diterima sebagai bagian dari proses pembelajaran – negara akan mampu menarik orang-orang berbakat dan mengejar inovasi radikal.
Tentu saja memimpin revolusi hijau tidak akan mudah.
Lembaga-lembaga negara harus mengatasi tantangan-tantangan sulit untuk menjadikan perubahan ini berhasil.
Ambil contoh ARPA-E, badan yang didirikan pada tahun 2009 sebagai bagian dari paket stimulus ekonomi Presiden Barack Obama.
Meskipun masih di tahap awal perkembangan, badan ini – berdasarkan model Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) yang beroperasi sejak lama – sudah menciptakan harapan-harapan baru.
Sejalan dengan komitmen yang dibuat Presiden Obama dan 19 pemimpin negara lainnya di Paris pada bulan Desember lalu dalam konferensi perubahan iklim untuk melipatgandakan investasi publik pada riset energi hijau, ARPA-E nampaknya siap menerima tambahan dana.
Tetapi ARPA-E masih kekurangan kapasitas untuk membuat dan membentuk pasar baru yang katakanlah mampu dilakukan DARPA.
Hal ini menjadi tantangan besar sebab badan ini bekerja dalam industri yang masih berada di tahap awal.
Meskipun perkembangan teknologi tenaga angin dan surya mendapat dorongan kuat di awal tahun 1970-an, keduanya masih diwarnai dengan ketidakpastian pasar dan teknologi.
Infrastruktur energi yang melekat masih mempertahankan keuntungan dan posisi kuat, dan pasar tidak memberi nilai tinggi pada keberlanjutan atau tidak menetapkan harga yang adil terkait limbah dan polusi.
Dalam menghadapi ketidakpastian tersebut, sektor bisnis tidak akan memasuki pasar hingga investasi-investasi paling berisiko dan padat modal sudah dilakukan, atau sampai pesan-pesan politik yang koheren dan sistematik sudah dikomunikasikan.
Dengan demikian pemerintah harus bertindak tegas untuk membuat investasi yang diperlukan dan memberikan sinyal yang tepat.
Yang terpenting, pemerintah juga harus menerapkan instrumen pengamanan (safeguards) untuk memastikan negara sebagai pelaku ekonomi akan memperoleh keuntungan sebagai imbalan upayanya.
Dahulu, hal ini dimungkinkan melalui “imbasan pajak” (tax spillover).
Namun tarif pajak marginal terbesar sekarang jauh di bawah tarif pada tahun 1950-an, ketika NASA, contoh terkemuka atas inovasi disponsori negara, didirikan di Amerika Serikat.
(Saat itu, tarif pajak marginal tertinggi adalah 91%) Memang benar, berkat lobi yang dilakukan beberapa pemodal ventura asal Silicon Valley, tarif pajak atas keuntungan modal turun 50% dalam lima tahun pada akhir tahun 1970-an.
Peningkatan penggunaan upstream patent – diklaim untuk alasan-alasan “strategis” – melemahkan efek spillover.
Tentu saja pemain sektor swasta seperti Gates dan Musk adalah mitra penting dalam menggerakkan revolusi hijau.
Melalui peran yang lebih besar dalam komersialisasi dan penyebarluasan tenologi baterai penyimpan energi, mereka akan mendapat imbalan yang cukup atas usahanya.
Tetapi bukankah seharusnya ARPA-E (atau angel investor-nya yaitu wajib pajak Amerika Serikat) juga memperoleh sebagian keuntungan, atas investasi dini dan berisiko yang dilakukannya?
Di beberapa negara, seperti Israel (melalui program Yozma) dan Finlandia (melalui Sitra fund), pemerintah berkontribusi dalam inovasi disponsori negara.
Hal ini memungkinkan negara sebagai pelaku ekonomi untuk terus berinvestasi dan mendorong gelombang inovasi berikutnya.
Mengapa negara-negara Barat begitu menentang ide rasional ini?
Green Money
NEW YORK – There is little doubt that green will be the metaphorical color of choice for world leaders when they gather at the G-20 Summit in Pittsburgh.
Attention will focus on turning the “green shoots” of recovery into sustainable “green growth,” leading to “green economies” consistent with the goal of protecting the world’s climate.
Governments in rich countries are beginning to spell out just what that will mean in terms of policy and lifestyle changes and the investments required to develop clean energy sources.
But, to be successful, a “green new deal” will have to address some enormous challenges in the developing world, where the impact of global warming will be felt first and hardest, and where rapid growth requires massive expansion of cheap energy.
Globally, more than 30 million tons of oil equivalent are consumed in the form of primary energy every day, equivalent to 55 kilowatt hours per person per day, with rich countries, on average, consuming more than twice that figure.
For many developing countries, the figure is well under 20 kwh; China is still well below the global average, and even most emerging markets consume less than one-third of the average in many advanced economies.
The economics behind efforts to close these energy gaps are relatively straightforward.
Up to a threshold of around 100 kwh per capita per day, energy consumption and human development indicators go hand in hand.
At current prices, between $10 and $20 per person per day would be needed to reach that threshold.
This puts energy security well beyond the means of not just the poorest, but also of most people in emerging economies.
Spending $10 per day on energy services would, for example, exhaust the per capita incomes of countries such as Angola, Ecuador, and Macedonia.
Hence, big investments in energy services are the order of the day throughout the developing world.
In order to provide more energy to meet development goals without accelerating global warming, there must be a shift to a new energy infrastructure built around renewables (of which the most significant are probably solar power, wind, and biofuels), cleaner coal, and carbon capture and storage.
The problem is that these are currently much more costly options than their carbon-heavy alternatives.
Policy makers in developing countries are concerned that being forced to go down this path could put modern energy services beyond the reach of poor countries, families, and communities.
Market-based solutions to the climate challenge run the very serious risk of undermining development objectives, precisely because they aim to raise the price of energy services in order to make renewable energy sources attractive to private investors.
Indeed, the protectionist elements tacked on to these proposals make them decidedly anti-development.
So what is needed is massive public investment in cleaner energy provision, coupled in the short term with appropriate subsidies to offset high initial prices.
If targeted at the most promising technology options (say, solar and wind), such a strategy would yield early unit cost write-downs through innovation, learning, and economies of scale; give the private sector clear, credible, and attractive signals; and encourage energy efficiency.
The big obstacle is access to predictable and affordable finance.
The onus is on rich-country governments to support this big push into clean energy in the developing world, as it was their carbon-fueled economic prosperity that has brought us to the brink of a climate catastrophe.
So far, rich countries have not risen to the challenge; despite commitments made at Kyoto, Bali, and elsewhere, the resources committed for climate-change mitigation – let alone adaptation – in developing countries have been paltry and poorly targeted.
The scale of the needed support is comparable to the Marshall Plan, which committed 1% of the United States’ GDP per year to help European reconstruction after World War II.
But, as with the original plan, the long-term returns from such a commitment will be enormous.
This time, moreover, the burden will not fall on one country alone, and a broader mix of traditional and innovative sources of financing are already available to help fund the required investment programs in energy efficiency and renewables.
Even so, scaling-up multilateral support will require a massive overhaul of international finance.
Back in April, G-20 leaders accepted that investing in a low-carbon infrastructure, particularly energy services, is key to a truly sustainable economic and environmental future.
In Pittsburgh, with the clock ticking on talks to adopt a successor treaty to the Kyoto Protocol this December in Copenhagen, the G-20 will have a real opportunity to show that the color of serious money to meet both climate and development goals really is green.
Green Shoots or Yellow Weeds?
New York – Recent data suggest that the rate of contraction in the world economy may be slowing.
But hopes that “green shoots” of recovery may be springing up have been dashed by plenty of yellow weeds.
Recent data on employment, retail sales, industrial production, and housing in the United States remain very weak; Europe’s first quarter GDP growth data is dismal; Japan’s economy is still comatose; and even China – which is recovering – has very weak exports.
Thus, the consensus view that the global economy will soon bottom out has proven – once again – to be overly optimistic.
After the collapse of Lehman Brothers in September 2008, the global financial system nearly melted down and the world economy went into free fall.
Indeed, the rate of economic contraction in the fourth quarter of 2008 and the first quarter of 2009 reached near-depression levels.
And the recent optimism that economies will bottom out by mid-year have been dashed by the most recent economic data.
The crucial issue, however, is not when the global economy will bottom out, but whether the global recovery – whenever it comes – will be robust or weak over the medium term.
One cannot rule out a couple of quarters of sharp GDP growth as the inventory cycle and the massive policy boost lead to a short-term revival.
But those tentative green shoots that we hear so much about these days may well be overrun by yellow weeds even in the medium term, heralding a weak global recovery over the next two years.
First, employment is still falling sharply in the US and other economies.
Indeed, in advanced economies, the unemployment rate will be above 10% by 2010.
This will be bad news for consumption and the size of bank losses.
Second, this is a crisis of solvency, not just liquidity, but true deleveraging has not really started, because private losses and debts of households, financial institutions, and even corporations are not being reduced, but rather socialized and put on government balance sheets.
Lack of deleveraging will limit the ability of banks to lend, households to spend, and firms to invest.
Third, in countries running current-account deficits, consumers need to cut spending and save much more for many years.
Shopped out, savings-less, and debt-burdened consumers have been hit by a wealth shock (falling home prices and stock markets), rising debt-service ratios, and falling incomes and employment.
Fourth, the financial system – despite the policy backstop – is severely damaged.
Most of the shadow banking system has disappeared, and traditional commercial banks are saddled with trillions of dollars in expected losses on loans and securities while still being seriously undercapitalized.
So the credit crunch will not ease quickly.
Fifth, weak profitability, owing to high debts and default risk, low economic – and thus revenue – growth, and persistent deflationary pressure on companies’ margins, will continue to constrain firms’ willingness to produce, hire workers, and invest.
Sixth, rising government debt ratios will eventually lead to increases in real interest rates that may crowd out private spending and even lead to sovereign refinancing risk.
Seventh, monetization of fiscal deficits is not inflationary in the short run, whereas slack product and labor markets imply massive deflationary forces.
But if central banks don’t find a clear exit strategy from policies that double or triple the monetary base, eventually either goods-price inflation or another dangerous asset and credit bubble (or both) will ensue.
Some recent rises in the prices of equities, commodities, and other risky assets is clearly liquidity-driven.
Eighth, some emerging-market economies with weaker economic fundamentals may not be able to avoid a severe financial crisis, despite massive IMF support.
Finally, the reduction of global imbalances implies that the current-account deficits of profligate economies (the US and other Anglo-Saxon countries) will narrow the current-account surpluses of over-saving countries (China and other emerging markets, Germany, and Japan).
But if domestic demand does not grow fast enough in surplus countries, the resulting lack of global demand relative to supply – or, equivalently, the excess of global savings relative to investment spending – will lead to a weaker recovery in global growth, with most economies growing far more slowly than their potential.
So, green shoots of stabilization may be replaced by yellow weeds of stagnation if several medium-term factors constrain the global economy’s ability to return to sustained growth.
Unless these structural weaknesses are resolved, the global economy may grow in 2010-2011, but at an anemic rate.
Greenspan Hypnotizes Himself
On the eve of the last G-7 meeting in London, US Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan did a startling about-face by soft-pedaling America’s trade deficit.
“Market pressures …appear poised to stabilize and over the longer run possibly to decrease the US current-account deficit and its attendant financing requirements,” he said.
But just two months earlier, in Frankfurt, Mr. Greenspan had cautioned that the US deficit could not go on forever without the dollar depreciating. What is going on here?
To be sure, the US trade figures have improved somewhat.
The expected December trade deficit is $57 billion—an improvement on the record $60.3 billion gap in November.
And the November figure will be adjusted downward because of a recently discovered statistical error by Canadian authorities.
But politics, not economics, explains why the Fed chairman changed his tune about America’s weak external position.
Mr. Greenspan’s statement in Frankfurt in November alarmed senior European Central Bank (ECB) officials, who considered it a “provocation” – one that promptly sent the dollar into an unwanted tailspin.
The last thing the Fed Maestro needed was a repeat performance on the eve of the G-7 – a meeting that is supposed to exemplify international co-operation.
So Mr. Greenspan decided to extend a peace offering to the Europeans.
Politics also explains Mr. Greenspan’s pre-G-7 comment that “the voice of fiscal restraint, barely audible a year ago, has at least partially regained volume.”
The Fed chairman is “hearing voices” because he is a team player who wants to encourage US budget cutting.
How would it look if he had openly expressed misgivings about Bush’s plan to cut the budget deficit in half by 2009 just days before it was made public?
What Mr. Greenspan chose to overlook, however, is that most experts are extremely – and rightly – skeptical of the Bush plan, which leaves out big-ticket items such as the cost of the Iraq War, and uses an unrealistic benchmark from which to measure the alleged 50% cutback.
Timing the budget’s release for just after the G-7 made for a harmonious London meeting in which both Americans and Europeans could claim that the US was taking care of business—that is, its twin fiscal and current-account deficits.
The Europeans gladly went along with this charade because they now fear dollar depreciation more than global imbalance.
So far, Europe’s fragile economic recovery has been based largely on exports.
The euro’s rapid appreciation against the dollar threatens to undermine this foundation.
But internal European Union studies indicate that European exports are more closely linked to changes in external demand than the euro-dollar exchange rate.
So long as external demand holds up – and recent growth numbers from China and the US are positive in this regard – Europe’s exports should continue to perform well.
In any case, protecting exports by resisting euro appreciation – or, more precisely, dollar depreciation – is a poor way to promote economic growth.
A strong currency keeps both inflation and ECB interest hikes at bay. This helps boost private consumption and investment.
Moreover, because crude oil is priced in US dollars, a rise in the euro means a fall in energy costs.
This, too, helps European growth.
Over the longer term, a strong currency promotes efficiency in export industries, further insulating competitiveness from exchange-rate effects. Dollar depreciation improves Europe’s terms of trade and real income.
America’s fiscal and external deficits will not disappear just because the chief magician at the Federal Reserve waves his wand and says abracadabra.
On the contrary, the longer Greenspan plays down America’s dangerous macroeconomic imbalances with happy talk, the more damage they will ultimately inflict on the global economy.
What the world needs now is the realist Greenspan of Frankfurt, not the cheerleader Greenspan of London.
Simply put, there must be dollar depreciation to keep global imbalances in check.
Instead of catering to European fears and prejudices about exchange rates, the Fed chairman should put politics aside and stick to sound economics.
The Costs of Grexit
PARIS – Earlier this week, following days of tense discussions, the new government in Athens reached an agreement with its eurozone creditors that includes a package of immediate reforms and a four-month extension of the financial assistance program.
But, despite Europe's collective sigh of relief, the compromise does not preclude the need for further tough negotiations on a new financial-assistance program that should be introduced by the end of June.
In any negotiation, a key variable influencing the protagonists' behavior, hence the outcome, is what failure to reach an agreement would cost each of them.
In this case, the issue is the cost of Greece's exit (“Grexit") from the eurozone – a prospect that was widely discussed in the media throughout the recent negotiation, with considerable speculation about the stance of the various players, especially the Greek and German governments.
From Greece's perspective, leaving the euro would be highly disruptive, which explains why there is very little support for it in the country.
But what about Grexit costs for the rest of the eurozone?
Ever since the question was first raised in 2011-2012, there have been two opposing views.
One view – dubbed the domino theory – claims that if Greece exited, markets would immediately start wondering who is next.
Other countries' fate would be called into question, as occurred during the Asian currency crises of 1997-98 or the European sovereign-debt crisis of 2010-2012.
Disintegration of the eurozone could follow.
The other view – often dubbed the ballast theory – claims that the eurozone would actually be strengthened by Greece's withdrawal.
The monetary union would be rid of a recurring problem, and a eurozone decision to allow or invite Greece to leave would bolster the credibility of its rules.
No country, it is claimed, could dare to blackmail its partners anymore.
Back in 2012, the domino theory looked realistic enough that the creditor countries ditched the Grexit option.
Having reflected and pondered over the summer, German Chancellor Angela Merkel went to Athens and expressed her “hopes and wishes" that Greece remains in.
But the situation today is different.
Market tension has eased considerably; Ireland and Portugal are not under assistance programs anymore; the eurozone financial system has been strengthened by the decision to move to a banking union; and crisis-management instruments are in place.
A Grexit-induced chain reaction would be significantly less likely.
But it does not follow that the loss would be harmless.
There are three reasons why Grexit could still seriously weaken Europe's monetary union.
First and foremost, a Greek exit would disprove the tacit assumption that participation in the euro is irrevocable.
True, history teaches that no commitment is irrevocable: according to Jens Nordvig of Nomura Securities, there have been 67 currency-union breakups since the beginning of the nineteenth century.
Any exit from the eurozone would increase the perceived probability that other countries may, sooner or later, follow suit.
Second, an exit would vindicate those who do consider the euro merely a beefed-up fixed-exchange-rate arrangement, not a true currency.
Confidence in the US dollar relies on the fact that there is no difference between a dollar held in a bank in Boston and one held in San Francisco.
But since the 2010-2012 crisis, this is not entirely true of the euro anymore.
Financial fragmentation has receded but not disappeared, meaning that a loan to a company in Austria does not carry exactly the same interest rate as a loan to the same company on the other side of the Italian border.
Critics like the German economist Hans-Werner Sinn have made a specialty of tracking exposure to the break-up risk.
None of this is currently lethal, owing to the initiatives taken in recent years; but it would be a mistake to assume that full confidence has been restored.
European citizens would certainly respond to a country's withdrawal (or expulsion) from the eurozone by starting to look at the currency in a different way.
Where a euro is held would become a relevant question.
Domestic and foreign investors would scrutinize more closely whether an asset's value would be affected by a breakup of the monetary union.
Governments would become more suspicious of the risks to which their partners potentially expose them.
Indeed, suspicion would become irreversible, and it would replace the belief in the irreversibility of the eurozone.
Finally, an exit would force European policymakers to formalize their so-far unwritten and even unspecified rules for divorce.
Beyond broad principles of international law – for example, that what matters for deciding an asset's post-divorce currency denomination are the law governing the underlying contract and the corresponding jurisdiction – there are no agreed rules for deciding how conversion into a new currency would be carried out.
A Grexit would force these rules to be defined, therefore making it clear what a euro is worth, depending on where it is held, by whom, and in what form.
Indeed this would not only make the break-up risk more imaginable; it would also make it much more concrete.
None of this means that eurozone members should be ready to pay whatever cost is needed to keep Greece inside the eurozone.
This would obviously amount to a surrender.
But they should not harbor any illusions, either: there can be no such thing as a happy Grexit.
Grit is Good
PARIS – The United States is widely recognized as possessing the deepest, most liquid, and most efficient capital markets in the world. America’s financial system supports efficient capital allocation, economic development, and job creation.
These and similar phrases have been common currency among American legislators, regulators, and financial firms for decades.
Even in the wake of the financial crisis that erupted in 2008, they trip off the word processors of a hundred submissions challenging the so-called Volcker rule (which would bar banks from making proprietary investments). The casual reader nods and moves along.
But there are signs that these assumptions are now being challenged.
Prior to the crisis, regulatory authorities focused mainly on removing barriers to trading, and generally favored measures that made markets more complete by fostering faster, cheaper trading of a wider variety of financial claims. That is no longer the case.
On the contrary, nowadays many are questioning the assumption that greater market efficiency is always and everywhere a public good.
Might such ease and efficiency not also fuel market instability, and serve the interests of intermediaries rather than their clients?
Phrases like “sand in the machine” and “grit in the oyster,” which were pejorative in the prelapsarian days of 2006, are now used to support regulatory or fiscal changes that may slow down trading and reduce its volume.
For example, the proposed Financial Transactions Tax in the European Union implies a wide-ranging impost generating more than €50 billion a year to shore up the EU’s own finances and save the euro. The fact that 60-70% of the receipts would come from London is an added attraction for its continental advocates.
Opponents argue, in pre-crisis language, that the FTT would reduce market efficiency and displace trading to other locations. “So what?” supporters reply: maybe much of the trading is “socially useless,” and we would be better off without it.
The Volcker rule (named for former Federal Reserve Chairman Paul Volcker) provoked similar arguments.
Critics have complained that it would reduce liquidity in important markets, such as those for non-US sovereign debt.
Defending his creation, Volcker harks back to a simpler time for the financial system, and refers to “overly liquid, speculation-prone securities markets.”
His message is clear: he is not concerned about lower trading volumes.
Haldane cites a striking statistic: in 1945, the average investor held the average US share for four years. By 2000, the average holding period had fallen to eight months; by 2008, it was two months.
The rapid, dramatic shifts brought about by HFT are likely to continue.
It is only a decade since trading speeds fell below one second; they are now as fast as the blink of an eye. Technological change promises even faster trading speeds in the near future.
Indeed, HFT firms talk of a “race to zero,” the point at which trading takes place at close to the speed of light.
Should we welcome this trend? Will light-speed trading deliver us to free-market Nirvana?
The evidence is mixed. It would seem that bid-offer spreads are falling, which we might regard as positive.
But volatility has risen, as has cross-market contagion. Instability in one market carries over into others.
As for liquidity, while on the surface it looks deeper, the joint report on the Flash Crash prepared by the US Securities and Exchange Commission and the US Commodity Futures Trading Commission shows that HFT traders scaled back liquidity sharply, thereby exacerbating the problem.
The liquidity that they apparently offer proved unreliable under stress – that is, when it is most needed.
So the traditional defense of US and, indeed, European capital markets is not as axiomatic as it once seemed.
Market participants need to engage more effectively with the new agenda, and not assume that claims of greater “market efficiency” will win the day.
Without more sophisticated arguments, they might well find themselves submerged under a pile of regulatory sandbags.
Grounding Syria’s Killers
NEW YORK – As Syria has descended into all-out civil war, much of the worsening slaughter has been attributable to aerial bombardments of urban neighborhoods that President Bashar al-Assad’s opponents control, with such attacks causing especially high casualties in recent weeks in the ancient city of Aleppo.
Can anything be done to stop the killing?
There are many good reasons not to intervene militarily.
For one thing, it would be impossible to do so under the auspices of the United Nations, owing to Russian and Chinese obstructionism in the Security Council.
There is also America’s understandable reluctance to become involved in yet another war in an Islamic country, as well as the impossibility of knowing what kind of regime might emerge if and when Assad is overthrown.
Yet it also seems impossible to stand by while the daily bloodbath continues.
The situation in Syria feels more and more like what we witnessed in Bosnia 20 years ago.
Then, as now, the international community’s main response for an extended period was to provide humanitarian assistance to the conflict’s growing number of victims.
Thanks to satellite television, the world had a front-row seat to watch the citizens of Sarajevo, who were kept alive by UN food deliveries, being killed by shelling and sniping from the surrounding hills.
Today, the UN is delivering an increasing amount of assistance to Syrian refugees who have managed to escape to neighboring countries, while those who have not are being slaughtered.
As with Syria now, Russian support for the Serbian side two decades ago was one of the factors that prevented military intervention.
But it was by no means the only obstacle.
The US presidential election in 1992 made George H. W. Bush’s administration reluctant to use military force.
Other political factors deterred Britain and France – and Bush’s successor, Bill Clinton – from intervening until another three years of killing had taken place.
While military intervention in Syria may be impossible, imposing a no-fly zone is not.
To be sure, a no-fly zone over Syria would not be a simple undertaking: substantial resources would be required, and, given the regime’s military capabilities, it would not be a risk-free operation.
Yet it was accomplished for more than a decade in neighboring Iraq to keep Saddam Hussein from attacking segments of his own population, so we know that it can be done in Syria as well.
Of course, someone – presumably Gulf States such as Qatar and Saudi Arabia – is supplying the Syrian opposition with weapons.
Yet, as long as Assad’s forces can attack opposition-controlled neighborhoods with helicopters and fixed-wing airplanes, the opposition’s ability to overthrow the regime with the arms that are now available to it seems questionable.
What is more certain is that the presence of armed fighters in a neighborhood provokes aerial attacks that destroy civilian infrastructure and maim and kill those residents who have not fled.
Former UN Secretary-General Kofi Annan made a valiant effort to negotiate a peace settlement when there still seemed to be a remote chance of success.
Since then, the sharp rise in bloodshed has made it increasingly unlikely, or even impossible, that Assad’s opponents would consent to any arrangement that kept him in power.
At the same time, Assad’s loyalists, especially members of the minority Alawite sect, must fear that they would be massacred if his regime fell.
At some point, the international community may have to intervene to prevent or mitigate such a massacre.
Its credibility in doing so, and therefore its likelihood of success, would be far greater if it were to intervene now to establish a no-fly zone to protect civilians in the opposition neighborhoods of Syria’s cities.
Because Russian and Chinese intransigence precludes the UN from establishing a no-fly zone, the Arab League and NATO should jointly take the lead.
And, while the participation of the US, which has by far the greatest logistical capacity, is essential, it should not be in the forefront.
As in the case of Libya, this would be an excellent opportunity to “lead from behind.”
A no-fly zone is by no means a solution to the conflict in Syria.
But it would be a modest step in the direction of reducing the great harm currently being done.
A more comprehensive approach, if one could be found, would be far preferable.
Until then, it seems well worth pursuing efforts that would help to abate the carnage.
Growing Up in the Eurozone
MILAN – A rapid and large increase of government debt has been a general phenomenon in the advanced countries since the 2007-09 crisis: for the first time, the average debt/GDP ratio for OECD countries has surpassed 100%.
Fiscal consolidation will weigh on growth prospects for two generations to come, and the welfare state as we have known it in Europe since World War II will have to be transformed, especially given a rapidly aging population.
But the eurozone debt crisis has distinctive features.
Most importantly, while the average debt/GDP ratio is no higher than it is in other advanced countries, and consolidation efforts started earlier, the eurozone has been mired in a severe crisis of confidence for the past two years.
This points to a systemic dimension of the crisis that cannot be reduced to profligate behavior by fiscal sinners.
Indeed, the Greek crisis exposed three main flaws in the monetary union itself.
First, the system lacked effective arrangements to align fiscal and other economic policies.
As long as enforcement of fiscal discipline is entrusted to an intergovernmental body, the problem is bound to reappear, limiting the credibility of common budgetary rules.
Moreover, financial markets underpriced private and sovereign credit risks, in the implicit belief that no one would fail, and that all debts would somehow be made whole, implying weak market discipline on borrowers.
Finally, once the crisis hit, leading to a re-pricing of risks in financial markets, the need to avoid an economic and financial meltdown compelled governments to support aggregate demand and make private liabilities whole.
But the disconnection between centralized monetary and decentralized fiscal powers de facto impeded the full use of monetary instruments to meet monetary and financial shocks.
That left individual eurozone members exposed to brutal pressure by financial markets at a time when excessive private debt was turned into unsustainable public debt.
Suddenly, the eurozone had become a straightjacket.
And so it has remained: budgets are cut, growth falters, and periphery countries must engineer substantial real exchange-rate devaluations to regain competitiveness and close their external deficits.
Core countries, meanwhile, argue that they can do little to strengthen aggregate demand and relieve pressure on their partners, even as the periphery’s agony is dragging the core into recession, owing to its dependence on peripheral export markets.
And, indeed, recent data point to a rapidly worsening economic environment in Germany, where the trade surplus has shrunk dramatically in recent months.
Over the past two years, fundamental changes in the eurozone’s economic governance have aimed at rectifying the monetary union’s founding flaws.
And, along the way, an intergovernmental process has become communitarian.
Key powers over the implementation of common policy guidelines have been entrusted to the European Commission, and the European Council has limited its own ability to reject Commission recommendations by requiring a qualified majority to change them.
Strong economic-governance rules, however, will not suffice.
A fully functioning monetary union also requires a central bank that is free to act as required to confront liquidity and confidence shocks, some mutualization of government debts, and centralized control over fiscal policy.
Moreover, it must have centralized banking supervisory policies, with strong powers to manage bank crises and to liquidate banks that cannot be rescued.
All of this can be achieved only gradually, as Europe moves to a fully-fledged federal union.
Whether the eurozone will survive in the meantime will be determined by the European Council’s capacity to establish intermediate arrangements that can halt the crisis and restore trust among its members.
At their meeting at the end of June, European leaders acknowledged for the first time the multiple dimensions of the crisis, accepting that austerity – putting everyone’s house in order – will not suffice.
Accordingly, new joint policy initiatives will address economic growth, banking union, and liquidity.
Moreover, European leaders have placed these new policies within a coherent longer-term framework that may also include “the issuance of common debt.”
Likewise, the European Council has agreed on a new “Compact for growth and jobs” that identifies a specific European dimension of growth policies, mainly integration of energy, transport, communications, and services, together with higher infrastructure investment.
What is notably missing is recognition of the need for greater flexibility on fiscal-consolidation efforts.
As the Commission has requested, countries with stronger fiscal positions should consider slowing their consolidation efforts in order to avoid aggravating the recession.
But, in order to preserve investors’ confidence, some eurozone countries must strike a difficult balance between austerity and overkill, which would have been facilitated had the European Council issued a clear statement that letting automatic stabilizers work, while remaining on track with structural budget targets, fully complies with European Union obligations.
Moreover, a greater share of the adjustment burden must fall on Germany.
Recent fairly generous wage agreements in Germany will help, but are not enough; there is also a need to boost domestic demand.
More aggressive liberalization of the bloated banking system, network services (especially in energy and transport), and public procurement may contribute significantly over time to raising domestic investment and incomes.
The sizeable investments required to make up for the loss of nuclear energy may contribute more immediate stimulus.
All of this should not be seen as a concession, but as part of the obligations undertaken by eurozone governments to address excessive imbalances.
Now more than ever, Germany must be persuaded that without its contribution in reviving growth and correcting external imbalances, the eurozone faces prolonged depression and certain collapse.
Long Live China’s Boom
BEIJING – After three decades of 9.8% average annual GDP growth, China’s economic expansion has been slowing for 13 consecutive quarters – the first such extended period of deceleration since the “reform and opening up” policy was launched in 1979.
Real GDP grew at an annual rate of only 7.5% in the second quarter of this year (equal to the target actually set by the Chinese government at the beginning of this year).
Many indicators point to further economic deceleration, and there is a growing bearishness among investors about the outlook for China.
After all, China has high private and public savings, foreign reserves exceeding $3.3 trillion, and great potential for industrial upgrading and infrastructure improvement.
Indeed, China can maintain an 8% annual GDP growth rate for many years to come, because modern economic growth is a process of continuous technological innovation and industrial upgrading.
Of course, this is true for developed and developing countries alike.
But developed countries differ from developing countries in an important way. Since the Industrial Revolution, developed countries have always been on the global frontier of technologies and industries, which has required them to invest in costly and risky indigenous research and development.
By contrast, technologies and existing industries in developing countries are in general well within the global frontier.
As a result, they benefit from the “latecomer’s advantage”: technological innovation and industrial upgrading can be achieved by imitation, import, and/or integration of existing technologies and industries, all of which implies much lower R&D costs.
In theory, any developing country that can harness its latecomer’s advantage to achieve technological and industrial upgrading can grow faster than developed countries.
How much faster is an empirical question.
According to the Growth Commission led by Nobel laureate Michael Spence, 13 economies took full advantage of their latecomer status after World War II and achieved annual GDP growth rates of 7% or higher – at least twice as high as developed countries’ growth rates – for 25 years or longer.
China became one of the 13 economies after 1979.
Because the country’s latecomer status explains its 33 years of rapid economic growth, the key to understanding its potential for further rapid growth in the future lies in estimating how large those advantages still are.
Per capita GDP, which reflects a country’s average labor productivity and its overall technological and industrial achievement, is a useful proxy to estimate latecomer’s advantage.
That is, the per capita GDP gap between China and developed countries essentially reflects the gap between them in terms of overall technological and industrial achievement.
According to the most up-to-date estimate by the late economic historian Angus Maddison, China’s per capita GDP in 2008 was $6,725 in 1990 dollars, which was 21% of per capita GDP in the United States.
If the latecomer’s advantage implied by the income gap between the four NIEs and the US enabled the NIEs to realize average annual GDP growth rates of 7.6%-9.2% for 20 years, China’s annual growth potential should be a similar 8% for the 2008-2028 period.
To realize its potential growth as a latecomer, China needs, above all, to deepen its market-oriented reforms, address various structural problems, and develop its economy according to its comparative advantages.
Globalization’s Last Gasp
LONDON – Does Donald Trump’s election as United States president mean that globalization is dead, or are reports of the process’ demise greatly exaggerated?
If globalization is only partly incapacitated, not terminally ill, should we worry?
How much will slower trade growth, now in the offing, matter for the global economy?
World trade growth would be slowing down, even without Trump in office.
Its growth was already flat in the first quarter of 2016, and it fell by nearly 1% in the second quarter.
This continues a prior trend: since 2010, global trade has grown at an annual rate of barely 2%.
Together with the fact that worldwide production of goods and services has been rising by more than 3%, this means that the trade-to-GDP ratio has been falling, in contrast to its steady upward march in earlier years.
This disturbing trajectory, argue the mavens of globalization, reflects the resurgent protectionism manifest in popular opposition to the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) and the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP), and now in Trump’s electoral victory.
It means that the benefits of openness and specialization are being squandered.
Causality in economics may be elusive, but in this case it is clear.
So far, slower trade growth has been the result of slower GDP growth, not the other way around.
This is particularly evident in the case of investment spending, which has fallen sharply since the global financial crisis.
Investment spending is trade-intensive, because countries rely disproportionately on a relatively small handful of producers, like Germany, for technologically sophisticated capital goods.
In addition, slower trade growth reflects China’s economic deceleration.
Until 2011 China was growing at double-digit rates, and Chinese exports and imports were growing even faster.
China’s growth has now slowed by a third, leading to slower growth of Chinese trade.
China’s growth miracle, benefiting a fifth of the earth’s population, is the most important economic event of the last quarter-century.
But it can happen only once.
And now that the phase of catch-up growth is over for China, this engine of global trade will slow.
The other engine of world trade has been global supply chains.
Trade in parts and components has benefited from falling transport costs, reflecting containerization and related advances in logistics.
But efficiency in shipping is unlikely to continue to improve faster than efficiency in the production of what is being shipped.
Already, motor-vehicle manufacturers ship an automotive transmission back and forth across the US-Mexican border several times in the course of production.
At some point, unpacking that production process still further will reach the point of diminishing returns.
So should we worry that trade is growing more slowly?
Yes, but only in the sense that a doctor worries when a patient runs a fever.
Fever is rarely life-threatening; rather, it is a symptom of an underlying condition.
In this case, the condition is slow economic growth, also known as secular stagnation, caused by depressed investment, which in turn reflects financial problems and policy uncertainty.
This, then, is the underlying condition.
Trade agreements like the TPP and TTIP address it only obliquely.
Increased spending on infrastructure by governments, to boost investment and growth directly, is more to the point.
But whether the Trump administration and the new US Congress can design and implement a program of productive infrastructure spending remains to be seen.
More generally, a political consensus is needed on growth-promoting policies, so that investment is not held hostage to political infighting.
Whether this will be possible under Trump’s administration is another open question.
The story for cross-border flows of financial capital is even more dramatic.
Gross capital flows – the sum of inflows and outflows – are not just growing more slowly; they are down significantly in absolute terms from 2009 levels.
But dramatic is not the same as alarming.
In fact, it is mainly cross-border bank lending and borrowing that have fallen.
Foreign direct investment – financial flows to build foreign factories and acquire foreign companies – remains at pre-crisis levels.
So do cross-border borrowing and lending through stock and bond markets.
This difference reflects regulation.
Having concluded, rightly, that cross-border bank lending is especially risky, regulators clamped down on banks’ international operations.
In response, many banks curtailed their cross-border business.
But, rather than alarming anyone, this should be seen as reassuring, because the riskiest forms of international finance have been curtailed without disrupting more stable and productive forms of foreign investment.
We now face the prospect of the US government revoking the Dodd-Frank Act and rolling back the financial reforms of recent years.
Less stringent financial regulation may underpin a recovery in international capital flows.
But we should be careful what we wish for.
Growth in a Buddhist Economy
NEW YORK – I have just returned from Bhutan, the Himalayan kingdom of unmatched natural beauty, cultural richness, and inspiring self-reflection.
From the kingdom’s uniqueness now arises a set of economic and social questions that are of pressing interest for the entire world.
Bhutan’s rugged geography fostered the rise of a hardy population of farmers and herdsmen, and helped to foster a strong Buddhist culture, closely connected in history with Tibet.
The population is sparse – roughly 700,000 people on territory the size of France – with agricultural communities nestled in deep valleys and a few herdsmen in the high mountains.
Each valley is guarded by a dzong (fortress), which includes monasteries and temples, all dating back centuries and exhibiting a masterful combination of sophisticated architecture and fine arts.
Bhutan’s economy of agriculture and monastic life remained self-sufficient, poor, and isolated until recent decades, when a series of remarkable monarchs began to guide the country toward technological modernization (roads, power, modern health care, and education), international trade (notably with neighboring India), and political democracy.  What is incredible is the thoughtfulness with which Bhutan is approaching this process of change, and how Buddhist thinking guides that thoughtfulness.
Bhutan is asking itself the question that everyone must ask: how can economic modernization be combined with cultural robustness and social well-being?
In Bhutan, the economic challenge is not growth in gross national product, but in gross national happiness (GNH).
I went to Bhutan to understand better how GNH is being applied.
There is no formula, but, befitting the seriousness of the challenge and Bhutan’s deep tradition of Buddhist reflection, there is an active and important process of national deliberation.
Therein lies the inspiration for all of us.
Part of Bhutan’s GNH revolves, of course, around meeting basic needs – improved health care, reduced maternal and child mortality, greater educational attainment, and better infrastructure, especially electricity, water, and sanitation.
This focus on material improvement aimed at meeting basic needs makes sense for a country at Bhutan’s relatively low income level.
Yet GNH goes well beyond broad-based, pro-poor growth.
Bhutan is also asking how economic growth can be combined with environmental sustainability – a question that it has answered in part through a massive effort to protect the country’s vast forest cover and its unique biodiversity.
It is asking how it can preserve its traditional equality and foster its unique cultural heritage. And it is asking how individuals can maintain their psychological stability in an era of rapid change, marked by urbanization and an onslaught of global communication in a society that had no televisions until a decade ago.
I came to Bhutan after hearing an inspiring speech by Prime Minister Jigme Thinley at the 2010 Delhi Summit on Sustainable Development. Thinley had made two compelling points.
The first concerned the environmental devastation that he could observe – including the retreat of glaciers and the loss of land cover – as he flew from Bhutan to India. The second was about the individual and the meaning of happiness.
Thinley put it simply: We are each finite and fragile physical beings. How much “stuff” – fast foods, TV commercials, large cars, new gadgets, and latest fashions – can we stuff into ourselves without deranging our own psychological well-being?
For the world’s poorest countries, such questions are not the most pressing.
Their biggest and most compelling challenge is to meet citizens’ basic needs.
But, for more and more countries, Thinley’s reflection on the ultimate sources of well-being is not only timely, but urgent.
Everybody knows how American-style hyper-consumerism can destabilize social relations and lead to aggressiveness, loneliness, greed, and over-work to the point of exhaustion.
What is perhaps less recognized is how those trends have accelerated in the United States itself in recent decades.
This may be the result of, among other things, the increasing and now relentless onslaught of advertising and public relations.