One Dalit (the lowest level of India’s old caste system) leader expressed his fear that Anna’s success might inspire some majoritarian leader to rouse an even larger movement to rescind the protective rights and affirmative-action policies that have brought the lower castes some dignity.
And some NGO leaders object that their own, very different anti-corruption agenda is being pre-empted by Hazare’s demands.
In a populous country, it is not difficult to attract a large crowd.
The electronic media are particularly attracted to colorful crowds waving flags and espousing nationalist causes.
As one journalist pointed out, when 400,000 people (far more than Hazare’s followers in Delhi) marched in Kolkata in May 1998 to protest against the government’s nuclear tests, the media barely noticed.
Even when movements have near-universal support (which is not the case with the recent political movements in the US or India), there is a fundamental tension between democracy’s procedural and participatory aspects.
Apart from electoral reform, outlets for political participation and expression of public grievances must be balanced by institutions and procedures that are partly insulated from the rough-and-tumble of politics.
Of course, representative government does sometimes become unresponsive, particularly between elections, but direct democracy is not the solution.
The US state of California, which has become increasingly dysfunctional since a 1978 popular referendum capped property taxes, can attest to that.
Nor is it an answer to demand hasty enactment of legislation in the face of a threat to cause public disorder by starving oneself to death, as Anna Hazare has done.
Most citizens in the world’s two largest democracies understand that democracy does not offer magic solutions.
One of the most lamentable developments of our time is that so many are now prepared to try unhealthy palliatives and short cuts.
Democratic Inequality
CHICAGO – Why did the household savings rate in the United States plummet before the Great Recession?
Two of my colleagues at the University of Chicago, Marianne Bertrand and Adair Morse, offer an intriguing answer: growing income inequality.
Bertrand and Morse find that in the years before the crisis, in areas (usually states) where consumption was high among households in the top fifth of the income distribution, household consumption was high at lower income levels as well.
After ruling out a number of possible explanations, they concluded that poorer households imitated the consumption patterns of richer households in their area.
Consistent with the idea that households at lower income levels were “keeping up with the Vanderbilts,” the non-rich (but not the really poor) living near high-spending wealthy consumers tended to spend much more on items that richer households usually consumed, such as jewelry, beauty and fitness, and domestic services.
Indeed, many borrowed to finance their spending, with the result that the proportion of poorer households in financial distress or filing for bankruptcy was significantly higher in areas where the rich earned (and spent) more.
Were it not for such imitative consumption, non-rich households would have saved, on average, more than $800 annually in recent years.
This is one of the first detailed studies of the adverse effects of income inequality that I have seen.
It goes beyond the headline-grabbing “1%” debate to show that even the everyday inequality that most Americans face – between the incomes of, say, typical readers of this commentary and the rest – has deep pernicious effects.
Equally interesting is the link that the study finds between income inequality and pre-crisis economic policy.
Republican Congressmen from districts with higher levels of income inequality were more likely to vote for legislation to expand housing credit to the poor in the years before the crisis (almost all Democrats voted for such legislation, making it hard to distinguish their motives).
And the effect of spending by the rich on non-rich households’ spending was higher in areas where house prices could move more, suggesting that housing credit and the ability to borrow against rising home equity may have supported over-consumption by the non-rich.
I was most fascinated, though, by the difference in legislators’ response to inequality now and in the past.
In a study of the congressional vote on the McFadden Act of 1927, which sought to boost competition in lending, Rodney Ramcharan of the US Federal Reserve and I found that legislators from districts with a highly unequal distribution of land holdings – farming was the primary source of income in many districts then – tended to vote against the act.
More inequality led legislators, at least in that case, to prefer less competition and less expansion in lending.
And we found that counties with less bank competition experienced a milder farmland boom, and therefore a smaller bust in the years before the Great Depression.
The obvious lesson to be drawn from these episodes is the importance of unintended consequences.
In the early twentieth century, a congressional district’s rich landowners were likely to own the local banks as well, or to be related to, or friends with, bank owners.
They benefited from limiting competition and controlling access to finance.
Representatives voted on behalf of their districts’ powerful interests.
They preferred less competition in credit markets not out of concern for the unwitting farmers, but in order to defend powerful lenders’ profits.
It worked, but an unintended collateral effect was to protect these districts from getting carried away by the financial frenzy.
Why did twenty-first-century legislators behave differently?
The cynical, and increasingly popular, view is that they were again voting their pocketbooks – all financial legislation in the run-up to the 2008 crisis was supposedly driven by the financial sector’s appetite for more customers to devour with teaser loans and dubious mortgages.
But, if voting was influenced by the financial sector, the supposed party of the plutocrats, the Republicans, should have voted in unison for the bill.
Instead, they split on the basis of whose non-rich constituents were more desirous of obtaining finance.
Twenty-first-century legislators seemed to be more democratic, responding to their voters’ possibly misguided wishes, rather than primarily to powerful financial interests.
Indeed, once the unintended consequences of their actions – more financial duress for the non-rich after the crisis – became clear, Bertrand and Morse show that the legislators in unequal districts moved against the financial sector to protect their constituents, voting to set limits on interest rates charged by “payday” lenders (who lend to over-indebted lower-income borrowers at very high interest rates).
Of course, such legislation will have unanticipated consequences, which future studies will unearth, but the intent behind it cannot be doubted.
We should not come away from these episodes thinking that expanding access to finance is bad.
In general, expanding access is beneficial (just not before a crisis!), but finance is a powerful tool that has to be used sensibly.
Access is good; excess is bad.
But there is a more important point: while there are many gaps between the intent and consequences of legislation, legislators do seem ultimately to care more about their less-moneyed constituents than they did in the past.
Democracy is stronger.
In these cynical times, that is encouraging.
Demografi dan Pembangunan
WASHINGTON, DC – Realisasi Tujuan Pembangunan Berkelanjutan (Sustainable Development Goals) – bertujuan mengentas kemiskinan, meningkatkan pemerataan kesejahteraan, dan memajukan keberlanjutan, sekarang hingga akhir 2030 – mengharuskan penyelesaian sejumlah tantangan utama, mulai dari menjamin pendanaan yang memadai untuk melawan perubahan iklim hingga mengendalikan guncangan-guncangan makro ekonomi.
Akan tetapi ada satu potensi masalah yang bisa hikmah di balik musibah: transisi demografi di hampir semua negara yang terjadi dalam beberapa tahun ke depan.
Ketika agenda SDG mencapai tenggat waktunya, populasi penduduk dunia diperkirakan mencapai 8,5 miliar jiwa.
Dua puluh tahun kemudian – sekitar 34 tahun dari sekarang – angka tersebut diperkirakan mendekati 10 miliar penduduk, atau bertambah 2,5 miliar jiwa dari jumlah saat ini.
Dunia seperti apa yang akan kita diami?
Di mana generasi berikutnya akan tinggal?
Dari mana sumber penghasilan mereka?
Apakah mereka akan menguatkan atau justru melemahkan perekonomian nasional?
Sebagai gambarannya, kita bisa mundur 35 tahun, kembali ke awal tahun 1980an.
Presiden AS Ronald Reagan, pemimpin Cina Deng Xiaoping, Perdana Menteri Inggris Margaret Thatcher, Presiden Perancis François Mitterrand, dan Presiden Uni Soviet Mikhail Gorbachev mendominasi tajuk utama berita dunia.
Penjualan PC sangat rendah dan anak-anak bersaing memainkan kubus Rubik, alih-alih mencoba unggul di permainan Pokémon.
Saat itu, populasi penduduk dunia hanya 4,5 miliar jiwa, 42% diantaranya (hampir dua miliar) hidup di dalam kemiskinan ekstrem.
Laju pertumbuhan penduduk yang terlampau tinggi sangat dikhawatirkan sebab bisa melebihi produksi pertanian dan hanya mengakibatkan kemiskinan.
Namun prediksi Malthus salah.
Walaupun penduduk dunia bertambah hingga 7,5 miliar orang, hanya 750 juta jiwa, setara dengan 10% penduduk, hidup di dalam kemiskinan ekstrem.
Dua negara, Cina dan India mengangkat ratusan juta orang keluar dari jurang kemiskinan dalam beberapa dekade terakhir, berhasil meningkatkan pendapatan dan kesehatan warga.
Keduanya merealisasikannya melalui penguatan kelembagaan dan mengedepankan kebijakan-kebijakan yang mendukung pertumbuhan yang solid dan inklusif.
Cina misalnya memanfaatkan bonus demografi: angka fertilitas turun dan pertumbuhan angkatan kerja jauh lebih cepat dibandingkan penduduk tidak produktif, sehingga memaksimalkan sumber daya untuk berinvestasi pada manusia dan modal.
Hasilnya adalah kenaikan pertumbuhan dan peningkatan standar hidup.
Efek bonus demografi bisa dimanfaatkan hingga beberapa dekade, meskipun bagi Cina ini hampir mendekati akhirnya.
Tetapi bagi India dan negara-negara berkembang lainnya, bonus demografi baru mulai dirasakan.
Bahkan, hampir 90% kemiskinan dunia berpusat di negara-negara dimana kelompok penduduk usia kerja meningkat, ini menciptakan peluang besar untuk pengentasan kemiskinan secara cepat dalam puluhan tahun ke depan.
Contohnya di Afrika Sub-Sahara, yang saat ini dirundung kemiskinan ekstrem cukup parah, jumlah anak-anak usia di bawah 15 tahun setara dengan 43% total penduduk.
Ketika anak-anak tersebut cukup matang untuk memasuki pasar tenaga kerja, proporsi pekerja di kawasan tersebut akan meningkat secara signifikan dan  menaikkan rata-rata pendapatan per kapita.
Namun tidak semua negara siap memanfaatkan fenomena “youth bulge” atau ledakan usia muda.
Sejak sekarang hingga 2030 nanti, sejumlah negara berpendapatan menengah akan mengalami penurunan jumlah penduduk usia kerja.
Selain itu, hal ini mencerminkan kecenderungan adanya kenaikan pendapatan yang mendorong keluarga menunda kehamilan, berdasarkan bukti empiris.
Bahkan di Amerika Serikat, isu demografi tidak selamanya buruk – bukan hanya karena anggapan umum bahwa pergeseran dari angka fertilitas tinggi ke rendah berhubungan dengan pergeseran usia harapan hidup rendah ke tinggi.
Sejarah menunjukkan ada jenis bonus demografi kedua – bonus lain yang berlangsung lebih lama daripada yang pertama – yang muncul dari akumulasi tabungan kelompok penduduk usia lanjut yang menghasilkan lonjakan investasi.
Banyak negara maju yang mengikuti pola tersebut.
Bagaimanapun juga, memetik bonus demografi membutuhkan kerja keras.
Seperti dimuat dalam Global Monitoring Report tahun 2015/2016 yang diterbitkan Kelompok Bank Dunia, respon kebijakan negara menentukan bagaimana tren demografi mempengaruhi kesejahteraan penduduk.
Terapkan pendekatan yang salah dan ledakan populasi kaum muda bisa menyulitkan dan kenaikan populasi yang menua secara cepat bisa membebani pertumbuhan ekonomi dan anggaran negara.
Bagi negara-negara yang memiliki kenaikan penduduk usia kerja, tantangan utamanya adalah menciptakan lapangan kerja produktif yang memadai.
Sementara itu, bagi negara-negara yang menghadapi populasi yang menua (aging population), perlu meningkatkan produktivitas dan menerapkan sistem kesejahteraan sosial.
Apapun kondisi atau tren yang dihadapi, wajib dilakukan investasi pada human capital dan enabling environment pengembangan bisnis untuk meningkatkan kesempatan kerja.
Selain itu, setiap negara harus memanfaatkan keunikan kondisi demografinya melalui penetapan kebijakan yang sesuai mengenai perpindahan modal lintas negara, migrasi, dan perdagangan.
Aliran modal lebih banyak harus disalurkan ke negara-negara “lebih muda” (younger population) – dengan basis manufaktur dan pasar konsumen yang berkembang – untuk menunjang investasi dan pertumbuhan kesempatan kerja; sementara aliran tenaga kerja layaknya dikerahkan ke negara-negara “menua” (aging population), guna mengisi kesenjangan angkatan kerja.
Agar seluruh kebijakan di atas berjalan, setiap negara perlu meningkatkan efisiensinya dan kredibilitas lembaga-lembaga pemerintahan pusat dan daerah.
Untuk menghindari ketidakstabilan yang mungkin terjadi, perlu juga dikurangi atau dihilangkan segala ketidakpastian.
Selama 35 tahun terakhir, terbukti bahwa populasi penduduk lebih besar tidak serta-merta lebih miskin.
Walaupun pemusatan warga miskin yang banyak terjadi di negara-negara lemah dan terkena dampak konflik akan mewarnai tantangan pengentasan kemiskinan dalam puluhan tahun ke depan, tidak ada alasan untuk menunda progres.
Kita diberkati dengan sumber daya dan pengetahuan untuk meraih kemakmuran, kesetaraan, dan keberlanjutan.
Tantangan sebenarnya ialah memanfaatkannya secara efektif.
Demonetization on Five Continents
CAMBRIDGE – Around the world, several countries are currently undergoing “demonetization,” or currency reforms in which the government removes banknotes of a certain denomination from circulation and replaces them with new notes.
Governments pursue demonetization for a variety of reasons, and some of the recent initiatives are going better than others.
When demonetization is particularly dramatic and disruptive, it is often a signpost on the road to hyperinflation.
This seems to be the case in Venezuela, where President Nicolás Maduro recently recalled the 100-bolivar note, and will replace it with new notes denominated at 500-20,000 bolivars.
Economists define hyperinflation as a pattern of monthly price increases that exceed 50%, which may happen in Venezuela in the next few months.
Hyperinflation has been much rarer this century than in the twentieth century, and Venezuela will be the first country to experience it since Zimbabwe in 2008-09.
The current Venezuelan episode continues a long tradition of gross currency mismanagement in Latin American and former Soviet-bloc countries, where past governments used demonetization to transfer wealth from the public to themselves.
In each case, the fundamental problem is that the government cannot finance its unsustainable spending through taxation or borrowing, so it resorts to debasing the currency.
The Venezuelan government’s latest “currency reform” may ostensibly be aimed at curbing high inflation.
But fundamental macroeconomic reform requires that the government rein in its excessive primary budget deficits, so that it does not have to keep printing money.
In these scenarios, there is minimal economic and social disruption.
When Lithuania left the litas and adopted the euro in 2015, its currency transition went smoothly, as did Germany and France’s adoption of the euro in cash form in 2002, and so on with all 19 countries that have joined the eurozone.
A third form of demonetization is embodied in Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s November 8 announcement that 500- and 1,000-rupee bills – constituting 86% of the cash in circulation in India – would no longer be considered legal tender and should be exchanged for newly issued bills by the end of the year.
Since then, the country has been reeling.
Indians have been waiting in long lines at banks, only to discover that the banks had not received enough new bills.
Some businesses are unable to operate.
India’s demonetization plan was intended as a way to crack down on illegal activities.
But its abrupt implementation has inflicted unnecessarily high costs on the Indian economy.
The US had similar motives when it phased out bills denominated at $500 and above, in 1969.
So, too, did the European Central Bank, when it commendably decided in May to phase out the €500 note.
High-denomination notes are often used for tax evasion, bribery, drug trafficking, and even terrorism, so governments use demonetization to frustrate criminal enterprise.
As it happens, such prominent observers as Kenneth Rogoff, Larry Summers, and Peter Sands think the US should even phase out $100 bills, too.
This form of demonetization is typically carried out gradually, and in some cases, indefinitely, by simply letting targeted notes wear out on their own.
If leaders are brave and want to invalidate a high-denomination note in less than one year, they can ask tough questions of anyone who tries to exchange a large quantity of them.
Rather than just making future illegal activities more difficult, they can also strike a blow against people who stockpiled cash from past illegal activities.
But imposing a short timeframe requires political will.
It will be resisted by non-criminals – everyone from survivalists to grandparents who want to give a crisp new $100 bill to a grandchild for a special occasion.
India’s strategy of rapid demonetization has obviously fallen short, because it was unnecessarily abrupt and secretive.
What’s more, the Modi government is targeting relatively small notes (worth approximately $7 and $15, respectively) that all Indians use for all purposes.
It should have allowed for more time to print an ample supply of new notes, and to help businesses switch over to non-cash payment methods, such as electronic funds transfers.
Even with more warning, people who had stockpiled the targeted bills for illegitimate purposes would have suffered a loss, if they had been unable to demonstrate to a bank the provenance of their currency.
Their other option would have been to offload the bills at a discount in an unofficial market.
Most important, by allowing more time, the government could have avoided inconveniencing ordinary people and disrupting the economy.
One possible explanation for Modi’s urgency is that, eyeing the 2017 election in Uttar Pradesh, he was trying to disrupt rival political parties that use cash in their campaigns.
If true, that would be a rather cynical justification for what is supposed to be a good-government reform.
Western leaders could probably be bolder when they phase out big bills as slowly as they do.
But Modi has been too bold.
The Looming Death of Homo Economicus
KIEL – The world seems to be on the verge of another “great transformation,” with changes far more profound than news-grabbing economic or geopolitical headlines about Asia’s economic rise or the fires in the Middle East.
The coming changes will fundamentally redefine the nature of our economic interactions – and the social dynamics that underlie them.
This is a transformation on the scale of the shift, more than 8,000 years ago, from nomadic hunter-gatherer societies to settled agricultural ones, which eventually led to the rise of cities.
A similar transformation occurred in Europe in the tenth century, with the emergence of guilds – associations of skilled workers who controlled the practice of their craft in a particular town – which paved the way for the Industrial Revolution.
The particular characteristics of the impending transformation remain unclear.
It may well involve revolutions in bio-, nano-, and digital technology, together with a social-networking revolution that eliminates geographical and cultural barriers.
What is already clear, however, is that, like previous transformations, this one will involve a fundamental change in all of our economic relations and the social relations that support them.
Mainstream economics offers a straightforward analysis of and policy response to such a transformation.
Whenever technological or other changes allow for people to be compensated for the benefits that they confer on one another (minus the costs), the price-based market system can adjust.
When the changes create externalities, economic restructuring is required – say, adjustments in taxes and subsidies, regulatory shifts, or property-rights upgrading – to offset the costs and benefits for which the market cannot compensate.
And when the changes give rise to particularly high levels of inequality, redistributive measures are needed.
This approach is based on the assumption that, if everyone is fully compensated for the net benefits that they confer on others, individuals pursuing their own self-interest will, as Adam Smith put it, be led, “as if by an invisible hand,” to serve the public interest as well. According to this view, everyone is Homo economicus: a self-interested, fully rational individualist.
But, as past “great transformations” demonstrate, this approach is inadequate, because it neglects the social underpinnings of market economies.
In such economies, contracts tend to be honored voluntarily, not through coercive enforcement.
What makes these economies function is not a policeman protecting every shop window, but rather people’s trust, fairness, and fellow-feeling to honor promises and obey the prevailing rules.
Where this social glue is lacking – such as between Israelis and Palestinians – people cannot exploit all of the available economic opportunities.
This link is apparent in the deep social significance of most of an individual’s economic transactions.
When people acquire expensive cars, designer clothing, and opulent houses, they generally seek social recognition.
When couples or friends give gifts to one another or take vacations together, they perform economic transactions inspired by affiliation and care.
In short, mainstream economics – and the concept of homo economicus – recognizes only half of what makes us human.
We are undoubtedly motivated by self-interest.
But we are also fundamentally social creatures.
This oversight is particularly crippling in view of the impending transformation, which will upend the underpinnings of contemporary society.
Indeed, at present, despite unprecedented economic integration and new opportunities for cooperation, our social interactions remain atomized.
The problem lies in deeply ingrained – and divisive – perceptions of identity.
The world is divided into nation-states, each controlling many of the instruments of public policy.
People’s social allegiances are divided further by religion, race, occupation, gender, and even income bracket.
Where social barriers are sufficiently strong, economic barriers are certain to appear.
These can range from protectionist trade policies and increasingly strict immigration controls to religious wars and ethnic cleansing.
Clearly, economic success vitally depends on how people perceive their social affiliations.
One view is that our identities are immutable, impermeable, exogenously generated, and intrinsically opposed to one another.
This classic “us versus them” dichotomy leads to sympathy for one’s in-group and implacable conflict with out-groups – a bottomless source of conflict throughout history.
But another view is possible: each person has multiple identities, the salience of which is shaped by one’s motivations and circumstances.
This idea – which is firmly rooted in neuroscience, psychology, anthropology, and sociology – implies that an individual has significant latitude in shaping his or her identities.
This is not to say that national and religious identities are not profoundly important.
Rather, it implies that we are co-creators of our identities.
Instead of choosing identities that divide us, making it impossible to tackle multiplying global problems, we can shape identities that extend our sense of compassion and moral responsibility.
A growing body of scientific evidence shows that compassion, like any other skill, can be ingrained and enhanced through teaching and practice.
Educational institutions can thus work to develop students’ capacity for caring in tandem with their cognitive abilities.
More broadly, societies everywhere should be driven by a common goal that transcends their diverse backgrounds.
Resolving problems that extend across borders is a good place to start, with strategies involving specific tasks for various groups and countries to undertake that advance the greater good.
Initiatives like conflict-resolution workshops, reconciliation commissions, cross-cultural education programs, and compulsory civic duty for school leavers could also help.
The mainstream view that people are wholly self-interested economic actors denies our innate capacity for reciprocity, fairness, and moral responsibility.
In deepening social affiliations, we can lay the groundwork for a new form of economy in which many more opportunities can be seized.
Denying Democracy in Hong Kong
This week marks the 15th Anniversary of the promulgation of Hong Kong’s constitution, the Basic Law, by China’s National People’s Congress.
The Basic Law supposedly established a political framework to accord with the late Deng Xiaoping’s policy of “one country, two systems,” with Hong Kong’s people ruling Hong Kong with a high degree of autonomy.
Under this policy, Hong Kong’s capitalist system, the rule of law, and its people’s freedoms and way of life were to be preserved.
It provided for a popularly elected Chief Executive and Legislative Council.
Indeed, apart from defense and foreign affairs, Hong Kong was to be master of its own house.
But, despite its promise of universal suffrage, the Basic Law restricts democratic development during the first ten years after the handover of Hong Kong to China.
As a result, full democracy is to be permitted only in 2007.
I said in my maiden speech in the Legislative Council in 1985 that the policy of “one country, two systems” cannot work without democracy.
As Deng once said of China: “With a good system, even evil men cannot do evil. But without a good system, even good men cannot do good, but may be forced to do evil.”
For Hong Kong, the only good system is democracy.
For under a democratic system, those in power realize that it is the people who put them in office, and they will be voted out if they are perceived to be serving Beijing’s interests rather than Hong Kong’s.
Of course, Deng’s policy can work only if Beijing wants it to work.
Indeed, not only must China refrain from interfering in Hong Kong’s internal affairs, but it must encourage the people of Hong Kong to defend their much smaller system.
Unfortunately, Beijing has other ideas.
On July 1, 2003, the sixth anniversary of the handover, nearly a million people took to Hong Kong’s streets in a peaceful protest against an anti-subversion bill that would have eroded freedom of the press, of religion, and of association.
The demonstration led to a postponement of the bill, and ultimately to its withdrawal, as well as to the resignation of the Secretary for Security, who was responsible for it.
But that demonstration also spurred a major change in China’s policy towards Hong Kong.
Until then, interference from China was covert and subtle, so that the public perception was that Hong Kong’s Chief Executive, Tung Chee-hwa, was in charge.
After the demonstration, China’s government adopted a hands-on approach, letting the people of Hong Kong know who the boss really is.
Thus, on April 26, 2004, China announced its unilateral decision that Hong Kong is not to have democracy in 2007 without saying when Hong Kong will have it.
Then came Tung’s resignation as Chief Executive in March.
The popular belief is that Tung was sacked or pressured to step down.
Tung was handpicked by former Chinese President Jiang Zemin in 1996 and was openly endorsed by Jiang for a second term in 2002.
But he was not popular because the public viewed him as a puppet of China and a crony of big developers, particularly Li Ka-shing, Hong Kong’s richest person.
Although the election of the next Chief Executive will not take place until July, China has let it be known that our present Chief Secretary, Donald Tsang, is the chosen one.
Moreover, although the Basic Law prescribes a five-year term for the Chief Executive, China is insisting that the winner will only serve for the remainder of Tung’s term, until June 30, 2007.
The clear message is that after almost eight years of Chinese rule, China’s leaders do not trust anyone in Hong Kong to govern for five years.
This, surely, is the greatest indictment of China’s Hong Kong policy since 1997.
But the solution lies in changing the system, not just the leader.
The way forward is not more control or suppression, but more trust and democracy.
The latter leads to the full implementation of Deng’s policy, enshrined in the Basic Law, of “one country, two systems,” while the former turns the Basic Law into a worthless piece of paper.
In 1984, British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher, said of the impending handover of Hong Kong, “The eyes of the world are on us.”
That may or may not be true today, but at least the people of Taiwan are watching.
Depression Economics
BERKELEY – A decade ago, the 2008 Nobel laureate in economics, Paul Krugman, wrote a little book entitled The Return of Depression Economics .  It sank like a stone.
The East Asian financial crisis of 1997-1998 was sharp but short and quickly cured once the IMF realized that feckless governments were not the problem and then United States Treasury Secretary Robert Rubin parachuted the New York banks into South Korea’s economy.
The collapse, not long after, of the dot-com bubble in 2000-2001 brought on not a depression but merely an output decline so mild as to barely warrant the name “recession.”
Now Krugman is back with a revised and expanded version of his book, and, sadly, the timing is perfect.
For there is a much better case to be made today than there was in 1998 that we should be thinking in terms of “depression economics.”
But the book does not tell us what “depression economics” is supposed to replace.
So let me try my hand at defining non-depression economics:
·        Short-run economic policy should be left in the hands of the central bank, with the legislature and the executive focusing on the long run and keeping their noses out of year-to-year fluctuations in employment and prices;
·        Central banks’ highest priority should be to maintain their credibility as guardians of price stability, and only then turn their attention to keeping the economy near full employment, which they should do by influencing asset prices – upward when unemployment threatens to rise, and downward when an inflationary spiral looms;
·        Central banks should influence asset prices through normal open-market operations – by buying and selling short-term government securities for cash, thus changing the “safe” interest rate and the price of longer-duration assets;
·        While the central bank should stand ready to intervene to prevent bank runs, it should let the financial sector run itself with a light regulatory hand, viewing itself not as a chaperone but rather as the designated driver in the case of speculative excess.
This is the doctrine that Krugman argues is no longer sufficient for our age.
And he has a very good case.
Nearly all of these principles are, today at least, honored more in the breach than in the observance.
Today, short-run economic policy cannot just be left to the central bank alone.
For one thing, its balance sheet is not big enough.
At a minimum, the central bank now needs the assistance of that part of the government that taxes and borrows.
Moreover, the highest priority for central banks can no longer be to maintain their credibility as guardians of price stability, but rather their credibility as guardians of the financial system’s stability and soundness.
Once that highest goal has been achieved, central banks can turn their attention to trying to keep the economy near full employment.
One principle does remain true: central banks should try to keep the economy at near full employment by pushing asset prices up when unemployment threatens to rise.
But central banks today are influencing asset prices through a very large number of channels and procedures other than conventional open-market operations: they are trying to affect not just duration discounts but risk, default, and information-driven discounts as well.
Nor is it any longer accepted that such actions will be sufficient.
Fiscal stimulus is needed as well.
Non-depression economics eschews fiscal policy, on the grounds that central banks’ tools are powerful enough and their decision-making more effective and technocratic than that by legislatures.
But in today’s prevailing conditions, we cannot afford this perspective.
Finally, central banks still stand ready to intervene to prevent bank runs.
But the presumption in favor of light financial-sector regulation now has few defenders.
The consensus view is rather that of William McChesney Martin, who served as US Federal Reserve Chairman from 1951 to 1970: a good central bank prevents speculative excess by “taking away the punchbowl before the party really gets going.”
Higher Education Misconceived
CAMBRIDGE – Ever since economists revealed how much universities contribute to economic growth, politicians have paid close attention to higher education.
In doing so, however, they often misconceive universities’ role in ways that undermine their policies.
For example, US President Barack Obama has repeatedly stressed the need to increase the percentage of young Americans earning a college degree.
This is undoubtedly a worthwhile aim that can contribute to national prosperity and help young people realize the American Dream.
Yet economists who have studied the relationship between education and economic growth confirm what common sense suggests: the number of college degrees is not nearly as important as how well students develop cognitive skills, such as critical thinking and problem-solving ability.
Failure to recognize this point can have significant consequences.
As countries embrace mass higher education, the cost of maintaining universities increases dramatically relative to an elite system.
Given that governments have many other programs to support – and that people resist higher taxes – finding the money to pay for such an effort becomes increasingly difficult.
Universities must therefore try to provide a quality education to more students while spending as little money as possible.
Accomplishing all three objectives – quality, quantity, and cost efficiency – simultaneously is difficult, and the likelihood of compromise is great.
With graduation rates and government spending easy to calculate, educational quality, which is difficult to measure, is likely to be the objective that slips.
No one need know – and thus no one can be held accountable – when graduation rates rise but the hoped-for economic benefits fail to materialize.
A second misconception by policymakers is that the only important benefit from a college education is the opportunity that it gives graduates to find a middle-class job and contribute to economic growth and prosperity.
But, while this contribution is important, it is not the only one that matters.
Apart from finding a first job, college graduates seem to adapt more easily than those with only a high school degree as the economy evolves and labor-market needs change.
They also tend to vote at higher rates, engage in more civic activities, commit fewer crimes, educate their children better, and get sick less frequently by adopting healthier lifestyles.
Researchers estimate that these additional benefits are worth even more than the added lifetime income from a college degree.
If policymakers overlook them, they run the risk of encouraging quicker, cheaper forms of education that will do far less to serve either students or society.
These misconceptions are clearly evident in government leaders’ speeches over the past two decades.
As former President Bill Clinton remarked in his State of the Union address in 1994: “[W]e measure every school by one high standard: Are our children learning what they need to know to compete and win in the global economy?”
Since then, George W. Bush and Obama have echoed similar sentiments when speaking about their educational-policy goals.
The same attitudes are manifest in other countries as well.
A telling example is the shift in jurisdiction over British universities since 1992 from the Department of Education and Science to the Department for Education and Employment, and, in 2009, to a new Department for Business, Innovation, and Skills.
This shrunken conception of the role of higher learning is unprecedented.
It ignores what were long regarded as the most essential aims of education: strengthening students’ moral character and preparing them to be active, informed citizens.
In light of this tradition, the recent shift to material objectives comes as something of a surprise.
John Maynard Keynes prophesied in the 1920’s that as countries grew wealthier, people’s preoccupation with money and possessions would diminish. Instead, just the opposite has occurred.
Granted, democratic political leaders must be responsive to the people, and money and jobs are clearly on people’s minds.
According to a recent survey, among first-year university students in the United States in 2012, 88% cited getting a better job as an important reason for attending college, and 81% listed “being very well off financially” as an “essential” or “very important” goal.
But it is also true that 82.5% of these freshmen sought “to learn more about things that interest me” as an important reason for attending college, and 73% wanted “to gain a general education and appreciation of ideas.”
Among the objectives they considered “essential” or “very important,” 51% mentioned “improving my understanding of other countries and cultures,” 45.6% cited “developing a meaningful philosophy of life,” and substantial fractions listed such goals as “becoming a community leader,” “helping to promote racial understanding,” and “becoming involved in programs to clean up the environment.”
In the end, surveys suggest that what people want most is not wealth so much as happiness and the satisfaction that comes from a full and meaningful life.
Money helps, but so do other things, such as close human relationships, acts of kindness, absorbing interests, and the chance to live in a free, ethical, and well-governed democratic society.
A stagnant economy and lack of opportunity are undoubtedly problems, but so are low voting rates, civic apathy, widespread disregard for ethical standards, and indifference to art, music, literature, and ideas.
It is the responsibility of educators to help their students live satisfying, responsible lives.
However well or badly universities perform this task, their efforts to succeed at it are worth fighting for and deserve their governments’ recognition and encouragement.
After all, as Louis Brandeis observed: For good or ill, “our government is the potent, the omnipresent teacher.”
If our leaders regard education merely as a means to jobs and money, no one should be surprised if young people eventually come to think of it that way, too.
Designer Diets?
Throughout our lives, we are exposed to a complex mixture of food compounds.
Intricate biochemical processes extract from food the energy and other useful components that enable us to grow and function.
Many compounds, seemingly unimportant in the past, are now recognized as influencing our health.
For example, lycopene from cooked tomato sauces may help prevent prostate cancer.
Everyone, indeed, knows that food can have a positive or negative impact on health.
Food may never cure any particular disease, but diets rich in fruits and vegetables, cereals and plant-sourced oils offer protection from many cancers, cardiovascular disease, and other illnesses associated with old age.
The problem, for scientists and consumers alike, is that the benefits are not the same for everyone.
So we need to understand how what we eat interacts with our bodies – or, more specifically, our genes – to affect our health.
This is the science of nutrigenomics.
The long-term aim of nutrigenomics is to define how the whole body responds to food using so called “systems biology.”
It consists of two strings – formed from phosphate and sugar – along which four unique chemical compounds (DNA bases) are attached.
There are about three billion bases, and the sequences in which they occur is our genetic code, or human genome.
Within the genetic code, there are 30,000-40,000 highly organized regions called genes.
Genes are the basic unit of heredity, and, unless you are an identical twin, the combination of genes inherited from your parents is unique to you.
The genes that you have make up your genotype.
The resulting product, for example eye color, is your phenotype.
Genotyping can be used to determine which genes you have, but it cannot always predict your phenotype.
The inheritance of some characteristics, including eye color, is simple.
The majority of phenotypes are, however, the product of complex multi-gene interaction, environment, and lifestyle choices.
This includes our risk of developing a host of age-related diseases.
Genes code for proteins, the body’s workers, which are not made directly from DNA, because they do not speak the same language.
Ribonucleic acid (RNA) acts as an interpreter in a process called transcription (the reading of genes).
Translation from RNA creates three-dimensional proteins from combinations of 22 essential amino acids – essential only because our bodies are not able to make them, so they must be obtained from our diet instead.
The proteins that are produced, their quantities, and their characteristics collectively form the proteome, and their activities, in combination or in response to signals from within the body or external to it, form our metabolism.
Such is the complexity of nutrigenomics that it is no longer possible for nutritional researchers to work alone.
Expertise in a wide variety of different areas – molecular and cell biology, mathematics and statistics, nutrition and diet, food chemistry, and social science – is fundamental to progress.
To this end, 22 leading groups have united to create The European Nutrigenomics Organization, or NuGO.
Funded by the European Commission, NuGO gives scientists from organizations that usually compete for funding and the best researchers their first real opportunity to work together.
Difficulties stemming from professional jargon, organizational structure, and distance are more than offset by the benefits of integrating nutrigenomics facilities and expertise to ensure cooperative use of knowledge and its application in nutritional research. 
Nutrigenomics is not the Holy Grail of nutrition, but neither is it irrelevant to all but the worried-but-wealthy few that will be able to afford the new food products when they arrive.
Determining the structure of DNA and the sequence of the human genome has revolutionized biology and medicine. It has created new specialties and advanced our understanding of disease.
But rarely does this knowledge allow us to control outcomes – prevention rather than cure.
Indeed, in the twenty-first century, we still cannot describe health except in terms of the absence of disease.
Today’s new technologies enable health to be identified in terms of patterns of gene expression, protein production, and metabolic response.
Applied to nutrition, nutrigenomics will allow us to understand, and perhaps more importantly, to manipulate our individual response to existing foods so as to benefit our health. 
For some people, this will mean expensive genetic testing and designer diets, but for most, it will mean realistic advice based on visibly demonstrable phenotypes – a tendency to gain weight, for example, or an intolerance or allergic response to certain food types.
Above all, nutrigenomics holds out the promise of providing the healthy independence that everyone hopes for in later years.
Bankir Bank Sentral Kehabisan Akal
NEW HAVEN – Penghujung musim panas tahun ini ditandai dengan babak baru proses perumusan kebijakan yang sia-sia oleh dua bank sentral dunia, yakni Federal Reserve Amerikadan Bank of Japan.
Dalam babak baru ini FED Amerika memutuskan untuk berdiam diri dan hal ini yang justru menjadi inti permasalahan.
Ada pun langkah yang diambil oleh para perumus kebijakan di BOJ adalah dengan mengajukan suatu kebijakan itu-itu lagi yang tidak lazim dan lemah.
Baik FED Amerika dan BOJ menerapkan strategi-strategi yang sayangnya terputus dari perekonomian yang telah dipercayakan pengelolaannya kepada mereka.
Terlebih lagi langkah-langkah terbaru yang mereka ambil lebih menekankan komitmen mendalam dengan suatu mekanisme transmisi yang semakin tersembunyi dan membahayakan antara kebijakan moneter, pasar finansial, dan ekonomi berbasis aset.
Pendekatan seperti ini terbukti membawa krisis 2008-2009 dan bukan tidak mungkin menanam benih krisis selanjutnya beberapa tahun ke depan.
Tenggelam di dalam perdebatan mengenai keunggulan instrumen-instrumen ampuh dan mutakhir yang melengkapi amunisi para bankir sentral ini adalah kenyataan pahit lesunya pertumbuhan ekonomi.
Jepang adalah contoh negara yang tepat.
Terjebak di dalam trayektori pertumbuhan 1% selama seperempat abad terakhir ini, perekonomian Jepang gagal menyikapi segala daya upaya yang berulang kali dikerahkan melalui paket stimulus moneter luar biasa.
Apa pun sebutannya – awalnya, ZIRP (zero interest-rate policy di akhir tahun 1990-an), lalu QQE (Qualitative and Quantitative Easing yang dikeluarkan oleh Gubernur BOJ Haruhiko Kuroda di tahun 2013), dan yang sekarang NIRP (langkah terbaru untuk mendekati kebijakan suku bunga negatif) – BOJ telah memberikan janji palsu dan kinerja yang rendah.
Bahkan, dengan pertumbuhan nyata PDB per tahun yang merosot ke 0.6% sejak Shinzo Abe terpilih sebagai Perdana Menteri di akhir tahun 2012 – lebih lambat sepertiga kali dibandingkan nilai rata-rata per tahun 0.9% yang lamban selama 22 tahun (1991 hingga 2012) – stimulus maksimum yang dikenal dengan istilah “Abenomics” telah menjadi kegagalan yang memalukan.
Kinerja dari FED Amerika juga tidak jauh berbeda.
Perumbuhan nyata PDB di Amerika Serikat meningkat hanya sebesar 2.1% selama 28 kuartal sejak berakhirnya Great Recession di kuartal ketiga 2009 – tidak sampai setengah dari laju rata-rata sebesar 4% dibandingkan periode-periode dari kemajuan sebelumnya.
Sebagaimana di Jepang, proses pemulihan perekonomian Amerika Serikat yang berjalan lambat terbukti tidak responsif terhadap keagresifan FED Amerika dengan stimulusnya yang tidak lazim – suku bunga nol, tiga jenis balance-sheet expansion (QE1, QE2, dan QE3), dan yield curve twist yang sepertinya merupakan faktor pendorong langkah yang ditempuh BOJ.
(BOJ baru saja mengumumkan target suku bunga nol untuk Obligasi Pemerintah Jepang Sepuluh Tahun.)
Meski secara konsisten terjadi penurunan pertumbuhan, para bankir di bank sentral tetap meyakini keefektifan dari pendekatan yang mereka pilih dengan menyampaikan apa yang mereka sebut sebagai hasil “mandate-compliant”.
FED Amerika menunjukkan penurunan tajam tingkat pengangguran di Amerika Serikat – dari 10% pada Oktober 2009 ke 4.9% saat ini – sebagai bukti prima facie dari perekonomian yang mendekati salah satu target dual mandate FED Amerika.
Namun ketika pertumbuhan ketenagakerjaan yang baik ini dibandingkan dengan hasil output yang lemah, argumen ini tidak lagi meyakinkan dan justru memperlihatkan perlambatan produktifitas yang memunculkan pertanyaan-pertanyaan serius mengenai potensi pertumbuhan jangka panjang Amerika Serikat dan pada akhirnya akumulasi dari tekanan-tekanan biaya dan inflasi.
Menurut mereka yang kontra terhadap fakta, FED Amerika tidak bisa disalahkan atas daya upaya mereka, dan bersikeras bahwa kebijakan moneter yang tidak lazim menjadi batasan antara Great Recession dan Great Depression.
Akan tetapi, hal ini merupakan pernyataan belaka dan bukan suatu kesimpulan yang bisa dipertanggungjawabkan.
Sementara tarikan kebijakan dirasa cukup absen di dalam perekonomian nyata baik Jepang dan Amerika Serikat, pasar aset memiliki cerita lain lagi.
Ekuitas dan obligasi melonjak menumpang kebijakan moneter yang menyebabkan jatuhnya suku bunga dan suntikan likuiditas besar-besaran.
Kebijakan-kebijakan baru yang tidak lazim di kedua negara ini jelas mengabaikan keterpisahan di antara pasar aset dan kegiatan ekonomi nyata.
Hal ini merupakan cerminan dari resesi neraca yang memilukan, dimana permintaan agregat disangga secara artifisial oleh gelembung harga aset, runtuh pada saat gelembung tersebut meledak, dan menyebabkan kegagalan overleveraged,konsumen berbasis aset (Amerika Serikat) dan bisnis (Jepang).
Dalam keadaan seperti ini, kurangnya respon kepada kebijakan suku bunga zero bound tidak mengherankan.
Hal ini bahkan mengingatkan kita pada perangkat likuiditas tahun 1930-an ketika bank sentral juga menjalankan upaya-upaya pendorong yang sifatnya satu arah (pushing on a string).
Hal yang membingungkan adalah bahwa para bankir di bank sentral tetap melakukan penyangkalan meskipun kenyataannya sudah jelas.
Seperti yang terlihat dari langkah terbaru BOJ, kegemaran untuk melakukan rekayasa keuangan terus berlanjut.
Dan sebagaimana telah ditunjukkan oleh FED Amerika, normalisasi kebijakan suku bunga yang sangat elusif terus mengalami penundaan.
Kehabisan akal, para bankir di bank sentral tetap fokus pada merancang instrumen baru daripada bertanggung jawab atas peran destruktif instrumen mereka dalam menyulut krisis.
Walau pasar finansial terbuka terhadap segala bentuk akomodasi moneter, kita tidak bisa menyangkal sisi gelap yang dibawanya.
Manipulasi harga aset– saham dan obligasi, aset dengan durasi panjang dan pendek, dan juga mata uang.
Akibatnya para penabung dihukum, biaya modal ditekan, dan pengambilan risiko secara sembrono didorong di dalam iklim sekarang ini yang membatasi pendapatan.
Hal ini terutama berbahaya untuk perekonomian yang sangat membutuhkan investasi peningkatan produktifitas.
Dan hal ini tidak berbeda dengan lingkungan asset-based excess yang memupuk krisis keuangan global 2008 – 2009.
Selain itu, pasar aset yang sudah memperlihatkan gelembung-gelembung kecildi era yang mengakomodasi moneter ekstrim mengurangi tekanan kepada otoritas fiskal untuk mengambil tindakan.
Tidak mengindahkan salah satu (ya, Keynesian) pelajaran yang paling kuat dari tahun 1930-an yakni kebijakan fiskal adalah satu-satunya jalan keluar dari perangkap likuiditas – bisa menjadi tragedi terbesar untuk kita semua.
Para bankir di bank sentral sangat ingin masyarakat mempercayai langkah-langkah yang mereka ambil.
Namun, mempercayai mereka akan membawa kita semakin jauh dari kebenaran.
Deterring Arab Democracy
CAMBRIDGE – The lack of democracy in the Arab world results from an unholy alliance between Western interests and local autocrats, justified by what both sides claim to be the region’s “cultural specificity.”
In a nutshell, it has been much easier for the West to do business in the post-colonial Middle East with un-democratic regimes, which have found Western support and recognition useful in marginalizing local liberal and democratic forces, even as it paved the way for the rise of Islamist radicalization.
Sticks as well as carrots have been used – by both sides – to maintain this alliance.
For example, the Western emphasis on reform and democracy in recent years has been used more often than not as a threat, a typical message being: “Help us in Iraq or we will press for democracy and human rights in your own country.”
And the Arab reply is equally threatening: “Stop pressing us on the reform issue or we won’t cooperate in the ‘war on terror’!”
Two other major issues have sustained the trade-off: Israel and the rise of the Islamist movements.
The Arab public overwhelmingly regards Israel as an alien and illegitimate entity imposed by force on Palestinian land with Western support. If this perception was channeled democratically and allowed to shape Arab countries’ policies toward Israel, any peace negotiations would be even more complicated than they are now.
So it is far easier for authoritarian regimes like Egypt and Jordan (and in the future perhaps Syria), where there is no need for parliamentary agreement, to launch negotiations and sign peace agreements with Israel.
Likewise, in Morocco, Tunisia, Mauritania, Qatar, Oman, and Bahrain, where various low-level contacts and Israeli representations exist, undemocratic regimes can define whatever relationship with Israel they choose.
The rise of radical Islamism has been no less obstructive when it comes to Arab democracy.
Decades of unholy alliance between Arab autocrats and the West have seen radical Islam emerge as a “salvation” force.
If free and fair elections were to be held in any Arab country, Islamists would come to power. That was the case in Algeria in 1991-92, in Iraq in 2005, and in the West Bank and Gaza in 2006.
Other countries, such as Jordan, Morocco, Kuwait, Yemen, and Bahrain, have created more limited space for democracy. There, too, Islamists have immediately filled it.
The West has wasted decades, missing countless chances to establish regimes that could empower Arab liberal and democratic forces.
The West’s blind support for autocratic Arab rulers has reduced all hope of peaceful change.
The democratic process has lost its aura and its thrust, not least because democratization seems to lead to the rise of political movements the West finds unacceptable.
The whole notion of democracy has been eroded and discredited, with the radicalization that engulfs many Muslim societies now spilling over into their emigrant communities in the West.
When US President George W. Bush’s administration launched its Middle East Partnership Initiative for democratization in 2002, it turned out to be too little too late – and it died too soon.
The allocated budget was just $29 million, but its rapid death can also be ascribed to its short-sighted design – and to Barack Obama, who has shown little interest in the issue.
Obama’s praise of Egypt’s Hosni Mubarak as a man with whom one could do business demoralized Egyptian opposition groups, which have been struggling against the long-serving autocrat and his efforts to ensure that his son, Gamal Mubarak, succeeds him.
The US is not the only guilty party. Europe has played a major role in retarding democratic reform in Libya and Saudi Arabia.
Libya has become a Mecca for European leaders trying to win multi-billion dollar oil and investment deals. The rehabilitation of the Qaddafi regime has never included any push to ease political repression in Libya.
An even more telling case is Saudi Arabia.
No European leader risks antagonizing the Saudis by raising the issue of democracy and human rights.
Saudi women remain prohibited from driving cars, traveling on their own, and working or studying without the permission of a male relative.
Saudi society, and those of some other Gulf States, lacks minimum levels of political freedom and participation.
The status quo is excused by Arab regimes in the name of cultural specificity – the same pretext used by Western governments to justify their “value-free” policies toward these regimes.
Add together all the trade-offs between the West and the Arab regimes, along with the Israeli and Islamist factor, and the conclusion at which one arrives is as inescapable as it is alarming: the West cannot afford democracy in the region.
Can Europe’s Banks Save the EU?
NEW YORK – The multi-billion-dollar fine that the US government recently sought to impose on Germany’s Deutsche Bank for mis-selling mortgage securities in the United States has done little to improve confidence in the European Union, which remains plagued by slow economic growth, high unemployment, immigration challenges, and mounting uncertainty.
What the Deutsche Bank scandal has done is shine a light on a last-resort option – a kind of “Hail Mary pass,” in American football terms – that could potentially save the European project.
Despite representing around 20% of world GDP, the eurozone does not have a top-ten bank or financial services institution in the FT 500 global ranking.
The knock-on effects of such a fragmented and vulnerable banking system are apparent in Europe’s relatively poor showing in other sectors, such as technology and energy, that are vital for EU members’ economic future.
Europe has no shortage of banks: Germany has more than 1,500, and Italy has over 600.
But many are “zombie banks,” with too many branches, too few deposits, and funding costs that far exceed those of their more successful peers.
In fact, according to the International Monetary Fund, some one-third of Europe’s banking sector, representing assets worth $8.5 trillion, remains weak and unable to generate sustainable profits.
All of this creates significant downside risks for the EU economy and, ultimately, the entire European political experiment.
Restoring stability in Europe’s banking system, by the IMF’s own estimate, will require at least one-third of Europe's banks to close or merge.
For Deutsche Bank, market speculators already seem to be expecting a merger, such as with Commerzbank, another German institution.
But, if such a merger is to be the first step toward consolidating the European banking sector and strengthening the EU, it should be a cross-border affair, bringing Deutsche Bank together with a significant French and/or Italian financial institution.
Such an approach could be a game changer in terms of the EU’s political credibility, which is perhaps most crucial to keeping the EU dream alive.
A cross-border European bank merger would have several benefits.
As with any merger, consolidating weak, underperforming banks would enable them to strengthen their balance sheets and restructure non-performing loans – estimated to be worth some €1 trillion ($1.1 trillion), roughly three times higher than other global jurisdictions – thereby benefiting the wider economy.
But a cross-border merger that creates a kind of European super-bank would be even more effective in addressing perennial operational challenges (in particular, liquidity and capital).
More important, this type of financial restructuring would open credit channels that are vital to fund investment and drive economic growth.
A cross-border European merger would also give a key region of the world economy a bank that is commensurate with its global importance.
A European banking champion would be far more competitive globally, rivaling the brawn of America’s dominant banks.
Creating such an institution is particularly urgent today, given that many countries worldwide seem to be increasingly rejecting economic openness in favor of more protectionist policies and balkanized regulation.
In a more fragmented, less globalized world, where cross-border capital flows are declining – last year, the Institute of International Finance reports, net capital flows for emerging markets were negative for the first time since 1988 – Europe’s banking infrastructure will need to become broader and deeper in order to thrive.
The third – and perhaps most important – reason why cross-border mergers might be the key to saving Europe’s banking sector is that they would signal to market participants and European citizens alike that political leaders are committed to European integration.
Again, the political and economic backdrop intensifies the urgency of such a move.
Progress toward fiscal integration has stalled.
National agendas have often taken priority over cooperation.
And the United Kingdom is set to start negotiating its way out of the EU altogether – a decision that can reasonably be viewed as an indictment of Europe’s current integration model.
From the perspective of financial markets and investors, a cross-border merger would be viewed bullishly, boosting confidence.
Even for ordinary citizens, any indication that the EU is not simply going to fall apart would carry major benefits, offering some semblance of assurance in a highly uncertain environment.
To be sure, a cross-border merger is a radical proposal.
The amount of political will it would require will not be easy to muster.
But no bold play is ever a sure thing.
The truth is that, without credible and transparent evidence of deepening linkages – not just in fiscal matters, but also in business and finance (the backbone of a modern economy) – the EU will remain a loosely connected and not particularly credible collection of countries.
As we have seen in the last few years, such an arrangement will not resolve those countries’ economic woes.
One might argue that now is not the time to push toward greater integration.
The situation is too fragile, and popular opposition is too strong.
If growth were even middling, skeptics might say, the political environment would be far more amenable.
But the EU’s current disjointed structure will not hold.
If strong action is not taken soon, the cracks will only widen, generating increasingly powerful political discord and, ultimately, dooming the entire European project.
Devaluing Life
In August 2001, President George W. Bush told Americans that he worried about “a culture that devalues life,” and that he believed that, as President of the United States, he has “an important obligation to foster and encourage respect for life in America and throughout the world.”
That belief lay behind Bush’s denial of federal government funds for stem-cell research that could encourage the destruction of human embryos.
Although the Bush administration acknowledged that some scientists believe stem cell research could offer new ways of treating diseases that affect 128 million Americans, this prospect evidently did not, in Bush’s view, justify destroying human embryos.
Last month, the military forces that this same president commands aimed a missile at a house in Damadola, a Pakistani village near the Afghanistan border.
Eighteen people were killed, among them five children.
The target of the attack, Al Qaeda’s number two man, Ayman al-Zawahiri, was not among the dead, although lesser figures in the terrorist organization reportedly were.
Bush did not apologize for the attack, nor did he reprimand those who ordered it.
Apparently, he believes that the chance of killing an important terrorist leader is sufficient justification for firing a missile that will almost certainly kill innocent human beings.
Other American politicians took the same stance.
Senator Trent Lott, a conservative Republican – and a prominent opponent of abortion – said of the attack: “Absolutely, we should do it.”
Senator John McCain, another leading Republican, though one often ready to disagree with Bush, expressed regret for the civilian deaths, but added, “I can’t tell you that we wouldn’t do the same thing again.”
Indeed, it would be hard for the current administration to say that it wouldn’t do the same thing again, because it has done it many times before.
On November 1, 2001, American planes bombed Ishaq Suleiman, a group of mud huts, because a Taliban truck had been parked in one of the streets.
The truck left before the bomb hit, but 12 local villagers were killed and 14 were injured.
There are many more such stories of innocent lives being lost in the war in Afghanistan.
In Iraq, too, American attacks have taken the lives of many civilians.
Again, one of many examples will suffice.
On April 5, 2003, a civilian neighborhood in Basra was bombed.
The target was General Ali Hassan al-Majid, known as “Chemical Ali” because of his use of chemical weapons against Iraqis.
One bomb hit the home of the Hamoodi family, a respected, educated family, none of whose members belonged to the ruling Baath Party.
Of the extended family of 14, ten were killed, including an infant, a two-year-old baby, a 10-year-old boy, and a 12-year-old girl.
Four months later, Majid was captured alive; the bombs had missed their intended target.
This consistent pattern of readiness to inflict civilian casualties – often when striking targets that are not of vital military significance – suggests that Bush and other pro-life American leaders have less concern for the lives of innocent human beings in Afghanistan, Iraq, and Pakistan, than they have for human embryos.
This is a bizarre set of priorities.
No parents grieve for a lost embryo in the way that they would grieve over the death of a child.
No embryos are capable of suffering, or have hopes or desires for the future that are abruptly cut off by their death.
It might be possible to justify the loss of innocent human life in Damadola by a utilitarian calculation that killing Al Qaeda’s leaders will, in the long run, save a larger number of innocent human beings.
After all, if they remain at large, they may succeed in carrying out further terrorist attacks that take hundreds or even thousands of innocent lives.
Bush, however, cannot rely on that argument, for it is precisely the kind of justification that he rejects when it comes to destroying embryos in order to save, in the long run, those dying from diseases for which we currently have no cure.
Other moralists will say that the difference between destroying embryos for research purposes and killing civilians in military attacks is that the former is deliberate killing, whereas the latter deaths are “collateral damage” – unintended, if foreseeable, side-effects of a justifiable act of war.
We can grant that it was not the primary intention of those who planned and authorized the attack on Damadola to kill innocent people.
We can also accept that al-Zawahiri is undoubtedly a dangerous foe, still active in a terrorist movement, and that he is a legitimate military target.
Perhaps this particular attack can be justified on those grounds.
Nevertheless, the doctrine that it is acceptable to take actions that will foreseeably kill innocent people can have the effect of leading us to treat more lightly than we should the deaths of those killed.
That, it seems, is what has happened somewhere in the American chain of command.
The presence of a Taliban truck does not justify bombing a village in which civilians are going about their daily lives.
Killing innocent people in order to bring a kind of rough justice to “Chemical Ali” – a particularly nasty member of Saddam’s military elite, but one who at the time of the raid was no longer in command of military forces – is wrong.
A culture that allows – and even endorses – such tactics is not one that is genuinely committed to encouraging respect for life.
We can be quite sure that American forces would not have acted in the same way if the civilians nearby had been other Americans.
Developing Countries and the Global Crisis
NEW YORK – This year is likely to be the worst for the global economy since World War II, with the World Bank estimating a decline of up to 2%.
Even developing countries that did everything right – and had far better macroeconomic and regulatory policies than the United States did – are feeling the impact.
Largely as a result of a precipitous fall in exports, China is likely to continue to grow, but at a much slower pace than the 11-12% annual growth of recent years.
Unless something is done, the crisis will throw as many as 200 million additional people into poverty.
This global crisis requires a global response, but, unfortunately, responsibility for responding remains at the national level.
Each country will try to design its stimulus package to maximize the impact on its own citizens – not the global impact.
In assessing the size of the stimulus, countries will balance the cost to their own budgets with the benefits in terms of increased growth and employment for their own economies.
Nor do existing international lending institutions.
But if we are to avoid winding up in another debt crisis, some, perhaps much, of the money will have to be given in grants.
And, in the past, assistance has been accompanied by extensive “conditions,” some of which enforced contractionary monetary and fiscal policies – just the opposite of what is needed now – and imposed financial deregulation, which was among the root causes of the crisis.
In many parts of the world, there is a strong stigma associated with going to the International Monetary Fund, for obvious reasons.
And there is dissatisfaction not just from borrowers, but also from potential suppliers of funds.
The sources of liquid funds today are in Asia and the Middle East, but why should these countries contribute money to organizations in which their voice is limited and which have often pushed policies that are antithetical to their values and beliefs?
Many of the governance reforms proposed for the IMF and the World Bank – affecting, most obviously, how their heads are chosen – finally seem to be on the table.
But the reform process is slow, and the crisis will not wait.
It is thus imperative that assistance be provided through a variety of channels, in addition to, or instead of, the IMF, including regional institutions.
New lending facilities could be created, with governance structures more consonant with the twenty-first century.
If this could be done quickly (which I think it could), such facilities could be an important channel for disbursing funds.
At their November 2008 summit the G-20 leaders strongly condemned protectionism and committed themselves not to engage in it.
Unfortunately, a World Bank study notes that 17 of the 20 countries have actually undertaken new protectionist measures, most notably the US with the “buy American” provision included in its stimulus package.
But it has long been recognized that subsidies can be just as destructive as tariffs – and even less fair, since rich countries can better afford them.
If there was ever a level playing field in the global economy, it no longer exists: the massive subsidies and bailouts provided by the US have changed everything, perhaps irreversibly.
Indeed, even firms in advanced industrial countries that have not received a subsidy are at an unfair advantage.
They can undertake risks that others cannot, knowing that if they fail, they may be bailed out.
While one can understand the domestic political imperatives that have led to subsidies and guarantees, developed countries need to recognize the global consequences, and provide compensatory assistance to developing countries.
One of the more important medium-term initiatives urged by the UN Commission is the creation of a global economic coordinating council, which would not only coordinate economic policy, but would also assess impending problems and institutional gaps.
As the downturn deepens, several countries may, for example, face bankruptcy.
But we still do not have an adequate framework for dealing with such problems.
And the US dollar reserve-currency system – the backbone of the current global financial system – is fraying.
China has expressed concerns, and the head of its central bank has joined the UN Commission in calling for a new global reserve system.
The UN Commission argues that addressing this old issue – raised more than 75 years ago by Keynes – is essential if we are to have a robust and stable recovery.
Such reforms will not occur overnight.
But they will not occur ever unless work on them is begun now.
Closing Developing Countries’ Capital Drain
NEW YORK – Developing countries are bracing for a major slowdown this year.
According to the UN report World Economic Situation and Prospects 2016, their growth averaged only 3.8% in 2015 – the lowest rate since the global financial crisis in 2009 and matched in this century only by the recessionary year of 2001.