By contrast, the run-up in stock prices in Brazil started from a very different point, with the price-earnings ration as low as six in 1998.
When a stock-market boom reaches historic proportions, a story always develops to rationalize it.
The news media typically present reasons to justify the view that the economy has entered a “new era.”
Sometimes the stories are mere fabrications to validate market optimism, as with the 1990’s boom.
But, at other times, the stories seem more solid.
Lula has called this a “magic moment” for the Brazilian economy.
While such words merit caution, economy fundamentals bear them out.
The currency, the real, has been strengthening steadily, to nearly twice its value against the US dollar in October 2002, when Lula was first elected.
Inflation and interest rates are falling, the country is running a trade surplus, foreign investment is flowing in at a high rate, and the government has more than paid off its debts to foreigners, becoming a net creditor to the rest of the world.
So stock investors seem to be recognizing Brazil’s economic vitality, carefully watching corporate earnings rise, and running with them.
After being lone believers through 2002, Brazilian stock market participants are now finding that investors from all over the world want to join the party.
Nevertheless, given corruption scandals involving prominent government figures that have come to light over the past few years, it is natural to wonder why the stock market has remained so strong.
Why haven’t the stories of corruption caused a crisis, as similar scandals did in Korea and Malaysia during the Asian financial crisis in 1997-98?
Indeed, while the scandals have shaken the government, Lula was overwhelmingly reelected last year, and investors continue to pour money into the stock market.
One reason is that the corruption scandals have provided an opportunity for investors to see Brazilian freedom of speech and democracy in action.
Newspapers and television commentators have been relentless in reporting the scandals, helping to prove to Brazilians and foreign investors alike that the political system is sufficiently stable to withstand open criticism.
Lula remains popular with Brazilians because his populist rhetoric shows real sympathy with the less affluent, and with foreign investors because he has always tempered his radicalism to accommodate economic reality.
He recently criticized Bolivian President Evo Morales’s threats to seize foreign assets for his failure in this regard: “Radicalism is incompatible with the common sense needed from someone who governs.”
That combination of philosophical radicalism and economic pragmatism has proven to be a perfect formula for Brazil’s progress.
Granted, the future is unknown; we have no crystal ball to predict the Bovespa’s likely path.
But, for me, the story is far more convincing than the one told during the 1990’s stock-market boom.
Strategi Bisnis ExxonMobil yang Berbahaya
NEW YORK – Strategi bisnis ExxonMobil yang terbaru merupakan bahaya bagi pemegang sahamnya dan seluruh dunia.
Lagi-lagi kita diingatkan atas hal ini melalui rumusan laporan Komite Artik dalam Dewan Minyak Bumi Nasional (National Petroleum Council’s Arctic Committee), yang dipimpin oleh CEO ExxonMobil, Rex Tillerson.
Laporan ini meminta pemerintah Amerika Serikat untuk melanjutkan pengeboran minyak dan gas di Artik – tanpa menyebutkan dampaknya terhadap perubahan iklim.
Ketika perusahaan minyak lainnya mulai bicara jujur tentang perubahan iklim, model bisnis ExxonMobil masih menyangkal kenyataan yang ada.
Pendekatan ini tidak hanya salah secara moral; tapi juga ditakdirkan untuk gagal secara finansial.
Tahun 2014 merupakan tahun terpanas dalam pencatatan perangkat hukum, suatu pengingat yang suram akan nasib planet kita pada perundingan iklim global tahun ini, yang akan berpuncak di Paris bulan Desember yang akan datang.
Pemerintah negara-negara dunia sepakat akan menjaga tingkat pemanasan yang diakibatkan manusia di bawah 2º Celsius (3.6º Fahrenheit).
Tetapi lintasan terkini menunjukkan pemanasan jauh melebihi batas ini, kemungkinan sekitar 4-6º Celsius di akhir abad ini.
Solusinya tentu saja adalah pengalihan bahan bakar fosil menjadi energi rendah karbon seperti tenaga surya atau angin, dan penggunaan kendaraan elektrik yang bertenaga listrik rendah karbon.
Sejumlah perusahaan minyak terbesar dunia mulai mengakui kenyataan ini.
Perusahaan-perusahaan seperti Total, ENI, Statoil, dan Shell mendukung metode carbon price (seperti sistem pajak atau perizinan) untuk mempercepat transisi menuju energi rendah karbon dan mulai melakukan persiapan internal.
Shell telah meningkatkan investasi dalam teknologi carbon capture and sequestration (CCS) untuk menguji apakah penggunaan bahan bakar fosil dapat dibuat menjadi aman melalui penangkapan CO2 agar tidak lepas ke atmosfir.
Hal ini tidak berarti seluruh pendekatan yang diambil perusahaan-perusahaan ini sudah difinalisasi; mereka menjanjikan akan menetapkan kebijakan iklim sebelum pelaksanaan climate summit tahun ini.
Setidaknya mereka membahas perubahan iklim dan mulai menghadapi  kondisi pasar jangka panjang yang baru.
Sayangnya, ExxonMobil berbeda.
Pihak manajemen perusahaan ini, yang dibutakan oleh kekuasaan politiknya sendiri yang besar, secara sengaja mengabaikan perubahan realitas global.
Kekuasaan ini berada dalam zona nyaman di tengah-tengah pelobi dan penasihat politik Washington DC yang berhasil menyakinkan pimpinan perusahaan bahwa karena Senat Amerika Serikat kini dikuasai Partai Republik, entah bagaimana risiko-risiko bisnis perubahan iklim terhapuskan dan dunia tidak akan berubah meskipun ada atau tidak ada mereka.
Di saat yang sama, ExxonMobil bukanlah pemain kecil dalam sandiwara perplanetan ini.
ExxonMobil adalah salah satu tokoh utama.
Menurut studi yang dilakukan tahun 2013, ExxonMobil berada di posisi kedua di antara perusahaan-perusahaan dunia, tepat di bawah Chevron, yang menghasilkan total emisi terbesar.
Bahkan studi ini mendapati bahwa satu perusahaan ini menyumbangkan lebih dari 3% dari keseluruhan emisi dunia sejak bahan bakar fosil mulai digunakan!
Lalu apa pendapat ExxonMobil mengenai kenyataan iklim yang baru?
Bagaimana perusahaan ini akan menyesuaikan kebijakan korporasi dengan kebutuhan planet?
Sayangnya ExxonMobil membenamkan persoalan ini.
Ketika analis independen seperti Carbon Tracker menanyakan rencana perusahaan untuk menyesuaikan pengeboran minyaknya yang tanpa henti dengan batasan-batasan planet tentang perlunya menjaga penggunaan bahan bakar fosil agar mempertahankan ambang batas perubahan iklim di bawah 2º C, mereka mengabaikan batasan tersebut.
ExxonMobil dengan santainya merasa yakin sekali bahwa pemerintah negara-negara dunia tidak akan menjalankan komitmennya (atau akan melobi demi menghindari pemenuhan tanggung jawabnya).
Tiba lah kita pada pembahasan laporan Artik yang terbaru.
Kementerian Energi Amerika Serikat meminta Dewan Minyak Bumi Nasional, suatu kelompok industri, untuk memberikan saran tentang pengeboran di Artik.
Hasil yang diterima dari komite pimpinan Rex Tillerson justru berupa arahan yang salah.
Pengeboran sumber daya minyak dan gas di Artik akan menyebabkan tingkat pemanasan jauh melebihi batas 2º C. Pemanasan di Artik sendiri sudah jauh lebih cepat dibandingkan rata-rata pemanasan di bumi, sehingga berpotensi menyebabkan gangguan iklim secara berbesar-besaran, kekacauan berskala global – yang dapat meliputi pola cuaca ekstrim yang saat ini terjadi di lintang tengah Amerika Serikat.
Berdasarkan alasan-alasan tersebut di atas, sains terbaik dan terkini, termasuk studi penting yang diterbitkan dalam jurnal Nature tahun ini, memberikan pesan jelas dan tegas: Pertahankan minyak bumi di Samudera Artik berada di laut dalam; tindakan eksplorasi tidak memiliki tempat yang aman dalam sistem iklim.
Dunia ini sudah memiliki lebih dari cukup cadangan minyak dan gas; kini saatnya beralih ke energi rendah karbon, menjauh dari cadangan yang terbukti melimpah, jangan kita justru menambahnya dan terus mengancam planet.
Sebagaimana dirumuskan dalam studi Nature: “Eksplorasi sumber daya di Artik dan penambahan apapun dalam produksi unconventional oil tidak selaras dengan upaya menekan rata-rata pemanasan global di angka 2º C.”
Pembahasan ini ialah topik yang tepat untuk studi tentang Artik di tengah-tengah Dewan Minyak Bumi Nasional.
Namun laporan ini tidak pernah membahas persoalan apakah sumber daya minyak dan gas di Artik sesuai dengan keselamatan iklim.
Posisi ExxonMobil yang tidak memiliki rasa malu seharusnya sangat mengkhawatirkan pemegang sahamnya.
Pihak manajemen perusahaan berencana mengeluarkan uang dalam jumlah besar – mungkin puluhan miliar dolar – untuk eksplorasi cadangan minyak dan gas di Artik yang tidak bisa digunakan secara aman.
Seiring dengan pergeseran global menuju energi terbarukan yang sudah berkontribusi pada merosotnya harga minyak bumi, kebijakan iklim yang diterapkan di tahun-tahun mendatang akan menjadikan pengeboran di Artik sebagai pemborosan sumber daya.
Dana pensiun, universitas, gabungan perusahaan asuransi, dan pusat investasi pemerintah di seluruh dunia bergulat dengan bertambahnya risiko, baik dari segi moral maupun finansial, dari kepemilikan saham di perusahaan-perusahaan minyak, gas, dan batubara.
Sebagaimana Lisa Sachs dan saya pernah utarakan sebelumnya, investor yang bertanggung jawab harus segera menanyakan kepada perusahaan tersebut mengenai rencana bisnis untuk mematuhi batas pemanasan 2º C.
Rencana bisnis yang mencakup investasi di Artik, laut ultra-dalam, dan oil sands di Kanada tidak pantas berada dalam dunia beriklim aman.
Investor ExxonMobil harus mendesak jawaban dari pihak manajemen perusahaan tentang strategi bisnis yang bertentangan dengan kebutuhan global dan kesepakatan kebijakan.
Jika ExxonMobil tetap mempertahankan strategi bisnisnya yang berbahaya, investor harus segera menetapkan bahwa sudah tiba saatnya untuk meninggalkan semuanya dan mencari yang baru.
Big Oil, Big Tobacco, Big Lies
BOSTON – Selama beberapa tahun terakhir, semakin banyak orang telah mempelajari dengan seksama peristiwa-peristiwa yang terjadi di planet kita agar bisa memperbaikinya di masa depan – kekeringan yang berlangsung lama, kenaikan permukaan air laut, banjir besar – dan pada akhirnya mengakui bahwa aktivitas manusia memicu perubahan iklim yang terlampau cepat.
Tetapi ternyata, Exxon (sekarang ExxonMobil) sudah memiliki firasat ini bahkan sejak tahun 1978.
Pada awal 1980-an, para ilmuwan Exxon tidak sekedar mempunyai firasat.
Saat itu mereka memahami sains di balik perubahan iklim, namun tidak hanya itu, para ilmuwan ini menyadari peran perusahaannya yang sangat besar dalam mendorong fenomena tersebut.
Mengingat kemungkinan dampak yang menimbulkan malapetaka bagi sebagian besar penduduk, mereka mendesak pimpinan perusahaan Exxon untuk mengambil tindakan.
Namun pimpinan justru menyembunyikan kebenaran ini.
Mungkin ada hikmah di balik kisah yang membuat geram ini: investigasi terbaru yang mengungkap kebohongan Exxon mungkin justru mempercepat tindakan untuk mengatasi krisis iklim yang segera terjadi.
Lagipula pencerahan yang sama di industri rokok – apa yang diketahui perusahaan-perusahaan rokok besar dan kapan mereka menyadarinya – telah mengubah lanskap kesehatan masyarakat.
Pada tahun 1996, serentetan tuntutan hukum memaksa perusahaan-perusahaan rokok untuk mempublikasikan jutaan dokumen internal yang menegaskan hal-hal yang sudah lama diduga oleh pendukung kesehatan masyarakat dan pembuat masyarakat: bahwa sejak tahun 1950an, industri mengetahui nikotin bersifat adiktif dan merokok dapat menyebabkan kanker.
Akan tetapi demi melindungi kepentingannya sendiri, Big Tobacco dengan sengaja menyesatkan publik dan melakukan segala tindakan demi menciptakan keraguan pada temuan-temuan ilmiah yang mereka ketahui dengan benar.
Taktik semacam ini memungkinkan industri untuk menunda, selama lebih dari 50 tahun, penetapan peraturan yang seharusnya dapat menyelamatkan jutaan nyawa setiap tahunnya.
Namun setelah pencerahan tersebut, jelas bahwa industri rokok merupakan kekuatan jahat yang tidak terlibat dalam proses pembuatan kebijakan.
Karena Big Tobacco tidak lagi menjadi bagian dari proses ini dan pendukung kesehatan pun dipersenjatai dengan bukti-bukti nyata akibat konsumsi rokok, mereka akhirnya mampu memaksa pemerintah mereka untuk bertindak.
Pada tahun 2003, para pemimpin dunia menyepakati Konvensi mengenai Kerangka Kerja Pengendalian Tembakau (Framework Convention on Tobacco Control) atau (FCTC), yang dirundingkan di bawah naungan Organisasi Kesehatan Dunia (WHO).
Kini, perjanjian ini mencakup  90% penduduk dunia dan berkontribusi terhadap merosotnya penjualan perusahaan-perusahaan global secara signifikan.
Seiring berjalannya waktu, perjanjian ini akan menyelamatkan ratusan juta nyawa (dan menghemat anggaran kesehatan pemerintah dalam jumlah besar).
Sekarang jelas sekali bahwa Big Oil telah mengikuti strategi Big Tobacco.
Pada tahun 1997, hampir dua dekade setelah perusahaan-perusahaan minyak besar dunia mulai mempelajari perubahan iklim, mereka lalu membatalkan penelitian dan mengklaim bahwa ilmu iklim “far from clear” dengan demikian tidak “membenarkan kewajiban mengurangi penggunaan energi”.
Selain menyembunyikan temuan-temuan mereka sendiri, ExxonMobil (dan perusahaan sejenis) juga mendanai dan mempromosikan ilmu pengetahuan sampah dan menyerang ilmuwan yang memberikan peringatan bahaya bencana iklim yang akan terjadi.
Pendekatan perusahaan-perusahaan bahan bakar fosil sebegitu efektifnya hingga media baru-baru ini saja mulai menyadari peran utama yang dimiliki industri ini dalam mengakibatkan yang disebut “debat iklim”.
Tetapi barangkali kesuksesan terbesar Big Oil adalah mengurangi kemauan politik untuk melaksanakan peraturan yang tepat.
Bahkan setelah masyarakat internasional mengadopsi Konvensi Kerangka Kerja PBB tentang Perubahan Iklim (UNFCCC) pada tahun 1992, industri bahan bakar fosil berhasil memblokir kemajuan yang berharga – sampai pada titik apabila tindakan serius tidak segera dilaksanakan, seluruh proses akan gagal.
Di Eropa, lobi oleh Royal Dutch Shell sangat melemahkan upaya Uni Eropa hingga sekarang tidak ada target-target yang mengikat perihal efisiensi energi atau energi terbarukan bagi masing-masing negara.
Perusahaan ini bahkan mengirimkan surat ke presiden Komisi Eropa mengklaim bahwa “gas itu bermanfaat bagi Eropa”.
Shell dan perusahaan minyak lainnya sekarang berjanji akan bekerja sebagai “penasihat” pemerintah untuk menghadapi perubahan iklim.
Sama seperti berkas-berkas tembakau yang mengusir industri tembakau keluar dari proses pembuatan kebijakan, investigasi Exxon harus memaksa para pemimpin dunia untuk menghilangkan industri bahan bakar fosil dari upaya-upaya untuk mengatasi krisis iklim.
Bagaimanapun juga, kebijakan apapun tidak akan berhasil jika mereka yang membuatnya yakin itu akan gagal.
Titik balik bagi kebijakan kesehatan masyarakat terkait tembakau muncul ketika kebobrokan industri tidak terbantahkan lagi.
Kini tiba saatnya bagi gerakan iklim.
Kita tidak bisa hanya berharap bahwa industri bahan bakar fosil akan mengubah perilakunya.
Sesuai dengan tuntutan yang dibuat aliansi kelompok-kelompok hak asasi manusia, para aktivis lingkungan, dan pendukung akuntabilitas korporasi, kita harus menendang industri keluar dari proses pembuatan kebijakan sama sekali.
Para ilmuwan Exxon benar: dampak perubahan iklim terhadap banyak komunitas akan sangat buruk.
Dengan begitu banyak nyawa yang dipertaruhkan – dan  bukti ancaman yang nyata – Big Oil, seperti Big Tobacco dulu, harus diperlakukan layaknya akibat yang diciptakan: Big Trouble.
Eyesight for Israel’s Blind
PARIS – To find a glimmer of hope on the Israel-Palestine question has become difficult, if not impossible.
Most Israelis now believe that a peaceful solution will not come in their generation.
As for the Palestinians, the political stalemate, and ongoing Israeli occupation, has led to radicalization: if they cannot have “something,” they want it all.
And many believe that whatever their weakness today, time is on the Palestinians’ side.
Even the most moderate Palestinians now reject Israeli leftists’ offers of help in terms of human support against the actions of Israeli settlers or police.
The political dialogue between moderates of both camps is mostly dead, and personal contact has become minimal.
In the streets of Jerusalem, Israelis and Palestinians give the impression of deliberately trying not to see each other.
Moreover, as Israel increasingly resembles a successful developed country, its Jewish citizens tend to ignore its Arab citizens, just as the rich elsewhere often do not see the poor in their midst.
But, unlike the poor in many emerging and developed countries, who can hope for social mobility, Israeli Arabs are second-class citizens, even if their living standards remain higher than those of most Arabs in the region.
As we know from Deuteronomy, “Man does not live by bread alone.”
This distrustful ignorance of the other can be found everywhere in Israel.
Or almost everywhere, for there is a place that escapes this reality: the hospital.
Because of an urgent eye problem upon my arrival in Israel in late June, I had to spend seven hours in the ophthalmology department of the Hadassah Hospital in Ein Kerem, which is the main center of treatment, teaching, and research in Jerusalem.
What I saw during those hours were, despite my personal condition, the most comforting and hopeful signs that I have encountered in the entire region in many years.
Arab citizens of Israel – that is, Palestinian doctors and nurses – were treating Jewish and Arab patients.
Israeli doctors and nurses attended to Arabs’ needs.
I even saw some interaction among patients themselves.
Old Israelis who had clearly come from Eastern Europe before World War II were playing with very young Palestinian children.
There was an atmosphere of reassuring tolerance of the other.
In the highly professional, well-organized, and yet very relaxed (if not slightly confused) atmosphere of the hospital, one could glimpse what the future might hold with different political leadership on both sides.
It was as if the ill were behaving in a healthy way, whereas, outside of the hospital, the healthy were behaving pathologically.
In the hospital, patients’ only choice was to place themselves in the hands of the other.
What I encountered that day in Ein Kerem was the best of Israel – and a direct rebuttal to the frequent accusation that Israel is an “apartheid state.”
And it was fitting that this token of a possible future should be found in an ophthalmology department, an enterprise devoted to restoring vision.
Arab citizens of Israel and Jewish citizens of Israel interact with each other as equals when they are placed in a situation in which they can and must.
Might all Israelis and Palestinians find themselves in such a position one day?
I am not naïve.
I understand that what I saw that day (with one eye) in the Hadassah Hospital cannot easily be replicated elsewhere.
Two days after my hospital experience, a tour of the Palestinian neighborhoods of Jerusalem – surrounded or divided by the security wall – served as a reminder of the region’s harsh and sobering realities.
But the lessons from the Hadassah Hospital remain alive in my heart as much as my head.
When people have no other choice but to trust each other, they will be able to do so and feel better for it.
It is a question of balance, competence, and respect.
Can the reality of the hospital be transferred to the reality outside?
Probably not.
But that should not prevent people from reflecting on what a different world could look like one day – or from working to bring about that world now.
Eyes Wide Shut on Global Warming
The Kyoto Treaty on controlling climate change was, as Harvard professor Rob Stavins puts it, “too little, too fast.”
On one hand, because it covered only those countries projected to emit roughly half of the world’s greenhouse-gas emissions by mid-century, it was not an effective long-run safeguard against the dangers of global warming.
On the other hand, because it required significant and expensive short-run cuts in emissions by industrial countries, it threatened to impose large immediate costs on the American, European, and Japanese economies.
In short, the Kyoto agreement meant lots of short-term pain for little long-run gain.
The European Union and American economists in the Clinton administration argued for passage of the Kyoto Treaty only by creating models for something that wasn’t the Kyoto Treaty.
President George W. Bush sided with his vice president, Dick Cheney, in denying that a global-warming problem even exists (his treasury secretary, Paul O’Neill, and his administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, Christine Whitman, disagreed).
This has probably cost the world a decade of wasted time in developing a policy to deal with the problem, particularly given that intentional inaction is likely to continue until Bush’s term is finished.
But the political cards will be reshuffled, and there will be a new deal on global warming, when America next elects a president in November 2008.
By 2009, the US may have a State Department willing to speak up again.
Unless we are extraordinarily fortunate and learn that climatologists have overlooked some enormously important channels of carbon sequestration, the models predicting global warming will still be grimly accurate in 2009.
When the time comes to revisit international policies on global warming, two things should happen.
First, the world’s industrial core must create incentives for the developing world to industrialize along an environmentally-friendly, C02- and CH4-light, path.
Slow growth of greenhouse-gas emissions in rapidly-growing economies must be accompanied by credible promises to deliver massive amounts of assistance in the mighty tasks of industrialization, education, and urbanization that China, India, Mexico, Brazil, and many other developing countries face.
Second, the world’s industrial core must create incentives for its energy industries to undertake the investments in new technologies that will move us by mid-century to an economic structure that is light on carbon emissions and heavy on carbon sequestration.
Providing the proper incentives for effective research and development will not be easy.
Public programs work less well when the best route to the goal – in this case, the most promising post-carbon energy technologies – is uncertain.
Private R&D is difficult to encourage when investors suspect that success would lead the fruits of their work to be taken by some form of eminent domain and used throughout the world with little compensation.
The world could continue to close its eyes to global warming and hope for the best: a slightly warmer climate that produces as many winners (on the Siberian, Northern European, and Canadian prairies) as losers (in already-hot regions that become hotter and dryer), and that the Gulf Stream continues warming Europe, the monsoons are not disrupted, and that the Ganges delta is not drowned by stronger typhoons.
Or perhaps we are hoping that the “we” whose interests are taken into account when important decisions are made will not be the “we” who are among the big losers.
Perhaps we will continue to close our eyes.
But our chances of ensuring a more sustainable world would be higher if we had not allowed ourselves to be blinded for the past decade by the combination of the public-relations stunt known as the Kyoto Treaty and the idiocy-as-usual known as the Bush administration.
The Chan-Zuckerberg Solution
BERKELEY – When Facebook’s founder, Mark Zuckerberg, and his wife, Priscilla Chan, recently announced their plan to devote some $45 billion in Facebook shares toward making the world a better place, some critics wrote off the move as a public-relations ploy.
They noted that Chan and Zuckerberg were not putting their shares in a charitable foundation, but rather into an investment company that can allocate funds however it chooses – and that it can choose for-profit investments.
Skeptics also noted that instead of making an irrevocable legal commitment, the couple had only pledged to donate “most of their wealth” to the fund.
According to one mean-spirited critic, Zuckerberg was simply moving his “money from one pocket to the other” with a substantial “PR return-on-investment [that] dwarfs that of his Facebook stock.”
The truth is quite different.
The strategy adopted by Chan and Zuckerberg, a combination of traditional philanthropy and impact investing, is exactly in sync with the most promising trends in modern altruism.
The defining strength of traditional philanthropy is its ability to take risks.
Philanthropies don’t have to answer to public officials or generate returns for private shareholders.
That allows them to finance bold, innovative ideas.
And, in contrast to both the public and for-profit sectors, they can adopt a very long time horizon for problems that require decades to solve.
In many ways, traditional philanthropies operate like venture capitalists.
They might know that many of their projects will not pay off, but they are betting that a few will turn out to be pioneering breakthroughs, and that their success will spark policy changes or attract larger flows of public and for-profit private funding.
But philanthropy is only one way to address social and environmental challenges.
Impact investing – a term coined in 2007 at a conference sponsored by the Rockefeller Foundation, one of the oldest traditional philanthropies – is another.
Unlike philanthropic donors, impact investors seek both social and financial returns on their investments.
Impact investing not only broadens the pool of available wealth; it fosters projects that will produce self-sustaining returns.
In recent years, the money flowing into impact investing has expanded rapidly, and the range of assets available to impact investors has grown to match.
Social venture capital firms, which seek a “double bottom line” (healthy financial returns, as well as broader social or environmental benefits) are one of the fastest-growing segments of the venture-capital industry.
In Northern California, for example, the Bay Area Equity Fund has invested $100 million since 2004 in companies such as Revolution Foods, Pandora, SolarCity, and Tesla.
All told, the fund estimates that those investments have created 15,000 jobs and generated an internal rate of return of 24.4%.
Big institutional players, meanwhile, are becoming significant impact investors by pouring money into Environmental, Social, and Governance (ESG) mutual funds.
By one estimate, investment in ESG funds has exploded, from $202 billion in 2007 to $4.3 trillion in 2014.
A growing number of ESG funds are now directly available to retail investors.
Even giant pension funds are eager to enter the arena, and the US Department of Labor recently made that easier.
In October, Secretary of Labor Tom Perez revised existing rules to allow pension fund managers to consider the social impact of investments as long as doing so does not compromise the managers’ fiduciary obligations.
A similar 1978 ruling, allowing pension funds to allocate some of their investments to non-traditional assets, helped fuel the growth of the venture capital industry.
Purely philanthropic foundations face major constraints.
They are, in theory, allowed to act as impact investors to make “program-related investments” in projects consistent with their stated missions; in practice, however, they face strict fiduciary rules that make them reluctant to do so.
A growing number of foundations – such as the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, the Rockefeller Foundation, and the Kresge Foundation – are increasing their investment in activities that further their philanthropic goals.
Unfortunately, program-related investments still represent only 1% of the capital deployed by foundations, with just 0.05% of that going toward equity investments.
The Chan-Zuckerberg initiative is a high-profile example of the rapid growth of social-impact finance that complements and supports traditional philanthropy.
Chan and Zuckerberg will receive no tax benefit from transferring their wealth to a limited liability corporation.
But when they donate Facebook shares to a charitable organization, the recipient won’t have to pay capital gains tax when it liquidates the shares and puts the money to work.
And Chan and Zuckerberg will get a charitable deduction for the value of the shares at the time they are donated.
Meanwhile, they will be free to use part of their fortune as impact investors in for-profit social enterprises that promise both financial and social returns (and they will have to pay taxes on the profits they reap).
They can also choose to invest in advocacy and even political activity to encourage change.
This is exactly the approach that many of this generation’s major tech-based philanthropists, from Pierre Omidyar to Laurene Powell Jobs, are using.
None of this is to say that the government should relinquish its own role in addressing major public challenges.
For all their money, not even billionaire philanthropists like Zuckerberg and Gates can implement solutions on a regional, national, or global scale.
But they can assume the upfront risks of developing and testing new approaches to tackling long-term social and environmental problems.
And then they can advocate for policy changes and public funding to scale those approaches that work.
In short, there is nothing wrong with public-spirited innovation capital.
On the contrary, its soaring popularity suggests that it will be a crucial component of twenty-first-century problem-solving.
Face-to-Face with Facebook
NEW YORK – Long ago, when Facebook founder Mark Zuckerberg was in grade school, I wrote a book (Release 2.1: A Design for Living in the Digital Age) in which I lauded something called “P3” (now p3p), the platform for privacy preferences.
I was sure that people would start using P3 or something like it to control access to data about themselves.
Of course, I was wrong...for about 10 years.
Now, at last, it’s starting to happen – though not exactly the way I envisioned it. Nor is it exactly the way Zuckerberg envisioned it...
While many people are up in arms about Facebook’s shifting privacy policies, millions of others are calmly managing their reputations online, using the tools that Facebook and other social Web sites provide.
The younger generation is comfortable with sharing precisely because they know how to control it.
Zuckerberg is right that they don’t necessarily want privacy or what analyst Danah Boyd calls “seclusion,” but they do want “control.”
They won’t blindly follow defaults.
Generally, young people post more information of an edgy nature about themselves and about their friends than do older adults, so they are quickly learning the need for specific controls.
By contrast, older users (1) are less likely to do stupid things in the first place, and (2) are less likely to do so in range of a camera. (Of course, there are notable exceptions.)
But they, too, don’t want default settings that leave them feeling exposed.
They want to “evolve” on their own, rather than be pushed (or led unwittingly) by Facebook.
In short, the market is working, slowly, and consumers are educating themselves, slowly.
Facebook has been a big part of that: it has provided the tools to do so, and is constantly tweaking them. It has also publicized those tools, often inadvertently, by setting overly public defaults.
But in its rush to make money, the company seems to have been greedy – and pretty tone-deaf – in its response to critics.  The critics may not represent the majority of users, but they deserve a polite and considered response.
And when the company does screw up – as with Beacon and more recently its plans for user data-sharing with favored vendors such as Pandora – it needs to show more humility.
That’s not a moral judgment, but a business one.
If the market is working towards a world where users exercise the power to manage their own reputations, it will ultimately punish companies that become too arrogant.
But that is only part of the privacy discussion.
The comforting thing about the kind of data that Facebook primarily deals with is that it’s public. If your friends and other people can see it, so can you.
More troubling is the data you don’t even know about – the kind of data about your online activities collected by ad networks and shared with advertisers and other marketers, and sometimes correlated with offline data from other vendors.  By and large, that’s information you can’t see – what you clicked on, what you searched for, which pages you came from and went to – and neither can your friends, for the most part.
But that information is sold and traded, manipulated with algorithms to classify you and to determine what ads you see, what e-mails you receive, and often what offers are made to you.
Of course, some of that information could go astray...
Personally, I don’t really mind, but there are many people who would, if they understood what was going on in the first place.
I predict that, whether it’s this year or in ten years, this will become a much greater issue than what information people share openly with friends.
The challenge is to make this hidden sharing of information less confusing, more explicit, and more transparent before the majority of people discover it for themselves in a way that leaves them feeling deceived.
I regularly attend advertising industry events and raise this issue, and the answers I get are something along the lines of “what people don’t know won't hurt them,” or “all we’re doing is giving them ads better targeted to their interests.”
But people have a way of objecting to being manipulated like that. They like to be treated as individuals, not to be put into buckets.
I keep telling marketers that this is not a threat, but an opportunity.
Just as Facebook has educated people, clumsily, about privacy controls, so marketers must educate people, ideally more elegantly, about tracking controls.
I hope it won’t take ten years and a lot of bad publicity for advertisers to figure that out.
From my own perspective, as I look at the emerging market for people generating and using their own health/behavior data, this commotion is useful.
People who share health data are likely to be much more adept at managing it than they would have been just a few years ago. They will also be fairly skeptical about the companies they entrust it to.
That ultimately argues for transparency and paid models, so that consumers don’t wonder what other allegiances companies may have.
“I pay you to manage my data,” is pretty straightforward.
“I give you my data and you give me a free service” leaves the customer wondering what else the company may do with the data.
The Second Nuclear Age
NEW HAVEN – North Korea’s launch of a long-range missile in mid-December was followed by a flurry of global condemnation that was almost comical in its predictability and impotence.
But the launch underscored a larger reality that can no longer be ignored: the world has entered a second nuclear age.
The atomic bomb has returned for a second act, a post-Cold War encore.
This larger pattern needs to be understood if it is to be managed.
The contours of the second nuclear age are still taking shape.
But the next few years will be especially perilous, because newness itself creates dangers as rules and red lines are redefined.
This took at least ten years in the first nuclear age, and this time may be no different.
In the Middle East, South Asia, and East Asia, old rivalries now unfold in a nuclear context.
This has already changed military postures across the Middle East.
Part of the Israeli nuclear arsenal is being shifted to sea, with atomic warheads on diesel submarines, to prevent their being targeted in a surprise attack.
Israel also is launching a new generation of satellites to provide early warning of other countries’ preparations for missile strikes.
If Iran’s mobile missiles disperse, Israel wants to know about it immediately.
Thus, the old problem of Arab-Israeli peace is now seen in the new context of an Iranian nuclear threat.
The two problems are linked.
How would Israel respond to rocket attacks from Gaza, Lebanon, or Egypt if it simultaneously faced the threat of nuclear attack by Iran?
What would the United States and Israel do if Iran carried its threat to the point of evacuating its cities, or placing missiles in its own cities to ensure that any attack on them would cause massive collateral damage?
Pakistan has doubled the size of its nuclear arsenal in the last five years.
Its armed forces are set to field new tactical nuclear weapons – short-range battlefield weapons.
India has deployed a nuclear triad – bombers, missiles, and submarines – and in 2012 tested an intercontinental ballistic missile, giving it the ability to hit Beijing and Shanghai.
India almost certainly has a multiple warhead (known as a MIRV), in development, and has also launched satellites to aid its targeting of Pakistan’s forces.
In East Asia, North Korea has gone nuclear and is set to add a whole new class of uranium bombs to its arsenal.
It has rehearsed quick missile salvos, showing that it could launch attacks on South Korea and Japan before any counter-strike could be landed.
China, too, is shifting its nuclear forces to mobile missiles and submarines.
These weapons can be put on alert in a way that would be highly visible to US satellites and the global media.
Thus, the Chinese can easily “nuclearize” a crisis with the US or anyone else.
They do not have to detonate a nuclear weapon, but only alert adversaries to the dramatic increase in the political stakes and dangers of a showdown.
Russia, not wanting to be left out of the act, has recently staged the largest nuclear exercises in decades to remind everyone that it remains a serious nuclear player, too.
These individual developments are troubling.
But they cannot be understood in isolation from the larger multipolar system of major powers that is forming.
To a great extent, this is a nuclear multipolar system: possessing nuclear weapons contributes to a country’s global status as a major power.
To see this, consider the following question: When was the last time that the US or anyone else seriously proposed that India sign the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) – that is, that India give up the Bomb.
Given America’s economic problems and looming defense cuts, as well as growing Chinese power, there is no longer even a remote possibility that this demand will be made.
India has become an accepted, legitimate member of the nuclear club, the fiction of the NPT notwithstanding.
It is even less likely that China or Russia would disarm for the sake of a nuclear-free world.
But the most urgent problem stems from the breakdown of major countries’ one-time nuclear monopoly and the empowerment of smaller countries like North Korea, Pakistan, Israel, and, quite possibly, Iran.
A new set of rules for diplomacy, military strategy, and arms control is needed to stabilize this emerging nuclear order.
Pretending that it does not exist is not a strategy.
Fads, Frenzies, and Finance
Barcelona – The financial crisis, credit crunch, and ensuing economic downturn have severely damaged the credibility of financial markets, institutions, and traders.
More and more people are claiming that markets are characterized by irrationality, bubbles, fads, and frenzies, and that economic actors are driven by behavioral biases.
George Soros’s recent book on the credit crisis is a good example of this line of thinking.
He even suggests that established financial theory is obsolete.
His view, in essence, means that the current financial crisis is the final proof that markets do not process information efficiently.
If this is true, we are closer to John Maynard Keynes’s view of the market as a casino than to Friedrich von Hayek’s view of it as a marvelous mechanism for processing dispersed information.
For example, the recent spike in oil prices would have been driven by an irrational frenzy in futures markets.
Market operators would have miscalculated systematically, been overconfident about their information, and overreacted to news.
I believe, however, that there is another explanation for these phenomena, which is based on rational calculation and information processing by institutions and traders.
The problems we see in the financial markets have very much to do with lack of good information, misaligned incentives, and, in fact, rational responses to the environment.
When information is scarce and unevenly distributed, prices may well depart from the reality of fundamentals.
We see this when new technologies arrive on the scene.
The Internet bubble is the most recent example, but a similar phenomenon occurred with the construction of railways more than a century ago.
It can be argued that the sophisticated loan packages created by banks in recent years are, likewise, a new and unknown product, so information and experience to aid pricing has been scarce and dispersed.
In such circumstances, prices may well move far from the fundamentals as assessed by a hypothetical collective wisdom that would pool all information in the market.
Trading on the momentum of price movements may then become a rational activity that becomes self-fulfilling, as investors decide to “ride the bubble” while it lasts.
The bubble is inflated further by the asymmetry between those who bet that prices will rise and buy, and those who forecast a fall, but stay out because to sell short is too costly.
This means that important and relatively persistent departures of prices from fundamental values are possible, and even likely, when information is dispersed – but that a correction to align them with reality will always follow.
Eventually, stock prices do reflect the fundamentals of the economy.
This explains why the market can look like Keynes’s casino in the short term and like Hayek’s marvel in the long term.
So how does this explain the overexposure of many institutions to sub-prime mortgage risk and the collapse of the interbank market?
Were banks that chose to securitize sub-prime loans instead of keeping them on their balance sheets behaving irrationally?
Again, informational asymmetries and misaligned incentives are at the heart of what happened.
Keeping those loans on the books would have meant that a bank would have had to incur a large capital adequacy provision and monitor the loans’ performance, at a cost to itself.
Securitization avoided such costs and placed the new product advantageously – with the complicity of rating agencies, which stood to profit from investors’ inexperience and lack of information.
Executives collected generous bonuses, and equity holders were protected by limited liability.
A probable cause of the collapse of the interbank market is precisely informational failure.
This is a well-known phenomenon; indeed the study of the market for automotive “lemons” won George Akerlof the Nobel Prize.
Banks still don’t trust each other, since each wonders how many skeletons the other has in its closet.
There is no irrationality here.
The debate over the irrationality of financial markets is no mere academic argument.
If we believe that economic actors are irrational, then we will enact paternalistic policies aimed at controlling behavior or bailing out failed agents and institutions, which could be self-defeating and even dangerous.
This may include restrictions on investments by institutions and individuals and intrusive regulation that limits, or dictates, their conduct in the market.
The calls to curb speculation in derivatives markets or short sales have this flavor.
If, on the other hand, we believe that economic actors will respond rationally to incentives and information, then we can usefully reform regulatory frameworks with well-targeted measures, including restrictions on off-balance sheet vehicles, tougher disclosure requirements, and controls on rating agencies’ conflicts of interests.
Failing states in Central America
When the US Defence Department produced a report in December in which it named Mexico as one as one of two countries (along with Pakistan) at risk of rapidly becoming a failed state there was a predictable rejection of its findings in many quarters.
In fact, the authors may have got their analysis right, just for the wrong country.
Head further south to Central America – Guatemala in particular – and the failed state paradigm may be far more applicable.
Considering the apparent progress made by democracy in the region since the 1990’s, this assessment may seem a little harsh.
But dig a little closer to look at the quality of democracy, above all in the condition of state institutions such as the judiciary and the police, and the picture becomes less rosy.
Ironically, it is Mexico’s hardline strategy against the drug cartels on its own territory which is making the situation worse; gangs are seeking the relative sanctuary of Central America as a base for their operations.
The evidence from Guatemala is particularly worrying.
Some 80% of Latin American cocaine reaching the US passes through the country at some point.
President Álvaro Colom in February claimed that 40% of the 6,200 murders recorded in 2008 were linked to drug-related violence.
Investigators from the US and Guatemala believe that the two biggest Mexican cartels, the Sinaloa and Gulf gangs, are spreading their tentacles across various departments; the Gulf cartel’s notorious armed wing, Los Zetas, is held responsible for a spate of massacres in the country in the past year.
Many economists believe that a major reason for the quetzal’s strength against the dollar in recent years has been the amount of drug money laundered through the Guatemalan financial system.
Compared with the strong-arm tactics employed by his Mexican counterpart Felipe Calderón, Colom seems resigned to defeat.
Comments in January that the country was helpless against an ‘avalanche’ of drug-trafficking from the north were aimed at securing international support, but do little to inspire confidence in his leadership.
The sad truth is that he may well be right: the national police (PNC) are notoriously corrupt, understaffed and inefficient, as much a part of the problem as the drug gangs themselves.
Moreover, the armed forces have become a shadow of their former self, and still have human rights legacies hanging over them from the country’s bitter civil war.
Even if the PNC were to convert itself overnight into the world’s most effective crime-fighting machine, it would still be unlikely to have a significant immediate impact.
Without an overhaul of the entire judicial system, any government measures or societal pressure are not going to make much of a difference.
This is true as much as for the rest of Central America – with the general exception of Costa Rica and Panama – as it is for Guatemala alone.
Evidence from El Salvador would appear to bear this point out: the Salvadoran police are widely regarded as stronger and more efficient, but crime rates remain roughly on a par with Guatemala.
In both countries, impunity is the key: in Guatemala only 4% (at most) of all crimes, and less than 2% of murders, result in a criminal conviction.
The condition of the Central American judiciary is at the heart of the prospect of state failure.
Already weak and inefficient, prone to corruption, politicisation, lack of co-ordination between departments, and outright intimidation of its officials, judicial systems across the isthmus have been an easy target for organised crime.
Guatemala has been the most obvious victim so far, but Honduras also suffers all the similar conditions to be the next in line.
Bringing the judicial system and other key state institutions to their knees is the main aim of the drug cartels.
Being in virtual control of large swathes of Central American territory and being able to act with relative impunity are ultimately very good for business.
The US may view its war on drugs in Mexico and Colombia as partially successful; the danger is that Central America does not have those countries’ institutional resilience, leaving the way open for new fronts to be opened.
Quite aside from the terrible human and institutional impact, this situation also undermines the long-term economic strategies of Central American governments.
For better or for worse, democracy in the region has been accompanied by policies of economic liberalisation and efforts to attract foreign investment, culminating in the signing of the Central American Free Trade Agreement with the US in 2005.
While foreign companies have not been deliberately targeted, regular headlines of new killings hardly present a positive international image.
On-the-surface political stability and favourable investment laws may be in place, but in the absence of an effective judiciary or reliable security forces, committing capital to promising projects becomes that much more difficult.
Significant improvements to this situation will be hard won.
Central American politicians’ habitual tough talk on violent crime has paid few dividends in practice; it makes little impact on drug cartels, whose resources often far outweigh those of the local police or army.
Attention will inevitably be focused on the US to provide more material and technical support to the security forces; drips of funding for Central America under the term of the Mérida Initiative agreed with Mexico are welcome, but likely to be insufficient in the grand scheme of things.
Meanwhile, the economic downturn is doing its bit to help the gangs’ cause: jobs will dry up, poverty will increase and the government’s ability to provide basic welfare and social services will be tested, making a life of crime all the more attractive and rewarding.
The possible implications of this Catch-22 are troubling to say the least.
Failing the Syria Test
MADRID – On October 2nd in Istanbul, Syria’s disparate opposition movements gave the go-ahead for the formation of a “Syrian National Council.”
This is the most important step yet taken by the fragmented forces that have been trying since May to lead a peaceful uprising against President Bashar al-Assad’s regime.
The Council’s formation boosted the morale of those who have been demanding stronger and more unified representation.
But a mere two days after its creation, the embryonic Council suffered its first big setback.
France, the United Kingdom, Germany, and Portugal, in collaboration with the United States, presented a draft resolution before the United Nations Security Council seeking to condemn repression in Syria and put an end to the use of force against civilians.
The draft was a sugarcoated version of a previous text, proposed last June. This one contained nebulous terms such as “specific measures” or “other options.”
It stressed the sovereignty, independence, and territorial integrity of Syria, and emphasized the need to resolve the current crisis peacefully, by means of an inclusive political process – and called for a national dialogue led from within the country.
The draft called for a 30-day period to study the options, up from 15 days in the earlier draft.
The object was plain: to gain a Russian, and consequently, a Chinese abstention.
But Russia and China vetoed the proposal anyway, and only nine members of the Security Council voted in favor, with Brazil, India, South Africa, and Lebanon abstaining.
There are three key implications of the Security Council’s vote.
First, violence will increase.
Since the protests erupted last March, there have been an estimated 2,700 deaths, more than 10,000 people displaced to Turkey, and thousands more arrested.
The Assad government does not hesitate to fire on civilians, lay siege to cities, or shut off their electricity and water.
And a few days ago, it was reported that some 10,000 Syrian soldiers had defected, with several hundred joining rival movements such as the Free Syrian Army and the Free Officers Movement.
Unless some international protection arrives, a movement that began peacefully risks entering a new and dangerous phase.
Second, there will be grave consequences for regional security.
Syria is a strategic hinge in the Middle East.
It has been one of the countries most hostile toward Israel, mainly through its support of Hamas, Iran, and Hezbollah.
Chaos in Syria would threaten Lebanon’s stability and alter Iran’s geopolitical influence in the region.
Iraq, governed by Shia political forces, also keeps close tabs on Syria’s evolution, as does Turkey, which, until fairly recently, considered Syria a keystone of its regional policy.
Finally, the Security Council vote exposed a clear division within the international community.
Among the BRICS – Brazil, Russia, India, China, and South Africa, all of which happen to be on the Security Council currently – two vetoed and the rest abstained (along with Lebanon, for obvious reasons).
In the case of the resolution on military intervention in Libya, the BRICS decided "to let" Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi be overthrown.
Not so with Syria, where none aligned itself with the positions supported by the European Union and the US.
The Security Council’s composition wouldn’t be substantially different if an “ideal” distribution of seats were to be achieved.
So the fact that no agreement has been reached on Syria forces us to reflect on the future difficulties that we will face in managing global security.
Of course, there is no “one size fits all” model for intervention, but that does not justify evading our “responsibility to protect” – a fine concept promoted by former UN Secretary-General Kofi Annan and adopted by all UN member states in 2005.
Support for the resolution would have weakened Assad’s position, as it would have revealed him as isolated from his traditional allies, Russia and China.
It would also have shown the international community to be unanimous in its rejection of repression and committed to protecting the Syrian people (though the draft made no mention of military intervention).
The sanctions adopted by the EU and the US against Assad’s regime are not enough.
But, unless further measures are channeled through – and thus legitimized by – the Security Council, other alternatives are limited.
In recent years, with countries such as China, India, and Brazil taking their rightful place on the international scene, the G-7 has given way to the G-20.
Likewise, an ambitious reform of the International Monetary Fund was adopted in 2010 to reflect changes in the global distribution of power.
But this change in global governance must not be limited to economic policymaking.
After all, globalization has brought many overall benefits, but also less friendly aspects, such as the ones dealing with global security.
Despite our growing interconnectedness, the UN Security Council has not yet been unable to achieve sufficient consensus to resolve pressing matters such as Syria.
Nobody ever said that the road to stronger global governance would be straight or simple to navigate.
But there are no detours: without effective structures of power and a genuine commitment from all players, the future does not look promising for global stability and prosperity.
The Failure of Free Migration
LONDON – The horrendous attack by a French-Tunisian man on a crowd in Nice celebrating Bastille Day, which killed 84 and injured hundreds more, will give National Front leader Marine Le Pen a massive boost in next spring’s presidential election.
It doesn’t matter whether the murderer, Mohamed Lahouaiej Bouhlel, had any links to radical Islamism.
Throughout the Western world, a toxic mix of physical, economic, and cultural insecurity has been fueling anti-immigration sentiment and politics precisely at the moment when the disintegration of post-colonial states across the Islamic crescent is producing a refugee problem on a scale not seen since World War II.
In the last 30 years or so, a key benchmark for liberal-democratic societies has been their openness to newcomers.
Only bigots could not see that immigration benefits both hosts and migrants; so the task of political leadership was to keep such views out of the dominant discourse, and to facilitate integration or assimilation.
Unfortunately, most Western elites failed to appreciate the conditions of success.
Although the movement of peoples has been a constant feature of human history, it has been relatively bloodless only when it was into scantily settled or developing territories.
A classic case was the nineteenth-century emigrations from Europe to the New World.
Between 1840 and 1914, 55 million people left Europe for the Americas – much larger, relative to population, than migration since WWII.
Nearly all the movers were economic migrants, pushed out of their countries by famine and agricultural depression and pulled to the New World by the promise of free land and a better life.
As the world industrialized and filled up with people, the flow of people from developed to developing areas reversed.
Poverty and starvation still pushed migrants off the land in poor countries; now, however, the pull factor was not free land, but better jobs in developed countries.
This set up today’s tension.
After WWII, Western governments devised policies that aimed to balance the economic benefits of immigration (cheap labor) with protection of domestic jobs and ways of life.
For example, between 1955 and 1973, West Germany admitted 14 million “guest workers,” largely from Turkey.
In recent years, refugees have mainly been fleeing either persecution or extreme insecurity following state disintegration.
We saw this in the Balkans in the 1990s, and in Afghanistan and the Horn of Africa in the 2000s.
The five million Syrians now in Turkey, Lebanon, and Jordan are the latest and most dramatic example of this pattern.
For this class of migrant, push factors are by far the most important.
But the line between refugees and economic migrants blurs over time.
History indicates that most refugees do not return to their country of origin.
It takes too long for the feeling of extreme insecurity to subside; and, meanwhile, the lure of a better life takes hold.
This explains an important fact about popular perception: most people in the host countries do not distinguish between economic migrants and refugees.
Both are typically viewed as claimants on existing resources, not as creators of new resources.
The flight of East Asians from Kenya during that country’s “Africanization” campaign led directly to the UK’s anti-immigration legislation of 1968.
This historical perspective suggests three conclusions.
First, anti-immigrant sentiment is not based only on prejudice, ignorance, or political opportunism.
Anti-immigrant language is not just socially constructed.
Words are not mirrors of things “out there,” but they have some relation to such things.
You cannot manipulate something unless there is something to manipulate.
We have little chance of changing the words unless we alter the realities to which they refer.
Second, the era of unregulated mass population movement is drawing to a close.
As the Brexit vote shows, Europe’s political class greatly underestimated the strains caused by free mobility across borders – a shibboleth of the failed neoliberal project of maximizing market-based resource allocation.
Critics of neoliberalism cannot consistently exempt population movements from regulation.
Indeed, the fatal flaw of free mobility in the EU is that it always presupposed a state to manage the movement.
This state does not exist.
Giving people an EU passport doesn’t legitimize a single labor market, which is why “emergency brakes” on migration within the EU are inevitable.
Third, we need to accept the fact that most of the refugees arriving in the EU will not return home.
The way forward is difficult.
The easiest steps are those that increase voters’ security, in the widest sense, because such policies are within the control of political leaders.
These measures will include not just a cap on the number of economic migrants, but also policies leading to expectation of full employment and continuity of income.
Only if voters’ economic insecurity is diminished is there any hope for active policies to assimilate or integrate refugees, whose numbers Western leaders cannot directly control.
The unsolved problem is how to reduce those factors pushing people out of their own countries.
We may hope that economic development in Eastern Europe – or Mexico – will equalize conditions sufficiently to end net flows from one region to another; but ending the flow of refugees from the Middle East and Africa is altogether more daunting.
Restoration of order and creation of legitimate authority are preconditions of economic development, and we don’t know how this is to be done.
In some cases, it may require redrawing borders.
But it is hard to see that happening without years of fighting, or to know how the West can reduce the bloodshed.
One thing seems certain to me: without increased security at both ends, political violence will spill over from the Islamic world to its nearest neighbors in Europe.
Либерал-демократияның жеңіс туралы қиялы
ВАШИНГТОН – Британдықтардың Еуроодақтан шығуды қолдап дауыс беретінін, америкалықтардың Дональд Трампты келесі президенті етіп сайлайтынын болжаған сарапшы өте аз болды.
Бірақ көп ұзамай бұл жаңсақтықтың консенсустық түсіндірмесі де шықты.
Алайда, мұндай көпжақты да салдарлы мәселелерге үстірт баға беруден абай болу керек.
Бүгінгі консенсустық пікір бойынша біз салыстырмалы түрде космополит әрі өзара жымдасқан әлеміне байланып, білімі төмендеу, қоғаммен байланысы аздау топтарды мұқият тыңдай алмаған «элитаны» - академиялық ортаны, ақпарат құралдарын және бизнесті кінәлаймыз.
Жаһанданудың игілігін бәрінен де аз көрген топ – осылар болғандықтан, олардың (Брекзит мәселесінде) супраұлттық институттарды ал (Дональд Трамп мәселесінде) истеблишменттің кандидаттарын кері итеруі әбден мүмкін еді. Мұны елемеу көп жағынан алғанда анық қателік болды.  
Бұл көзқарастың жаны бар.
Бүгінгі қаржылық және интеллектуалдық элитаға, соның ішінде сауалнама жүргізушілерге, «топтық ойлау» әдеті жұққан. Олар көбіне бірдей ортада білім алған, бірге жұмыс істейді, бірдей басылымдарды оқиды және Давостан Аспенге дейінгі аралықтағы біртекті конференциялар мен шараларда бас қосады.
Бұл тобыр тарихтың ең керемет сабақтарын алып, бойымызға сіңірдік деп сенеді.
Олар нәсілшілдікті, этноцентризмнің тіпті ең жұмсақ түрлерін өткір сынайды, есесіне феминизмді кері теппеуі мүмкін.
Бұл топ әркелкіліктің үлгісі болмағанымен, мұнда әркелкілік ерекше құндылық ретінде бағаланады, әрі еркектің үстемдігі біртіндеп төмендеп келеді.
Бұл топтың және бір ерекшелігі – байлық.
Топ мүшелерінің барлығы шетінен мультимиллионер болмағанымен, олардың бойында экономикалық жаһанданудың жемісін жеуге мүмкіндік беретін қабілет те, білім де бар.
Соның кесірінен олар әсіресе АҚШ-та теңсіздіктің үлкен мәселеге айналып келе жатқанын осы кезге дейін байқамай келген (ең бай элитаның өкілдері бұрын-соңды болмаған көлемде филантропиялықпен айналысып жатса да).
Бизнес пен қаржыдан бастап саясатқа дейінгі басты салаларда салдарлы шешімдер қабылдайтын космополит элита онша жолы болмаған, дұрыс білім алмаған, жақсы байланыс орнатпаған жандардың мұң-мұқтажына көңіл бөлуі тиіс екені анық.
Пікірлес адамдармен бункерлерде жинала бергенше, олар шыққан ортасы мен қазіргі ахуалы әркелкі жандарды, соның ішінде жаһандануға қатысы әртүрлі адамдарды байланыстыратын платформа жасауы керек. Мұндай платформа қоғамдық пікірталастың жіктелуі мәселесін шешуге ықпалын тигізеді.
Алайда, идеологиялық «көпіршік» - жалғыз ғана проблема емес.
Бір жағынан элита популистік жеңістерді ғана болжай алмай қалған жоқ, сондай-ақ олар популист емес екені дау тудырмайтын Франсуа Фийонның Францияның орташыл-оңшыл республикалықтардың праймеризінде үлкен басымдықпен алға шығатынын да білмей қалды.
Жұмысшы таптың ашу-ызасына көңіл бөлмеу – олардың саяси сәуегейлігіне көлеңке түсірген жалғыз мәселе емес екені айқын.
Әрине, егер тек фактілер анық айтылса, халық оларды салқынқандылықпен талқылап, сайлаушылар көп ұйымдаспай, саясат конструктивті сипат алады деген сенімге иланған ыңғайлырақ.
Алайда, тіпті фактіге негізделген, озық дискурстың өзінде халықтың мүдделері әркелкі болады.
Брекзитті не Трампты қолдап дауыс бергендер жаһанданудың игіліктерін түсінбей қойған жоқ, қазір олардың өз тиесілі нанын бөліп алудағы қабілеті мен мүмкіндігі шектеулі болып тұр.
Коммуникациядан да маңызды мәселе – игілікті бөлісу саясаты, ал бұл саясаттың екі жаққа да жеңіс әкелмейтіні аян.
Еркін сауда мен технологиялық өзгерістердің игіліне бөленген топ салық, субсидия не жұмыс беру арқылы жеңілгендерге жеңілістің өтеуін төлеп отыруы керек.
Сол сияқты, либерал-демократиялық Батыстың экономикалық және геосаяси мүдделері жалпы алғанда бірізді деген пікірдің өзі жаңсақ.
Шындығында, ортақ тұстары көп болғанымен, олар энергетикадан бастап қауіпсіздік мәселесіне дейін тым әркелкі болып келеді. Мәселен, Еуропа АҚШ-қа қарағанда көмірсутегіне көбірек тәуелді.
Осы тұрғыдан қарағанда, ынтымақтастық бойынша келісімге келу үшін жақсы араласу, фактілер бойынша бір тоқтамға келу жеткіліксіз.
Екі жақ та құрбандыққа баратын келіссөздер қажет болады.
Бұл екі жайт та Батыс әлемін түсінудегі бір үлкен олқылыққа меңзейді: ол – ешкім жеңілмейтіндей шешім бар дегенге сену.
Шындығында, оңшыл-орташыл, солшыл-орташыл бағыттағы либер-демократия мұндай шешімдер ұзақ мерзім тұрғысынан «қоғамға», тіпті бүкіл адамзатқа пайдалы дегенге сенеді (мұнда мәселен, ең маңызды игілік – бейбітшілікті мысалға келтірсек болады).
Демократия қалтарыс, бұлтарыстармен келіссөз жүргізеді, құрбандықтарды анықтайды.
Бірақ, ақыр соңында бәрі жеңіске жетеді. 
Әрине, ешкім жеңілмейтін шешімдер қабылдау мүмкін болмаса, жұрттың бәрі жеңіледі.
Өткен ғасырдың бірінші жартысында ауылшаруашылық жерлерін тартып алмасаң, елді аштыққа ұшыратасың деген түсінік болған.
Ал бүгінде энергетика туралы осылай айтады.
Ал шынайы жағдай бұдан күрделірек.
Экономика инклюзивті өсімге, «жеңіске» қол жеткізуі үшін ең бақуатты топ реттеу мен салық салу ережелеріне, соның ішінде халықаралық тәртіпке бағынуы керек, ал бұл ұзақ мерзім тұрғысынан алғанда олардың байлығын ортайтады.
Бұл оларды жеңілгендер санатына қоспаса да (олар сол қалпы бай болып қала береді), байлардың біраз нәрсесінен айырылатынын ешкім жоққа шығара алмайды.
Либерал-демократиялық тәсілдеменің ең жақсы жері – мұнда әрдайым компромиске орын бар. Жұрттың бәрі өздерін жеңімпаз сезініп үйлеріне қайтпағанымен, жеке адамдар мен мемлекеттер кеңістік пен ресурстарды барлық жағынан шектегеннен гөрі бірге жұмыс істесіп, келісім-шарттар жасасудың әлдеқайда жақсы екенін көреді.
Қазіргі конфликтілердің, соның ішінде ішкі саяси итжығыстардың шығыны тым үлкен болғаны сондай, тіпті жеңімпаздардың өздері ақыр соңында жеңілген болып шығады.
Соңғы жаңсақтықтарды ескере отырып біз саяси радарымызды қайта жабдықтауымыз керек, мұнда біз тек өз «әуенімізге» сай келетін нәрселерді ғана емес, радарға кедергі жасайтын жайттардың бәрін ескеруіміз қажет.
Мұнда либерал не социал-демократтар мен ұлтшыл немесе басқа да қатаң идеологтардың арасындағы айырмашылықтың салдары көп болмақ. Алдыңғысы орта мерзімде бір жақтың жеңіп, екіншісінің жеңілетінін, ал ұзақ мерзім тұрғысында өз елінде біртіндеп демократиялық өзгерістер болатынын, бұл үшін халықаралық бейбітшілікті сақтап тұру керектігін мойындауы тиіс.
Fair Contracts for Poor Countries
A number of countries in Latin America, Africa, Eastern Europe, and elsewhere are abrogating or renegotiating contracts with multinational enterprises (MNEs), and others are likely to follow suit.
The costs can be high.
Governments may get better terms, but they may also become embroiled in international investment disputes and discourage other investors.
For companies, renegotiations mean uncertainty and possible interruptions of production and revenue.
Significant shifts in power (typically as a result of changes in commodity prices) and ideology, or changes in the economics of projects, can lead to renegotiations, especially when it comes to large investments in natural resources and infrastructure.
But often the reason is that the host country considers a contract to be unfair.
While “fairness” may well be in the eyes of the beholder, in some cases, the host country may not have had the expertise required to negotiate the best possible deal – a frequent situation when MNEs negotiate with the least developed countries (the world’s 50 poorest countries, most of them in sub-Saharan Africa).
Mittal’s 2005 deal with Liberia (renegotiated last year) and various contracts with Congo probably fall at least partly into this category, as do some deals in ex-Soviet countries.
Suppose a $500 million petroleum or copper contract needs to be negotiated.
This will most likely involve a leading MNE, which can field a negotiating team that includes world-class lawyers, geologists, and financial analysts who understand, for example, the trade-offs between taxes and royalties and can put them in appropriate language.
The host country, on the other hand, simply cannot match such a team.
Perhaps it does not even know what to ask for.
The resulting contract is all the more problematic because it is likely to involve one of the host country’s few important resources, which can generate more predictable (and probably higher) revenues than official development assistance – and over a long period of time.
So, even without corruption, it is not surprising when a future government demands that the contract be renegotiated.
Clearly, the playing field with MNEs should be leveled.
In theory, the host country could hire its own international experts to assist it in negotiations.
But poor countries typically lack the funds needed to pay such a team’s fees.
Nor do the World Bank and regional development banks have the in-house expertise – or, as a rule, the funds – to provide technical assistance.
But what if MNEs provided the funds?
Obviously, MNEs want the best possible deal for themselves; but they also want durable contracts that won’t be repudiated by the next government.