We know that infectious diseases cause the most deaths, but we do not know which ones.
When it comes to deciding how best to allocate our resources, we are effectively flying blind.
Since 1990, we have halved child mortality worldwide; but nearly six million children under the age of five still die from preventable causes.
Four out of five child deaths occur in Sub-Saharan Africa or South Asia, regions where there are few doctors and even fewer pathologists.
Standard medical investigations of the causes of death are rare.
In many cases, there is no official death record at all.
When the cause of death is investigated, it is almost exclusively through a “verbal autopsy.”
Parents are asked, typically three months after their loss, about the circumstances surrounding their child’s death.
But while they may be able to report that their baby suffered from rapid breathing or diarrhea, they have no way of identifying the cause of these symptoms.
The problem is aggravated when it comes to the nearly 45% of deaths that occur during the first month of life.
In these cases, the cause of death is often recorded simply as a “neonatal death,” a label that provides no hint as to what caused the illness.
This information is useless and cannot help prevent other families from suffering the same tragedy.
Experience from successful health campaigns, such as eradicating polio or controlling Ebola, shows that while early progress can be achieved relatively easily, lasting results require enormous efforts and very accurate surveillance data.
It is to collect this crucial information that the Child Health and Mortality Prevention Surveillance – or CHAMPS – program has been launched.
The CHAMPS program – a long-term initiative led by the Emory Global Health Institute, with partners including the International Association of National Public Health Institutes, US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, and the Task Force for Global Health – eventually will involve some 20 sites in areas with the highest child mortality rates.
This will allow us to record causes of death more accurately and track progress as vaccination campaigns and other measures are introduced.
These sites will rely on a new technique that allows tiny samples of key organs, such as the liver or lungs, to be extracted with a needle, causing minimal damage to the body of a deceased child.
The samples will then be sent for analysis to strengthened local labs and reference centers to provide a more accurate and complete picture of all causes of death.
There are many possible interventions – such as providing folic acid to prevent birth defects, introducing new vaccines, or treating infections earlier – that we know could have an impact on child mortality.
CHAMPS will provide the information needed to prioritize these measures.
Furthermore, each site will help build the capacity of partner countries’ public health systems, providing valuable data and technical support that will have an impact far beyond helping to reduce child mortality.
For example, the surveillance centers will generate the data needed to tackle infectious diseases, provide early warning of epidemics, and generally improve global health.
The CHAMPS initiative is still in its early days.
The sites – six of which are being funded by the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation through an initial $73 million grant for the first three years – are just being established.
More partners and more funding will be needed to expand the network and maintain it over the long term.
And it will take time for the benefits to become clear.
But early results are encouraging.
Worries that parents would be reluctant to allow postmortem tests on their children have proved unfounded.
On the contrary, our experience so far shows that parents are very interested in finding out what killed their children.
At a well-established pilot site in Soweto, South Africa, both mothers and fathers are returning to learn the results of the testing – an unprecedented level of interest.
I believe that CHAMPS’ work may have the greatest impact of anything in which I have been involved in my 20 years in public health.
By accurately tracking the causes of child mortality, we can target treatments more precisely and usher in a new era – one in which preventable child deaths really will be a thing of the past.
A New Beginning for Greece – and Europe
KIEL – Greece is in urgent need of clear thinking.
The only reason the country has not long since defaulted on its debts is that the European Central Bank continues to provide funds to the Greek central bank through its emergency liquidity assistance (ELA) scheme.
The Greek central bank, in turn, lends money to the country’s commercial banks, which lend it to Greek citizens and foreign creditors.
The problem is that both groups of borrowers have been transferring large sums of money to other countries.
The result is that overdraft credits to the Greek central bank have grown by nearly €1 billion a day in recent months.
If Greece defaults and leaves the eurozone, these overdrafts will not be repaid.
ELA funding assumes that the Greek economy is temporarily illiquid, but not insolvent.
This assumption is patently false.
Despite all the pain Greece has suffered – a 30% drop in aggregate demand since the last cyclical peak and a rise in unemployment to more than 25% of the workforce – the Greek economy is still nowhere near competitive enough to repay its debts.
Part of the reason is that corruption remains high and administrative capacity to levy taxes remains woefully limited.
Meanwhile, low-income Greek households have borne the brunt of austerity.
In short, the mess continues.
But allowing Greece to default and still remain in the eurozone is not an option: it would signal that other eurozone countries could amass huge debts, funded by the ECB, without having any intention of repaying.
Fiscal responsibility in the eurozone would be fatally undermined.
Yet forcing a defaulting Greece out of the eurozone – against its will – is not an option, either: it would plunge the country into economic, social, and political instability, and there would doubtless be serious repercussions beyond the country’s borders.
In my judgment, there are only two viable options left.
The first – and more desirable – is for the ECB to assess realistically Greece’s lack of solvency and so stop providing ELA funds to its banking system.
This would precipitate a payment crisis for Greece.
But, recognizing the impending disaster, Greece would genuinely commit itself to the structural reforms that are in its own long-term interests: boosting the labor market’s flexibility, selling state-owned enterprises that most other European countries have already placed in private hands, and spending less on public-sector bureaucracy.
At the same time, Greece would ensure that these reforms do not hurt the poorest by introducing active labor-market policies (such as subsidies to train and hire the long-term unemployed).
Furthermore, Greece would commit itself to an automatically implemented fiscal plan, specifying the long-run ratio of national debt to GDP, the convergence rate to this ratio, and the degree of fiscal counter-cyclicality.
So much for what Greece must do.
In return, its creditors would agree to another one-time debt write-off – large enough to enable Greece realistically to repay its debts in the future, but small enough to avoid unnecessary transfers of credit.
Greece would remain within the eurozone, having lost some of its fiscal and structural sovereignty.
If this first option is not taken – the likely outcome, given the current game of political brinkmanship – Greece will default.
But that could set the stage for the second option, which I would call the “New Beginning Program.”
Under this program, creditor countries would write off Greece’s debts, on the condition that the country left the eurozone voluntarily.
This would give Greece the opportunity to start afresh from outside the monetary union: it could restructure its economy without outside interference, and could be ready to re-enter the eurozone at a later point under new conditions – this time without false statistical pretenses or unrealistic expectations.
Such an option would allow the Greek government to make a new start in stimulating competition, fighting corruption, and otherwise building a basis for long-term growth.
This would not be easy, but it would no longer be a process that Greece finds humiliating and creditor countries find exasperating.
This second option would be less desirable than the first.
The speculative uncertainties associated with a “Grexit” might well threaten other eurozone economies (for example, Cyprus and Portugal), while Greece, with a devalued drachma, would find it painfully expensive to import the capital goods it needs to generate a broad base of high-wage jobs.
But the second option would also be a new beginning for the whole eurozone.
Its member states would accept that monetary union is impossible without fiscal and structural coordination.
The minimum fiscal coordination needed would involve automatically implemented national plans, formulated by each government in advance.
As a counterpart, structural coordination must, at a minimum, focus European Union funds on countries with long-term current-account deficits, the aim being to improve their competitiveness through investments in their human capital.
Given that its current arrangements are neither credible nor sustainable, the eurozone needs this “new beginning,” regardless of which option Greece eventually takes.
New Directions for the UN
NEW YORK – The United Nations today leads what seems at times like a double life.
On the one hand, pundits criticize it for not solving all the world’s ills.
On the other hand, UN member states and people around the world are asking it to do more, in more places, than ever before – a trend that will continue in 2011.
It is not hard to see why.
We have only to read the newspaper, turn on the television, or go online to appreciate the sheer scale of the need.
Conflicts rage in too many places.
Natural disasters strike with greater fury, and in greater numbers, than ever before.
On top of all this, we face a new generation of threats, unlike any in history, which spill across borders and have global reach.
No single country or group, however powerful, can deal with them alone.
All must work together – in common cause for common solutions – to address challenges like climate change, poverty, and nuclear disarmament.
But there is profound skepticism that we can do so.
The world looks to the UN as never before, yet the conventional wisdom is that we are not up to the job.
The problems are too complicated.
Resources are too few.
The UN itself appears too divided to make the vital difference.
The conventional wisdom is, however, wrong; worse, it is dangerous, for we have all seen how quickly it can take hold, distort reality, and then harden like cement.
For example, four years ago, when I came to office, only a handful of global leaders knew enough even to talk about climate change – the defining challenge of our times, whose effects we see every day, all around us.
Today, we have moved climate change to the top of the global agenda.
But make no mistake: it has been a difficult road.
In December 2009 in Copenhagen, world leaders talked far into the night, and emerged, according to the conventional wisdom, with virtually nothing.
In fact, though we did not get a comprehensive, legally binding treaty that would usher in an era of sustainable, low-carbon prosperity, as we had hoped, there were significant achievements in Copenhagen.
For the first time ever, developed and developing countries acknowledged their responsibility to curb emissions of greenhouse gasses and agreed on the goal of limiting global temperature rise to below two degrees Celsius.
And, for the first time ever, countries made large pledges to finance mitigation and adaptation efforts: $30 billion over the next three years for fast-start financing, and $100 billion per year by 2020. 
The lesson is that we should not dream of overnight breakthroughs, or allow ourselves to fall into despair in the absence of immediate progress.
Let us work, instead, to build on many smaller advances, wherever we can make them – by mobilizing support, creating broad alliances, building coalitions, and taking into account a web of moving parts and complex issues – because that will set the stage for the eventual breakthroughs of tomorrow.
Collective action has never been easy, but it has never been more necessary than in achieving the UN’s Millennium Development Goals – the world’s blueprint for ending extreme poverty.
The conventional wisdom will tell you that the MDGs targets – reducing poverty and hunger, improving the health of mothers and children, combating HIV/AIDS, increasing access to education, protecting the environment, and forging a global partnership for development – are simply unattainable.
In fact, we are controlling disease – polio, malaria, and AIDS – better than ever before, and making big new investments in women’s and children’s health – the key to progress in many other areas.
Nevertheless, on climate change, poverty, and other issues, the conventional wisdom is that the UN should cede responsibility to the G-20.
But the G-20, by itself, is not the answer.
Despite strenuous debate about currency issues and trade imbalances at its summit in Seoul in November, the sole area of agreement concerned an issue on the G-20’s agenda for the first time – economic development.
Recognizing that global recovery depends on the emerging economies – that is, the developing world – G-20 leaders embraced investments aimed at lifting the world’s most vulnerable people out of poverty.
That is why G-20 leaders accept the need to work closely with the UN – after all, no organization does development better.
The G-20 and the UN are finding new ways to work constructively together – not as rivals, but as increasingly close partners.
And that is the way it should be.
Forty years ago, a great American statesman, Dean Acheson, looked back at the excitement he felt in helping to build the post-World War II order.
“Present at the Creation,” he called his memoir.
Today, we find ourselves at an equally exciting moment, no less critical to the future of humankind.
We, too, are present at a new creation.
And the UN must constantly re-create itself as well.
We must evolve and keep pace with a rapidly changing world.
We must be faster and more flexible, efficient, transparent, and accountable.
In an age of austerity, resources are precious; we must make every dollar count.
These are testing times for everyone.
People everywhere live in growing anxiety and fear.
There is near-universal loss of trust in institutions and leaders.
Amid such uncertainty, our future depends on a UN that brings together the countries of the world not only to talk and debate, but also to agree and to act; that mobilizes civil society, business, philanthropists, and ordinary citizens to help the world’s governments solve current problems; and that delivers peace, development, human rights, and global public goods – in a word, hope – to people around the world every day.
A Better Economic Plan for Japan
NEW YORK – It’s been a quarter-century since Japan’s asset bubble burst – and a quarter-century of malaise as one “lost decade” has followed another.
Some of the criticism of its economic policies is unwarranted.
Growth is not an objective in itself; we should be concerned with standards of living.
Japan is ahead of the curve in curbing population growth, and productivity has been increasing.
Growth in output per working-age person, especially since 2008, has been higher than in the United States, and much higher than in Europe.
Still, the Japanese believe they can do better.
I agree.
Japan has problems on both the supply and the demand side, and in both the real economy and finance.
To address them, it needs an economic program that is more likely to work than the measures policymakers have recently adopted – and which have failed to achieve their inflation target, restore confidence, or boost growth to the level desired.
For starters, a large carbon tax, if accompanied by “green finance,” would stimulate enormous investment to retrofit the economy.
Almost surely, this stimulus would exceed the contractionary effect of money being taken out of the system and the negative wealth effect of the decreased value of “carbon assets.”
The adverse wealth effect from the decrease in the value of carbon assets would be small; and, with the capital stock badly out of sync with the new price system, the investment unleashed would be large, unless there were bottlenecks in closing the gap.
In that case, the money generated by the tax could be used to reduce government debt; otherwise, it could be used to finance investments in technology and education – including supply-side measures to improve the productivity of Japan’s service sector.
These expenditures could simultaneously stimulate the economy in ways that would finally pull it out of deflation.
Many outsiders worry about Japan’s debt, which is easy to service at the low interest rates prevailing today, but would not be if rates increased to more normal levels.
While I don’t see that happening anytime soon, Japan could undertake two policies to inoculate itself against such concerns.
First, it could exchange some of its debt for perpetuities, bonds that are never repaid, but pay a (small) interest rate each year.
This would shift the risk entirely off the government’s books.
Some might worry that this would be inflationary; but in Japan’s upside-down economy, inflation is exactly what’s needed.
I believe worries about a sudden increase in interest rates are greatly overblown; but, out of an abundance of caution, the government could exchange say 5% of its debt every year, unless and until excessive inflationary pressures appeared.
Alternatively, the government could exchange the debt for non-interest bearing money – the long-feared monetization of government debt.
Even if monetary finance was more likely to boost inflation than the exchange of debt for interest-bearing perpetuities, this is hardly an argument against it: it is only an argument for going more slowly.
The second way Japan could protect itself from an interest-rate spike starts from the recognition that a large share of the money the government owes it owes to itself.
Many on Wall Street don’t seem to understand that what matters is the net debt – what the government owes to the rest of society.
If the government repaid the money it owes to itself – netting it out, in effect – no one would know the difference.
But those on Wall Street who look only at the headline debt-to-GDP ratio would suddenly feel better about Japan.
If after all of this, there is still evidence of a lack of demand, the government could reduce its consumer taxes, increase investment tax credits, expand programs to help low- and middle-income households, or invest more in technology and education, financing all of this by issuing money.
Again, old economics would worry about inflation; but Japan wants those “fears” to come true.
Japan does have more than a demand-side problem.
Data on output per hour worked suggest a supply-side problem, most clearly manifested in the service sector, where the impressive ingenuity seen in so many manufacturing industries typically is nowhere in evidence.
A natural niche for Japan would be technology developments in the service sector – such as the development of diagnostic instruments in the health-care industry.
Prime Minister Shinzo Abe, however, has taken a very different approach, supporting the Trans-Pacific Partnership trade deal with the US and ten other Pacific Rim countries.
Abe believes that the TPP would force needed reforms in domestic agriculture (though, interestingly, no one in the US thinks it would help the US move away from its highly distortionary agricultural policies).
In fact, such reforms would have a miniscule effect on GDP, simply because agriculture is a very small part of output.
Nonetheless, such reforms remain desirable and provide another arena in which young Japanese could show their ingenuity (though the TPP is not the best way to bring that about).
On the other hand, Abe is right to pursue policies to integrate women more fully and equally into the labor force.
If successful, such measures should provide a boost to both productivity and growth.
Even after a quarter-century of stagnation, Japan remains the world’s third-largest single economy.
Policies that can help raise standards of living there will stimulate demand and growth elsewhere in the global economy.
Equally important, just as it has shared its innovative goods and technologies with the world, Japan could end up exporting successful policies, with the same or similar measures increasing standards of living in other advanced countries as well.
Strategi Menyatukan dan Mengamankan Eropa
BRUSSELS – Fungsi – dan bahkan kelangsungan – Uni Eropa semakin dipertanyakan.
Faktanya, jelas sekali urgensinya bahwa rakyat Eropa dan dunia membutuhkan UE yang solid.
Kawasan Eropa semakin tidak stabil dan tidak aman dalam beberapa tahun terakhir.
Selain itu, krisis di dalam dan di luar perbatasan Eropa secara langsung berdampak pada jutaan warga UE.
Di tengah masa sulit seperti ini, UE yang kuat adalah UE yang berpikir strategis, mempunyai visi, dan bertindak bersama.
Setelah pemungutan suara di Inggris yang memutuskan untuk hengkang, kita sebagai penduduk Eropa harus memikirkan ulang cara kerja Uni Eropa; namun kita tahu persis hal-hal yang harus diperbaiki.
Kita tahu apa saja prinsip-prinsip, kepentingan, dan segala prioritas UE.
Ketidakpastian politik tidak akan ditoleransi.
UE memerlukan strategi yang mengawinkan strategi bersama dengan aksi gabungan.
Tidak ada satu pun negara anggota, apalagi bertindak sendiri, yang mampu mengatasi ancaman yang menghantui Eropa.
Mereka juga tidak bisa memanfaatkan peluang ekonomi global sekarang jika sendirian.
Tapi sebagai Kesatuan warga berjumlah lebih dari 500 juta jiwa, potensi Eropa tiada bandingannya.
Jaringan diplomatik kita luas dan dalam, mencakup setiap pojokan di bumi tercinta.
Secara ekonomi, Eropa termasuk dalam G3 bersama Cina dan Amerika Serikat.
Kita adalah mitra dagang dan investor asing terbesar bagi mayoritas negara di dunia.
Bersama, negara-negara anggota UE mengucurkan dana lebih besar untuk kerja sama pembangunan dibandingkan gabungan semua negara di dunia.
Memang benar, kami disini belum mengoptimalkan potensi tersebut.
Mayoritas penduduk UE paham bahwa tanggung jawab kolektif kami diperlukan demi peranan dalam hubungan internasional.
Para mitra juga memiliki ekspektasi agar UE memainkan peranan utama, termasuk sebagai penyedia keamanan global.
UE hanya bisa memenuhi kebutuhan rakyatnya dan menyukseskan kerja sama melalui kerja sama – bersatunya lembaga-lembaga UE dan pemerintah di masing-masing negara, di setiap tingkatan.
Ini lah tujuan Strategi Eropa untuk Kebijakan Luar Negeri dan Keamanan secara Global (Global Strategy for European Foreign and Security Policy), yang baru-baru saya presentasikan di hadapan pimpinan negara-negara anggota UE, Komisi Eropa, dan Dewan Eropa.
Strategi tersebut, strategi pertama EU setelah sepuluh tahun, berfokus pada kemampuan pertahanan dan anti-terorisme, serta penciptaan lapangan kerja, inklusi sosial, dan hak-hak asasi manusia.
Strategi global ini juga memuat isu tentang pembangunan perdamaian dan ketahanan negara dan komunitas di dalam dan sekitar Eropa.
UE cukup berbangga atas kecakapan soft power yang dimiliki – dan akan terus berbesar hati sebab kami yang terbaik dalam urusan ini.
Namun ide bahwa Eropa adalah sepenuhnya “kekuatan sipil” juga tidak tepat untuk mendeskripsikan kenyataan yang berkembang.
Misalnya, UE saat ini berpartisipasi dalam 17 operasi militer dan sipil di seluruh dunia.
Di tempat-tempat seperti Afghanistan dan Kongo, Georgia dan kawasan Sahel, Moldova, Somalia, dan di kawasan Mediterania, ribuan pria dan wanita dikerahkan di bawah Eropa.
Bagi Eropa di masa sekarang, soft power dan hard power berjalan beriringan.
Strategi tersebut memupuk ambisi otonomi strategis bagi UE yang vital bagi pengembangan kepentingan-kepentingan bersama rakyat UE, serta prinsip-prinsip dan nilai-nilai yang ada.
Meskipun demikian kami sadar bahwa seluruh prioritas tersebut bisa dipenuhi jika dilakukan bersama dan sesuai sistem internasional berlandaskan pada multilateralisme dan aturan, bukan berdasarkan masing-masing negara bertindak sebagai polisi dunia atau martir.
Itu sebabnya UE terus mempererat ikatan trans atlantik dan kerja sama dengan NATO, sementara berinteraksi dengan pemain-pemain baru dan menelaah pengaturan terbaru untuk memperkuat Strategi tersebut.
UE akan berinvestasi pada lembaga-lembaga regional dan kerja sama di dalam dan antar kawasan.
Kami juga akan mengusung reformasi tata kelola global demi mengatasi tantangan-tantangan abad ini.
Sembari melakukannya, kami akan terlibat secara praktis dan etis, berbagi tanggung jawab global dengan para mitra dan berkontribusi untuk penguatannya.
Setelah dua dekade mengalami ketidakpastian global, kami dapat memetik pembelajaran: kelemahan negara tetangga dan mitra adalah kelemahan kami juga.
Jadi kami akan beranjak dari ilusi bahwa politik luar negeri adalah zero-zum game.
Memiliki tekad seperti ini akan menguntungkan bagi semua negara anggota – dan penduduk UE.
Namun tujuan yang dimuat disini hanya bisa diwujudkan melalui Eropa yang bersatu dan berkomitmen.
Memadukan budaya demi mencapai tujuan dan kepentingan bersama jelas menantang, tapi hal ini juga merupakan kekuatan terbesar kita: keberagaman adalah sumber kekuatan.
Kepentingan kami adalah kepentingan bersama warga Eropa dan satu-satunya cara untuk memenuhinya adalah upaya bersama.
Itu sebabnya semua warga UE dan negara-negara anggota mengemban tanggung jawab bersama untuk menguatkan Kesatuan di Eropa.
Rakyat Eropa memerlukan kesatuan tujuan dan tindakan di kalangan negara anggota.
Dunia yang rentan menyerukan kebangkitan UE yang percaya diri dan bertanggung jawab, dipersenjatai dengan kebijakan luar negeri dan keamanan yang berorientasi outward dan forward looking.
But even that may be wishful thinking.
Meanwhile, financial markets fret about the country’s budget deficit and talk of a serious crisis. 
Meanwhile, the Czechs managed to elect a perfectly hung parliament.
Prime Minister Mirek Topolanek is an advocate of urgently needed reforms, but he lacks a parliamentary majority and is pressing for a fresh general election in the first half of 2007.
With no means of stemming election-year fiscal expansion, the Czechs, too, have been forced to abandon their 2010 target date for euro adoption.
Then consider Poland, where the Kaczynski twins, who hold the presidency and the prime ministership, have allied themselves with populist, xenophobic, and anti-Semitic parties.
One of their priorities is to attack the central bank and slander its governor, Leszek Balcerowicz, the iconic father of Poland’s economic transformation, with accusations that echo those of the Stalinist era.
So much for the region’s “big four” countries.
But bad news is emerging from the smaller countries as well, including the Baltic states.
Across Central and Eastern Europe, the scene is almost universally depressing.
When so much goes wrong at the same time, it is tempting to look for a common cause.
One factor that is often cited is “reform fatigue.”
In barely 15 years, these countries have moved from central planning and economic backwardness to “normal” market economies with impressive GDP growth.
But rapid change is always unnerving, and not everyone has emerged better off.
Above all, uncertainty has become the norm, in contrast to the gray but predictable future offered by the old communist regimes.
Today, many people now long for that period, which they see as less driven by material values.
With membership achieved and EU money starting to pour in, leaders feel secure enough to let economic policy slip. 
Thus, budget deficits are the rule, and where they are largest, as in the Czech Republic and Hungary, they have gained priority over euro adoption.
Indeed, only Slovenia has been admitted to join the euro area in 2007, the earliest possible date.
Estonia and Lithuania applied as well, but were refused entry.
There is some truth in both explanations of Eastern Europe’s backsliding.
But what is the phenomenon that such explanations are supposed to clarify?
There has been no general tilt to the right or left in the region.
Reforms that are attacked in one country continue to guide others. 
Nevertheless, the EU’s newest members share some key features.
Most importantly, they inherited from the Soviet era bloated and inefficient public sectors, which they are finding hard to downsize and professionalize.
The private sector has been entirely rebuilt and is vibrant, but it cannot remain competitive if fiscal demands are not reduced – a familiar problem in Europe as a whole.
For now, the tension has been left unresolved, leading to high budget deficits. 
But the EU’s new member countries have no access to any safety net.
They could well squander the significant transfers that they receive through the agricultural and structural funds, as many previous EU recipients did.
If they abandon macroeconomic discipline, as Hungary and possibly the Czech Republic may be doing, they alone will face the consequences.
Being outside the euro area, their currencies would fall, undermining growth in purchasing power and living standards.
As they are economically small, the rest of the EU would barely shudder.
Fortunately, the main lesson to emerge from the region’s current troubles is that economies adapt faster than polities to changing conditions.
Growth has been strong; while it could have been stronger under more favorable policies, only huge mistakes could break the rise in living standards, given the region’s productivity gains.
Western Europe went through a similar phase of economic development in the 1950’s and 1960’s; now it is Central and Eastern Europe’s turn.
Sadly, then as now, countries never seem to learn from others’ mistakes.
Innovation in Development Finance
ROME – More than four decades ago, the world’s wealthiest countries pledged that at least 0.7% of their GDP would be devoted to official development assistance (ODA).
But, since the Monterrey conference, major additional development-finance needs have been identified, including aid-for-trade schemes and financing for climate-change mitigation and adaptation.
And, while the Leading Group on Innovative Financing for Development – which includes 63 governments, as well as international organizations and civil-society groups – has contributed to significant progress in the last decade, the definition of innovative development finance remains in dispute.
Indeed, critics contend that the international taxes – for example, on carbon emissions – that the Leading Group has identified as a potential source of finance infringe on national sovereignty.
Moreover, the sources of finance do not necessarily determine how the funds are allocated, let alone how they are ultimately used.
For example, although the so-called Tobin tax (a small levy on financial transactions) was originally intended to fund development assistance, a version of it was recently adopted in Europe in order to supplement national budget revenues.
Of course, such “off-label” uses of innovations in development finance do not discredit them.
The UN’s 2012 World Economic and Social Survey on new development finance discusses various existing and proposed innovations in financing, intermediation, and disbursement.
Aside from allocating and trading greenhouse-gas (mainly carbon or “carbon equivalent”) emissions allowances, “solidarity levies” could be imposed on airplane tickets, and taxes imposed on aviation or ship fuel.
Another proposal involves creating new international liquidity by issuing special drawing rights (international reserve assets maintained by the International Monetary Fund).
The resulting funds, as well as those from existing unused SDRs, would be allocated or re-allocated to development projects and leveraged to augment investment resources.
Yet another scheme would deploy royalties for natural-resource extraction from the global commons, such as Antarctica and other areas beyond “exclusive [national] economic zones.”
Some initiatives are already underway.
For example, the project (RED) is a corporate campaign that aims to raise money for The Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis, and Malaria by donating a portion of proceeds from consumer products branded with the cause.
While some are critical of the disparity between what these “altruistic” companies spend on advertising and the amount of money that they actually raise, such “cause marketing” could prove to be an effective mechanism for generating additional development finance.
Furthermore, some proposals entail no additional funds.
Development-finance flows could be restructured, so that they are channeled through mechanisms like the International Finance Facility for Immunization, which binds ODA commitments over a long period and securitizes them in order to generate funds for immediate use.
Similarly, debt-conversion schemes such as Debt2Health and debt-for-nature swaps would allow countries to redirect debt-service payments to development projects.
Some worthwhile new risk-management proposals include advance commitments for new vaccines, subsidies to drug manufacturers to make their products more affordable, and regionally pooled catastrophe insurance.
Over the last six years, roughly $6 billion has been allotted to innovative sources of financing, compared to current annual ODA of more than $120 billion – and far less than the almost $20 trillion committed by G-20 countries to economic recovery (including bailouts) since 2008.
But some recent proposals promise to raise far more resources for sustainable development.
An internationally coordinated carbon tax could raise $250 billion annually, while a small financial-transaction tax could raise another $40 billion.
Likewise, regular SDR emissions to keep pace with the growth of global liquidity could yield roughly $100 billion annually for international development cooperation.
Such emissions would reduce demand for US Treasury bonds and other liquid assets of preferred currencies.
At the same time, if the world’s most powerful countries stopped promoting full capital-account liberalization, developing countries would feel less pressure to protect themselves by accumulating foreign-exchange reserves.
By investing the funds in development projects instead, they could address both savings and foreign-exchange constraints.
Finally, innovative strategies are needed to align development finance with national development goals, transforming the multilateral system operationally so that it works more effectively with stakeholders on the ground.
One model is the Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer, which has succeeded spectacularly in reducing levels of chlorofluorocarbons, highlighting the continued potential of inclusive multilateralism.
The New Generation Gap
NEW YORK – Something interesting has emerged in voting patterns on both sides of the Atlantic: Young people are voting in ways that are markedly different from their elders.
A great divide appears to have opened up, based not so much on income, education, or gender as on the voters’ generation.
There are good reasons for this divide.
The lives of both old and young, as they are now lived, are different.
Their pasts are different, and so are their prospects.
The Cold War, for example, was over even before some were born and while others were still children.
Words like socialism do not convey the meaning they once did.
If socialism means creating a society where shared concerns are not given short shrift – where people care about other people and the environment in which they live – so be it.
Yes, there may have been failed experiments under that rubric a quarter- or half-century ago; but today’s experiments bear no resemblance to those of the past.
So the failure of those past experiments says nothing about the new ones.
Older upper-middle-class Americans and Europeans have had a good life.
When they entered the labor force, well-compensated jobs were waiting for them.
The question they asked was what they wanted to do, not how long they would have to live with their parents before they got a job that enabled them to move out.
That generation expected to have job security, to marry young, to buy a house – perhaps a summer house, too – and finally retire with reasonable security.
Overall, they expected to be better off than their parents.
While today’s older generation encountered bumps along the way, for the most part, their expectations were met.
They may have made more on capital gains on their homes than from working.
They almost surely found that strange, but they willingly accepted the gift of our speculative markets, and often gave themselves credit for buying in the right place at the right time.
Today, the expectations of young people, wherever they are in the income distribution, are the opposite.
They face job insecurity throughout their lives.
On average, many college graduates will search for months before they find a job – often only after having taken one or two unpaid internships.
And they count themselves lucky, because they know that their poorer counterparts, some of whom did better in school, cannot afford to spend a year or two without income, and do not have the connections to get an internship in the first place.
Today’s young university graduates are burdened with debt – the poorer they are, the more they owe.
So they do not ask what job they would like; they simply ask what job will enable them to pay their college loans, which often will burden them for 20 years or more.
Likewise, buying a home is a distant dream.
These struggles mean that young people are not thinking much about retirement.
If they did, they would only be frightened by how much they will need to accumulate to live a decent life (beyond bare social security), given the likely persistence of rock-bottom interest rates.
In short, today’s young people view the world through the lens of intergenerational fairness.
The children of the upper middle class may do well in the end, because they will inherit wealth from their parents.
While they may not like this kind of dependence, they dislike even more the alternative: a “fresh start” in which the cards are stacked against their attainment of anything approaching what was once viewed as a basic middle-class lifestyle.
These inequities cannot easily be explained away.
It isn’t as if these young people didn’t work hard: these hardships affect those who spent long hours studying, excelled in school, and did everything “right.”
The sense of social injustice – that the economic game is rigged – is enhanced as they see the bankers who brought on the financial crisis, the cause of the economy’s continuing malaise, walk away with mega-bonuses, with almost no one being held accountable for their wrongdoing.
Massive fraud was committed, but somehow, no one actually perpetrated it.
Political elites promised that “reforms” would bring unprecedented prosperity.
And they did, but only for the top 1%.
Everyone else, including the young, got unprecedented insecurity.
These three realities – social injustice on an unprecedented scale, massive inequities, and a loss of trust in elites – define our political moment, and rightly so.
More of the same is not an answer.
That is why the center-left and center-right parties in Europe are losing.
America is in a strange position: while the Republican presidential candidates compete on demagoguery, with ill-thought-through proposals that would make matters worse, both of the Democratic candidates are proposing changes which – if they could only get them through Congress – would make a real difference.
Were the reforms put forward by Hillary Clinton or Bernie Sanders adopted, the financial system’s ability to prey on those already leading a precarious life would be curbed.
And both have proposals for deep reforms that would change how America finances higher education.
But more needs to be done to make home ownership possible not just for those with parents who can give them a down payment, and to make retirement security possible, given the vagaries of the stock market and the near-zero-interest world we have entered.
Most important, the young will not find a smooth path into the job market unless the economy is performing much better.
The “official” unemployment rate in the United States, at 4.9%, masks much higher levels of disguised unemployment, which, at the very least, are holding down wages.
But we won’t be able to fix the problem if we don’t recognize it.
Our young do.
They perceive the absence of intergenerational justice, and they are right to be angry.
New-Model Development Finance
WASHINGTON, DC – China’s success in establishing the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank has been widely regarded as a diplomatic fiasco for the United States.
After discouraging all US allies from joining the AIIB, President Barack Obama’s administration watched as Great Britain led a raft of Western European countries, followed by Australia and South Korea, into doing just that.
Worse, the Obama administration found itself in the position of trying to block Chinese efforts to create a regional financial institution after the US itself was unable to deliver on promises to give China and other major emerging economies a greater say in the governance of the International Monetary Fund.
The administration had pushed European countries to accept less representation on the IMF Board and increase China’s voting share from 3.65% to 6.07%, only to prove unable to win the support of the US Congress.
Once again, Obama found himself stymied abroad because of political paralysis at home.
From a geopolitical perspective, China’s AIIB initiative is a bold and successful gambit in what Ely Ratner, a senior fellow at the Center for a New American Security, describes as “an institutional competition for global governance that has now officially begun.”
China will control a majority of the voting shares in the AIIB, initially capitalized at $100 billion.
Unless the Western victors of World War II can update the rules and institutions that underpinned the post-war international order, they will find themselves in a world with multiple competing regional orders and even dueling multilateral institutions.
From the point of view of developing countries in need of capital, competing banks probably look like a good thing.
Developing-country governments will be only too pleased to borrow without the pesky conditions that the World Bank and existing regional development banks typically attach to their loans.
And, as a region, East Asia will now get more of the roughly $8 trillion that the Asian Development Bank has estimated that the region will need to keep growing through 2020.
But what about the impact on actual development, the likelihood that individual citizens of poor countries will live richer, healthier, more educated lives?
World Bank conditionality often includes provisions on human rights and environmental protections that make it more difficult for governments bent on growth at any cost to run roughshod over their people.
Competition is good, but unregulated competition typically ends up in a race to the bottom.
China’s establishment of the AIIB is the latest sign of a broader move away from the view that aid to developing countries is best provided in the form of massive government-to-government transfers.
Power and wealth are not only diffusing across the international system, but also within states, such that corporations, foundations, wealthy individuals, private investment funds, civil-society groups, and most recently, municipal governments all have a role to play in development.
Consider the second Quadrennial Diplomacy and Development Review, released last month by the State Department and the US Agency for International Development.
The QDDR emphasizes a “new model of development,” one based on the recognition “that the United States is one of many actors, and that countries require investments from multiple sources to achieve sustained and inclusive economic growth.”
Initiatives such as Feed the Future, the US Global Development Lab, and Power Africa combine “local ownership, private investment, innovation, multi-stakeholder partnerships, and mutual accountability.”
This new model moves beyond the mantra of “public-private partnership.”
It genuinely leverages multiple sources of money and expertise in broad coalitions pursuing the same big goal.
Power Africa, for example, includes six US government agencies: the Overseas Private Investment Corporation, the US Export-Import Bank, the US Trade and Development Corporation, the Millennium Challenge Corporation, and the US African Development Foundation.
Together, they will commit more than $7 billion over five years in financing, trade credits, insurance, small business grants, and direct government support to the energy sector in six partner countries.
Those investments will leverage billions in private-sector commitments, starting with more than $9 billion from a range of companies, including General Electric.
Power Africa takes a “transaction-centered approach,” creating teams to align incentives among “host governments, the private sector, and donors.”
Unlike big government-to-government transfers, which can often end up in the pockets of officials, the point is to ensure that deals actually get done and investments flow to their intended destination.
This pragmatic focus on results is equally evident in the QDDR’s emphasis on working with mayors around the world on issues like climate change.
Targeting government officials with the incentives and ability to make a difference in regulating emissions on the ground yields results much more quickly than negotiations on an international treaty.
Skeptics will say that the US is simply making a virtue of necessity.
The federal government no longer has billions of dollars to dole out to foreign governments, while China is far more centralized and less beholden to its taxpayers.
China and its partners in the AIIB can thus build the big things – roads, bridges, dams, railroads and ports – that unquestionably power an economy and that citizens notice, but that the US, and for that matter the World Bank, no longer funds.
The days of the Marshall Plan are long gone.
That criticism contains some truth.
But, over the longer term, the new US model of development is actually far more resilient and sustainable than the old government-to-government model.
Only societies with thriving sectors free of government control can participate in these broad coalitions of public, private, and civic actors.
Corporations, foundations, and civil-society groups, in turn, are much more likely to forge lasting ties with their counterparts in local communities in the host countries – relationships that will survive changes of government and fiscal turbulence.
Overall, the AIIB is a positive development.
More money aimed at helping poor countries become middle-income countries and at middle-income countries to help them provide transport, energy, and communication for their people is a good thing.
But the Asian way is not the only way.
Europe’s Foreign-Policy Resilience
RIGA – For decades, people have bemoaned the waning of Europe’s global political power.
To add some precision to the debate, in 2010 we helped to write the European Council on Foreign Relations’ first Foreign Policy Scorecard.
Back then, we wrote – rather mildly – that Europe had been “distracted” by the euro crisis.
By the end of 2012, the crisis could be considered less acute.
Nevertheless, European leaders have continued to devote more time and effort to financial and institutional questions than to geopolitical issues.
Europe’s image and soft power have undoubtedly continued to fade around the world (thought such a trend is difficult to quantify), while member states continue to cut defense and development budgets.
The good news, however, is that European foreign policy has not unraveled in the crisis.
Indeed, it has even shown some signs of progress.
The European Union managed to preserve the essence of its acquis diplomatique.
In fact, the Scorecard’s assessment of European foreign-policy performance in 2012 shows modest signs of stabilization and resilience.
Although the EU had no high-profile successes comparable to the military intervention in Libya in 2011, it performed surprisingly well in its external relations – especially given the deep crisis with which it continued to struggle.
For starters, the coherence of Europe’s policies toward Russia improved: the EU threatened to use the World Trade Organization’s dispute-settlement mechanism when the Kremlin announced new protectionist measures in late 2012.
It also launched an antitrust probe against Russian gas giant Gazprom, and criticized human-rights abuses during the crackdown on demonstrations that accompanied the March election that returned Vladimir Putin to the presidency.
There were also signs of modest improvement in Europe’s relations with China, despite a lack of unity that continued to undermine its leverage.
New EU missions to Niger, South Sudan, and the Horn of Africa under the aegis of the Common Security and Defense Policy were also launched – something that had not happened in the previous two years.
Of course, there were also areas in which Europeans performed less well.
Above all, they could not break the frustrating diplomatic gridlock over Syria or stem the escalation in violence as the year went on.
Europeans remained divided on the Israeli-Palestinian conflict (though to a lesser degree than in previous years), and failed to have an impact on the United Nations vote in November to upgrade Palestine’s status.
They also struggled to pursue a united approach to Azerbaijan and Ukraine, and continued to seek a coherent approach to Turkey as accession negotiations remained blocked.
Nonetheless, the EU’s foreign-policy performance in 2012 was positive overall.
It now remains to be seen whether this momentum can be maintained, which will depend largely on whether the EU can overcome the economic crisis (which continues to worsen in several member countries), restore growth, and curb unemployment.
In this sense, European leaders are right to focus on solving the financial crisis in the eurozone.
Any future gains in global influence, however, will require Europeans to overcome their internal divisions and improve their foreign-policy coordination. In particular, success will require turning the European External Action Service (EEAS) into an effective diplomatic corps that can convert the EU’s huge resources into real power.
The near future will present a growing list of challenges.
There are already indications from key strategic partners that they are beginning to regard the euro crisis as the “new normal”; in other words, they are planning for a future in which European power continues to erode.
Europe’s lack of a collective defense strategy, together with declining investment in military capacity, is also a serious obstacle to its continuing global influence as a security actor.
This makes it even more important for the EEAS to align the Common Security and Defense Policy with wider foreign-policy efforts.
This is a daunting task, given the EU’s current structure.
The specter of a British withdrawal from the EU will not make things any easier.
The US “pivot” to Asia further increases the pressure on Europe to deal with its own neighborhood.
Although the EU’s foreign policy toward Russia has become more effective, tensions have, if anything, grown – and may continue to do so.
Insecurity in Africa’s Sahel region, already a growing concern in 2012, has, in the first month of 2013, led one EU member state to go to war in a region not far from Europe’s doorstep.
Europeans are likely still to be dealing with the fallout of Islamist rebel groups’ attempted takeover of Mali this time next year, while the long-term consequences of developments in the Sahel are bound to be felt for years to come.
Despite the gravity of the euro crisis, the EU foreign-policymaking machine (such as it is) continued to function in 2012, with moderately successful results.
Just getting by, however, is unlikely to be enough to address the challenges that Europe is likely to face this year.
The EU will need to do more – and do it better.
We remain hopeful that it will be up to the task.
New Hope on Climate Change
The world has taken an important step toward controlling climate change by agreeing to the Bali Action Plan at the global negotiations in Indonesia earlier this month.
The plan may not look like much, since it basically committed the world to more talking rather than specific actions, but I am optimistic for three reasons.
First, the world was sufficiently united that it forced the United States to end its intransigence.
Second, the road map marks a sensible balance of considerations.
And, third, realistic solutions are possible, which will allow the world to combine economic development and control of greenhouse gases.
The first step at Bali was to break the deadlock that has crippled the global response to climate change since the signing of the Kyoto Protocol a decade ago.
This time the world united, even booing the US lead negotiator until she reversed position and agreed to sign the Bali Action Plan.
Likewise, the unwillingness of major developing countries such as China and India to sign on to a plan also seems to be ending, though considerable work remains to craft a global agreement to which both rich and poor countries can agree.
Doing so requires balancing many concerns.
First, we must stabilize greenhouse gases in order to avoid dangerous human interference in the climate system – the key goal of the 1992 United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, the global treaty under which the Bali negotiations took place.
Second, we must accomplish this while leaving room for continued rapid economic development and poverty reduction.
Poor countries do not and will not accept a system of climate control that condemns them to continued poverty.
Third, we must help countries adapt to the climate change that is already occurring and that will intensify in the future.
The Bali Action Plan addresses all three concerns.
The plan’s main point is to establish an Ad Hoc Working Group to reach a detailed global agreement by 2009 that will set “measurable, reportable, and verifiable” commitments to reduce greenhouse-gas emissions.
Such commitments are to be taken in the context of “sustainable development,” meaning that “economic and social development and poverty reduction are global priorities.”
The plan also calls for knowledge transfer to enable poor countries to adopt environmentally sound technologies.
The great question, of course, is whether stabilization of greenhouse gases, continued economic development, and adaptation to climate change can be achieved simultaneously.
Using our current technologies, no; but if we develop and rapidly adopt new technologies that are within our scientific reach, yes.
The most important challenge is to reduce, and eventually nearly eliminate, carbon dioxide emissions from burning fossil fuels such as oil, natural gas, and coal.
These fuels are at the core of the modern world economy, supplying around four-fifths of the world’s commercial energy.
Such emissions can be eliminated by either shifting to renewable forms of energy or reducing the emissions from fossil fuels.
The key insight is that roughly 75% of our fossil fuel use goes for just a few purposes: to produce electricity and heat at power plants, to drive automobiles, to heat buildings, and to power a few key industries such as refineries, petrochemicals, cement, and steel.
We need new environmentally sound technologies in each of these sectors.
For example, power plants can adopt solar energy or capture and safely dispose of the carbon dioxide they produce with fossil fuels – as can large factories.
Automobiles can be engineered for much greater mileage through hybrid technology combining battery power and gasoline.
Buildings can reduce their heating needs through improved insulation, or by converting from heating oil to electricity produced by clean technology.
According to the best economic and engineering estimates, if each key economic sector develops and adopts environmentally sound technologies in the coming decades, the world will be able to reduce carbon emissions dramatically for less than 1% of annual global income, thereby avoiding long-term damage that would cost far more.
In other words, the world can combine economic growth with declining emissions of carbon dioxide.
And rich countries will be able to afford to help poor countries pay for the new, cleaner technologies.
To reach agreement by 2009, we must move beyond current generalities by which rich and poor countries argue about who should be blamed for climate change and who should pay the costs.
We will need a true global business plan that spells out how the new technologies are developed, tested, and adopted on an expedited basis worldwide.
We must ensure that all countries adopt a verifiable strategy for environmentally sound technology, and that rich countries fulfill the Bali Action Plan’s promise to provide “financial and other incentives” to enable poor countries to adopt the new technologies.
With so many crises afflicting our world, there is perhaps cynicism that yet another global conference did little more than promise to continue talking.
But let’s see the positive message instead: 190 countries agreed on a sensible plan, and the underlying science and technology gives us realistic hopes for achieving it.
There is considerable and difficult work ahead, but the situation is better as a result of the deliberations in Bali.
Now it’s time to role up our sleeves and achieve what we’ve promised.
New Rules for the Monetary Game
NEW DELHI – Our world is facing an increasingly dangerous situation.
Both advanced and emerging economies need to grow in order to ease domestic political tensions.
And yet few are.
If governments respond by enacting policies that divert growth from other countries, this “beggar my neighbor” tactic will simply foster instability elsewhere.
What we need, therefore, are new rules of the game.
Why is it proving to be so hard to restore pre-Great Recession growth rates?
The immediate answer is that the boom preceding the global financial crisis of 2008 left advanced economies with an overhang of growth-inhibiting debt.
While the remedy may be to write down debt to revive demand, it is uncertain whether write-downs are politically feasible or the resulting demand sustainable.
Moreover, structural factors like population aging and low productivity growth – which were previously masked by debt-fueled demand – may be hampering the recovery.
Politicians know that structural reforms – to increase competition, foster innovation, and drive institutional change – are the way to tackle structural impediments to growth.
They feel that they cannot claim to be out of tools.
If all else fails, there is always the “helicopter drop,” whereby the central bank prints money and sprays it on the streets to create inflation (more prosaically, it sends a check to every citizen, perhaps more to the poor, who are likelier to spend it).
But they can also employ a range of other unconventional tools more aggressively, from asset purchases (so-called quantitative easing) to negative interest rates.
But do such policies achieve their goal of strengthening demand and growth?
Monetary policy works by influencing public expectations.
If an ever more aggressive policy convinces the public that calamity is around the corner, households may save rather than spend.
That tendency will be even greater if the public senses that the consequences (distorted asset prices, high government debt, etc.) eventually must be reversed.
Conversely, if people were convinced that policies would never change, they might splurge again on assets and take on excessive debt, helping the central bank achieve its objectives in the short run.
But policy inevitably changes, and the shifts in asset prices would create enormous dislocation when it does.
Beyond the domestic impacts, all monetary policies have external “spillover” effects.
In normal circumstances, if a country reduces domestic interest rates to boost domestic consumption and investment, its exchange rate depreciates, too, helping exports.
Today’s circumstances, however, are not normal.
Domestic demand may not respond to unconventional policy.
Moreover, facing distorted domestic bond prices stemming from unconventional policy, pension funds and insurance companies may look to buy them in less distorted markets abroad.
Such a search for yield will depreciate the exchange rate further – and increase the risk of competitive devaluations that leave no country better off.
As matters stand, central banks in developed countries find all sorts of ways to justify their policies, without acknowledging the unmentionable – that the exchange rate may be the primary channel of transmission.
An example of a red policy would be when unconventional monetary policies do little to boost a country’s domestic demand – but lead to large capital outflows that provoke asset-price bubbles in emerging markets.
There will be plenty of gray areas (or orange, to stick to the analogy).
A policy that has large positive effects for a big economy might have small negative effects for the rest of the world and yet still be positive overall for global welfare.
Such a policy would be permissible for some time, but not on a sustained basis.
We are far from having clear agreement on the color of policies today, even with the best data, models, and empirical work.
So we must begin a discussion.
We could start with background papers from eminent academics and move on to multilateral institutions such as the International Monetary Fund and the G-20.
There will be a lot of fuzziness initially, but discussion will lead in time to better models and data – and will push policymakers to stay out of the clearly red.
Arguably, what I have in mind will eventually require a new international agreement along the lines of Bretton Woods, and some reinterpretation of the mandates of internationally influential central banks.
But we already have a basis for discussion.
The IMF’s Article IV states: “In particular, each member shall … avoid manipulating exchange rates or the international monetary system in order to prevent effective balance-of-payments adjustment or to gain unfair competitive advantage over other members…”
Setting the rules will take time.
But the international community has a choice.
We can pretend all is well with the global monetary non-system and hope that nothing goes spectacularly wrong.
Or we can start building a system fit for the integrated world of the twenty-first century.
This article is based on work with Dr. Prachi Mishra at the Reserve Bank of India.
The Curing Machine
VIRGINIA BEACH – Last year, the Nobel Prize in Medicine was awarded for a discovery that took 44 years to develop, and involved two different research teams.
The breakthrough promises new kinds of diagnosis and therapy, but what if such insights could be developed by computers in minutes, rather than decades?
The recent appearance of a new coronavirus, which has killed nine people in the United Kingdom and the Middle East, is a reminder that novel treatments are sometimes needed in a hurry.
With different modeling abstractions, it might be possible to build an artificial-intelligence system (AI) that could design new treatments.
That system would suggest surprising, effective therapies, because it would understand disease in ways that are difficult for humans to imagine.
The notion seems like science fiction: everyone knows that AI is not particularly clever.
In order to build a “curing machine” of this kind, at least one far-reaching innovation is needed: a better way of modeling entire systems, which would deliver new conceptual tools to both biology and computer science.
In both fields, the conventional approach has been reductionist, with problems modeled at the level of their most basic components.
While this makes it possible to build “expert systems” that reason in narrow domains, or to design search engines that can find discrete facts, we are no closer to AI that reasons the way that we do – in and across multiple contexts, including time.
AI cannot integrate information about seemingly distinct processes, such as chemical, physiological, and psychological events, or anticipate novel outcomes.
We do these things over dinner.
Novelty is key.
To build a curing machine, we would need a way for computers to assemble concepts so that unexpected arrangements could emerge.
In biology, there has been a similar reductionist approach, best exemplified by the Human Genome Project, which catalogued the molecular “recipe” for every aspect of the body, in order to discover how the most basic pieces interacted.
Alas, the expected revolution in therapies is yet to occur.
Worldwide, total annual investment in biomedical research is about $110 billion.
HIV alone attracts many billions per year.
Yet, despite 25 years of intense investment in structural biology, we remain unable to move from understanding molecules to an understanding of whole systems.
A model of the dynamics between multiple processes – chemical, physiological, and psychological – would lend new insight into how diseases operate.
Consider, for example, the sense of smell.
The nasal cavity is unique, as the only place where brain cells (neurons) are directly exposed to the environment.