David’s mother is dead.
After her death, his father, a villager who grows vegetables and gets other work when he can, was unable to care for him, and placed him in an orphanage.
There, until Madonna came into contact with him, he was living with about 500 other children.
Largely due to Malawi’s HIV/AIDS epidemic, the country has a million such orphans.
Resources at the orphanages are limited, and many of the children there do not live to their fifth birthday.
Madonna said that when she met David, he had severe pneumonia and was breathing with difficulty.
Malawi is one of the world’s least developed countries, with an infant mortality rate of 94 per thousand and a life expectancy at birth of 41 years.
Of the adult population, about one in seven have HIV/AIDS.
Left in the orphanage, there is no reason to think that David would have done better than the average Malawian.
Most likely, he would have done worse.
In an interview, David’s father did not deny that his son would be better off with Madonna, and he refused to support the human rights activists seeking David’s return.
That seems a wise decision.
Admittedly, David will be cut off from his cultural roots.
Although Madonna has said that she will bring him back to Malawi to see his father again, he will scarcely be able to feel at home there.
His mother tongue will be English; if he ever learns to speak his father’s language, it will be as a foreigner.
Nor will he be entirely at home in London, especially in the circles in which Madonna moves.
A black child in a largely white world, he will always be “the orphan Madonna adopted.”
The difficulties of living in such circumstances, however, are surely less daunting than the hazards David would have faced had he stayed in the orphanage – assuming that he would have survived at all.
But there is a broader issue at stake in David’s case.
In adopting a child from a poor country, Madonna is following an example set by other celebrities like Mia Farrow, Ewan McGregor, and Angelina Jolie. Do such adoptions achieve anything more than helping the individual children adopted?
Adopting children from developing countries does not address the causes of poverty.
Despite the high rate of HIV/AIDS infections, Malawi’s population, like that of many developing nations, is growing rapidly.
It is projected to surpass 19 million by 2025. That will put more pressure on the country’s already limited stock of agricultural land.
Educating young Malawians, especially girls, and making contraceptives widely available, would do much more to slow population growth than a few inter-country adoptions.
To her credit, Madonna is doing more than adopting David.
Her project, “Raising Malawi” ( www.raisingmalawi.com ), will help other orphans.
More importantly, with other partners, Raising Malawi collects funds for agricultural assistance, medical care, and education for villagers as well.
Along with Angelina Jolie, Bono, George Soros, and many others, Raising Malawi is assisting Millennium Promise ( www.millenniumpromise.org ), an organization founded by the prominent Columbia University economist Jeffrey Sachs.
The promises of the United Nations Millennium Summit, signed by all the world’s leaders, included halving extreme poverty, halting the spread of HIV/AIDS, and providing primary education for all children by 2015.
Although good progress in meeting these goals has been made in Asia, in Africa there are now 140 million more people living in extreme poverty than there were in 1990.
Skeptics doubt that foreign aid really helps.
Millennium Promise seeks to respond to that skepticism one village at a time.
By selecting particular villages and providing basic health care, bed nets to stop malaria, primary education, better seeds, and other agricultural assistance, the organization aims to show that well-designed, comprehensive aid plans can, at relatively modest cost, raise people out of poverty.
One can only regret that the media seem less interested in this exciting and momentous story, which has the potential to help millions of children, than in Madonna’s adoption of a single Malawian infant.
Truth, Lies, and Venezuela
CAMBRIDGE – Venezuelan President Nicolás Maduro has a problem with me again.
The government-controlled national television station recently broadcast an illegally taped private phone conversation in which I proposed a study to explore how to rescue the Venezuelan economy by leveraging the support of the international community.
The government unsuccessfully edited the recording to make what was said sound nefarious, lied about the conversation’s meaning and about me, and plans to prosecute me.
This got me thinking about the eternal problem of evil.
Is it entirely relative, or are there objective grounds to characterize a behavior or act as evil?
Do all confrontations occur between legitimate parties – with, say, one person’s terrorist being another’s freedom fighter – or can we say that some fights really are between good and evil?
As the son of Holocaust survivors, I have always had an intuitive aversion to moral relativism.
But what objective grounds are there to say that the Nazis were evil?
As Hannah Arendt famously pointed out, people like Adolf Eichmann were plentiful and “neither perverted nor sadistic”; rather, “they were, and still are, terribly and terrifyingly normal.”
A similar normality emerges from Thomas Harding’s portrait of Rudolf Höss, the commandant of Auschwitz, a man proud of having excelled at his assigned task.
So what do we mean by evil in the first place?
Moral philosophy has taken two very different approaches to this question.
For some, the goal is to find universal principles from which to derive moral judgments: Kant’s categorical imperative, Bentham’s utilitarian principle, and John Rawls’s veil of ignorance are some of the best-known examples.
For others, the key is to understand why we have moral sentiments in the first place.
Why have our brains evolved to generate feelings of empathy, disgust, indignation, solidarity, and pity?
David Hume and Adam Smith pioneered this way of thinking, which eventually spawned the fields of evolutionary and moral psychology.
According to this latter view, moral sentiments evolved to sustain human cooperation.
We are programmed by our genes to feel concern for babies and empathy for people in pain.
We seek others’ recognition and avoid their rejection.
We feel better about ourselves when we do good and worse when we do bad.
These are the underpinnings of our unconscious moral sense.
As a consequence, I doubt that any modern society has ever broadly supported what they saw as evil.
Events like the Holocaust or the genocides in Ukraine (1932-1933), Cambodia (1975-1979), or Rwanda (1994) have been based either on secrecy or on the dissemination of a distorted worldview designed to make evil appear good.
Nazi propaganda blamed Jews for everything: Germany’s defeat in World War I, universal moral values that prevented the Aryan race from exerting its superiority, and both communism and capitalism.
Ukrainians were accused of being Polish spies, kulaks, Trotskyites, and whatever else Stalin could invent.
The spread of evil requires lies, because lies form the basis of the worldview that makes evil seem good.
But the dependence of big evil on big lies gives us a chance to fight back.
The biologist Martin Nowak has argued that the only way humans have been able to sustain cooperation is by developing cheap ways to punish misbehavior.
To discourage A from hurting B, the reaction of C can be important, because if A knows that C will punish him for what he does to B, he might think twice before hurting B.
But if punishment is risky or costly for C, she may not do much to A, making A feel unconstrained.
But if C can punish A in a cheap and even enjoyable way, the threat to A may be more substantial.
According to this view, the need to solve this conundrum is the evolutionary basis of gossip and reputation.
Humans love to gossip, and gossip can harm our reputation, which in turn affects how others treat us.
So punishment through gossip is both cheap and pleasant – and A’s fear of becoming the subject of gossip by C may be enough to deter bad behavior toward B.
This opens an important avenue for the control of evil.
As US Senator and Harvard professor Daniel Patrick Moynihan put it, “Everyone is entitled to his own opinions, but not to his own facts.”
So one way to contain evil is by attacking the lies on which it is based and condemning those who propound them.
In the US, there is a natural tendency to punish political candidates when they lie, but mostly about their personal peccadillos.
It would be great, for example, if Donald Trump’s calumnies about Mexicans made him unelectable.
If a country’s political culture is such that all agree on condemning intentional lies and liars, especially when their goal is to promote hatred, a country may avoid big evil.
But this is not the case in Venezuela.
Its government has run the country’s economy and society into the ground, overseeing the world’s steepest decline in output, highest inflation rate, and second highest murder rate, not to mention shortages beyond compare.
And now it is systematically lying about the causes of the mess it created and inventing scapegoats.
Maduro’s government blames its economic collapse on an “economic war” led by the US, the oligarchy, and international financial Zionism, of which I am supposedly an agent.
The problem is that the government has paid almost no cost for its systematic lies, even when these involve scapegoating poor Colombians for Venezuela’s shortages, and illegally expelling hundreds of them, and destroying their homes.
While Latin American former presidents have spoken out against this outrage, important leaders such as President Dilma Rousseff of Brazil and President Michelle Bachelet of Chile have remained quiet.
They should heed Albert Einstein’s warning: “The world is in greater peril from those who tolerate or encourage evil than from those who actually commit it.”
Magna Carta at 800
PRINCETON – Fly out of London’s Heathrow Airport and you may pass over a grassy field called Runnymede.
Eight hundred years ago this month, it offered a colorful spectacle, dotted with the tents of barons and knights, and the larger pavilion of King John of England, looking like a circus top with the royal standard fluttering above.
Despite the gathering’s pageant-like appearance, the atmosphere was undoubtedly tense.
The purpose was to settle a conflict between rebellious barons and their king, a ruler described by a contemporary as “brimful of evil qualities.”
John’s efforts to raise money to regain lost lands in France exceeded the usual taxes and levies that the nobles had accepted from his predecessors.
The king seized the estates, and sometimes the person, of wealthy lords or merchants and demanded hefty payments for their release.
If his years of amassing cash had led to victory, John might have got away with his arbitrary methods; but when he was defeated in France, a group of barons rose up against him and captured London.
As part of a peace deal brokered by the Archbishop of Canterbury, the king accepted the baron’s demands, put to him in a document called Magna Carta, or “the Great Charter.”
Magna Carta was not the first charter to be granted by an English king.
A century earlier, Henry I, by issuing a Coronation Charter, had indicated that he would be more respectful of the nobles’ privileges than was his predecessor.
But Henry’s successors soon returned to the arbitrary ways of kings in those times.
Magna Carta, too, looked like it might be short-lived.
It was soon annulled by Pope Innocent III, who had formed an alliance with the king.
But John died the following year, and the nobles backing his successor, the nine-year-old Henry III, needed support against a rival claimant to the throne.
To gain that support, Henry’s government reissued its own version of Magna Carta, which remains part of the laws of England.
Copies were made and dispersed to many of the great English cathedrals.
The Latin original was translated first into French, the language of the nobility, and then into English.
By the end of the century, peasants were citing it in a struggle against injustice.
The first printed edition was made in 1508.
In the 1640s, parliamentarians saw in it a legal basis for their overthrow of King Charles I. Later rebels, including the American revolutionaries and Nelson Mandela, have similarly justified their actions by appealing to Magna Carta.
What these fighters for justice and freedom take from this 3,500-word document is the brief statements of general principles in response to John’s arbitrary seizure of his subjects’ property and person.
In its 39th Chapter, Magna Carta states: “No free man is to be arrested, or imprisoned, or diseised [dispossessed], or outlawed, or exiled, or in any way destroyed, nor will we go against him, nor will we send against him, save by the lawful judgement of his peers or by the law of the land.”
Chapter 40 states, concisely, another powerful principle: “To no one will we sell, to no one will we deny or delay, right or justice.”
These two chapters have their modern echo in the 14th Amendment to the US Constitution, which decrees that no state shall deprive anyone of life, liberty, or property “without due process of law” or deny anyone “the equal protection of the laws.”
Yet Magna Carta is not a democratic document.
Although it established the requirement of common consent to taxation, that consent was to be obtained from an assembly of earls, barons, bishops, and abbots – in the age of chivalry, not even knights were invited to participate.
The idea that towns such as London should be represented was voiced at the time, but it found no place in the final text.
What Magna Carta shows, therefore, is that “Who rules?” is one question, and “What, if any, are the limits to political power?” is another.
Because Magna Carta attempted to set limits to political power without grounding these limits in the sovereignty of the people, it demonstrated a problem with which philosophers have grappled for even longer than 800 years.
From where do the principles that constrain rulers come, if from neither the rulers nor their subjects?
The tradition of natural law offers an answer that was familiar to medieval scholars, for whom natural law was knowable to us by our natural reason (as opposed to those laws that could be discovered only through divine revelation).
Magna Carta’s key principles can be seen as derived from reason because the very idea of a law excludes arbitrary arrest and seizure, as well as the rendering of a verdict on any grounds other than the proper application of the law.
If A is legally bound to return B’s cow when she strays onto his land, and then C’s cow strays onto B’s land in relevantly similar circumstances, B must also be bound to return C’s cow.
C need not bribe the judge to get his cow back.
There is nothing in Magna Carta that prevents the enactment and enforcement of unjust laws; but it does elevate the law above the ruler’s will.
Unfortunately, that idea still is not accepted in many countries.
Moreover, as the continued existence of the US prison camp at Guantánamo Bay shows, even among countries that trace their political institutions to Magna Carta, perceived security threats have weakened the requirement that no one be arrested except under the law of the land, and that justice not be delayed.
Mahmoud Abbas’s Bad Neighborhood
With Gaza poised on the brink of civil war, pity poor Mahmoud Abbas, who took over as president of the Palestinian Authority two and a half years ago, after the death of Yasser Arafat.
An academic by profession, Abbas has tried mightily to lead the Palestinian people with civility, adherence to democratic principles, and public disdain for violence.
He never had a chance.
Palestinian rivals, both from his own Fatah party and from the Islamists of Hamas, as well as the Israelis, perceived Abbas’s civility as weakness.
Abbas introduced a totally different style of management from that of Arafat.
Dressed in his military suit until his last day, Abu Ammar (Arafat’s revolutionary nom de guerre) did not believe that it was time to become a civilian president while the Israeli occupation continued.
Dressed in a suit and tie, Abbas introduced professional Western-style management to the presidency, but had no idea what to do with grass-roots militants.
One of the first comments I heard from journalists was that Abbas, a family man, went home at lunchtime and worked regular business hours.
His other name, Abu Mazen, is not a revolutionary name but reflects the practice of naming a person as the father of his eldest son.
Abbas’s son, Mazen, runs a local advertising agency.
In his attempt to counter Arafat’s political corruption and micromanagement, Abbas lost whatever chance he had to maintain the loyalty of the Fatah leadership, newly appointed PA officials, security personnel, and, most importantly, local militants.
Calling for national elections, while politically correct, was political suicide, for he lacked any idea of the possible outcome and did very little to ensure the discipline of Fatah.
An attempt at a primary to choose Fatah candidates backfired, owing to fraud and the losers’ refusal to honor the results.
Rival Fatah candidates then split the party’s vote, allowing Hamas an easy victory.
Negotiations with the Israelis was one area where Abbas, who led the Oslo process that saw the creation of the Palestinian Authority, thought he could do well.
But, unlike Oslo, when Abbas was working under Arafat and able to project power from that base, as Palestinian president he was both negotiator and supposedly the center of power.
The Israelis discerned Abbas’s weakness early on, and once Hamas was elected in a landslide, had little incentive to help him despite the prodding of the United States.
Not only was Abbas politically weak, with few friends among Fatah militants, but he also didn’t show much interest in what was happening in Gaza.
He spent as little time as he could there, preferring his Ramallah office on the West Bank and spending time with visiting politicians and meeting world leaders there or abroad.
And, while he was technically the commander-in-chief of the Palestinian forces, these forces lacked the will to stand up to Hamas’s growing power.
The economic siege on Palestine after the Hamas victory further weakened Abbas.
With no salaries to pay teachers (or even the security services), his ability to influence even his own presidential guard was severely limited.
During a meeting, which I attended, with a delegation from the International Press Institute to obtain the release of the BBC journalist Alan Johnston, abducted in Gaza in March, Abbas explained the PA’s inability and weakness.
Soldiers march on their stomachs, he said, and complained that his own forces have not been able to renew their equipment or obtain badly needed ammunition for seven years.
Ironically, the Israelis and the world community, which had basically frozen Palestinian finances, wanted Abbas to continue to control the security forces, despite Fatah’s loss in the parliamentary elections.
Israel and the US led a virtual blockade on Palestine, with Israel refusing to return collected taxes and the US pressing world banks not to recognize the signature of the Palestinian finance minister.
The nominal reason is Hamas’s refusal to recognize Israel.
But most Arab countries also don’t recognize Israel, and yet the banking world deals with them normally.
A compromise power-sharing agreement brokered by the Saudis initially seemed to be a solution.
According to the Mecca agreement signed last February, Hamas would give up important ministries such as finance, interior, and foreign affairs, while Abbas would ensure the end of the economic siege.
Four months later, however, the siege has not been lifted, and the Hamas ministers (such as former Foreign Minister Mahmoud Zahhar and Interior Minster Said Siyam) who were forced out now feel betrayed and are demanding their jobs back.
If the Israelis and the international community want Abbas to remain in power, they must change their approach dramatically, by lifting the economic siege and providing his presidency with military and political support.
And, if the Israelis are convinced that Abbas is too weak to do anything, they can help the Palestinians by releasing the Fatah strongman, Marwan Barghouti, from an Israeli jail.
Otherwise, Abbas will be left with no alternative but to follow the advice of a leading Palestinian professor, Ali Jirbawi, who suggested simply that Abbas should dissolve the Palestinian Authority and return power to the Israelis, who remain legally and practically responsible for the areas they occupied in 1967.
Bonds of the Diaspora
WASHINGTON, DC – The goals of the post-2015 development agenda cannot be achieved without strong programs and adequate funding.
Official development assistance amounts to roughly $130 billion a year; though foreign-direct investment and portfolio inflows can help poor economies, additional sources of development finance must be found.
One under-exploited resource is diaspora financing – that is, the remittances and savings earned by nationals working abroad and sent home to family and friends.
The challenge is to channel this income effectively.
There are more than 230 million international migrants worldwide, which is more than the population of the world’s fifth most populous country, Brazil.
The estimated $2.6 trillion that they earn annually exceeds the GDP of the United Kingdom, the world’s sixth-largest economy.
Much of this income is taxed or spent in the host countries.
But, assuming a 20% saving rate (close to the average for developing countries), this implies total annual diaspora saving of more than $500 billion.
In 2013, migrants from developing countries sent home around $404 billion (excluding the vast unrecorded inflows that arrive through informal channels).
India received $70 billion, more than the value of its exports of information-technology services.
Remittances to Egypt were larger than the country’s earnings from the Suez Canal.
And expatriate earnings accounted for more than one-third of Tajikistan’s national income.
These inflows tend to be larger in poor and small economies, and often provide the main lifeline in fragile or conflict-affected countries.
Remittances also arrive first in times of economic hardship and in the aftermath of natural disasters.
They tend to be more stable than private capital flows, declining by a mere 5% during the recent global financial crisis and recovering rapidly to pre-crisis levels.
Once the money is back in an expatriate’s homeland, it is put to good use.
Remittances have reduced poverty in Bangladesh, Ghana, and Nepal.
Children from recipient households in El Salvador have a lower school-dropout rate; in Sri Lanka, they have more access to private tutors.
The money finances health care, housing, and businesses.
Micro-finance borrowers can even use remittance receipts as evidence of credit history.
However, despite remittances’ evident value in supporting development goals, it must be remembered that they are private funds and should not be considered a substitute for official aid.
Attempts by governments to earmark remittances for specific “productive” uses have failed, especially in countries with weak investment environments.
Likewise, taxing remittances can hurt the poor disproportionately and drive the flows of money underground.
Conversely, improving the investment climate is likely to increase the share of remittances invested into businesses.
Some banks and businesses now offer zero-cost remittance services to attract customers.
Governments could also relax regulations for small remittance transactions.
Exclusive partnerships between national postal systems and money-transfer companies should also be abolished.
Another way to better use diaspora savings would be to create new “diaspora” financial instruments.
A low denomination security (of, say, $1,000), carrying a 3-4% interest rate, might be attractive to migrant workers who currently earn minimal interest on deposits held in host-country banks.
A five-year diaspora bond would have a lower interest rate than a sovereign bond sold to foreign institutional investors, as diaspora investors’ perception of risk in their home country is likely to be lower.
The bonds would also be more stable than non-resident foreign-currency deposits in developing countries, and registering the bonds with the appropriate authorities in major host countries would make them reasonably safe.
But diaspora bonds will not be a feasible development instrument unless they are linked to development projects in places where there is sufficient trust in the government.
The bonds should be available to all investors, not just migrant savers, and be distributed widely, not kept on the books of a few investment banks.
That way, large sums could be mobilized for development at low, stable interest rates, without diminishing migrant workers’ incentive to save.
Data and Development
WASHINGTON, DC – Since the turn of the century, the international development community has rallied behind the Millennium Development Goals, which set specific targets in eight key areas, including poverty, child mortality, and disease, to be achieved by 2015.
In formulating the post-2015 development agenda, measuring the MDGs’ successes – and identifying where progress has lagged – is critically important.
And that demands more and better data.
To be sure, international institutions and many developing countries have invested significantly in improving data collection to track better their performance against MDG targets.
In 2003, only four countries had two data points for 16 or more of the 22 principal MDG indicators; by last year, that figure had soared to 118 countries.
But development data remain a scarce resource in the developing world.
Given their value in measuring – and propelling – social and economic progress, this shortage must be addressed urgently.
A catalyst is needed to expand the production and use of development data.
With this in mind, the high-level panel on the post-2015 development agenda is right to call for a global “data revolution.”
The meteoric rise of digital technologies has changed the global landscape since 2000, when the MDGs were launched.
Remote sensing, information gathered from online activity, and crowd-sourced data from mobile phones can complement traditional methods of gathering statistics.
This technology-driven shift in the way people create, curate, share, and apply data should be reflected in development efforts for two reasons.
First, policymakers are eager to attain more up-to-date data that can guide their efforts.
Second, these data can also help drive innovation and civic engagement, by enabling the development of new and more effective goods and services.
However, there is a caveat.
The size and complexity of these datasets require specialized analytical skills (which remain in short supply), as well as more research and experimentation.
Increasing the quantity, quality, availability, and usability of data for development requires addressing the market failures that lead to gaps in data use and coverage in developing countries.
This means that as technology, data, and data users and providers make rapid advances, cooperation among diverse actors – governments, national statistics offices, donor agencies, global and local NGOs, academic and research institutions, the private sector and others – will be needed.
In this spirit of cooperation, the major multilateral development institutions – the African Development Bank, the Asian Development Bank, the Inter-American Development Bank, the International Monetary Fund, the Islamic Development Bank, the United Nations, and the World Bank – have already begun to strengthen their joint efforts in producing and sharing development data.
And the effort has already borne fruit.
But there is much more to be done.
Through new forms of collaboration, developing-country statistical agencies should aim to improve data coverage and quality, while leveraging technology to make data easier to manage, use, and access.
More (and more reliable) data could also improve decision-making by helping policymakers to understand specific social, economic, and environmental issues.
Better gender statistics could provide a more detailed understanding of women’s access to justice, education, and finance; improved measures of poverty and inequality could reveal how the benefits of economic growth are distributed; and natural capital accounting could uncover the value of resource endowments, thereby helping to ensure that they are used in a rational and sustainable manner.
Obviously, data related to issues that directly affect the wellbeing of people and the planet are essential for effective policymaking.
Making such data open and accessible should be viewed as a basic condition of ensuring people’s ability to hold governments accountable and thus participate in decisions that affect their lives.
The more resources that are devoted to achieving this goal, the more effective the post-2015 development agenda will be.
Trading Up from Poverty
WASHINGTON, DC – A long-held tenet of international-trade theory is that, in the long run, increased trade correlates with faster GDP growth.
But the challenge – which my institution, the World Bank, is working to overcome – is to ensure that trade-driven growth benefits the poor.
That is why the heads of seven multilateral institutions, including the World Bank, strongly supported the push for the trade-facilitation agreement that was reached earlier this month at the World Trade Organization’s ministerial conference in Bali.
To be sure, the incidence of poverty worldwide has reached an historic low, with the extreme-poverty rate (the share of the population living on less than $1.25 a day, in purchasing-power-parity terms) falling in 2010 by more than half since 1990.
But that still leaves more than one billion people worldwide living in extreme poverty.
Moreover, progress has been uneven, with poverty rates having declined far more in East Asia and Latin America than in Sub-Saharan Africa.
In order to cope with this changing global context, the World Bank has introduced a new objective to guide its poverty-reduction efforts: promoting sustainable, shared prosperity by monitoring the income growth of the poorest 40% of every country’s population.
Indeed, we are rethinking how we define success in development and how we provide trade-related support to developing countries.
Trade’s relationship with poverty is variable and complex.
Increased trade benefits consumers by reducing the prices of goods and services.
It gives the poor access to a wider variety of commodities, while providing firms with a more diverse selection of inputs.
But increased trade can also eliminate low-skill factory jobs and reduce agricultural prices – outcomes that disproportionately hurt the poor.
In India, for example, poverty has declined more slowly in areas where farmers face increased foreign competition.
Given constraints on inter-sectoral labor mobility, stemming from barriers to skills acquisition and rigid labor-market regulations, the poorest workers have few options when such changes occur.
As a result, increased trade may demand difficult adjustments in the short term.
Individuals may need to change their consumption habits; labor may have to be reallocated across sectors; and some workers may have to adjust to lower wages, at least temporarily.
Some firms will grow, while others will contract.
Experience has demonstrated that, with forward-looking policies, governments can enhance trade’s benefits and mitigate its negative impact on the poor.
Policymakers can promote retraining programs for displaced workers and remove regulatory obstacles that impede their flow into thriving, export-oriented sectors.
And, in order to protect farmers, they can eliminate export restrictions and ensure that timely, accurate market information is accessible.
With such policies in place, the World Bank’s efforts to bolster developing countries’ trade linkages could facilitate substantial poverty reduction. For example, we help developing-country governments connect firms, farmers, and households to markets and supply chains, thereby fostering increased investment and boosting economic activity.
Furthermore, we support infrastructure-development projects, enabling countries to build the roads, bridges, and ports that link traders to markets.
For example, a $1.8 billion highway project in Kazakhstan is facilitating trade-related transport across the country, stimulating the economies of the country’s poorest provinces, and creating more than 30,000 jobs.
In Nepal, the Bank is financing reconstruction of the steep, dangerous, and busy road that carries most of the country’s exports to India, and it is supporting the government’s efforts to connect some of the country’s remotest districts to the main road network.
The World Bank also helps countries to establish clear customs rules that more effectively protect traders from inconsistent treatment or solicitations for bribes.
And we are working to address costly border inefficiencies.
For example, we are helping to simplify and modernize trade procedures through Cameroon’s Douala port, and we have helped the government of Laos to establish an online portal that provides traders with access to all relevant laws, procedures, schedules, and forms from border-management agencies.
Moreover, since 2010, the International Finance Corporation, the Bank’s private-sector lending arm, has been promoting the integration of small and medium-size enterprises into global supply chains by increasing their access to capital.
Given this, it is crucial that developed-country policymakers recognize that a more efficient, better integrated, and more inclusive global trade regime will benefit all countries.
With genuine commitment from the international community and the appropriate domestic policies in place, trade can be a powerful force for poverty reduction.
Maintaining the Emerging-Economy Growth Engine
SEOUL – The world’s emerging economies seem to be losing their dynamism.
Countries that only a few years ago were being hailed for their resilience in the face of a global economic meltdown are now facing myriad challenges, reflected in significantly slower GDP growth.
Is the emerging-economy growth engine breaking down?
From 2000 to 2007, annual growth in emerging and developing economies averaged 6.5%.
More impressive, from 2008 to 2010, when the advanced economies were in recession or struggling through a fragile recovery, they managed to sustain 5.5% growth.
In fact, at the end of that period, average growth stood at a very healthy 7.5%.
But then growth began to slow, with the annual rate falling to 4% in 2015.
Even China, the largest and most dynamic emerging economy, recorded its lowest growth rate since 1990 (6.9%) last year, and the slowdown is forecast to accelerate this year.
Many now argue that the emerging economies are settling into a “new normal” of slower growth, and that their days as the key driver of the global economy are over.
Despite their current struggles, it would be premature to write off the emerging economies.
For starters, even if these countries’ growth rates do not return to pre-crisis levels, their contribution to the world economy should remain substantial, given that their share of world GDP in purchasing-power-parity terms has increased significantly, from 43% in 2000 to 58% in 2015.
But the emerging economies have much more to offer.
With the right policies, they can tap into as-yet-unexploited growth potential and continue their progress toward convergence with advanced-economy income levels.
The key to determining what those policies must be is to understand why growth has slowed in the first place.
At first, emerging economies were hit by external challenges, including weakening world trade, low commodity prices, and tight financial conditions.
Global merchandise trade slowed considerably over the last four years; in the first half of 2015, it contracted for the first time since 2009.
Oil and metal prices have dropped more than 50% from their 2011 peaks.
Moreover, the US Federal Reserve’s monetary-policy reversal, which entails a long-delayed increase in interest rates, combined with the negative-interest-rate policies of the Bank of Japan and the European Central Bank, has caused financial-market fluctuations and left emerging economies vulnerable to capital flight.
These external factors could be cyclical, but it remains to be seen how soon they will pass.
The recent emerging-economy slowdown is also the result of structural factors.
When the emerging economies’ growth stories began, the gap between their actual per capita incomes and long-run potential enabled rapid capital accumulation and strong technology-enabled productivity gains.
But after years of large-scale investment – which, in China in particular, has led to excess capacity and resource misallocation – capital accumulation has moderated.
Meanwhile, as countries move closer to the technology frontier, imitation and adaptation must give way to genuine innovation – no easy feat when innovative capabilities are lacking.
So what can emerging economies do to improve their prospects?
Though the particular policy mix will vary by economy, some priorities are clear.
For one thing, countries must strengthen their resilience against adverse external shocks, including through efforts to strengthen their own financial systems.
To reduce their vulnerability to volatile capital flows, they should promote exchange-rate flexibility, secure adequate international reserves, and adopt carefully designed capital controls.
Emerging economies that rely excessively on exports need to rebalance their sources of growth toward domestic demand.
Investment in public infrastructure, an improved investment climate, and social safety nets could all help to spur higher private-sector investment and household expenditure.
Greater priority must also be given to structural supply-side policies targeting productivity growth.
First, to strengthen human capital, emerging economies must complement their progress in educational attainment with efforts to improve schools’ quality, especially at the secondary and tertiary levels.
Where necessary, education systems must be reformed to meet changing industry demand and skill requirements.
Second, structural bottlenecks must urgently be addressed, through the streamlining of regulations, as well as reforms to promote competition in product markets and to increase the flexibility and efficiency of factor markets for labor, finance, and land.
Emerging economies must lower barriers to market entry, support business operations, and increase access to finance.
Obstacles to trade and foreign direct investment must be removed as well.
Finally, emerging economies must work to strengthen their institutions.
As it stands, corruption – facilitated by complex and burdensome regulatory environments, inefficient tax regimes, and weak judicial systems incapable of protecting investor and property rights – is pervasive in many emerging economies, hindering sustained growth.
Improving governance and bolstering the rule of law are essential to boosting productivity and long-term GDP growth.
The emerging-economy growth engine is not broken; it simply needs to be serviced.
With appropriate policies and structural reforms, the emerging economies can recapture their dynamism and move onto an even stronger growth path – taking the entire global economy with them.
Saudi Arabia’s Pilgrimage to Pakistan
LONDON – Over the last few years, Saudi Arabia has become increasingly estranged from its long-time protector, the United States.
It viewed America’s backing for Hosni Mubarak’s fall from power in Egypt – and its subsequent acceptance of the Muslim Brotherhood government – as a betrayal.
Then came US President Barack Obama’s refusal to enforce his “red line” in Syria, after President Bashar al-Assad’s regime unleashed poison gas on its opponents.
But the final straw was America’s support for the recent interim agreement on Iran’s nuclear program.
Saudi Arabia’s mounting distrust of the US matters, because whenever the Kingdom has felt an existential threat – and it regards Iran’s regional ambitions as such a threat – it has relied on an external power to protect it.
But if it can no longer rely on the US, where can the Kingdom turn for sufficient military muscle?
The answer seems to be Pakistan, a country that the rest of the world views as on the verge of becoming a failed state.
Pakistan has previously served the Kingdom’s interests by sending military and security assistance during times of stress.
Saudi Arabia received some 30,000 Pakistani soldiers in 1979, at the time of Iran’s Islamic Revolution.
And these troops remained in the Kingdom until the mid-1980’s.
The Saudis also employed thousands of Pakistani soldiers during the 1991 Gulf War.
And, at the beginning of 2014, Foreign Minister Saud Al-Faisal and Crown Prince Salman visited Islamabad to renew the two countries’ military agreements on joint arms production.
The visit was also intended to lay the groundwork to bring 30,000 Pakistani soldiers and military advisers to the Kingdom.
Why Pakistan, and why now?
The Saudi rulers view Pakistan as one of three regional powers, along with Iran and Turkey, capable of having a decisive impact on the Middle East.
An alliance with Shia Iran – the Kingdom’s supreme ideological enemy, and one with regional hegemonic ambitions – is out of the question.
Turkey, for its part, is regarded as a competitor for the mantle of Sunni Muslim leadership – a position long held by the Ottoman Empire.
The frequent description of Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdoğan as harboring “neo-Ottoman” ambitions for his country clearly implicates this rivalry.
It was the Ottomans who brought down two historical Saudi/Wahhabi states.
The first such state (1745-1818) was destroyed by Egypt’s Mehmet Ali with Ottoman support; the second (1824-1891) was also defeated by the Ottomans.
By contrast, the Kingdom has no problematic history with Pakistan.
On the contrary, the Saudis have bankrolled the Pakistani state, and proved a generous host to its current prime minister, Mian Nawaz Sharif, during his long exile following the military coup that toppled his government in 1999.
Indeed, Saudi Arabia has invested heavily in Pakistan since the early years of its independence.
Given that Pakistan was founded in 1947 on a religious basis, it is not surprising that its leaders sought support from the source of Islam, Mecca, then under Saudi rule.
The Kingdom, in turn, exported its Wahhabi teachings to the “Land of the Pure,” ultimately fueling the Islamic extremism and sectarian violence of the Taliban and others.
Saudi Arabia also invested in Pakistan’s nuclear weapons program, the so-called Sunni Bomb, by directly financing the research of A. Q. Khan, the father of the Pakistani effort.
The Kingdom’s hope of directly benefiting from Pakistan’s nuclear capabilities was blocked in 2003, when the US discovered the prospect of a transfer of knowledge and more.
Moreover, the forces that the Pakistan has sent to the Kingdom over the years have been perceived as generally loyal.
Although up to 30% of the Pakistani army are Shia, the Saudis will only accept Sunni soldiers, and Pakistan has happily provided them as mercenaries, sent on rotation and treated as guest workers.
Part of the Saudi plan today is to use Pakistanis as the backbone for a new Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) joint military force.
Pakistani forces under Saudi command were used in operations to quell Shia uprisings in Bahrain in 2011, and the Saudis now want a standby force ready to put down Islamist and Shia provocations whenever and wherever they may appear in the Gulf.
In the event of an existential threat in the region, in particular a confrontation with Iran, Pakistan would offer the Kingdom a form of deadly protection denied it by the West.
So to what extent can Pakistan really enhance Saudi Arabia’s security, particularly in a war against Iran?
Pakistan is badly fractured, with domestic terrorism running rampant.
Its military lacks the capacity to intervene in Saudi Arabia’s defense while maintaining not only domestic security, but also readiness for war against India (an obsession of Pakistani generals).
Moreover, Pakistan’s substantial Shia population might join the ranks of the violently disaffected if the military backed the Saudis in a sectarian war.
And the Pakistan People’s Party, now in opposition but still a powerful domestic force, shares interests with Iran.
So, although the strategic value of closer military ties with Pakistan seems highly questionable, Saudi Arabia has little choice.
The GCC is in fact disintegrating, following Qatar’s ouster for supporting the Muslim Brotherhood and Oman’s voluntary departure from the group.
That, together with the Kingdom’s deepening distrust of the US, is fueling a growing sense of isolation.
Pakistan may not be anyone’s idea of an ally when facing an existential threat; for Saudi Arabia, however, it is an idea whose time has come.
The Last of the Sudeiri Seven
LONDON – Ever since the Al Saud clan established in 1932 the kingdom to which they gave their name, the exercise of power in Saudi Arabia has been shaped by the intrigues and intricacies of royal politics.
With the assassination of King Faisal in 1975 by his nephew, the Sudeiri branch of the family became its dominant faction.
Fahd, the eldest Sudeiri son, ruled for 23 years, the longest reign for a Saudi king.
Abdullah’s succession in 2005 posed a direct challenge to the Sudeiri brothers’ authority.
Indeed, following Fahd’s death, Sudeiri power was reduced significantly, with only Crown Princes Sultan and Naif holding key roles.
Abdullah does not have a full brother.
To block a Sudeiri restoration, he initially grouped together a number of marginalized, likeminded princes.
Though Abdullah’s “Allegiance Council” was subject to Sultan’s control, its inclusion of Abdul Aziz’s remaining sons and the sons of his deceased brothers – in particular, King Faisal’s sons – gave the non-Sudeiri princes an institutional base of power.
The shift in power from the Sudeiris to King Abdullah and his sons was accelerated by the death of the two Sudeiri crown princes within a period of eight months.
After Sultan (who served for decades as Minister of Defense) died in October 2011, Abdullah froze the Allegiance Council.
Following the death of Naif (who was Minister of Interior for 37 years) in June 2012, he removed Abdul Rahman, a Sudeiri, and appointed Salman as Crown Prince.
Salman, too, is a Sudeiri, but his appointment represented a significant change, partly owing to his relative youth (78 years old).
Indeed, perhaps to satisfy the desire of the United States, a key ally, for a new generation of Saudi rulers, the 89-year-old Abdullah passed over his octogenarian brothers and appointed the youngest, 65-year-old Prince Migrin, as Second Deputy, putting him first in line to the throne after Salman.
Nearly a decade after succeeding Fahd, Abdullah is using his absolute power in other ways as well.
For example, he has strengthened the National Guard’s position by raising its status to that of a ministry, led by his eldest son, Mit’ib.
As a result of these and other changes, including the removal of key officials, such as Deputy Commander Badr Bin Abdul Aziz, the Guard’s power is now equal, if not superior, to that of the army.
Likewise, it is believed that Abdullah’s son, Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs Abdul Aziz, will soon replace Saud al Faisal, the world’s longest-serving foreign minister.
Abdullah also appointed his son Mish’al as Governor of Najran, before raising Mish’al’s profile further, in December 2013, by naming him Governor of Mecca, in place of Khalid Al Faisal.
Meanwhile, Abdullah’s son Turki has been made Deputy Governor of Riyadh.
Whatever Abdullah’s consolidation of power might mean domestically, the implications for the region are profound.
In personalizing Saudi politics to the extent that he has, Abdullah has also personalized foreign policymaking.
That has meant subordinating meritocracy to kinship and loyalty, which has inevitably weakened the regime’s capacity to respond effectively to regional developments.
To be sure, the King and his courtiers are much relieved that the Arab Spring did not lead to the creation of functioning democracies in Egypt, Yemen, Bahrain, Libya, or Syria.
Better still, from their perspective, rival Islamist regimes that emerged proved to be either incompetent and easily overthrown (as with Egypt’s President Mohamed Morsi), or without appeal to others (as in Tunisia).
Nevertheless, the Arab Spring revolutions did undermine the pillars of the regional status quo, whose construction and maintenance the Kingdom had underwritten with its petrodollars.
The uprisings ousted reliable old allies like Hosni Mubarak, and turned regimes such as Syrian President Bashar al-Assad’s into implacable enemies.
Saudi Arabia’s initial response to the fracturing of the regional order was to increase its support for those of its allies – Jordan, Lebanon, and Bahrain – that were still standing, and to turn the Egyptian army into its proxy, leading to the removal of the Muslim Brotherhood’s government.
Since 2013, Syria has become the main focus of Saudi Arabia’s attention in the region.
Saudi rulers regard the battle between Assad and his opponents as part of the Kingdom’s existential struggle against its main adversary, Iran.
Thus, Saudi Arabia has become the primary source of financing and weapons for Sunni rebel forces fighting Assad’s army, which is backed heavily by Shia Iran and its proxy, the Lebanon-based Hezbollah militia.
Despite its unusually activist foreign policy, the Kingdom has failed to bring down Assad’s regime, partly owing to US President Barack Obama’s refusal to enforce his “red line” concerning the Assad regime’s use of chemical weapons.
As a result, Saudi rulers no longer feel constrained to wait for US approval of their actions – or even to refrain from acting against American interests.
Saudi Arabia feels a deep fear of abandonment by the US, and is acting accordingly.
The political transition at home, it seems, is being matched – for better or worse – by a diplomatic transition in the Kingdom’s stance toward the region.
Make Politics, Not War, in Iraq
The United States is once again learning the limits of military power.
In Iraq, America has unrivaled control of the air, but can’t hold the ground.
Its mere presence incites violence.
While President George W. Bush believes that he has protected Americans by “taking the war to the enemy,” more than 1,700 Americans have died in the Iraq war, which also has provoked terrorist attacks on US allies.
The horrific London bombings probably were inspired by Britain’s co-leadership of the war.
The Bush administration’s mistake, of course, is to neglect politics in its war calculations, or to follow blindly the dictum that war is politics by other means.
In fact, most war is a failure of politics, a failure of political imagination.
Given their self-righteousness and lack of historical and cultural awareness, Bush and his advisors believed that invading Iraq would be easy, that Saddam Hussein’s military would crumble, and that the US would be welcomed as a liberator.
They failed to comprehend that Iraq has long been an occupied and externally manipulated country.
As a result, Iraqis understandably regard the American-led occupation as just another episode of outside exploitation.
It is widely accepted that oil, not terror, was the original motivation of the war – a war planned by Mr. Bush’s senior advisors during the 1990’s, and made possible by their accession to power in 2001.
Through the 1990’s, US Vice President Dick Cheney and others made clear that Saddam’s reign threatened America’s oil security by forcing over-reliance on Saudi Arabia.
Iraq’s vast reserves, went the argument, could not be developed safely until Saddam was deposed.
The September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks in the US provided the green light, not the underlying motivation.
The Iraqis sense all of this.
Bush’s refusal to set a deadline for withdrawing troops is not taken as a sign of resolve, but as a statement of America’s intent to remain in Iraq, establish a puppet regime, control the country’s oil and set up permanent military bases.
That won’t work.
There are simply too many real political forces on the ground in Iraq for America to manage, and these forces are increasingly demanding a timetable for US withdrawal, as are legions of Iraqis in the course of public protests and mosque worships.
Every time the US reiterates its refusal to set a deadline for withdrawal, it simply stokes political opposition, not to mention the insurgency.
There are too many Iraqis ready to fight and die to oppose the American presence.
Only politics, not arms, can calm the scene. 
Vietnam is a true precedent here.
Vietnamese deaths and casualties outnumbered American deaths and casualties by perhaps 20 to one, but the US still could not subdue the nationalist adversary that they faced.
The US could bomb Vietnam’s cities to rubble, as it can Iraq’s cities, but this solves nothing, claims vast numbers of innocent lives, and confirms the view of Americans as occupiers. 
All of this has an economic angle as well.
American foreign policy doctrine states that US national security rests on three pillars: defense, diplomacy, and development.
Economic aid for poor nations is crucial, because poverty provides the tinder for violence, conflict, and even terrorism.
Yet diplomacy and development take a distant second and third place behind defense – or more accurately, military – approaches in US foreign policy spending.
The US will devote approximately $500 billion, or 5% of GNP, to military spending this year – half of the world’s total.
In other words, the US spends as much on arms as the rest of the world combined.
Peaceful diplomacy did the job, showing Qadaffi that reopening diplomatic relations with the West and abandoning Libya’s nuclear ambitions would be advantageous for its own future and that of the country. 
The same approach would have been far less expensive and more promising vis-à-vis Saddam Hussein.
Vast sums – and millions of lives – would have been saved if that approach had been tried with Ho Chi Minh in the 1950’s.   
No one doubts that intelligence operations and police actions are needed to fight terrorists.
But the war in Iraq and enormous military expenditures are quite another matter.
The American military can protect the US from conventional military attack, and it can keep the high seas open, ensuring the flow of oil and other vital commodities.
But it can’t protect the US from politics.
For that, Americans need to be smarter, investing in peaceful development rather than military bases in long-abused lands.  
The US should leave Iraq quickly.
After that, it can and should use its political and economic weight to help manage a complex and difficult situation that is significantly, though not exclusively, of its own making.
America’s sway in Iraq will be limited, but leaving now would actually make it more effective than it is now, and at much less cost in terms of money and American, allied, and Iraqi lives.
Make the UN Stand for Freedom
For Sweden, my homeland, the United Nations is a sacred cow.
But today, many Swedes, like others around the world, are having second thoughts.
Three events incited these doubts.
The first was the slaughter in Rwanda a decade ago of more than 800,000 people within 100 days – probably the fastest genocide ever.
The well-documented fact is that Kofi Annan, then the UN’s Deputy Secretary General, ordered UN soldiers in Rwanda not to intervene or protect the victims.
That Annan, after this enormous failure, was promoted to Secretary General of the UN remains a puzzle.
Doubts about the UN, and Annan personally, were compounded by the ongoing scandal within the UN administration concerning the Oil for Food program.
Although reports have so far not implicated Annan directly, his management failures are abundantly clear.
The third – and perhaps the most disillusioning – scandal concerns the Commission on Human Rights, for it lays bare much about the structural and permanent lack of balance and morality within key UN agencies.
Most people assume that this Commission exists to promote human rights and democratic freedoms.
Yet some of the worst human rights violators are Commission members.
These enemies of freedom are permanently silent about torture, oppression, and mass murder carried out by their fellow dictatorships, but are quick to rant against the world’s democracies, in particular the United States.
The recent “High Level Panel” report on the future of the UN was right when it said: “We are concerned that in recent years States have sought membership of the Commission not to strengthen human rights but to protect themselves from criticism or to criticize others.”
So, finally, the truth is emerging.
After more than a third of a century at the UN, even Annan has come close to admitting that the Commission on Human Rights is a source of shame.
Is it reasonable to elect a pyromaniac to the board of a fire department?
Of course not.
So why is it that tyrannies like Cuba, China, Saudi Arabia, Sudan, and Zimbabwe are members of this Commission?
Recent members also include Libya, Vietnam, Congo, and Syria – the Libyans were even elected chair-country.
How can this be?
About half of today’s UN members are democracies, the other half non-democracies.
So totalitarian or authoritarian states – more interested in hiding their own oppression than fairly judging other nations – can easily trigger a sort of political pogrom against any democracy that annoys enough tyrants.
Sadly, many free countries seem utterly indifferent to the ongoing campaign against Israel.
To prevent such vicious absurdities from continuing, the world’s democracies must unite to prevent any country that systematically violates human rights from being allowed to be a member of the Commission on Human Rights.
Ongoing democratization in regions that have known only dictatorship provides hope that the balance is tilting in a way that would enable it possible for at least one UN body should incarnate freedom.
Who should decide if a country is democratic or not?
A tremendously respected independent think tank, Freedom House, is, like the UN’s headquarters, located in New York City.
Freedom House is led and advised by experts on 190 countries.
Freedom House monitors developments over time and makes its conclusions public in its “Annual Survey of Political Rights and Civil Liberties.”
If there is one book that should be compulsory reading for anyone who makes public statements about human rights, this is it.
So the goal of all free countries should be that only other free countries are allowed seats on the Commission for Human Rights.
Regimes that are “partly free” or “not free” should never be elected or appointed, for the only governments with the moral legitimacy to review and criticize human rights records are those that came to power through free elections and that can lose power when a new election defeats them.
Those who have attained power through violence and fraud are not legitimate and should never more shame the UN by being members of this Commission.
Unfortunately, most democracies are often unwilling to fight against the perversion of the UN Human Rights Commission.
The European Union represents 25 democracies and often inspires countries to seek their freedom, as it has in Ukraine and Lebanon.
But the EU’s habit is not to defeat the UN’s extremists, but to make strange compromises with them.
As a result, rogue states make a few concessions to get the Europeans and others on board and then claim moral parity with the democracies.
Free peoples everywhere should remember that totalitarian forces and ideas cannot be defeated by being nice and accommodating.
The Commission on Human Rights must rid itself of members that detest freedom.
Otherwise, the sole UN agency that concentrates on freedom will be nothing more than a handmaiden to tyranny.
Making European Defense a Reality
BRUSSELS – Anyone reflecting on the value, weight, and relevance of today’s European military forces for global affairs needs to keep two crucial questions in mind: Where do we want to go?
What do we want to achieve?
The EU’s goal is to be a global player with its own foreign policy, one shared by its 27 member states.
Any effective foreign policy clearly needs to rely on effective military and civilian resources.
But this goal does not mean that the EU will compete with NATO.
Whereas NATO is a political-military alliance, the EU endorses the development of a community of national destinies.
Moreover, NATO benefits from the military might of a dominant nation, while the EU must depend on the shared voluntary efforts of its members.
For two key reasons, it would be more correct to say that NATO and the European Security and Defense Policy (ESDP) are complementary.
First, certain countries turn specifically to Europe for help.
Whether in sub-Saharan Africa or the Middle East, their populations and governments are more inclined – for political, historical, or cultural reasons – to request European rather than NATO assistance.
Conversely, there are certain long-term crises, such as those provoked by terrorism, for which NATO is better placed to act.
For example, given its member states’ current resources, the EU, acting alone, would be unable to ensure a Western commitment in Afghanistan.
At the same time, the governments of Chad and the Central African Republic would never have accepted NATO’s intervention to help resolve the Darfur crisis.
Second, the EU is building its crisis management know-how on the basis of a global approach.
Military resources are only one tool among many others, and, generally speaking, their deployment is clearly defined, limited in time, and coordinated with civilian action.
As a result, the EU doesn’t need the articulated military structure that NATO possesses.
The recent creation in Brussels of the Civilian Planning Conduct Capability, based on a system comparable to that of a military chain of command, demonstrates – and, above all, guarantees – cohesive action.
In the same way, EUFOR military commanders regularly and frequently exchange information with the heads of such EU civil missions as the EUPOL police mission, the EUSEC security reform mission, the EUJUST justice mission, and so on, including, if present, the European Commission’s own representatives.
Being able to act militarily requires capable, flexible forces that are suited to their mission.
Their essential tasks should be movement, information gathering, and, if necessary, combat.
Moreover, their main qualities should be resistance – the ability to hold out – and the psychological resilience to deal successfully with an “intense” situation and to respond to it by exerting the best possible control.
This implies a high level of cohesion, which in the case of multinational forces is not guaranteed.
But the EU’s “Battlegroups” are a first response to this requirement.
As multinational forces that are built either on regional affiliations or strong bilateral relations, they bestow a “European” label on military resources while guaranteeing efficiency in the field.
Where necessary, they can be supported by air and maritime rapid response assets, and thus constitute a fully-fledged military resource for armed intervention.
However, although about 15 Battlegroups have been created – two of which are, at any time, on permanent call for six months – none has actually been deployed since the Artemis “prototype” mission to the Democratic Republic of Congo in 2003. As time passes, a concept without real commitment in the field may eventually raise suspicions about its relevance.
The EU also suffers from a well-known lack of capacity in strategic air transport, in-theater air transport, and combat support.
The European Defense Agency has a very important role to play in proposing and running programs to address these shortfalls.
The Capability Development Plan, which the EDA is developing in close collaboration with the EU Military Committee, aims to foster and improve solidarity in terms of capability, which is what Europe needs.
There are other areas in which we must make progress if the EU’s military resources are to be brought into line with its political ambitions.
One urgent need is simplification of our operational planning and the manner in which we conduct operations.
Finally, as all of the EU’s 27 member states are now trying to reduce public spending in sustainable ways, financing for military operations, without which nothing is possible, requires a new approach.
Those member states that are most heavily involved in an operation, in terms of both human resources and military equipment, are penalized by the financial burden that this commitment places on their national budgets.
Political solidarity must be underpinned by effective financial solidarity.
As an integral part of the CFSP, today’s ESDP and tomorrow’s Common Security and Defense Policy will work only if the member states responsible for implementing them allocate the resources that they need.
This implies a Europe-based approach that takes precedence over national considerations once national and European-level foreign policies are unified.
Making Europe Work
PARIS – Some economists believe that this summer could mark the moment when some of the eurozone’s peripheral members may begin to be forced out; others think that such a scenario is inconceivable.
All agree that, at least in the short term, a eurozone breakup would be disastrous for jobs and growth.
But, because the outcome is unknowable, and depends on politics as much as on economics, let us leave that frightening prospect to one side and look instead at what we know about the underlying performance of the European Union economy.
In short, how competitive is Europe in the summer of 2012?
If we compare the EU-15 (the membership before the enlargements of 2004 and 2007) with the US, the most obvious point is that GDP per capita in Europe is almost 25% lower, a difference of around $11,000 a year.
Furthermore, per capita EU productivity, which had been converging on the US level for 20 years up to 1995, when Europe was only about 5% below the US, lost ten percentage points in relative terms in the decade preceding the eurozone crisis.
Europe was unable to match America’s significant productivity boost from the information-technology revolution.
But Europe managed to hold its share of global exports during that period more effectively than did the US.
European companies have been more successful, on average, at maintaining their share of emerging-market demand than have US companies.
Moreover, European job creation has not been as bad as many think.
An analysis by McKinsey &amp; Company of new jobs in the US and the EU from 1995 to 2008 suggests that, while the US created 20 million new jobs, 19 million of them were attributable to population growth.
The EU-15 created about 24 million new jobs during the same period, with only nine million due to rising population.