In fact, China’s high debt/GDP ratio is, to a large extent, a result of its simultaneously high saving and investment rates.
And, while the inability to repay loans can contribute to a high debt burden, the nonperforming-loan (NPL) ratio for China’s major banks stands at less than 1%.
If, based on these considerations, one concludes that China’s debt/GDP ratio does constitute a substantial threat to its financial stability, there remains the question of whether a crisis is likely to occur.
Only when all of the specific linkages between a high debt burden and the onset of a financial crisis have been identified can one draw even a tentative conclusion about that.
China’s real-estate price bubble is often named as a likely catalyst for a crisis.
But how such a downturn would unfold is far from certain.
Let us assume that the real-estate bubble has burst.
In China, there are no subprime mortgages, and the down payment on the purchase price required to qualify for financing can exceed 50%.
Given that property prices are unlikely to fall by such a large margin, the bubble’s collapse would not bring down China’s banks.
Even if real-estate prices fell by more than 50%, commercial banks could survive – not least because mortgages account for only about 20% of banks’ total assets.
At the same time, plummeting prices would attract new homebuyers in major cities, causing the market to stabilize.
And China’s recently announced urbanization strategy should ensure that cities’ demographic structure supports intrinsic demand.
If that were not enough to ward off disaster, the government could purchase unsold properties and use them for social housing.
Moreover, if necessary, banks could recover funds by selling collateral.
As a last resort, the government could step in, as it did in the late 1990’s and early 2000’s, to remove NPLs from banks’ balance sheets.
Indeed, China has a massive war chest of foreign-exchange reserves that it would not hesitate to use to inject capital into commercial banks.
That remains a highly unlikely scenario.
China’s banking system does face risks stemming from a maturity mismatch between loans and deposits.
But the mismatch is less severe than some observers believe.
In fact, the average term of deposits in China’s banks is about nine months, while medium- and long-term loans account for just over half of total outstanding credit.
A more salient threat would arise if the government pursued too much capital-account liberalization too fast.
If China eases restrictions on cross-border capital flows, an unexpected shock could trigger large-scale capital flight, bringing down the entire financial system.
Given this, it is vital that China maintains controls over short-term cross-border capital flows in the foreseeable future.
Likewise, the Chinese government must address a fundamental contradiction.
Monetary interest rates have increased steadily, owing to rampant regulatory arbitrage (whereby banks find loopholes that enable them to avoid unfavorable rules) and the fragmentation of the credit market, while return on capital has fallen rapidly because of overcapacity.
If the Chinese government fails to reverse this trend, a financial crisis – in one form or another – will become inevitable.
But, given the authorities’ broad scope for policy intervention, the crash will not come anytime soon – if it comes at all.
The Long March from the Third Plenum
BEIJING – Though China’s leadership succession was completed earlier this year, the policy agenda for the coming decade has only just been revealed.
Following Chinese political tradition, the country’s new leadership had to wait for the Third Plenum of the Chinese Communist Party’s 18th Central Committee – held 3-4 quarters after the First Plenum, where the succession was sealed – to unveil its economic-policy priorities.
Third Plenums – and perhaps only Third Plenums – can bring about radical transformation.
Indeed, it was at the Third Plenum of the CCP’s 11th Central Committee that Deng Xiaoping launched the reforms that opened up the Chinese economy and triggered more than three decades of rapid economic growth.
The Third Plenums of the CCP’s 14th and 16th Central Committees – held in 1993 and 2003, respectively – also stand out.
At both meetings, CCP leaders put forward comprehensive plans for the creation and perfection of the so-called “socialist market economy” in China.
The 60-point “resolution” produced at the most recent Third Plenum covers six areas: the economy, the political system, the environment, culture, society, and Party capacity-building.
This represents a significant departure from the agendas produced at previous Third Plenums, which focused exclusively on economic reform.
But, when it comes to economic-reform objectives, the resolution is not overwhelmingly innovative.
Indeed, most of the goals that it includes – like reform of state-owned enterprises (SOEs), development of private enterprise, reduction of government intervention, protection of property rights, and creation of a modern market system – can be found in the resolution of the Third Plenum of the CCP’s 16th Central Committee.
Even the decision to redefine the market’s role in resource allocation as “decisive” was not the breakthrough that many observers have claimed.
After all, the 2003 resolution had already defined the market as “fundamental” to resource allocation.
Given this, the latest resolution’s most important implication is that it has dispelled any doubt about the new leadership’s commitment to the market-oriented reform that Deng initiated in 1978.
In line with tradition, the Third Plenum’s resolution did not discuss problems concerning growth and development, which one hopes the government will address in greater detail in the near future.
That said, some of the resolution’s specific provisions for economic reform represent much-needed progress.
·         SOEs will be required to deliver 30% of their profits to the state, instead of keeping most – or even all – of their profits, as they have done for the last two decades.
·         Farmers will be granted more property rights, allowing them, for example, to transfer and mortgage land-use rights, though the government understandably continues to exercise caution about rural-land privatization.
·         A real-estate property tax will be introduced, in order to suppress skyrocketing housing prices and reduce the vacancy rate – a controversial but perhaps necessary move.
·         The one-child policy will be eased, allowing a couple to have two children if one parent is an only child.
(Whether this change will be enough to reverse problematic demographic trends remains a topic of heated debate.)
·         The government will “accelerate the reform of the household registration system,” in an effort to facilitate urbanization.
But emphasis seems to have shifted to encourage coordinated development between urban and rural areas.
While rural migrant workers will be encouraged to settle in small and medium-size cities, migration to metropolises will remain tightly controlled – or even be more strictly regulated.
But the resolution’s genuinely groundbreaking objectives lie in other areas.
For starters, the resolution includes two potentially game-changing legal reforms.
First, it emphasizes the government’s commitment to “respect and protect human rights,” prohibiting law-enforcement authorities from extracting confessions “by torture, corporal punishment, or abuse” and abolishing widely criticized programs for “re-education through the labor system.”
Second, in order to strengthen judicial independence, the resolution includes a call “to explore the establishment of judicial jurisdiction systems that are suitably separated from administrative areas.”
In other words, the courts should be able to make decisions independently of the local governments that finance them.
In the political realm, the resolution includes measures to strengthen China’s so-called “consultative democracy.”
While the concept of enhancing the role of non-CCP forces in Chinese politics is not new, its prominence in the resolution reflects the Party’s willingness to adopt a more democratic political system – as long as it retains its dominant position, of course.
In a one-party system, meritocracy is a prerequisite for good governance, which in turn plays a central role in maintaining social stability.
Unfortunately, meritocracy has been eroded by a political culture of sycophancy and cynicism.
Designing a screening mechanism to minimize adverse selection in choosing bureaucrats and party officials has become one of the biggest challenges that China’s ruling elites confront.
Although the resolution’s general message is encouraging, a shopping list of reform objectives is not a strategic analysis of the contradictions that are undermining China’s development, let alone an action plan for responding to these contradictions.
Indeed, for China’s new leadership, the successful completion of the Third Plenum is only the first step in a new long march toward a more stable, prosperous future.
China’s Trilemma
BEIJING – The Nobel laureate economist Robert Mundell showed that an economy can maintain two – but only two – of three key features: monetary-policy independence, a fixed exchange rate, and free cross-border capital flows.
But China is currently juggling all three – an act that is becoming increasingly difficult to sustain.
At first glance, this may not seem to be the case.
Given that the People’s Bank of China (PBOC) has largely maintained its monetary-policy independence over the last three decades, and actively manages the renminbi’s exchange rate, it is natural to conclude that China imposes strict controls on capital flows.
In fact, China liberalized inward foreign direct investment more than 20 years ago, and eased controls for much of the capital account thereafter.
China’s efforts to regulate cross-border capital flows have never been very effective.
During the Asian financial crisis of the 1990s, China had to implement draconian measures to prevent capital flight.
In the early 2000s, short-term capital began to flow into China, with investors betting on the renminbi’s appreciation and, from 2004-2006, on rising asset prices.
Since renminbi internationalization was launched in 2009, exchange-rate arbitrage and the carry trade have surged.
Certainly, China’s capital controls, though porous, increase the transaction costs of moving short-term capital to and from China, thereby reducing upward pressure on the renminbi’s exchange rate; in extreme circumstances, this could play a decisive role in China’s financial security.
But capital continues to flow – if not entirely freely – across China’s borders.
This raises an obvious question: How has China managed to defy the Mundell trilemma by maintaining all three policy objectives simultaneously?
The answer lies in China’s sterilization policy.
China has run a capital-account surplus for most of the last 30 years, and a trade surplus every year since 1993.
The PBOC keeps the exchange rate stable by intervening heavily in the foreign-exchange market, creating so much liquidity that the authorities must engage in massive sterilization to avoid overshooting the targeted increase in the monetary base.
In China, unlike in advanced countries, monetary and sterilization policy are often one in the same.
The degree to which monetary policy is expansionary depends on the degree to which the liquidity created by currency-market intervention has been sterilized.
The most frequently used monetary instrument in sterilization is open-market operations.
Given China’s twin surpluses, the PBOC sold all of the government bonds that it had accumulated in 2003, so it has been selling central-bank bills ever since, with CN¥5 trillion ($812 billion) in such bills currently held by banks.
Another important instrument for sterilization is the reserve-requirement ratio, which, when raised, locks a large amount of liquidity in the banking system.
The ratio, which the PBOC has changed 42 times since 1998, currently stands at 20% – double the ratio for large banks in the United States.
Whatever the mechanism, the costs of sterilization are very high.
For starters, by maintaining an undervalued real exchange rate, China has fallen into the so-called “dollar trap,” boosting the US dollar’s international importance at China’s own expense.
As time passes, the senselessness of this policy will become increasingly apparent.
Sterilization also leads to a serious misallocation of resources, most obviously by functioning as a subsidy to the export sector, at the expense of the rest of the economy.
A less noticed form of resource misallocation stems from the fact that only sellers of foreign exchange gain liquidity, but the whole economy feels the effects.
As a result, small and medium-size enterprises that produce non-tradable products are denied much-needed funds and suffer from sterilization’s negative externalities.
Furthermore, the high reserve ratio and forced purchase of central-bank bills squeezes commercial banks’ profits severely – a phenomenon that will be intensified by interest-rate liberalization.
The quest for yield on available funds will drive banks to make riskier investments.
There are also quasi-fiscal costs involved.
Fortunately, despite the low returns on foreign assets, this is not yet a major problem for China, owing to the low costs of the corresponding PBOC liabilities.
Nonetheless, though predictions that China would abandon its exchange-rate controls in order to uphold monetary autonomy have proved wrong over the last decade, this time may be different.
With China’s liberalization of interest rates and short-term capital flows making it increasingly difficult for the country to juggle Mundell’s “irreconcilable trinity,” one hopes that Chinese leaders will finally allow the renminbi to float, while keeping in place existing capital controls.
China’s Investment Addiction
BEIJING – China’s economy slowed unexpectedly in the second quarter of this year.
Just as unexpectedly, most data released since July suggest that China’s growth has stabilized.
Markets, not surprisingly, have breathed a collective sigh of relief.
But should investors still be nervous?
Currently, the most severe problem confronting Chinese authorities is overcapacity.
For example, China’s annual production capacity for crude steel is one billion tons, but its total output in 2012 was 720 million tons – a capacity utilization rate of 72%.
More strikingly, the steel industry’s profitability was just 0.04% in 2012.
Indeed, the profit on two tons of steel was just about enough to buy a lollipop.
So far this year, the average profitability of China’s top 500 companies is 4.34%, down 33 basis points from 2012.
Some say that today’s overcapacity is a result of China’s past overinvestment.
Others attribute it to a lack of effective demand.
The government seems to come down in the middle.
On one hand, the authorities have ordered thousands of companies to reduce capacity.
On the other hand, the government has introduced some “mini-stimulus” measures, ranging from exemptions for “micro firms” from business and sales taxes to pressure on banks to increase loans to exporters.
The authorities’ official line is that China’s growth model requires less investment and more consumption.
But not all Chinese economists agree.
They argue that capital stock is the key factor for growth, and that China’s per capita capital stock is still low relative to developed countries, which implies considerable scope for further investment.
To be sure, capital accumulation is a driving force of economic growth, and catching up with developed-country income levels implies that China must increase its capital stock in the long run.
But what is at issue is not the size of the capital stock, or even the level of investment; the problem is the growth rate of investment, which has been significantly higher than that of GDP for decades.
According to official statistics, China’s investment rate is approaching 50% of GDP.
Given absorption constraints, capital efficiency has been falling steadily amid increasing deadweight.
If environmental damage caused by breakneck investment growth were taken into account, China’s capital efficiency would be even lower.
Human capital and technological progress are as important to economic growth as physical capital and labor, if not more so.
If resource allocation is skewed toward physical capital at the expense of accumulating human capital – for which adequate consumption is indispensable – economic growth would be more likely to slow than rise.
So China should reduce the growth rate of investment and increase that of consumption, allowing the investment rate to settle at a more sustainable level.
Of course, it is not entirely untrue that China’s overcapacity reflects a shortfall of effective demand.
But where can effective demand come from?
Again, China’s steel industry provides a telling example.
Despite China’s lack of a comparative advantage for steel production, it has built approximately one thousand mills, with output accounting for roughly half of the global total.
As early as 2004, China’s government tried to clamp down on overinvestment; and yet output increased dramatically, from 300 million tons that year to a billion tons in 2012, owing to strong demand generated by investment in infrastructure and real-estate development.
China’s investment consists of mainly three broad categories: manufacturing industry, infrastructure, and real estate.
In late 2008 and 2009, at the height of the global financial crisis, stimulus-fueled infrastructure investment sustained output growth.
In 2010, investment in real-estate development replaced infrastructure investment as the main driver of growth.
Today, both infrastructure and real estate are important drivers of China’s growth.
China does need more infrastructure investment – particularly in power and water utilities, transport, and communications.
But the pace of investment must take financial constraints fully into consideration.
More important, China can and should invest more in social infrastructure such as schools, hospitals, retirement homes, and so on.
However, real-estate investment is another story.
It is difficult to judge how serious China’s property bubble is and when it might burst.
But one thing is certain: China has invested too much in real-estate development.
With per capita income at less than $6,000, homeownership in China is roughly 90%, compared to less than 70% in the United States.
Average floor space per capita is 32.9 square meters, while median floor space per family in Hong Kong is just 48 square meters.
China has 696 five-star hotels, with another 500 on the way.
Five of the ten tallest skyscrapers under construction worldwide are in China.
In my view, this is madness.
China’s economy is being held hostage by real-estate investment.
On one hand, China should not try to eliminate overcapacity by maintaining the high growth rate of real-estate investment.
While investment in social housing should be welcomed, real-estate investment, currently running at 10-13% of GDP, is already far too high.
On the other hand, if real-estate investment growth falls, overcapacity will be difficult to eliminate.
This dilemma highlights the structural-adjustment challenge that China faces – and should give investors reason to hold their breath.
That said, there are two caveats.
First, unlike other categories of investment, real estate investment does not increase productive capital stock.
There is no fundamental difference between a house and an expensive durable consumer good.
Second, in China’s statistics, the growth rate of gross fixed-asset investment is much higher than that of gross capital formation.
This indicates that data on the growth rate of fixed-asset investment may have exaggerated the pace of capital-stock accumulation.
Hence, while the Chinese government should be firm on reducing the dependence of growth on investment, it must exercise utmost care when doing so.
China’s Fire Next Time
BEIJING – Earlier this year, rumors of China’s impending financial doom – triggered by either a housing-market crash or local-government debt defaults – were rampant.
But, in recent months, the economy has stabilized, leaving few doubts about China’s ability to grow by more than 7% this year.
Given that the Chinese government had ample scope for policy intervention, this turnaround should come as no surprise.
But the moment of financial reckoning has merely been postponed, not averted.
The fundamental problems that triggered alarm bells in the first place – including real-estate bubbles, local-government debt, rapid growth in shadow-banking activity, and rising corporate leverage ratios – remain unresolved.
Of these, the most immediate threat to China’s economic and financial stability is the combination of high borrowing costs, low profitability for nonfinancial corporations, and very high corporate leverage ratios.
According to a study by the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences, the debt/GDP ratio for China’s nonfinancial corporations was 113% by the end of 2012.
Standard &amp; Poor’s found that, a year later, these firms’ total debt amounted to $14.2 trillion, eclipsing the $13.1 trillion of outstanding debt in the United States and making China the world’s largest issuer of corporate debt.
There is no indication that the ratio will decline anytime soon, which is particularly worrisome, given the low profitability and high borrowing costs that China’s industrial enterprises face.
Indeed, Chinese firms’ profitability amounted to just over 6% last year, with 2012 profits for China’s 500 largest (mostly state-owned) corporations barely exceeding 2%.
Meanwhile, interest rates on bank loans to nonfinancial enterprises remain close to 7%, despite having fallen slightly over the last year.
And, in the second quarter of this year, the annualized interest rate on loans to small nonfinancial corporations surpassed 25%.
With insufficient profits to use for investment, nonfinancial corporations will become increasingly dependent on external finance.
As their leverage ratios increase, so will their risk premiums, causing their borrowing costs to rise and undermining their profitability further.
This destructive cycle will be difficult to break.
For example, if companies reduce investment, they will weaken growth and boost their leverage ratio further.
To be sure, China overcame a similar challenge in its public sector from 1998 to 2001.
It pursued growth-boosting investment in infrastructure and real-estate development to eliminate deflation, while maintaining artificially low interest rates to contain the rise of public debt.
But a lot has changed since then.
In fact, the investment-led growth model that facilitated double-digit growth in the decade after 2001 has exacerbated structural weaknesses, which must now be addressed.
Indeed, China must stem the pace of real-estate investment, which accounted for more than 13% of GDP in recent years – a move that will undoubtedly lead to slower economic growth and, in turn, reduce the profitability of China’s nonfinancial corporates further.
Moreover, ongoing interest-rate liberalization – which has occurred both openly and surreptitiously – means that artificially low borrowing costs have become far more difficult to maintain.
Though the People’s Bank of China still officially caps interest rates on deposits, commercial banks – in cooperation with nonbank financial institutions, especially trust companies – are using wealth-management products to attract deposits with de facto free-market interest rates.
As a result, the PBOC is losing control over interest rates on corporate loans, and thus has few options for constraining leverage ratios.
Despite these risks, it is too early to bet on a corporate-debt crisis in China.
For starters, no one knows at what corporate leverage ratio a crisis will be triggered.
In 1996, when Japan’s public debt/GDP ratio reached 80%, many Japanese economists and officials worried about a looming crisis.
Almost two decades later, the ratio has surpassed 200% – and still no crisis has erupted.
Furthermore, China has not yet completed its market-orientated reforms, which could unleash major growth potential in many areas.
Given the role that institutional factors play in China’s corporate-debt problem, such reforms could go a long way toward resolving it.
China’s leaders should take advantage of this respite from instability and low confidence to redouble their reform efforts.
Otherwise, they can expect alarm bells to begin ringing again – and, next time, they may not have the tools they need to silence them.
The Enigma of European Defense
PARIS – While Europe’s citizens largely support the establishment of a common security and defense policy, most European leaders have demonstrated a clear lack of interest in creating one – including at last month’s European Council meeting.
What accounts for this paradox?
One possible explanation is that financially strained European governments lack the means to fulfill their citizens’ expectations.
But that is unconvincing, given that the issue was framed in almost identical terms three decades ago, when budgetary constraints were not a problem.
In fact, it could be argued that such constraints should spur, not impede, the creation of a European defense structure.
After all, member countries would then be able to pool their resources, harmonize programs, and rationalize costs, thereby reducing individual governments’ financial burden.
Another, far more credible explanation is that Europeans’ interpretations of “a more active and stronger security policy” differ widely.
Indeed, current discussions in Europe concerning the use of force are dominated by three main perspectives, championed by France, the United Kingdom, and Germany.
France, which has once again intervened in Africa – this time to restore order in the Central African Republic – is the only European Union country that seems genuinely interested in satisfying popular demand for more robust European security structures.
The French consider Europe to be a kind of superpower – a status that implies a corresponding military capacity.
While this view probably stems from France’s historical political and military prowess, it also reflects the country’s current interests.
As Europe’s greatest military power (despite the UK’s larger defense budget), France would play a key role in any wide-ranging European military operation.
The UK, for its part, shares France’s belief that military power is a prerequisite to strategic effectiveness.
It claims that its opposition to a European defense structure stems from its belief that NATO – and thus the United States – is critical to European defense.
But, given that no other EU country has seriously considered excluding NATO, this argument seems to be little more than an excuse.
The truth is that the only kind of defense the British accept is that conducted by a coalition of European states acting under their national flags, as occurred in Libya.
In the UK’s view, “European” operations should be limited to humanitarian and peacekeeping objectives.
While it supported the fight against piracy off the Horn of Africa, that was more a policing operation than a military one, and it was guided by a shared interest in protecting trade routes from the Middle East and Asia.
Germany’s vision of European defense is very different from the French and British perspectives.
Unlike the UK, Germany supports a European security and defense policy, proudly highlighting its consistent military budget and major presence in European missions (larger than that of the overstretched French).
And, though Germany shares the UK’s belief that NATO bears primary responsibility for protecting Europe, its view of European engagement is even more restrictive.
In Germany’s view, European military intervention should be limited to the continent, and should not include combat operations.
In fact, a majority of Europe’s citizens prefer that European forces be deployed only for non-combat missions.
And, so far, virtually all European military operations have been aimed at evacuating European nationals, delivering humanitarian aid, or maintaining peace in the aftermath of conflict.
These differing views explain the uncertainty surrounding France’s recent interventions in Africa.
The French have lamented the miniscule support offered by the rest of Europe for its operations in Mali and the Central African Republic – exemplified by Germany’s refusal to create a fund for EU member-state operations.
But, given the urgency of the situations in Libya, Mali, and the Central African Republic, this lack of support has not undermined France’s efforts as much as prior consultation with European leaders would have done.
Had the Germans been consulted, they probably would have rejected the interventions anyway.
This conflict between the need for rapid response and the requirement for deliberation explains why the EU’s much-discussed “battlegroups” are unlikely ever to be deployed.
The fact that most Europeans are satisfied with limited political and military involvement outside of Europe makes increased defense cooperation even less likely.
A pessimist would say that Europeans are unable – or at least unwilling – to rethink their defense policy, because the US ultimately ensures their security through NATO.
According to this view, France’s efforts to encourage both transatlantic integration and autonomous political action are insufficient to change most Europeans’ minds.
A more optimistic interpretation is that Europe needs defense structures that account for the role of member states – not just for that of the EU.
From this perspective, Europe does have a significant military presence, whether in Afghanistan and Libya or Mali and the Central African Republic.
That is a start.
The GDP-Wellbeing Gap
KUALA LUMPUR – The link between economic growth and human wellbeing seems obvious.
Indeed, as measured by gross domestic product, economic growth is widely viewed as the ultimate development objective.
But it is time to rethink this approach.
In fact, there is a rising disconnect between countries’ per capita GDP and their citizens’ wellbeing, as rapid output growth exacerbates health challenges and erodes environmental conditions.
Given this, people increasingly value non-material wealth just as highly as monetary wealth, if not more.
But persuading policymakers and politicians of GDP’s limitations is no easy feat.
After all, it is far simpler to defend a well-understood, long-accepted framework than it is to champion a new worldview.
To be sure, GDP provides valuable information about a country’s production, expenditure, and income streams, as well as the flow of goods across borders.
Moreover, it has provided crucial guidance to countries, helping them to track economic gains that have improved citizens’ quality of life considerably – in many cases lifting them out of destitution.
But GDP fails to account for changes in a country’s stock of assets, making it difficult for policymakers to balance economic, social, and environmental concerns.
Without better measures of wellbeing – including health, education, and the state of the natural environment – policymakers cannot gain the insights that they need to ensure the long-term health of the economy and the individuals who comprise it.
This imperative underpins the concept of “sustainable development,” which has gradually gained acceptance since its introduction in the mid-1980’s.
But, even as countries have recognized the need for a more comprehensive understanding of development, they have largely retained GDP growth as their central objective.
This has to change.
Even US-based Nobel laureate Simon Kuznets, the depression-era father of GDP, said in 1934 that, “the welfare of a nation can scarcely be inferred from a measure of national income.”
The good news is that a robust, simple, and effective framework for measuring sustainability already exists.
Developed by a group of leading economists, including the Nobel laureate Kenneth Arrow and Partha Dasgupta of the University of Cambridge, it assesses an economy’s income flows in the context of its stocks of assets, including human and natural capital.
In other words, it accounts for the economy’s productive base, rather than just its monetary wealth.
Based on this framework, United Nations University and the UN Environment Program unveiled the Inclusive Wealth Report (IWR) at the 2012 Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro.
By providing a long-term comparison between GDP and “inclusive wealth” for 20 countries, the report aimed to motivate policymakers to take a more comprehensive, longer-term view of their economies’ development.
This November, a second IWR will be released, with many more countries represented and a stronger focus on human capital in national-account indicators.
To this end, collaborating experts will convene in Malaysia this month for a series of meetings, culminating in a public symposium entitled “Beyond Gross Domestic Product – Transitioning into Sustainability.”
Transforming the world’s understanding of economic development requires a dynamic approach.
Experts in various fields – including economics, sociology, psychology, and the natural sciences – must work together to develop an integrated suite of indicators that provides a comprehensive picture of humanity’s productive base, on which people’s ability to pursue their interpretation of success depends.
While final decisions should rest with policymakers and citizens, the process must be guided by the best available science, uncompromised by political demands or vested interests.
Moreover, one fundamental truth must be recognized: the planet cannot accommodate high-income status for all seven billion of its inhabitants.
For every country to attain per capita GDP of $13,000 (which, according to the World Bank, delineates high-income status), global GDP would need to rise from roughly $72 trillion today to $91 trillion.
If, however, we already use the equivalent of 1.5 earths to provide the resources we consume and to absorb our waste, the planet can sustainably support a GDP of only $48-50 trillion.
And if the planet already exceeds its sustainable carrying capacity, we should be reducing our demands on it – not adding new ones.
Simply put, we can no longer depend on GDP growth, and the limitless wealth accumulation that it implies, to solve our social and economic problems.
The world must align its value systems with this reality.
We must learn to do more with less, decouple economic growth from resource consumption, and nurture the social and spiritual aspects of our existence.
This shift will be impossible without fundamental changes to our education systems, political structures, and institutions.
It is a tall order, but our future depends on fulfilling it.
Zika and Reproductive Rights
NEW YORK – Mosquitoes know no boundaries, and neither does fear.
As public-health experts grapple with the Zika virus, panic continues to spread around the world.
Yet the crisis has brought to light two important truths.
The first revelation is how badly degraded public health systems have become, across Latin America and beyond.
This did not happen by chance.
In large part, it is the result of pressure on developing countries by concessionary lenders, such as the International Monetary Fund, to cut social sector expenses, including health spending, beginning in 1980.
In Brazil and elsewhere, state authorities could have deployed well-known and cost-effective measures to control mosquito-borne diseases, but they did not.
Their most affected citizens, who tend to be poor, have been forced to live with the consequences.
Second, the Zika epidemic has revealed, with particular poignancy, another dire threat to public health: the denial of women’s reproductive rights.
Governments are shirking their responsibility in this regard too, often in a grotesque manner.
The reported spike in cases of microcephaly – a birth defect – among infants in Zika-affected areas led the governments of Brazil, Colombia, Ecuador, and El Salvador to warn their female citizens “not to become pregnant.”
This message, which places the blame and burden of the Zika epidemic on women, is as unjust as it is unreasonable.
It is also toothless, as many women in the region do not have access to contraception or safe abortions.
The Zika crisis has highlighted an obvious reality: Not providing women with reproductive health information and services places their lives – and those of their children – at grave risk.
Latin America’s abortion laws are among the world’s most restrictive.
El Salvador, for example, bans abortion in all circumstances and has incarcerated women who have gone to emergency rooms after miscarriages, charging them with seeking illegal abortions.
Contraception can also be expensive or difficult to access across the region, despite high rates of teenage rape and pregnancy.
The result, especially with the addition of the Zika virus, is a recipe for tragedy.
Brazil, the Latin American country hit hardest by the virus so far, is emblematic of the problem: Abortion is allowed only in cases of rape, danger to the woman’s life, or in the case of fetal anencephaly (the absence of a major portion of the brain).
In response to the Zika crisis, Brazil should immediately allow abortion in cases of suspected microcephaly as well.
The loosening of restrictions, however, should not stop there.
Over the last few years, conservatives in the Brazilian Congress have been trying to place limits on abortion in cases of rape.
These efforts – which demonstrate complete disregard for the rights and dignity of women – must end.
Instead, women’s right to seek an abortion should be expanded – and quickly.
Governments must also ensure that services are accessible and affordable.
Wealthy Brazilian women can afford to pay private health providers for safe abortions.
Poor women are forced to resort to poorly trained and equipped providers who operate in unsanitary conditions, sometimes as part of criminal networks.
In September 2014, two women died in Rio de Janeiro following clandestine abortions.
In the region overall, 95% of abortions are unsafe.
In Latin America and the Caribbean, 62% of women aged 15-49 want to avoid a pregnancy.
But nearly a quarter of these women are not using an effective method of birth control.
Expense is only one barrier for poor women and girls; another is the lack of information.
Men and women need comprehensive sexuality education, so they are informed about their reproductive health and family planning options and know where they can get modern contraceptives.
Recent evidence suggesting that Zika might be transmitted sexually adds extra urgency to making male and female condoms and other contraceptives widely available.
The movement for reproductive rights has a long history in Brazil and in other parts of Latin America.
Over the last several months – even before Zika – feminists had been taking to the streets in outrage at the lack of access to safe and legal abortions.
The Zika crisis may mark a turning point in the fight for women’s health and equality.
It is certainly a wake-up call for governments everywhere to rebuild and strengthen public health systems, and to guarantee all women and girls access to contraceptives and safe abortions.
Women and girls around the world know the alternative – and it is terrifying.
Zimbabwe\u0027s Last Chance
As the world rooted for former United Nations Secretary General Kofi Annan in his recent efforts to end the violence in Kenya, many also found themselves wondering whether a weary Annan, or some other global leader, will be battling another fire by the end of this month: this time in Zimbabwe.
Zimbabwe’s upcoming elections, scheduled for March 29, offer both fear and hope to the millions trapped in or trying to escape the country’s hellish conditions.
Even official data now put the inflation rate at more than 100,000%, and the plight of ordinary Zimbabweans grows more desperate by the day.
The elections could bring Zimbabweans a chance to end the long dictatorship of President Robert Mugabe.
But, without supervision, they will be held in an environment that could dash Zimbabweans’ hopes.
Zimbabweans are denied their basic freedoms and subjected to violence.
Torture is widespread.
Civil society groups report the arrests of opposition electoral candidates, the manipulation of food supplies for political purposes, and violent incidents of voter intimidation.
The Zimbabwe Election Support Network has also expressed concern about the country’s state of readiness for this complex election, which will combine presidential, parliamentary, senatorial, and local government contests.
And this is to say nothing of the structural faults that continue to impede political progress – a defective constitution, censored media, and a partisan security and military establishment.
It didn’t have to be this way.
This past year has seen one missed opportunity after another.
South African president Thabo Mbeki convened negotiations with Zimbabwe’s political groups; but they have been so unfruitful that opposition leaders recently all but accused Mbeki of lying to the world about the progress of the talks.
Some African leaders – notably Ghana’s president, John Kufuor, and outgoing African Union head Alpha Konare – have tried to cajole Mugabe towards reform, to no avail.
Perhaps more significantly, the international community’s failure to address Zimbabwe seriously shows, once again, that it lacks the political will to prevent foreseeable crises.
Last year, UN Secretary General Ban Ki-moon and UN High Commissioner for Human Rights Louise Arbour condemned the regime’s use of torture and its mistreatment of pro-democracy forces.
Regrettably, the UN failed to follow up with institutional action.
The UN would say it must be invited into a country before it can take certain forms of action, such as sending official election observers.
But it is also true that with adequate political will, the UN Security Council could live up to its responsibility to Zimbabweans by responding to the crisis more aggressively.
The UN should have put Mugabe on the defensive with a forceful public offer to help Zimbabwe prepare for internationally supervised elections.
Instead, the UN continues to defer to Mugabe, who hides behind claims of sovereignty while jailing a defenseless populace.
With so many lives at stake, what can be done to avert an intensification of the Zimbabwe crisis?
People of good will throughout the world, including those affiliated with multilateral organizations like the UN, should descend on Zimbabwe to observe this month’s elections.
Accredited or not, they should stand in solidarity with the people of Zimbabwe at this crucial moment, act as witnesses to the deteriorating pre-election environment, and serve as a bulwark against any escalation of state brutality during and after the vote.
Mugabe would prefer to limit the presence of international observers to those sent by neighboring states – the same allies that somehow managed to deem the violent and fraudulent elections of the past seven years “legitimate.”
Zimbabwe’s neighbors also face a choice: they can use their proximity to halt Mugabe’s abuses, or to shield him from international scrutiny and rebuke.
Their choice may depend on what the world demands of them.
The people of Zimbabwe will play their part on March 29.
Habeas corpus, Latin for “you have the body,” is an old English common law principle incorporated into the US Constitution to ensure freedom from unlawful detention by the state.
It was and continues to be a critical check against the imprisonment of individuals without oversight by independent courts.
In Zimbabwe, this right – like so many other checks and balances – has been torn away by a repressive state.
Just hours before the US Supreme Court ruling, Tendai Biti, the Secretary-General of the opposition Movement for Democratic Change (MDC), was arrested upon his return to Zimbabwe.
Despite immediate attempts by his lawyers to locate him, his whereabouts remained unknown for days.
The police dismissed an initial court order demanding that Biti be produced before the court.
After Biti was finally produced before the court days later, the government announced that he will be charged with treason – which carries the death penalty – for unofficially announcing the results of the March 29, 2008, elections.  Prior to his detention, Biti had responded to such allegations by stating that his only crime was to fight for democracy in Zimbabwe.
It is unlikely that he will be able to challenge the basis of his detention in an independent court.
Since 1999, the MDC has offered a democratic alternative to President Robert Mugabe’s regime.
In the most recent elections, Zimbabweans made their choice known, despite serious obstacles and widespread repression, with the MDC’s presidential candidate, Morgan Tsvangirai, gaining more votes than Mugabe.
But, according to the vote counts released by the government after a suspicious month-long delay, the MDC’s margin of victory – 48% to 43% – fell short of the 50% required to avoid a run-off election. 
Biti is not the only MDC member to be “disappeared” for a period of time by Mugabe’s government.
Over the past two years, police and government-supported paramilitaries have routinely jailed, beaten, and even killed MDC officials and suspected MDC members.
Last year, Biti was detained and beaten along with Tsvangirai and dozens of other MDC officials.
The photos of Tsvangirai’s pummeled body led to an international outcry.
State-sponsored violence against the MDC and its supporters has escalated as the June 27 run-off vote draws near. Just weeks ago, Biti described the discovery of the mutilated body of Tonderai Ndira, an MDC youth leader.
Ndira had been taken by the police from his home.
He was missing for seven days; when his body was found, it was recognizable only by a bracelet he always wore. 
Here in our offices in Johannesburg, we have two Zimbabwean lawyers who fled their country after receiving death threats for their work defending human rights.
At least five of their clients have been murdered in the past few weeks.
Most recently, the Zimbabwean police suspended the work of numerous human rights organizations that were documenting the recent violence.
It is hard to imagine that a free and fair election can take place against the backdrop of such intense and systemic violence.
Indeed, even South African president Thabo Mbeki, who, despite an outcry from many of his citizens, has supported Mugabe, felt compelled to label it a “cause for serious concern.”
In the majority opinion in Boumediene v. Bush , Justice Anthony Kennedy wrote that “Liberty and security can be reconciled; and in our system they are reconciled within the framework of the law.”
But there is no rule of law left in Zimbabwe – no habeas corpus and no check on arbitrary state action.
It is time for the international community to step in, call for an end to the detention and disappearance of MDC officials and perceived supporters, and push for a democratic transition in Zimbabwe.
Only then can the principles underlying the Supreme Court’s decision come within reach of ordinary Zimbabweans.
Zoellick to the Rescue?
Will newly anointed World Bank President Robert Zoellick be able to get the organization back on its feet after the catastrophic failed presidency of Paul Wolfowitz?
Although hardly a megawatt star of the Bob Rubin category, he certainly brings some positive attributes to the job.
First, as a key player in bringing China into the World Trade Organization, Zoellick is a proven internationalist in an American administration where internationalists have sometimes seemed like an endangered species.
Second, he is a firm believer in the power of markets and free trade, which have clearly done far more to alleviate poverty over the past half-century than any aid program.
Third, he seems to have been a consistent behind-the-scenes supporter of the Bank, whereas many of his Bush administration colleagues would be just as happy to see it shut down and its Washington headquarters turned into private condominiums and offices.
So presumably he has a constructive vision for the Bank’s future.
But Zoellick is not without his weaknesses.
First and foremost, his appointment extends the embarrassingly outmoded practice of always installing an American in the job.
With the Bank tirelessly preaching the merits of good governance, its failure to adopt democratic principles undercuts its own legitimacy.
The claim that the World Bank needs an American president to ensure that the US keeps donating money is ridiculous.
The annual cost of the US contribution to the World Bank, even taking into account off-the-books loan guarantees, is relatively minor.
Any number of developing countries, from China to India to Brazil, could easily step up if the US foolishly stepped down.
Zoellick’s background as a lawyer hardly makes him perfect for the job, either.
The World Bank presidency is not about negotiating treaties, as Zoellick did when he was US Trade Representative.
The Bank’s most important role in development today is as a “knowledge bank” that helps aggregate, distill, and disseminate best practices from around the world.
In this respect, the Bank’s technical assistance to governments is very similar to what private consultants offer to companies.
Moreover, many of the World Bank president’s most important decisions involve economics in an essential way.
Wrong economic decisions, such as in the 1970’s, when Robert McNamara pushed grandiose, but environmentally devastating, infrastructure projects, have haunted the Bank for decades.
The biggest question mark, though, is whether Zoellick will be able to hit the ground running and implement desperately needed reforms.
Reform number one, of course, is to ensure that the next World Bank President is not an American.
Rodrigo de Rato, Zoellick’s counterpart at the European-dominated International Monetary Fund, has already suggested that his successor should be chosen in a more inclusive process.
The World Bank should be ashamed that its president has not yet offered a similar proposal.
Second, Zoellick should ask why the Bank spends only 2.5% of its budget on the “knowledge bank” research function that it trumpets so proudly in its external relations materials, while it spends three times that amount on maintaining its executive board.
Third, Zoellick should use his formidable negotiating skills to cajole rich countries into greatly increasing the grant component of World Bank aid.
The idea that a big government-guaranteed global bank is needed to fill holes in private capital markets is laughable nowadays.
True, the Bank’s poorest clients have little access to private capital markets.
By and large, however, the poorest countries need grants, not loans that they still won’t be able to pay in 20 years.
As the Bank switches from loans to grants, it can use some of its massive retained earnings to endow its “knowledge bank” function and related technical advice.
But all this knowledge shouldn’t be free.
A lot of technical advice falls on deaf ears, with countries listening only long enough to get their hands on Bank money.
Instead of merely pushing its agenda, the Bank should start charging for its technical advice on a graduated scale so that more of its engagements are client-driven.
Last but not least, the Bank needs to play a much bigger role in environmental issues and, in general, in promoting good international citizenship by both rich and poor countries.
(Some of us have been proposing this for almost two decades.)
Of course, Zoellick could just attempt to fill the role symbolically and do little or nothing, as some of his predecessors have done.
Or, less likely, he could embrace some megalomaniacal and over-reaching vision of government intervention, as others have tried.
In any case, let’s wish him luck.
The world needs the World Bank a lot more than it needs another condominium.
Zuma Rising
The anxiety over Jacob Zuma’s election as president of South Africa obscures a significant milestone: for the first time in decades, a sub-Saharan nation has at its helm a champion of ordinary people.
African politics has long been the exclusive domain of aristocrats, soldiers, and technocrats.
“We have learned from the mistakes of the past 15 years, especially the manner of which we may have, to some degree, neglected the people’s movement,” he said in April, before his African National Congress swept to victory.
Until now, populism has been the missing note in African political culture.
Zuma, who spent his youth herding cattle and only gained formal education while in the notorious Robben Island prison with Mandela, is refreshingly aware that Africa’s biggest problem is its inequalities, not its global marginalization.
In Africa’s wealthiest nation – but also the nation where wealth is most unequally shared – a bold populist now holds ultimate power over government policy.
Yet, while Zuma’s populist appeal reflects South Africa’s especially large differences in economic class, the threat of imposing higher taxes and other obligations on employers and the wealthy has raised fears at home and internationally.
Moreover, Zuma has been called a chameleon, accused of telling his audiences what they want to hear.
Zuma’s turbulent personal life – many wives and his embarrassing contention during a rape trial that he avoided HIV infection by taking a shower – has invited ridicule.
Most seriously, doubts persist about his commitment to democracy, with critics arguing he’s an old-style African “big man” ready to bully opponents and ravage the public coffers with his cronies.
Dismissing complaints, Zuma insists, “There’s no cloud around me.”
His defenders, meanwhile, point to two benefits that he has already delivered: an end to Mbeki’s ambivalent approach to fighting HIV/AIDS, the country’s major public health threat, and a refreshing willingness to move against Zimbabwe’s aged dictator, Robert Mugabe, whom Mbeki coddled out of a misguided sense of loyalty for his support during the struggle against apartheid.
In an Africa bereft of successful populist politicians, Zuma’s role models may come from Latin America, where income inequality is also extreme and the trade-union movement, as in South Africa, is strong and militant.
With enormous pressure from ordinary people to deliver tangible gains, Zuma the populist will quickly face a major test: will he emulate Lula of Brazil, who has struck an admirable balance between good economic governance and re-distribution of wealth to the poor?
Or will he follow the path of Hugo Chávez, a popular autocrat who seems to prefer building a cult of personality over raising living standards for the poor.
The stakes for Africa are enormous.
South Africa has the continent’s largest economy and, until the global financial crisis, posted 10 years of steady economic growth.
In an economic slowdown, the country’s severe crime problem might only worsen; so might unemployment, which already tops 20% in the formal economy.
Zuma senses the urgency of the situation.
He is, after all, 67 years old and likely to serve only a single term in office.
“We can’t waste time,” he says.
Yet, according to the political economist Moeletsi Mbeki, at his core, “Zuma is a conservative.”
In this sense, Zuma represents yesterday’s South Africa.
He is part of the proud generation that defeated apartheid – and then peacefully engineered a transition to durable black-majority rule.
Their achievement remains one of the greatest in recent history.
At the same time, Zuma’s revolutionary generation still seems uneasy leading South Africa in a post-apartheid era that is now 15 years old.
In a region that reveres the elderly, Zuma’s attachment to his rural traditions must be matched by an equal openness to the appetites of the country’s youth.
Three in ten South Africans are younger than 15, meaning that they did not live a day under apartheid.
Somehow Zuma must find a way to honor his own generation’s commitment to racial justice and national liberation, while empowering the masses who daily suffer the sting of class differences and yearn for material gain.