According to a 2003 report, conditions have worsened since Dr. Vasseur's report, and France's overcrowded prisons are on a "descent to hell."
Particularly troubling is France's protracted incarceration of pre-trial suspects.
In a country that regards itself as a civilized counterweight to belligerent American hegemony, nearly half of all prisoners have never been convicted of a crime.
Why do prisons the world over concentrate such suffering and misconduct?
Partly by design.
Prisons herd together angry, unruly people against their will.
While the best facilities provide programs to help prisoners reintegrate into society, prisons also subject inmates to strict, often arbitrary discipline and depersonalizing rituals like numbering and strip searches - practices that foster more rage than reformation.
On the other side of the bars, low-paid, often poorly trained corrections officers exercise near-absolute authority over an irascible population.
In time, even the most well meaning come to regard their wards with cold detachment, if not dehumanizing contempt.
Not all prisons succumb to these corrosive and polarizing dynamics.
But penologists recognize that certain factors - including overcrowding, insufficient guard training, detached management, shoddy infrastructure, racial tensions, and lack of public accountability - make disaster almost inevitable.
Many of these conditions pervade prisons worldwide.
All of them were present in Iraq - in addition to the strains of combat and officially approved interrogation techniques that senior US officials now admit violated the Geneva Conventions.
Rather than heeding warnings from the Red Cross and others, however, Pentagon officials let dangerous prison dynamics spin out of control.
A flurry of investigations will now try to figure out what went disastrously awry at Abu Ghraib.
But ensuring that "justice is done," as US Secretary of State Colin Powell promised, means that judgment must not stop at the low-ranking soldiers who were foolish enough to pose for demented snapshots.
More importantly, the abuses in Iraq demand careful scrutiny of detention practices not only there, but in our own communities as well.
The Bankers’ Capital War
PARIS – Almost everyone nowadays agrees that banks need more capital.
Christine Lagarde chose to make it her first campaign as Managing Director of the International Monetary Fund.
And conventional analyses of the financial crisis focus on the weak capital base of many banks, which left them with insufficient reserves to absorb the losses they incurred when asset prices fell sharply in 2007-2008.
Taxpayers, notably in the United States and the United Kingdom, were obliged to step in to fill that hole.
The same disaster movie is now playing in the eurozone.
We can only hope that the bankers are eventually rescued from the burning eurotower by Super-Sarkozy and Wonder-Frau Merkel – and that the Basel Committee of Banking Supervisors ensures that there will be no sequel.
The Basel Committee has proposed strengthening considerably both the quantity and the quality of capital in the global banking system.
This would mean much larger core equity capital for all banks and a range of additional reserves – a capital conservation buffer, a countercyclical buffer, and a surcharge for systemically vital institutions – to be added by local regulators as they see fit.
Unfortunately, the final implementation date for these new obligations has been deferred until 2019 – by which point a few banks might still be left standing.
In fact, the view that banks need more capital, while widespread, is not unanimous.
Two notable holdouts are Jamie Dimon and Walter Bagehot.
Dimon, the Chairman and CEO of J.P. Morgan, has been making his contrarian views known to regulators, most recently almost coming to blows, according to eyewitnesses, in a spat with Governor of the Bank of Canada Mark Carney, who chairs a group that is designing parts of the new regime.
Walter Bagehot is in no position to threaten Carney, or any other regulator.
He died in 1877.
But in his great work on finance, Lombard Street, published in 1873, he asserted that, “A well-run bank needs no capital.
No amount of capital will rescue a badly run bank.”
I expect that Dimon, who has steered Morgan through the crisis without the need for public support, would say “amen.”
Of course, regulators cannot easily require all banks to be “well-run” in Bagehot’s sense.
So banks require capital as a backstop.
It is not a bad substitute for perfect judgment, and at least it can be defined and measured.
But how much capital is enough?
Even if, at heart, they take the Bagehot view, all bankers recognize that market confidence requires them to demonstrate a more solid capital base to attract wholesale funding, as well as to satisfy the stricter demands of regulators.
But a wide gap has opened up between the financial authorities and the banks on the costs and benefits of the much higher requirements now demanded by Basel.
Basel 3, the Basel Committee’s new global regulatory standard on banks’ capital adequacy and liquidity, will more or less double the equity requirements, and will impose extra costs on banks deemed “too big to fail.”
The Committee’s analysis of the economic consequences found that the impact on growth would be modest, perhaps reducing GDP by 0.33% after five years – easily within the margin of forecast error.
The OECD took a different view, putting the growth impact at about twice that level, and rather higher in Europe, where companies rely far more on bank financing than they do in the US.
In sharp contrast, the Institute of International Finance, the leading trade association for the world’s top banks, believes that the impact of higher capital requirements could be far stronger.
The IIF believes that GDP could be fully 5% lower after five years, with unemployment more than 7% higher.
The IIF’s forecast may seem alarmist, but the competing estimates are based on some intriguing analytical differences.
Regulators take the view that the impact of higher capital requirements on the cost of credit to borrowers will be modest, as the overall cost of funds to banks will not rise much.
They rest their case on the famous Modigliani-Miller theorem, which implies that a company cannot alter its capital cost by changing the balance between equity and debt on its balance sheet.
If there is more equity, then logically debt should be cheaper, as the company (or bank) is better insulated from default.
Bankers accept that, in the long run, the theorem might hold, but argue that it will take time, especially given recent events, to persuade investors that banks are genuinely safer, and that their shares should be thought of as closer to utility stocks, yielding a lower return.
Indeed, Franco Modigliani also argued that investors have a “preferred habitat,” and that coaxing them out of it carries some cost.
That does not bode well for banks, which have been a very poor investment in the last few years.
Moreover, the banks assume that they will need to hold more capital than regulators ostensibly require in order to maintain a margin of safety.
These assessments are unusually divergent.
Though economists are notoriously disputatious, their estimates do not often differ by a factor of ten.
It would be wise, before the rules are set in stone, to refer the issue to the World Institute for the Resolution of Economic Disputes in Baltimore, or “The Wire.”
Unfortunately, there is no such institute, in Baltimore or anywhere else.
There is no one who can offer a timely and, above all, authoritative view on which forecast is the more compelling scenario.
The stakes of not knowing are very high.
The Banking Conundrum
BARCELONA – Central bankers and regulators tend to worry that too much competition in the financial sector increases instability and the risk of systemic failure.
Competition authorities, on the other hand, tend to believe that the more competition, the better.
Both can’t be right.
There is a trade-off between competition and stability.
Indeed, greater competitive pressure may increase the fragility of banks’ balance sheets and make investors more prone to panics.
It may also erode the charter value of institutions.
A bank with thin margins and limited liability does not have much to lose, and will tend to gamble – a tendency that is exacerbated by deposit insurance and too-big-to-fail policies.
The result will be more incentives to assume risk.
Indeed, for banks close to the failure point in liberalized systems, the evidence of perverse risk-taking incentives is overwhelming.
That is why crises began to increase in number and severity after financial systems in the developed world started to liberalize in the 1970’s, beginning in the United States.
This new vulnerability stands in stark contrast to the stability of the over-regulated post-World War II period.
The crises in the US in the 1980’s (caused by the savings-and-loan institutions known as “thrifts”), and in Japan and Scandinavia in the 1990’s, showed that financial liberalization without proper regulation induces instability.
In an ideal world, the competition-stability trade-off could be regulated away with sophisticated risk-based insurance mechanisms, credible liquidation and resolution procedures, contingent convertibles, and capital requirements with charges for systemic institutions.
The problem is that regulation is unlikely to eliminate completely market failures: the competition-stability trade-off can be ameliorated, but not eliminated.
For example, the United Kingdom’s Independent Commission on Banking (ICB) has proposed ring-fencing retail activities from investment-banking activities in separately capitalized divisions of a bank holding company.
This is a compromise aimed at minimizing the incentive to gamble with public insurance while allowing some economies of scale for banking activities.
But the devil is in the details, and, even in the most optimistic scenario, the trade-off between competition and stability will remain.
One shortcoming of the measure consists in the fact that the crisis has hit both universal and specialized banks.
Furthermore, the definition of the boundary between retail and investment-banking activities will leave an important grey area and generate perverse incentives.
And the regulatory boundary problem persists: risky activities may migrate to areas where regulation is lax and reproduce the problems with the shadow banking system that we have witnessed during the crisis.
As a result, investment-banking operations might need to be rescued if they pose a systemic threat.
The massive regulatory failure exposed by the financial crisis that began in 2008 underscores the need to concentrate on reforms that provide the correct incentives to banks.
But, if the past is any guide to the future, we should be aware of the limits of regulation.
The UK’s ICB has rightly stated that there is room to improve both competition and stability, given the current weak regulatory framework, but it would be imprudent to strive for the complete elimination of market power in banking.
The design of optimal regulation has to take into account the intensity of competition in the different banking segments.
For example, capital charges should account for the degree of friction and rivalry in the banking sector, with tighter requirements in more competitive contexts.
It follows, then, that prudential regulation and competition policy in banking should be coordinated.
This is all the more true in crisis situations, in which a protocol of collaboration should be implemented to delineate liquidity help from recapitalization, and to establish the conditions for restructuring in order to avoid competitive distortions.
What implications does this have for market structure?
Concentration in well-defined deposit and loan markets is linked with competitive pressure.
In more concentrated markets, banks tend to offer worse terms to customers.
The crisis has affected both concentrated banking systems (for example, the UK and the Netherlands) and non-concentrated systems (e.g., the US and Germany).
In both cases, it has brought consolidation, leaving fewer players with increased market power and too-big-to-fail status.
Witness the takeover by Lloyds TSB of the troubled HBOS (Halifax/Bank of Scotland) in the UK, or post-crisis consolidation in the US.
All this would not be so problematic if the increased market power of the merged institutions were a temporary reward for past prudent behavior.
In that case, the benefits would wane in importance as new competitors entered the banking fray.
But if banks’ market power increases due to barriers to entry, consumers and investors will suffer.
An active competition policy will be needed.
But the degree to which the authorities will be able to push for more competition in banking will depend crucially on the regulatory framework.
Let us fix and strengthen that framework, while bearing in mind that a simple mandate to maximize competitive pressure in banking is no more possible, or desirable, than one that would aim at eliminating instability completely.
Central Banking’s New Face
LONDON – A changing of the guard is underway at many of the world’s leading central banks.
Haruhiko Kuroda is now installed as the governor of the Bank of Japan (BOJ), faced with the daunting task of ending two decades of stagnation.
Mark Carney, the Bank of Canada’s current governor, who is set to take over as the governor of the Bank of England (BoE) in July, is already making his presence felt in British monetary-policy debates.
And in the United States, the expected conclusion of Ben Bernanke’s term as Chairman of the Federal Reserve Board in January is already inviting speculation about his successor.
The only holdouts among the world’s leading economies are the eurozone and China.
But that does not necessarily imply constancy.
Mario Draghi has been the president of the European Central Bank for barely a year, and the governor of the People’s Bank of China, Zhou Xiaochuan, was almost replaced when he reached retirement age in February.
Twenty years ago, such developments would have interested mostly bankers and businesspeople.
But, since the global financial crisis, the need to revive and sustain economic growth in the US, the United Kingdom, and Japan – and to avoid financial collapse in the eurozone – has prompted major central banks to be more outspoken and pursue more aggressive monetary policies, including unconventional measures like quantitative easing (QE).
As a result, many central bankers have become household names; some even have tabloid nicknames, like “super Mario” Draghi.
This new prominence has also forced some central bankers to reassess their decision-making processes.
In Japan, outsiders recently got a rare glimpse into the BOJ’s activities when minutes of a policy meeting were leaked.
Likewise, the accidental release a day early of the minutes from the Fed’s March rate-setting meeting to more than 100 people, including banking executives, congressional aides, and bank lobbyists, raised questions about how the bank controls the disclosure of privileged information.
In fact, the Fed has been under increasing scrutiny since 2008, when near-zero nominal interest rates drove it to become the first central bank to adopt QE.
In a push to reduce the cost of borrowing, the Fed purchased long-term assets in the market, injecting liquidity into the financial system.
The BoE and the ECB have since adopted similar measures.
In early April, the BOJ announced plans to unleash the most aggressive bond-buying program of all, promising to inject $1.4 trillion into the economy over the next two years in order to meet an inflation target of 2%.
This is monetary policy on steroids, and, to opponents of inflation-inducing money creation, it amounts to playing with fire.
But, for Japan, which has been struggling with deflation for a generation, it is a risk worth taking.
Whether Kuroda’s assault will bolster domestic consumption and investment remains to be seen.
Unconventional measures are part of a broader transformation of monetary policymaking.
In addition to becoming bolder and more expansive, it has become increasingly intertwined with fiscal policy.
This is most explicit in Japan, where monetary policy is a central component of Prime Minister Shinzo Abe’s economic strategy, dubbed “Abenomics,” implying collaboration between the government and the central bank.
Does this undermine central-bank independence by amounting to a de facto subordination of unelected technocrats to elected politicians?
Arguably, Japan is an exceptional case, with the constraint of the zero bound on nominal interest rates demanding, at long last, a deviation from conventional measures.
In Europe, however, Bundesbank President Jens Weidmann has criticized the ECB for overstepping its mandate with its “outright monetary transactions” program, through which Draghi aims to fulfill his pledge to guarantee the euro’s survival.
As a result, questions about the role of monetary policy and the independence and accountability of central banks, once confined to rarefied academic discussions, are fixtures of broad policy debate.
But, rather than try to define a single approach, central bankers should aim to develop individualized approaches within the orthodox monetary-policy framework, which revolves around price stability and independence.
For example, the Fed’s mandate dictates that price stability can be explicitly linked to active support for GDP growth and employment; for the BoE and the ECB, it can be a condition for achieving the broader goal of sustainable growth and employment.
As long as politicians observe the rule of non-interference – at least publicly – central banks will be perceived as unconstrained by political interests.
The BOJ, by demonstrating that aggressive money creation is a legitimate approach to fighting deflation, has broken previously sacrosanct conventions.
At the same time, it has taken the unprecedented step of incorporating monetary policy into a comprehensive economic strategy based on coordination among different policy areas and their associated institutions.
This integrated approach could prove effective in countries where the real economy and the financial sector are closely linked, ensuring the timely, orderly implementation of policies, while preventing adverse spillovers.
Such coordination would infringe on central-bank independence no more than multilateral cooperation undermines the sovereignty of the countries involved.
While the impact of Abenomics on Japan’s economy remains to be seen, its impact on debates about monetary policy and the relationship between central banks and governments is already becoming apparent.
One hopes that Carney will follow this trend of challenging conventional wisdom at the BoE.
A new era of active and varied monetary policy may have begun, with potential benefits for all.
The Battle for Churchill’s Bust
NEW YORK – The election of the United States’ next president is surely the most important contest in the democratic world.
Yet the issues being contested can seem awfully trivial.
Consider, for instance, the question of Winston Churchill’s bust.
A bronze sculpture of the British prime minister had been in the Oval Office of the White House since the 1960’s.
On becoming President, Barack Obama replaced it with a bust of Abraham Lincoln.
Mitt Romney, his Republican opponent in November’s election, has vowed to restore it if he wins.
Then a White House spokesman said that the bust was still on the premises, just in a different room, whereupon the story changed once more: there were apparently two busts of Churchill; one still in the White House, and one that Obama returned to the British embassy.
Why would anyone care about this?
One answer was provided by two of Mitt Romney’s advisers, who stated that their candidate particularly valued the “special relationship” with Britain because of the shared “Anglo-Saxon heritage.”
This heritage, they claimed, was not sufficiently “appreciated” by the current president.
When this bizarre statement, with its racist undertones, threatened to become a scandal, Romney quickly distanced himself from it.
He did not want to be seen as a racist.
But how else is his peculiar nostalgia for Churchill’s bust to be understood?
In fact, the phrase “Anglo-Saxon” is not often heard any more in the US, where the majority of the population has not been of Anglo-Saxon origin for a long time (which is also true of Britain’s largest cities).
When Americans use the term, it is usually to differentiate white Americans from the rest, which is not something that most Americans, least of all presidential candidates, would now choose to do in public.
“Anglo-Saxon” is more often used in a negative sense by the French, as in “Anglo-Saxon bankers” or “Anglo-Saxon conspiracies” (to keep the French down).
Just recently Le Monde had the wonderful headline: “[President] Hollande Defends French Foie Gras against Anglo-Saxon lobbies” (the reference was to California’s ban on foie gras under its animal-cruelty laws).
Even Churchill himself did not speak of Anglo-Saxons much.
He talked about “the British race” or the “English-speaking peoples.”
The so-called “special relationship” between Britain and the US, certainly prized by Churchill, was not so much racial as it was a product of World War II – and a rather complicated one at that.
During the war, Churchill and Roosevelt shared the idea that once Germany and Japan were defeated, British and US military forces should act as global policemen.
They believed that the world would be safe from future Hitlers if it were, at least for some time, under the enlightened leadership of the democratic English-speaking peoples.
By the end of the war, however, Britain was too exhausted to police the world.
The country was bankrupt and His Majesty’s colonial subjects were growing restive.
The future belonged to the US and the Soviet Union, neither of which had sentimental feelings about the British Empire, let alone the “Anglo-Saxons.”
But the British elite, fully aware of their country’s decline, took the “special relationship” with the US very seriously, for it was the only way for Britain to feel like it was still a major power, unlike, say, France.
They still do.
Churchill certainly saw it that way, but so did Tony Blair, who presented President George W. Bush with the second Churchill bust.
Americans, on the whole, have far less interest than the British in the “special relationship.”
But they are often sentimental about Churchill.
He is the man whom many American presidents would like to emulate, not because of any racial affinities, but because of his allure as a wartime leader.
The US is the strongest military power in the world, just as Britain was in Churchill’s youth.
And, like British empire-builders in the past, US elites often claim a moral mission to remake the world in America’s image.
Churchill, in other words, became a symbol of presidential hubris in the US, even as the “special relationship” can be viewed as a symbol of British decline.
People tend to forget that Rudyard Kipling’s famous poem about “the white man’s burden” was not an ode to the British Empire, but to the US colonial enterprise in the Philippines.
Too much power corrupts, as we all know.
Hubristic presidents contemplating Churchill’s bust in their office are prone to believe that they have been called upon to be “war presidents” – that they, like Churchill in 1940, must oppose the next Hitler.
This siren song drew the US into Vietnam, Afghanistan, and Iraq.
So, when Obama decided to remove Churchill’s bust from his office in 2008, this struck me as a very sensible gesture.
A little less hubris would do the US, as well as the world, some good.
But now Romney wants him back.
Whatever else he might be, Romney does not come across as a convincing war leader.
Businessmen rarely are.
Yet he likes to portray himself as a tough patriot, and Obama as an un-American wimp.
Perhaps Romney wants another war, in which he can play Churchill.
Or perhaps his two advisers were speaking the truth.
Maybe Romney really is feeling sentimental about the “Anglo-Saxon heritage,” even as Asian power grows.
If so, nostalgia for Churchill is hardly a sign of American vitality, but more like a romantic rearguard battle, typical of a country in decline.
The Battle for Hope
PARIS – Since the arrival of President Barack Obama in the White House, there has been an undeniable rapprochement between Europe and the United States.
But on the deeper and more fundamental level of emotions and values, is it possible that the gap between the two sides of the Atlantic has widened?
Today, there is much more collective hope and much more individual fear in America in the wake of the global economic crisis.
But the reverse is true in Europe.
Here one encounters less collective hope and less individual fear.
The reason for this contrast is simple: the US has Obama, and Europe has the welfare state.
So what can be done to promote an “Americanization” of Europe in political terms and a “Europeanization” of America in social terms?
Comforted by a new President who incarnates a return of hope, who inspires and reassures at the same time, Americans are starting to believe that the worst of the economic crisis is behind them.
What was at the beginning of this spring no more than “a glimmer of hope,” to use Obama’s phrase, has become a more serious and positive trend.
Animated collectively by a combination of natural optimism and deep nationalism, Americans have made their president’s campaign slogan, “Yes, we can,” their own.
By contrast, when the personal situations of many individual Americans are examined through European eyes, the extreme individualism that constitutes a key part of American optimism translates into an unacceptable social scandal.
“Cities of Tents are Filling with the Victims of the Economic Crisis,” read one headline a month ago on the front page of a mass-circulation American newspaper.
Journalists report tragic stories of middle-class Americans losing their jobs and homes, potentially putting their lives at risk without any social protection.
Who will pay for your costly cancer treatment if you lose the health insurance policy that came with your job?
It is wrong to assume, as some ultra-free marketers do, that the absence of social protection makes you stronger.
The ambition of a country and a society born of the principles of the Enlightenment cannot be to create a people armed to the teeth with guns yet entirely disarmed in the face of illness.
Moreover, in a society that “lives to work,” where one’s job is such a central component of one’s identity, the loss of work is more destabilizing than in a culture where one “works to live,” as in Europe.
Americans’ perspective on retirement is highly revealing: they are afraid of it.
What will they do?
This perspective is not simply rooted in economics, even if today a large proportion of older Americans are rushing back to work as the downturn wrecks their retirement plans.
The geographic separation of families, owing to America’s size and Americans’ mobility, makes the association between retirement and being a grandparent less practicable in the US than it is in Europe.
In Europe, meanwhile, there is undeniably less collective hope and probably a little less individual fear.
Perhaps because they are older and more cynical, European societies seem to bask in a “collective moroseness,” from which they have difficulty emerging.
The record level of abstention in the recent European Parliament elections is further proof of that growing cynicism and alienation.
Of course, it is neither possible nor desirable to “clone” Obama in each of the European Union’s 27 member states.
But what is needed to reduce the deficit of hope that plagues Europe today?
The answer is far from obvious.
Europe suffers from a shortage of leaders who can speak in its name; from a shortage of ambition (what, after all, is the collective ambition of Europeans now that the EU is perceived more as part of the problem than part of the solution).
But, above all, Europe suffers from an identity deficit, for no one seems to know what it means to be a European nowadays.
America, by contrast, seems to have an abundance of all the things Europe lacks.
Formulated in such terms, the European challenge seems even more formidable than the American one.
Nevertheless, it is far from clear that the US will find it easier to reform its health and social security system, and thus alleviate the individual fears of its citizens, than for Europe to inspire its citizens with a sense of collective hope.
In reality, Europe and America should represent a source of mutual inspiration that would reduce the human consequences of inequality in the one, and restore a sense of hope in the other.
Turkey’s Class Struggle
NEW YORK – One interpretation of the anti-government demonstrations now roiling Turkish cities is that they are a massive protest against political Islam.
What began as a rally against official plans to raze a small park in the center of Istanbul to make way for a kitschy shopping mall quickly evolved into a conflict of values.
On the surface, the fight appears to represent two different visions of modern Turkey, secular versus religious, democratic versus authoritarian.
Comparisons have been made with Occupy Wall Street.
Some observers even speak of a “Turkish Spring.”
Clearly, many Turkish citizens, especially in the big cities, are sick of Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdoğan’s increasingly authoritarian style, his steely grip on the press, his taste for grandiose new mosques, the restrictions on alcohol, the arrests of political dissidents, and now the violent response to the demonstrations.
People fear that sharia law will replace secular legislation, and that Islamism will spoil the fruits of Kemal Atatürk’s drive to modernize post-Ottoman Turkey.
Then there is the issue of the Alevis, a religious minority linked to Sufism and Shi’ism.
The Alevis, who had been protected by the secular Kemalist state, deeply distrust Erdoğan, who further unsettled them by planning to name a new bridge over the Bosphorus after a sixteenth-century sultan who massacred their forebears.
Religion, then, would seem to be at the heart of the Turkish problem.
Political Islam’s opponents regard it as inherently anti-democratic.
But things are not so simple.
The secular Kemalist state was no less authoritarian than Erdoğan’s populist Islamist regime; if anything, it was more so.
And it is also significant that the first protests in Istanbul’s Taksim Square concerned not a mosque, but a shopping mall.
Fear of sharia law is matched by anger at the rapacious vulgarity of developers and entrepreneurs backed by Erdoğan’s government.
There is a strong leftist bent to the Turkish Spring.
So, rather than dwell on the problems of contemporary political Islam, which are certainly considerable, it might be more fruitful to look at Turkey’s conflicts from another, now distinctly unfashionable, perspective: class.
The protesters, whether they are liberal or leftist, tend to be from the urban elite – Westernized, sophisticated, and secular.
Erdoğan, on the other hand, is still very popular in rural and provincial Turkey, among people who are less educated, poorer, more conservative, and more religious.
Despite Erdoğan’s personal authoritarian tendencies, which are obvious, it would be misleading to regard the current protests purely as a conflict between democracy and autocracy.
After all, the success of Erdoğan’s populist Justice and Development Party, as well as the increasing presence of religious symbols and customs in public life, is a result of more democracy in Turkey, not less.
Customs that the Kemalist secular state suppressed, such as women’s use of headscarves in public places, have reappeared, because rural Turks have more influence.
Young religious women are turning up at urban universities.
The votes of conservative provincial Turks now count.
Likewise, the alliance between businessmen and religious populists is hardly unique to Turkey.
Many of the new entrepreneurs, like the women in headscarves, are from villages in Anatolia.
These newly rich provincials resent the old Istanbul elite as much as businessmen from Texas or Kansas hate the East Coast elites of New York and Washington.
But to say that Turkey has become more democratic is not to say that it has become more liberal.
This is also one of the problems revealed by the Arab Spring.
Giving all people a voice in government is essential to any democracy.
But those voices, especially in revolutionary times, are rarely moderate.
What we see in countries such as Egypt and Turkey – and even in Syria – is what the great British liberal philosopher Isaiah Berlin described as the incompatibility of equal goods.
It is a mistake to believe that all good things always come together.
Sometimes equally good things clash.
So it is in the painful political transitions in the Middle East.
Democracy is good, and so are liberalism and tolerance.
Ideally, of course, they coincide.
But right now, in most parts of the Middle East, they do not.
More democracy can actually mean less liberalism and more intolerance.
It is easy to sympathize with the rebels against Bashar al-Assad’s dictatorship in Syria, for example.
But the upper classes of Damascus, the secular men and women who enjoy Western music and films, some of them members of the Christian and Alawite religious minorities, will have a hard time surviving once Assad is gone.
Baathism was dictatorial and oppressive – often brutally so – but it protected minorities and the secular elites.
But keeping Islamism at bay is not a reason to support dictators.
After all, the violence of political Islam is largely a product of these oppressive regimes.
The longer they stay in power, the more violent the Islamist rebellions will be.
This is no reason to support Erdoğan and his shopping-mall builders against the protesters in Turkey, either.
The demonstrators are right to oppose his haughty disregard of public opinion and his stifling of the press.
But to see the conflict as a righteous struggle against religious expression would be equally mistaken.
Higher visibility for Islam is the inevitable result of more democracy in Muslim-majority countries.
How to stop this from killing liberalism is the most important question facing people in the Middle East.
Turkey is still a democracy.
It is to be hoped that the protests against Erdoğan will make it more liberal, too.
The Battle for Ukraine
The old axioms are true: firmness can pay; resolution can see you through. We who are struggling to maintain our democracy in Ukraine believe this.
Now, more than ever, we must believe this, for Russian troops wearing Ukrainian uniforms have entered our country, because Ukrainian soldiers are refusing to carry out orders to crush those who are demonstrating to defend our democracy.
We will need the solidarity of our neighbors, and of freedom-loving peoples around the world, to assure that our democratic dreams are realized in peace.
The struggle to secure the victory of Viktor Yushchenko, the true winner in last Sunday’s presidential election, as Ukraine’s new president is not one that we sought.
But, that battle for our freedom having been imposed upon us, we will not be found wanting in either courage or resolve.
The days and nights ahead will be difficult, and the secret presence of Russian troops will make them all the more dangerous.
The forces of Prime Minister Viktor Yanukovych foolishly stuffed ballots and intimidated the country’s electoral commission to an absurd degree.
They then tried to force the Ukrainian people to swallow this sham – threatening to ban public gatherings, close our borders to new visa seekers, and silence any word of our protests on television.
More and more members of a governmental machine that thought it could impose a fraudulent election on Ukraine’s people are shying away from imposing that choice by force.
Members of the army, the security services, and government officials are all balking at doing the bidding of the Yanukovych clique. Such a volatile ruling elite cannot be counted on to be consistent from now on.
The way ahead is a minefield.
We recognize that an unstable government can swing back to uncompromising intransigence. It will try to erode our support by infiltrating our protests with loyalists who will carry the virus of defeatism, and it will seek to outflank us by appealing to ordinary, hard-working Ukrainians, worried about feeding and clothing their children, that a tottering economy needs stability to be saved.
It will try to divide the country between Russian and Ukrainian speakers.
But it is too late for divide and misrule strategies to work.
Ukrainians know that the choice they make now, that their decision to stand firm with Viktor Yushchenko today, will determine their freedom forever, as well as the health of their nation – its independence as well as its economic strength.
So we will stand firm in the cold and the snow to see that our democratic choices are respected.
To do otherwise is to surrender not only our freedom, but our hopes for better lives.
We defy those who seek to corrupt our democracy, but we stand with the hand of friendship extended to all of our neighbors, including Russia.
It has no reason to intervene.
A vibrant Ukrainian democracy will need the comradeship of Russia and of Europe to build the kind of society that our people desire.
Our boldness is tinged by realism. By securing our democracy, we help secure Russia’s own.
For we are engaged not in revolution, but in peaceful democratic evolution.
Ukrainians have endured the worst that man can do to his fellow man: Stalin’s orchestrated famines of the 1930’s and the Nazi slaughterhouse of World War II.
So do not doubt our ability to endure and stand firm.
We shall persist, and our democracy shall prevail.
Stand with us.
The Battle of the Bonds
LONDON – Everyone knows that Greece will default on its external debt.
The only question concerns the best way to arrange it so that no one really understands that Greece is actually defaulting.
On this topic, there is no shortage of expert plans – among them bond buy-backs, bond swaps, and the creation of Eurobonds, a European version of the “Brady” bonds issued by Latin American countries that defaulted in the 1980’s. What all such schemes amount to is piling one lot of bonds on top of another in an attempt to square the circle of Greece’s inability to pay, and to minimize the losses faced by its creditors – mostly European banks.
Every week, a preposterous coterie of European bankers and finance ministers drags itself from one capital to another to discuss which default/restructuring plan to adopt.
Meanwhile, Greece’s agony continues, and the “markets” wait to swoop down on Portugal, Ireland, Italy, and Spain.
No one who is not well versed in financial legerdemain can make much sense of this battle of the bonds.
But behind it lie two moral attitudes, which are much easier to grasp.
The first is traditional disapproval of debt.
The oldest rule in personal finance is to avoid debt – that is, never spend more than you earn.
Economists and moralists have been united in believing that you should actually spend less than you earn – in order to “save” for the proverbial rainy day or for old age.
Getting into debt was long associated with profligacy or fecklessness.
And, if a person became indebted, it was a point of honor to repay the obligation when it fell due, by selling assets, reducing consumption, working harder, or some combination of the three.
Indeed, it was often more than a point of honor: failure to repay debt on time landed the debtor in prison.
The same attitude governed institutional debt.
Banks grew out of a practice by gold smiths and silver smiths, who, for a small price, accepted deposits for safekeeping.
When they became lending institutions, their earliest rule was to keep almost 100% of cash reserves against their loans, so that they would not be caught short if most of their depositors decided to withdraw their money at the same time.
Similarly, before the introduction of limited liability in the nineteenth century, a company’s shareholders or partners were each liable for all of the firm’s debts, which severely restricted businesses’ willingness to borrow to finance trade.
For public finance, too, the orthodox rule was that budgets should always be balanced; except in emergencies, governments should never spend more than they “earned” in taxation.
Again, it was a point of honor for governments to pay back such debts as they were incurred, whatever the sacrifice to the country.
Until recently, the conventional view was that “mature” sovereigns always honored their debts, while only banana republics failed to do so.
These historically embedded norms and practices were only slowly superseded.
But, in the twentieth century, with greater security of conditions and continuous economic growth, it became normal for individuals, companies, and governments to borrow in anticipation of earnings – to spend money they did not have, but that they expected to have.
With fear of bank runs and defaults receding, banks’ reserve ratios became ever smaller, thus increasing their lending facilities.
On this bedrock rose an imposing edifice of bond markets and banks that drove down the cost of finance, and thus sped up the rate of economic growth.
It was this system of financial intermediation whose near-collapse in 2008 seemed for many to justify the ancient warnings of the perils of indebtedness.
In their exhaustive historical review of financial crises, Carmen Reinhart and Kenneth Rogoff write: “Again and again, countries, banks, individuals, and firms take on excessive debt in good times without enough awareness of the risks that will follow when the inevitable recession hits.”
But there is a contrary moral attitude, the essence of which is that, whereas excessive debt is to be deplored, the blame for it lies with the lender, not the borrower.
“Neither a borrower nor a lender be,” Polonius admonished in Hamlet.
Lending money at interest was identified with “usury,” or making money from money rather than from goods and services – a distinction that goes back to Aristotle, for whom money was barren.
The moneylender was the most hated figure in medieval Europe.
The last legal restrictions on taking interest on money were lifted only in the nineteenth century, when they succumbed to the economic argument that lending money was a service, for which the lender was entitled to charge whatever the market would bear.
But the theory of usury survived in the view that it was morally wrong to extract some additional amount that was made feasible by the borrower’s weak bargaining position or extreme need.
These two moral attitudes confront each other today in the battle of the bonds.
The demand for debt repayment confronts the philosophy of debt forgiveness.
In the lender’s view, the 17% interest rate that Greece’s government now has to pay for its 10-year bonds accurately reflects the lender’s risk in buying Greek government debt.
It is the price of past profligacy.
But in the borrower’s view it is usurious – taking advantage of the borrower’s desperation.
The sensible middle position would surely be an agreed write-off of a portion of the outstanding Greek debt, combined with a five-year moratorium on interest payments on the remainder.
This would immediately relieve pressure on Greece’s budget and give its government the time and incentive to put the country’s economy in order.
In the long run, however, we will have to answer the broader question that the eurozone’s various debt crises have raised: Is the social value of making finance cheap worth the days of reckoning for stricken debtors?
The Battle of the Temples
BANGKOK – The military skirmishes between Thailand and Cambodia that have claimed more than two dozen lives, caused scores of injuries, and displaced tens of thousands of people since February are primarily attributable to domestic politics in both countries.
Rooted in ancient enmities and the legacy of the colonial era, the fighting is damaging the entire region. So virulent is the dispute that even a short-term settlement will require third-party mediation.
A secure peace will depend mainly on how the endgame to Thailand’s domestic political crisis plays out in the coming months – and on Cambodia’s willingness to stay out of this process.
At issue in the conflict is 4.6 square kilometers that adjoin a millennium-old Hindu temple known as “Preah Vihear” to Cambodians and “Phra Viharn” to Thais.
Cambodia insists that the disputed land has been under its territorial sovereignty since a landmark case decided by the International Court of Justice in 1962. In its 9-to-3 verdict, the ICJ ruled that Cambodia’s map, drawn up by French surveyors in 1904-1907, put the temple area in Cambodia, and that Thailand (known as Siam until 1939) had not objected previously.
During the hearings, Cambodia asked the ICJ to rule on the adjoining land, but the judges confined their decision only to the temple, as Cambodia originally requested.
The French-made map became the core of the dispute, because it manipulated natural geographic divisions.
Thailand rejects the map, which contravenes a Franco-Siamese agreement in 1904 stipulating a demarcation along a watershed line separating the two countries.
Moreover, the French mapping effort took place just a decade after Siam ceded a clutch of territories – much of today’s western Cambodia – to France, which was then perched above Indochina as the colonial master At that time, a vulnerable Siam was compelled to sign a host of unequal treaties with European powers in exchange for maintaining its independence.
Until recently, the overlapping claims on the 4.6 square kilometers were not a serious issue.
Villagers and merchants from both sides conducted a brisk business and border trade unfettered by the authorities.
Bilateral tensions flared when Thai politics heated up after the September 2006 military coup that overthrew the democratically elected prime minister, Thaksin Shinawatra, on charges of corruption and disloyalty to the monarchy.
In 2008, after the self-exiled Thaksin’s proxy force, the People’s Power Party, took power following an election victory, the Thai government signed a joint communiqué agreeing to Cambodia’s listing of Preah Vihear Temple as a UNESCO World Heritage site.
The communiqué became a lightning rod for Thaksin’s opponents at home, spearheaded by the People’s Alliance for Democracy.
The PAD depicted the UNESCO registration of Preah Vihear as a treasonous sell-out of Thai sovereignty, and used it to destabilize the pro-Thaksin government.
When the PAD seized control of Government House and Bangkok’s two airports, its protest leaders hectored Cambodian Prime Minister Hun Sen and likened him to a hooligan.
Exacerbating matters, the PAD progenitor of that insult became Thailand’s foreign minister after Thaksin’s opponents regained power in December 2008, led by Prime Minister Abhisit Vejjajiva and reinforced by the army.
At that point, tensions with Cambodia became inevitable.
Hun Sen had scores to settle with the anti-Thaksin coalition of the Democrat Party, the PAD, and the army.
In 2009, Hun Sen appointed Thaksin as economic adviser to the Cambodian government and invited him to deliver a high-profile public address in Phnom Penh.
The bilateral relationship has been rocky ever since, alternating between periods of friction and conciliation.
The spate of armed clashes along the border this year stems from PAD provocations.
Although some of its members entered the cabinet under Abhisit, PAD leaders felt betrayed and abandoned by Abhisit and some of his powerful backers.
The PAD’s yellow-clad supporters returned to the streets, this time under the banner of ultra-nationalism over Preah Vihear and a domestic anti-corruption campaign. The PAD has openly called for a military coup to clean up Thai politics.
The PAD initially found little traction.
The Thai army stayed out of the Preah Vihear controversy, and Abhisit’s government shrugged off the PAD’s machinations.
But, as the anti-establishment, pro-Thaksin “red shirts” staged huge protests of their own against the army’s suppression of their fellow demonstrators in April-May of last year, the men in uniform became agitated.
A major tipping point may have been the red-shirt leaders’ allusion to the conspicuous royal silence in response to the army’s violent suppression, which heightened the army’s fear of a clear and present danger to the monarchy.
The Thai army abandoned its neutral posture and became increasingly belligerent.
It unilaterally ruled out the presence of regional observers on the Thai-Cambodian border, a deal mediated by Indonesian Foreign Minister Marty Natalegawa in February.
The Abhisit government, congenitally beholden to the army, took its cue and effectively reneged on the Indonesia-brokered peace drive.
It was a blow not only to Indonesia as the chair of Association of Southeast Asian Nations this year, but also to ASEAN itself, particularly given the organization’s quest to become an ASEAN Community by 2015.
If ASEAN is not allowed a mediating role, the Thai-Cambodian spat may wind its way back to the United Nations Security Council, which earlier delegated the issue to ASEAN amidst heavy lobbying by Cambodia and Thailand.
Cambodia wants to multilateralize the border conflict as much as Thailand tries to limit it to bilateral negotiations.
Though the Thai-Cambodian border battles have involved tanks and heavy artillery, they are unlikely to degenerate into open, large-scale warfare.
The ASEAN framework acts as a safety net and mutual commercial interests should ultimately prevail.
But sporadic shooting and verbal antagonism between the two sides will continue, as Thailand’s powers-that-be close ranks in a right-wing turn towards the symbols and institutions of royalism, entangling Hun Sen, who should have stayed on the sidelines, in the endgame unfolding in Bangkok.
The Beauty in Ugly Elections
Elections in countries that have been strangers to democracy are never pretty, as Afghanistan's recent vote demonstrated and as any election in Iraq is likely to be.
But electoral flaws are not always the whole picture.
Consider Kazakhstan, where five million people cast ballots in September for their parliament's lower house.
Western media judged the election a failure.
CNN reported it "neither equitable nor free."
The Economist snidely referred to the "results" in quotation marks.
Most quoted the OSCE's finding that the elections were riddled with "serious shortcomings."
Those elections were flawed. But only a small percent of the breaches were the result of deliberate manipulation.
We were there, and visited eight urban and rural polling places, talked with roughly a hundred voters, election officials and observers, as well as officials from six parties.
The majority of shortcomings resulted from organizational ineptitude.
The worst cases of outright manipulation occurred when local bureaucrats - all appointed from above - pressured voters to support President Nursultan Nazarbayev's Otan Party.
This problem will doubtless persist until more local officials are chosen through elections.
Many, probably most, of the other problems were managerial in nature.
Often, voter lists were incomplete or inaccurate.
The head of the Central Electoral Commission has now proposed that members of the local public join election officials and administrators in compiling the lists.
Electronic voting, used at 10% of polling stations, also caused problems.
Even though voters could choose between electronic and paper ballots, difficulties remained, especially among older voters.
Another problem was the bar code system designed to prevent duplicate voting.
Some qualified voters didn't get their bar codes; others feared that employers might use them to learn how they voted.
Despite the new election law's assurance of equal coverage in the main media, government TV channels devoted more time to the pro-government parties.
Protests by some parties that could not afford the high cost of TV spots and billboards mirror similar complaints in the US.
Far more serious was the lack of transparency in the Central Electoral Commission and the political imbalances on some local commissions.
Some of this may have been deliberate, but incompetence also played a part.
So how bad was the election?
Exit polls suggest that ballot totals fairly closely reflect voter choices.
But how to explain charges of "gross violations" by the Ak Zhol Party, the largest opposition group, or the decision by the Minister of Information, an Ak Zhol candidate, to resign in protest?
Or the 89 charges of violations filed by just one bloc?
The ex-minister's charge is disingenuous.
He himself presided over many violations, a fact noted by the OSCE back in 1999.
He resigned only after winning election to parliament.
Clearly, Ak Zhol used accusations of impropriety as a weapon against the government parties.
Indeed, many opposition groups engaged in dirty tricks.
Nevertheless, the elections represented significant progress. First, they were competitive.
The official registration of ten parties, including opposition groups, surpassed any previous election, and the OSCE admitted that voters had "a real choice."
Had systematic manipulation occurred, one-third of the races would not have gone to runoffs.
Moreover, there were real surprises.
The Asar Party, founded and led by President Nazarbayev's daughter, was expected to claim second place, assuring her eventual succession.
But, despite ample funding and abundant media access, Asar finished third.
At the same time, 17% of all candidates were women, far more than in earlier elections.
Runoff votes will send more women than ever to Kazakhstan's parliament.
Turnout was relatively high, at 57% of registered, particularly given that the OSCE had intoned that "public interest does not seem to be high"; other experts wrote of "voter fatigue."
Defying such sour predictions, voters clearly felt that elections matter.
For the first time, parties could make their case in seven debates aired on national television. Many voters changed their choices after watching these.
Another first was that observers from all parties monitored the polling.
Thousands of volunteers took their role seriously, producing the complaints that the Prosecutor is now investigating.
Another 1,029 foreign observers came from as far away as India and Thailand.
The government knew monitors would turn up improprieties, but believes that it has nothing to hide, and much to gain, from honest criticism.
Even the experiment with electronic voting machines was a qualified success.
The decision to use them should have been made earlier to allow more training, but most voters experienced no problems.
Equally important, no newspapers were closed, stories suppressed, or journalists harassed, as occurred in earlier Kazakh elections.
Obviously, the election's flaws cannot be swept under the carpet. But nor is Kazakhstan seeking to do so.
Public debate about how to improve the system has commenced.
At the same time, the process as a whole further legitimizes elections in the eyes of people accustomed by Soviet rule to dismissing all votes as charades.
Kazakhstan deserved the criticism it received from Western election monitors. But it also earned kudos that have been withheld.
Kazakhstan's elections mark a big step forward.
Even an ugly election can be beautiful if it advances democracy - an important lesson for countries like Afghanistan and Iraq.
The Beginning of the End for Guantánamo
The “war on terror” has forced democracies to grapple with the extent to which they can afford to protect the civil rights and liberties of both their citizens and foreigners.
The debate has been most intense in the United States, where the refrain that the Constitution is not a “suicide pact” and that national security can justify extraordinary measures is heard repeatedly.
Some measures – unauthorized searches of bank records and wiretapping of telephone calls – compromise the liberty of all.
Others – most notoriously, the confinement of roughly 450 alleged Muslim fighters in Guantánamo Bay – impinge on people thought to be the enemy.
Amid rising allegations of abuse, President George W. Bush’s government realized some time ago that it could not maintain its Guantánamo detention camp forever.
Yet it did not want to repeat the experience of the Zacharias Moussaoui trial, in which, after many propagandistic appeals from the dock, the alleged twentieth September 11, 2001, hijacker was finally convicted and sentenced to life imprisonment.
So the Bush administration proposed a middle way: a military commission under military judges, which would recognize fewer rights for the accused and bar appeals to civilian courts.
In its recent decision in Hamdan v. Rumsfeld , the US Supreme Court said “no”: Bush’s exercise of executive power went too far.
As a result, the decision will have a lasting impact on America’s constitutional structure.
Salim Ahmad Hamdan served as Osama bin Laden’s personal driver.
Other than drive his boss around and attend meetings, he did nothing more to promote the terrorist attacks of September 2001.
Yet his driving and his knowledge of Al Qaeda’s purposes struck the military as sufficient to charge him with entering a conspiracy to kill civilians and engage in terrorists acts.
When his trial began, the prosecution tried to exclude Hamdan from the room during the testimony of a witness against him.
The government wanted to protect its sources.
But this unusual procedure, permitted in the military commissions, runs afoul of accepted canons of federal, Constitutional, and international law.
The defense immediately sought an injunction in federal court to prevent the trial from continuing.
The federal court ruled that under the Geneva Conventions, Hamdan, as a prisoner of war, was entitled to a court hearing that followed the same procedures as one judging soldiers of the detaining power, that is, an American court martial.
The Supreme Court, however, sidestepped the question of whether Hamdan was a prisoner of war, arguing instead that the conflict was governed by common Article III in all the Geneva Conventions, which regulates armed conflict ”not of an international character.”
In such cases, there is a duty to guarantee that all sentences are passed “by a regularly constituted court affording all the judicial guarantees which are recognized as indispensable by civilized peoples.”
Bush’s military commissions were found to fall below this standard.
While the discussion of the Geneva Conventions and procedural rights is important, the more profound portion of Justice John Paul Stevens’ majority opinion addresses the boundaries of the law of war, and specifically whether the conspiracy charge against Hamdan constitutes a violation of this body of customary international law.
Everyone agrees that, under US law, the jurisdiction of military tribunals is limited to violations of the laws of war, so if conspiracy cannot be charged, Hamdan and others like him cannot be tried in any military courts, not just the ad hoc commissions.
In order to resolve the question of whether conspiracy constitutes a crime under the laws of war, Justice Stevens followed the arguments made in the brief that I submitted on behalf of Experts on Conspiracy and the Law of War.
The law of war, the Court reasoned, must reflect the consensus of all legal systems.
But conspiracy, as a stand-alone offense, is particular to Anglo-American common law.
This argument has been well known since the Nuremberg trials, which rejected charges of conspiracy to commit war crimes and crimes against humanity.
Justice Stevens cited Telford Taylor, the chief prosecutor in Nuremberg, who made the same point about the oddity of conspiracy charges in international tribunals.
Moreover, arguments about international law in the post-WWII period have quietly dropped all references to conspiracy charges.
This admittedly has not been an explicit process, but the pattern is undeniable.
As Justice Stevens wrote, “The crime of ‘conspiracy’ . . . does not appear in either the Geneva Conventions or the Hague Conventions – the major treaties on the law of war.”
He could have added the Rome Statute and UN resolutions establishing the ad hoc tribunals for the former Yugoslavia and for Rwanda.
The international community’s rejection of conspiracy charges is correct, I believe, because international criminal proceedings are oriented to post hoc justice – to judging those who are alleged to have already brought about massacres and other major crimes that concern the international community.
Conspiracy, by contrast, is suited to a legal system that emphasizes early police intervention, before criminal plans are carried out.
Early intervention is possible in a domestic legal system, but there is no international police force that could fulfill a similar function.
The Bush administration is now left in an embarrassing position.
It does not want to prosecute the Guantánamo detainees in federal courts, but it is unlikely that it can prosecute them under the law of war as interpreted in the Hamdan decision.
Although Hamdan recognizes the legitimacy of confining enemy combatants until the end of hostilities, doing so is untenable.
The international community will not accept this form of massive preventive detention, with continuing allegations of abuse and torture.
Sooner or later, Bush will have to decide between prosecutions in federal court or closing the camp.
The Bell Tolls for India’s Congress Party
NEW YORK – Politics in Asia’s two giants, India and China, has suddenly turned very uncertain.
China remains in authoritarian mode, of course.
But egregious human-rights violations and suppression of dissent are raising the specter of growing internal disruptions, particularly in the wake of purges within the top leadership.
By contrast, India, with its firmly rooted liberal democracy, smells to some like roses.
But many believe that India, too, faces uncertain political prospects.
In particular, there is widespread belief in India today that one of the country’s two main political parties, the Indian National Congress, essentially run by Sonia Gandhi and her son, Rahul Gandhi, has now run its course and will sink into oblivion.
According to The Economist: “The Congress Party…is in a funk” and “in danger of…long-term decline.”
But the Congress has been written off before: the article from The Economist was published in January 2003.
Indeed, the uniform prediction prior to the 2004 election was that, after having lost three elections in a row, the Congress was heading for its fourth defeat and eventual dissolution.
Yet it won that election, and then won a second parliamentary election in 2009.
Politics is, of course, full of reversals of fortune.
But, unlike in 2004, it is unlikely, for several reasons, that the Congress can survive the dire predicament that it now faces today.
For starters, in 2004, the Congress was challenging an incumbent government that had served for six years.
This time, the Congress has formed the incumbent government for two consecutive terms, and its tenure has recently been marked by scandals that have made it look ineffectual, rudderless, and corrupt.
To make matters worse, India is experiencing a sharp economic slowdown, further undermining the Congress’s prospects in elections that must be held no later than June 2014.
Second, and more important, voter attitudes have shifted significantly during the past decade.
Average annual economic growth of 8.5% over the eight-year period from 2003 to 2011 has led to a revolution of perceived possibilities.
As the economists Poonam Gupta and Arvind Panagariya have demonstrated, voters in most Indian states now support leaders and parties that deliver good economic outcomes, and turn out those who do not.
This marks a major shift from the fatalistic attitudes of the past, which generally helped incumbents, who benefited from voters’ belief that there was no real alternative to existing arrangements.
This voting behavior has been reinforced by recent examples of political failure and success.
Brazenly corrupt leaders such as Kumari Mayawati of Uttar Pradesh and Digambar Kamat of Goa were each bundled out after one term.