Think of her as George W. Bush II, but in designer pumps.
Both groups are reacting to genuine evidence.
Her supporters are responding to a potent set of symbols, and her detractors to an even more potent set of facts.
Palin’s symbolic appeal to a certain group of female voters is important to understand, and we must respect the rage and hunger that it reflects.
The subtext of that appeal is class.
Working-class white women in America have had their talents exploited and undervalued for as long as the nation has functioned.
While affluent white women, or women of any background who managed to get a high-quality education – America’s Hillary Clintons, Madeline Albrights, and Condoleezza Rices – broke through the glass ceiling, and even have the women’s movement to lionize them, working-class white women have watched their rise with understandable resentment.
Their more affluent peers hire women like them to do the dirty work, or else they have had to deal with stagnant minimum-wage pay in the US labor market’s “pink-collar” or service-industry ghetto.
Their ceiling is made of concrete, and it is pitched far lower over their talents and their mobility.
Above all, they have been excluded, practically and symbolically, from the country’s political discourse, and are treated regularly with condescension by politicians.
Race, too, is a factor.
While reports are surfacing that Palin told a group of African-Americans that she did not have to hire black people, working-class white women often understand their own experience in terms of racial hostility.
They perceive an underclass that they believe receives benefits denied to them and a thriving economy in the developing world that siphons off well-paying blue-collar jobs.
So, when Sarah Palin is escorted into the media limelight, she becomes the symbolic revenge fantasy of many of those silenced, exhausted factory workers and secretaries.
To see a working-class white woman be picked to serve a heartbeat away from the US president resonates powerfully with them.
Think of the appeal of films like Thelma and Louise or Working Girl, in which the leading character is a gutsy, exploited secretary who, trampled by a snooty female Ivy League boss, nonetheless manages to end up with the dream job, the dream guy, and the corner office.
Just about any woman who was not born into privilege, has small children at home, and is not a cannibal or a Satanist would elicit initial roars of approval from women in general, and surely from a group that has been silenced and trivialized for so long.
When you’ve been making the coffee forever, it’s nice to imagine leading the free world.
That said, Palin’s sinking approval ratings show that, while such women thrill to symbolic validation, they are not fools.
They have begun to notice how Palin is trotted out like a model at an auto show to be introduced to heads of state as if they are local car dealers, and how the media are allowed to take pictures but not ask questions (“That’s me with Henry Kissinger!”).
They also notice that the economy is imploding, while Iraq is calming down only because the US is paying insurgents and al-Qaeda sympathizers the equivalent of a monthly car payment per person not to kill its soldiers.
Moreover, as Palin’s political persona takes shape, it looks increasingly alarming.
The problem is not just that the McCain campaign has surrounded her with veterans of the Bush-Cheney cabal (Karl Rove’s acolytes and operatives now write her speeches and manage her every move).
It’s also that she believes that God set her legislative agenda in Alaska, and that she has failed to venture much beyond the Discovery Channel when it comes to foreign travel.
Meanwhile, the elephant in the room is the fact that dermatologists are confirming that the form of cancer for which McCain has been treated has an actuarial survival rate of two to four years for a person his age.
So, as the disturbing prospect of a long Palin presidency starts to set in, she doesn’t look so great to working-class white women anymore.
So, what should this brief Palin bubble teach us?
In becoming the poster girl for a re-branded continuation of the Bush administration, Palin is showing herself to have much in common with glossy faux-populists like Eva Peron or Denmark’s anti-immigrant leader Pia Kjærsgaard.
What we should learn – for next time and for every time to come – is that great leaders and great dreams are being overlooked in the women who prepare our food, process our Internet orders, and wipe up the spills in our hospitals.
It is these women’s voices that deserve support – not that of a scary stalking-horse for eight more years (or more) of rule by the thugs who looted America’s treasury, wrecked its economy, and sent 4,000 brave young men and women to die in a war based on lies.
The Palin Non-Factor
LONDON – Senator John McCain is a genuine American hero.
He was a brave airman, with a fine war record.
Unlike the so-called “chicken hawks” who avoided service in the Vietnam War themselves but could barely wait to send young Americans into Iraq to fight, McCain’s life is not at odds with his politics.
In the Senate, while supporting President Bush’s war of choice in Iraq, he has been prepared to stand up for his independent judgment on issues such as campaign finance reform and climate change.
So when, as a presidential candidate, McCain said that, if elected, he would seek to work with Democrats and independents, and that he would search for consensus, it was easy to believe him. After all, this is exactly how he had behaved as a senator.
There seemed every chance that he would apply this approach to the choice of his running mate.
His friend Senator Joseph Lieberman, a former Democrat and a hawk on the Iraq war, appeared to be the most likely pick.
We know what happened.
With his campaign apparently dead in the water, McCain reached out all right – to the right-wing fundamentalists in his own party.
Governor Sarah Palin strode onto the national stage, rhetorical guns blazing.
Whatever else you say about the governor’s views, no one could call the choice of the “hockey mom” from Alaska a bold bid for consensus.
She was chosen, to borrow the commentators’ jargon, to energize the party base, which comprises hard-liners suspicious of McCain’s lack of enthusiasm for the causes that fire them up, such as creationism and a ban on abortion.
According to the McCain campaign’s calculus, a political outsider with redneck views would appeal to white working-class voters.
Moreover, a woman on his ticket might attract some of those disappointed by Senator Hillary Clinton’s loss to Senator Barack Obama in the Democratic race.
So far, the selection of Palin seems to have paid off.
Questions about her record have been sidestepped; her inexperience is lauded as a virtue; any criticism is dismissed as sexism.
Speaking as a one-time campaign manager in British politics, there seem to be three important points for the Democrats to remember.
First, Palin is not at the top of the ticket.
It is impossible to imagine her surviving a primary campaign.
She would never have withstood the searching inquiries of months of campaigning.
But no one seems disposed to contemplate her heroic lack of qualifications to sit a heartbeat away from the Oval Office.
Second, it is McCain whom the Democrats should attack.
He would be president, not the Alaskan.
It is McCain’s views on the economy and foreign policy, not Palin’s on Darwin and the wickedness of sex education, which should be the targets.
The economy is not McCain’s strong suit.
He was arguing as Wall Street went into meltdown that the American economy’s fundamentals were still strong.
McCain’s solution seems to be more of Bush’s policies – tax cuts for the rich plus promises to curb public spending.
How credible is that?
The Republicans under Bush have turned huge surpluses into terrifyingly large deficits.
The mortgage crisis and the credit crunch have led to bailouts for the banks and the nationalization of housing finance and insurance.
America needs to rein in its household and fiscal spending, so that it can cut the amount of money that it borrows and owes.
It is not easy to do this when the rich get richer – enjoying their biggest spree since the Roaring Twenties – and average household income remains stagnant for the third decade running.
Social equity is not irrelevant even in America, the land of opportunity.
When they get into the polling booth in November, will Americans vote on “culture wars” issues – sex and guns – or on the basis of whether they can afford to pay their mortgages?
As for foreign policy, it is Obama who has rightly said that America needs to switch the focus of its military operations from Iraq to Afghanistan.
His opponent originally derided what has rapidly become the conventional wisdom.
The election is too important to all of us to begin and end with her.
I would get back to the central issues. That is where the election will be lost or won.
The Pandemic That Wasn’t
PALO ALTO – Last June, the United Nations’ World Health Organization, responding to an outbreak of the H1N1 virus, or swine flu, boosted the pandemic alert to the highest level, Phase 6, meaning that a pandemic was under way – the first time in 41 years that the organization had taken that declared step.
But the outbreak appears to have ended less like the rogue wild boar that WHO bureaucrats predicted and more like a roasted pork tenderloin with apples and sage.
In fact, the WHO repeatedly violated Sherlock Holmes’ warning, “It is a capital mistake to theorize before you have all the evidence.”
And the pandemic alert was doubly strange, given that ordinary seasonal flu sweeps the world annually, is invariably far more lethal than the currently circulating low-virulence H1N1, and certainly meets the WHO’s definition of a pandemic: infections over a wide geographic area and affecting a large proportion of the population.
Ironically, the appearance of the H1N1 flu during the past nine months might be thought of as a net public-health benefit, because it appears to have suppressed, or at least supplanted, the far more virulent and lethal seasonal flu strains.
During the second week of January, 3.7% of Americans tested positive for the seasonal flu, compared to 11.5% during the same week in 2009.
The official death toll worldwide from H1N1 is under 14,000, while seasonal flu kills about 36,000 on average in the United States and hundreds of thousands elsewhere.
Most flu and public-health experts consider the WHO to have been overly alarmist.
The decision in April 2009 to raise the pandemic flu threat to the penultimate level, Phase 5 (“Pandemic Imminent”), already raced far ahead of the accumulated data, so the Phase 6 declaration in June revealed the organization’s paradigm to be fundamentally flawed.
A warning system based solely on how widely a virus has spread, but that does not consider the nature and severity of the illness it causes, would classify as “pandemics” not only seasonal flu, but also the frequent but largely inconsequential outbreaks of virus-caused colds and gastroenteritis, for example.
(The WHO has never explained why these obvious examples do not meet their criteria.)
False alarms make the “pandemic under way” designation almost meaningless and diminish its usefulness.
And that, in turn, has important consequences: as Jack Fisher, a professor of surgery at the University of California, San Diego, School of Medicine, observed, “Keep crying ‘wolf,’ and WHO can expect lower than customary compliance with flu vaccine advisories next fall.”
Worse, imagine what would happen when we encounter a genuinely dangerous new pathogen, such as a strain of H5N1 avian flu (which in its current form has a mortality rate more than 100 times higher than H1N1) that is easily transmissible between humans.
The UN’s false alarms also have had more immediate negative effects.
According to Matthew Hingerty, the managing director of Australia’s Tourism Export Council, the country lost thousands of tourists because of the WHO’s pandemic declaration.
Egyptian public-health authorities overreacted and ordered the slaughter of all pigs in the country.
In addition to the direct economic losses, because the pigs were no longer available to consume much of the garbage produced in Cairo, the numbers of rodents rose to fearsome levels.
The publicity and resulting panic surrounding the WHO’s announcement of Phase 5 and 6 alerts – especially in the absence (until December) of widely available vaccine – also brought out fraudsters peddling all sorts of ineffective and possibly dangerous protective gear and nostrums: gloves, masks, dietary supplements, shampoo, a nasal sanitizer, and a spray that supposedly coats the hands with a layer of anti-microbial “ionic silver.”
For all these reasons, the declaration of a pandemic must not be a prediction but rather a kind of real-time snapshot.
The WHO’s performance has been widely criticized: the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe, for example, said on January 12 that it plans to debate “false pandemics, a threat to health” later this month.
And yet WHO officials continue to defend their actions.
In a January 14 conference call with reporters, Keiji Fukuda, the special adviser to the WHO’s director general for pandemic flu, argued that the organization did not overplay the dangers but “prepared for the worst and hoped for the best.”
The WHO’s dubious decisions demonstrate that its officials are either too rigid or incompetent (or both) to make necessary adjustments to the pandemic warning system – which is what we have come to expect from an organization that is scientifically challenged, self-important, and unaccountable.
It may be able to perform and report worldwide surveillance – i.e., count numbers of cases and fatalities – but its policy role should be drastically reduced.
The Paracetamol Dilemma
WELLINGTON – Paracetamol (known as acetaminophen in the United States) is one of the world’s most commonly used drugs.
It is the preferred medication for relieving fever and pain because of its safety profile.  However, 10 years ago, a hypothesis was proposed that the use of paracetamol may increase the risk of developing asthma.  It was suggested that a change from the use of aspirin to paracetamol among children in the US during the 1980’s may have contributed to the increasing prevalence of childhood asthma noted during this period.
Substitution of paracetamol for aspirin, researchers proposed, may have led to an enhanced allergic immune response, thereby increasing susceptibility to asthma and other allergic disorders.
Since then, a number of epidemiological studies have reported an association between asthma and exposure to paracetamol in the womb, in childhood, and in adulthood.
These studies led to the suggestion that the use of paracetamol may represent an important risk factor in the development of asthma.
The latest evidence to support this hypothesis comes from a large international epidemiological study of childhood asthma that was recently published in the medical journal The Lancet .
This analysis, from the International Study of Asthma and Allergies in Childhood (ISAAC), involved more than 200,000 six- and seven-year-old children from 73 centers in 31 countries.
The children’s parents or guardians completed written questionnaires about current symptoms of asthma, rhinitis (hayfever), and eczema, and about several risk factors, including use of paracetamol for fever in the child’s first year of life and frequency of paracetamol use in the past 12 months.
The study identified that the reported use of paracetamol for fever in the first year of life was associated with symptoms of asthma in the six- and seven-year-old children.
The association was present in all major regions of the world, with an estimated 46% increased risk following adjustment for other risk factors.
A dose-dependent association between asthma symptoms at 6-7 years and paracetamol use in the previous 12 months was also observed.
Similar associations were observed between the use of paracetamol and the risk of severe asthma symptoms.
The proportion of asthma cases that could be attributed to exposure to paracetamol was calculated to be between 22% and 38%.
Paracetamol use both in the first year of life and in children aged 6-7 was also associated with an increased risk of symptoms of rhinitis and eczema.
This suggests that the potential effect of paracetamol is not restricted to the airways and may affect a number of organ systems.
Identifying the potential mechanisms that might underlie the association between paracetamol and asthma (and other allergic disorders) was not a part of this study.
On the contrary, they suggest that suppressing fever may occasionally produce harmful effects, and conclude that widespread use of drugs to reduce fever should not be encouraged.
They recommend that in children their use should be restricted to situations of high fever, obvious discomfort, or conditions known to be painful. 
What is agreed is the need for randomized controlled trials of the long-term effects of repeated use of paracetamol in children.
The Paradox of Blinking
SINGAPORE – The world has recently witnessed two major diplomatic blinks.
Japan, facing mounting pressure from China, unconditionally released a Chinese trawler captain whose ship had rammed a Japanese naval patrol boat.
And US President Barack Obama did nothing when Israel refused to extend its freeze on new building construction in the West Bank, causing Israeli West Bank settlers to rejoice.
In the short run, it is clear who lost. In the long run, however, the outcome of backing down may not be so clear.
China, in particular, should weigh carefully the long-term political price of celebrating its supposed victory over Japan.
According to Newton’s third law of motion, “for every action there is always an equal and opposite reaction.” Geopolitics has a similar law: whenever the world sees a new emerging power, the world’s greatest existing power tries, directly or indirectly, to block its rise.
Today, the world’s greatest power is the US, and the greatest emerging power is China.
So far, surprisingly, the US has not forged a strategy to thwart China’s rise.
The reasons for this geopolitical aberration are complex. But a key factor is that, until recently, China’s leaders have abided by the wise counsel of Deng Xiaoping: taoguang yanghui (conceal [our] capabilities and avoid the limelight), and shanyu shouzhuo (be good at keeping a low profile).
China’s decision to browbeat the Japanese into submission over the fishing trawler, suggests that China may be throwing Deng’s geopolitical caution out the window.
More recklessly, after securing the release of the trawler, China demanded an apology from Japan.
A major rule in international relations is never to make a demand that cannot be met.
Having already been humiliated by China, such an apology would be politically suicidal for the Japanese government.
In fact, China should hope that no such apology is forthcoming.
In the past few decades, Japan has become a sleeping tiger.
Having outperformed the rest of Asia for more than a century, the Japanese have decided to slow down.
Japan has lost its drive to remain one of the world’s greatest powers, and it may never regain it.
But, given Japan’s history, one would be foolish to underestimate the country.
While the world frets about North Korean and Iranian nuclear weapons, it is useful to remind ourselves that Japan, should it choose, could become a nuclear power in a matter of weeks.
It has all the ingredients, though painful memories of World War II and the bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki have so far kept its leaders well away from developing a nuclear stockpile.
Moreover, if Japan needs allies to balance the rise of China, it could easily turn not only to the US, but also to Russia and India.
In short, the geopolitical cards could turn out in Japan’s favor if China overplays its hand.
Similarly, geopolitics does not work in Israel’s favor on the West Bank issue.
When US global dominance was unquestioned, as in the 1990’s, it made sense for Israel to secure its long-term future by maintaining a stranglehold over the US Congress.
But American power has peaked.
At its high water mark, the US, with 5% of the world’s population, accounted for close to 30% of global GDP.
Given this spectacular economic performance, Americans could spend more on defense than the rest of the world combined.
All this, quite naturally, led to geopolitical hubris, in Washington and in Tel Aviv.
While US power will inevitably decline in relative terms, that of the 1.3 billion people who live in the Islamic world – the vast majority of them in Asia – will inevitably increase.
The rising economic tide that is lifting China and India will lift them as well.
Asian Muslims have the same mentality as the Chinese and Indians. What China and India are doing today, Asia’s Muslim societies will do tomorrow.
As a result, the combined GDP of the 57-member Organization of the Islamic Conference nations – now only about 13% of global output – will easily double in the coming decades.
So time is no longer on Israel’s side.
The security fostered by America’s unchallenged global power has been shown to be an illusion.
Soon America will have to make major geopolitical adjustments, especially if its economy underperforms in the coming decade or two. Like the former Soviet Union, the US will have to carry out perestroika and cut defense spending.
As a friend of Israel, I am surprised that more of us are not calling on the country’s leaders to seize the brief geopolitical opportunity of a viable two-state solution, while the offer remains on the table.
Israel’s continued humiliation of the Palestinians, now telecast live into hundreds of millions of Muslim homes, is generating unnecessary reservoirs of hate.
The scenes of exultant West Bank settlers only aggravate this.
Israel’s recent falling out with its best friend in the Islamic world, Turkey, should have provided its leaders a premonition of the new world that is coming.
The fallout with Turkey was a minor tremor.
With larger geopolitical earthquakes coming, the time for Israel to act is now.
The Paranoid Style in Russian Politics
An old saying in politics in Moscow is that relations between the United States and Russia are always better when a Republican rules in the White House.
We are statesmen, and the Republicans are statesmen.
Because we both believe in power, it is easy for the two of us to understand each other.
The problem with this saying is the paranoid mindset behind it, for it implies that the nature of Russian-US relations has not changed fundamentally since the Cold War’s end; that the animosities that exist between the two countries are those of two permanently implacable geopolitical opponents.
Russians, it seems, can only feel good about themselves if they are contesting the world’s great power head to head.
Indeed, Russian President Vladimir Putin considers the Soviet Union’s collapse “the largest geopolitical catastrophe of the twentieth century.”
As a result of this mindset, key elements in the Russian elite have tried mightily – and with some success, especially in recent years – to bring about a deterioration in Russian-US relations.
The Kremlin appears to be seeking systematically to obstruct the US, even when obstruction does not seem to be in Russia’s national interest.
Thus, Russia sells high-technology weapons, including bombers, submarines, and perhaps an aircraft carrier, to China, which not only shares the world’s longest border with Russia, but also disputes parts of that border.
Russia’s assistance to Iran in realizing its nuclear ambitions also falls into the category of self-destructive folly.
Not only is Russia building a civilian nuclear reactor in Iran, thereby helping to advance Iranian knowledge of the nuclear process; it is also reluctant to support efforts by the United Nations Security Council to press Iran not to develop nuclear weapons.
Diplomatic obstruction is not the only means Russian elites use to foster antagonism with the US.
They also seek to inflame domestic public opinion.
To maintain their influence, it seems, they believe that they need to create an image of America as Russia’s implacable enemy, which, by extending NATO membership to ex-communist countries, is bringing an existential threat right to the country’s doorstep.
Of course, this demonization is nothing like what we saw during the days of the USSR.
Nevertheless, Putin still considers it necessary to pose in front of television cameras every few months to report that Russian scientists have developed some new missile that can penetrate any anti-ballistic missile system that the US may erect.
Why Putin’s advisors and public-relations managers encourage him to make these banal triumphalist announcements is difficult to fathom unless one comprehends the sense of grievance that almost all Russians feel at the loss of Great Power status.
That trauma burns even deeper among Russia’s rulers, where it has generated a powerful and persistent psychological complex.
For them, America and the West remain the ultimate enemy.
Descartes famously said, “I think, therefore I am.”
Russia’s rulers appear to live by the credo, “I resist America, therefore I am great.”
Consider the words of Vitaly Tretyakov, the editor of the weekly Moscow News , on the recent US elections. According to Tretyakov, “the coming to power of a Democrat as president in America is incomparably worse for us than the savage imperialism of today’s Republican administration.”
Whereas “the Republicans’ actions are not aimed at us,” but instead “at Islamic terrorists and rogue states,” under a Democratic president, Russia would likely “become a prime focus of antagonism, due to our authoritarianism, our lack of democracy, stifling of freedom, and violation of human rights.”
Thus, for Tretyakov, “bad Bush and his Republicans are better for us than the very bad Democrats.”
Tretyakov is hardly alone.
On the contrary, his morbid logic is a perfect reflection of the paranoid vision that has taken hold in the Kremlin.
But what if these people get their wishes, and NATO collapses and Islamists triumph?
Who then will stop their advance towards Russia’s southern borders from Afghanistan and Central Asia?
The problem with diplomatic paranoia is not that someone is after you, but that you are unable to tell the difference between a real enemy and an imagined one.
The Particle-Emissions Dilemma
STOCKHOLM – Particle emissions into Earth’s atmosphere affect both human health and the climate.
So we should limit them, right?
For health reasons, yes, we should indeed do that; but, paradoxically, limiting such emissions would cause global warming to increase.
Why?
The combustion of fossil fuels, wood, and other biomass increases the amount of airborne particles, which, in a somewhat simplified manner, we can describe as “white” or “black.”
Both types can be found in varying amounts in all emissions.
Most black particles stem from small-scale and inefficient burning of biofuels, and, in Asia and Africa, from the burning of agricultural waste.
By contrast, white particles consist largely of sulfur from the burning of coal and oil.
Because black particles contain soot and absorb sunlight, they are believed to increase global warming.
White particles, however, reflect some of the incoming sunlight back into space, producing a cooling effect on Earth’s climate.
Indeed, according to the United Nations’ Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, the cooling effect of white particles may counteract as much as about half of the warming effect of carbon dioxide.
So, if all white particles were removed from the atmosphere, global warming would increase considerably.
The dilemma is that all particles, whether white or black, constitute a serious problem for human health.
Every year, an estimated two million people worldwide die prematurely, owing to the effects of breathing polluted air.
Furthermore, sulfur-rich white particles contribute to the acidification of soil and water.
Lowering the level of black particles in the atmosphere would benefit both human health and the climate.
Measures aimed at accomplishing this could be particularly effective in countries where emission standards for diesel-fueled vehicles have not yet been introduced, and in countries, especially in Asia and Africa, where rural dwellings are heated by primitive stoves and food is prepared over open fires, causing large emissions of soot particles.
In 2011, the United Nations Environment Program published a report comparing measures targeting soot particles and other so-called “short-lived climate pollutants” to measures reducing CO2, which showed that the former would achieve a more rapid decrease of global warming in the coming decades.
The proposal in this report is now gaining support among governments in many countries and may become an important complement to measures to limit CO2 emissions of.
Naturally, measures targeting soot and other short-lived particles must not undermine efforts to reduce CO2 emissions.
In the long term, emissions of CO2 and other long-lived greenhouse gases constitute the main problem.
But a reduction in emissions of soot (and other short-lived climate pollutants) could alleviate the pressures on the climate in the coming decades.
So, what do we do about white particles?
How do we weigh improved health and reduced mortality rates for hundreds of thousands of people against the serious consequences of global warming?
It is difficult to imagine that any country’s officials would knowingly submit their population to higher health risks by not acting to reduce white particles solely because they counteract global warming.
On the contrary, sulfur emissions have been reduced over the last few decades in both Europe and North America, owing to a desire to promote health and counter acidification; and China, too, seems to be taking measures to reduce sulfur emissions and improve the country’s terrible air quality.
But, in other parts of the world where industrialization is accelerating, sulfur emissions continue to increase.
One way out of the dilemma could be to allow higher sulfur emissions in sparsely populated areas where the soil is not vulnerable to acidification.
Here, emissions from ship traffic on the open seas come to mind.
However, this is probably not a viable alternative.
The most reasonable conclusion is that we should limit particle emissions to reduce health risks.
As a consequence, the greenhouse effect would come more fully into view, which we could then hope would further strengthen the resolve to reduce emissions of CO2 and other greenhouse gases.
Nobel laureate Paul Crutzen has suggested another solution: manipulate the climate by releasing white sulfur particles high up in the stratosphere, where they would remain for several years, exerting a proven cooling effect on Earth’s climate without affecting human health.
In 1991, the eruption of Mount Pinatubo in the Philippines created a haze of sulfur in the higher atmosphere that cooled the entire planet approximately half a degree Celsius for two years afterwards.
Other methods of geoengineering – that is, consciously manipulating the climate – include painting the roofs of houses white in order to increase the reflection of sunlight, covering deserts with reflective plastic, and fertilizing the seas with iron in order to increase the absorption of CO2.
According to the Royal Society in Britain, releasing sulfur particles into the stratosphere would probably be the most cost-effective method.
But our goal should be to avoid such a hazardous enterprise, which future generations would have to continue for hundreds of years.
Instead, we should aim to reduce emissions of CO2 and other pollutants that contribute to global warming.
The Party is Over
MUNICH – With the United States teetering into recession, the global economic boom has ended.
The boom was unusually long and persistent, with four years of roughly 5% growth – a period of sustained economic dynamism not seen since around 1970.
The clearest sign that the boom is ending is the IMF’s forecast of 1.5% growth for the US in 2008.
That may not sound like a recession, but the Fund’s marginally positive projection primarily reflects the growth overhang from 2007, with hardly any new contribution in 2008.
It is compatible with three consecutive quarters of zero growth in 2008.
Many argue that a US recession will no longer affect the world because China has supplanted America as an engine of the global economy.
Wrong.
Although China is growing fast, its economic power remains tiny.
While the US contributes 28% to world GDP, China accounts for only 5%.
The whole of Asia, from Turkey to China, contributes 24%, less than the US alone.
At some stage, the world may no longer catch a cold when the US sneezes, but that is far from being true now.
Twenty-one percent of China’s exports and 23% of the EU’s exports to non-member countries go to the US.
Thus, the world cannot help but be pulled down by a US slump.
The most recent CESifo World Economic Survey (WES) from 90 countries confirms this.
Assessments of the current economic situation and expectations for the next six months have worsened everywhere.
In both western and eastern Europe, the index sank more than in Asia or Latin America.
The decline in the WES indicator during the last two quarters was the sharpest since 2001, when the stock market bubble burst.
In the US, the WES indicator is now below the level of September 11, 2001 and so is the Michigan index of consumer confidence.
For many years, the US has lived beyond its means: a household saving rate close to zero and investment financed solely with foreign funds.
The US current account deficit, which is identical to net capital imports, grew steadily to an annual $811 billion in 2006, or 6% of GDP – by far the largest since the Great Depression.
Year after year, the US managed to sell its assets abroad and enjoy the high life at home.
No longer.
The world has caught on.
Banks everywhere are learning the hard way that the debt with which the US financed its consumption boom will not necessarily be repaid.
The mortgage-backed securities that US banks succeeded in selling to the world are not comparable to European assets with similar names.
In Europe, particularly Germany, a mortgage-backed security ( Pfandbrief ) is an ultra-safe asset, as normally banks finance no more than 60% of a house’s value.
By contrast, such US securities are like a lottery ticket.
US banks finance up to 100% of a house’s value, sometimes even more, and the sub-prime market even includes loans to people without jobs and income.
Many European banks may not have understood this, yet they still shied away from revealing these dubious investments on their balance sheets.
Instead, they placed them in conduits based in low-tax countries.
Those conduits are now showing gigantic losses that have to be covered by the parent banks, some of which are being driven to the brink of bankruptcy.
This spring will show the necessary write-offs in the annual balance sheets, but the full truth will not become known before the 2008 balance sheets are published in the spring of 2009.
As American assets have lost their attractiveness, their prices have dropped.
This has meant either a decline in asset prices quoted in dollars or in dollars quoted in other currencies.
Indeed, adjusted for inflation, the dollar is now nearly as low against the euro as it was against the deutschmark in 1992, when German unification resulted in the breakdown of the European currency system.
The prices of US homes are also declining at an accelerating rate, in many areas by more than 10% per year.
The prices of traded mortgage-backed securities have followed house prices down.
Only US stock market prices have remained relatively stable.
Second, with banks losing substantial amounts of equity capital – estimates now reach $300 billion and more – the need to maintain minimum equity-debt ratios will force them to curtail business lending, hindering investment demand.
True, the US Federal Reserve has tried to prevent a recession by cutting its interest rates.
But the Fed cannot endow the banks with new equity capital and prevent a credit crunch.
More promising is the $150 billion tax cut that the US Congress recently enacted.
Equivalent to 1% of US GDP, it is large by all accounts.
Whether it is enough to compensate homeowners for the wealth losses resulting from declining house prices and to prevent the impending recession remains to be seen.
But, whatever happens, the party is over.
The PC Turns 25
In August 1981, IBM introduced the 5150 personal computer.
It was not really the first personal computer, but it turned out to be “The Personal Computer,” and it revolutionized not just business life, but also the way people thought about the world.
The 1981 PC was a break with IBM’s previous business model, according to which it did not sell computers, but leased them.
With the 5150, IBM moved into mass production of a standardized commodity using components produced by other companies.
“Big Blue” (as IBM is known) allowed other companies (notably the infant Microsoft) to develop its software.
No good deed goes unpunished: by making the PC, IBM practically destroyed itself as a company.
Its innovation gave rise to a huge number of new and dynamic companies, forcing IBM to reinvent itself completely in order to compete with them – just one example of the socially transformative effects of the PC.
Before 1981, visionaries who thought about the impact of technology on society believed that the computer would allow a centralization of knowledge and power.
This was the world of George Orwell’s Big Brother, the extrapolation of the twentieth century’s experience of totalitarianism.
Powerful computers led to potent states and powerful and centrally directed business corporations.
The PC seemed at first to promise a restoration of the balance in favor of the individual.
Computing became decentralized, and the new flexibility produced a sense that control was moving away from big agglomerations of power – whether governments or companies.
It is not surprising that the triumph of the PC seemed to be accompanied by a revival of the nineteenth-century vision of classical liberalism and individualism.
The idea was that an individual could buy a computer and the software needed for a specific (and increasingly complicated) purpose, and immediately generate a productive result.
Indeed, within a few years, individuals would possess in a small machine as much computing power as the mainframe IBM 360’s that had revolutionized centralized computing in the 1960’s.
But this initial triumph of the PC (and very substantial sales in the 1980’s) did not immediately fulfill all the initial hopes for individual empowerment and social transformation.
It did not seem to produce many efficiency gains, despite enormous investments in information technology.
Immense amounts of time were wasted in enterprises by informal requests for assistance, forcing knowledgeable workers to become computer gurus in order to aid their colleagues.
The initial disappointment about electronic productivity was thus a vivid demonstration of the limits of classical individualism.
Only with inter-connection in the 1990’s, above all through the Internet, did the PC realize its potential.
Suddenly, economists (especially in the United States) began to measure substantial productivity gains.
New forms of activity – Internet auctions, Internet encyclopedias, Internet chat rooms –reproduced over a much wider area the interactions of individuals.
Interlinked PC’s really created a sense of a vibrant social market.
Individuals could realize themselves, as in the old nineteenth-century model, but only to the extent that they interacted with as many other people as possible.
It was these interactions, rather than the individual on his or her own, that created value and set in motion a dynamic process.
The potential was alluring, but also terrifying.
The linking of PC’s produced scares about the potential dangers of the new world.
People were afraid of malevolent computer viruses that would sweep the world and destroy information and programs in the space of a few hours.
There was widespread fear that dependence on computers would produce a millennial catastrophe, as hospitals, airplanes, power grids, and communications would all grind to a halt when 1999 became 2000.
These traumas required responses very different from previous technological changes.
Government regulation was incapable of dealing with the issues involved, although it was certainly helpful to devise ways of making destructive hackers criminally responsible.
Nor would innovation by one company help.
A solution required generally collaborative efforts – of a sort that corresponded to an ancient vision of civic republicanism rather than the modern ideas of centralized power or isolated and autonomous individuals.
Some observers believe that this interconnectivity has now, after a quarter-century, made the PC obsolete.
There are more specialized applications of computing and information technology in smart machines and mobile telephones, whose defining characteristic is that they communicate with each other.
But the alleged obsolescence of the PC is actually a sign of how basic it has become to a new vision of society.
We need to celebrate, advertise, and propagandize new innovations only when their success is questionable, before they have become widely accepted.
In the eighteenth century, cheap and washable cotton undergarments produced a revolution in hygiene, but soon this had become so commonplace that the cotton revolution no longer generated any excitement.
The PC has become the modern equivalent of cotton: so basic has it become to our lives that, despite the fact that around 200 million PC’s are sold each year, it now simply generates an electronic yawn.
But, like the cotton revolution, the true measure of the social and political transformations wrought by the PC will become clear only after a much longer time.
The People Versus Putin
I helped select Vladimir Putin to succeed Russia’s first democratically elected President, Boris Yeltsin.
Because KGB/Mafia structures now rule Russia and manipulate the judicial system, it is assumed that Yeltsin wanted to handpick his successor in order to avoid future prosecution.
But we who chose Putin were charged with finding someone to continue Yeltsin’s reforms, not shield him and his family.
Indeed, Yeltsin was fearless, and sought not his personal survival, but the survival of the democratic idea that he introduced to Russia.
Yet that idea is now under threat because of the successor we chose.
I don’t deny my responsibility for supporting Putin.
We weren’t close friends, but he and I worked together in critical situations, and I never doubted his sincerity.
Putin acts according to his convictions. The problem is that his convictions – including his belief that Russia can prosper only if it is ruled by a single source of power – are wrong.
This gross error is leading Russia to political ruin.
Of course, no one holds high office without making mistakes, even fundamental ones, and this is especially true in tumultuous periods.
Yeltsin was no exception, but he recognized his errors.
When he retired on New Year’s Eve 1999, for example, he asked forgiveness for launching the war in Chechnya.
Putin, by contrast, seems incapable of recognizing and admitting his mistakes, and persists in a policy long after its failure is visible to the world.
One of Yeltsin’s errors was his failure to put moral priorities at the head of his reform agenda.
Russia should have repented for Stalinism and the gulag system.
The whole nation, with no exception, should have repented, the way the Germans have repented since 1945.
This failure matters, for it allowed Putin’s unqualified belief in central authority to lead to the recapture of the state by the security services.
Indeed, a direct result of national repentance for the gulag era should have been the banning of the communist party and the disqualification from political office of those who worked in the KGB.
Although such political screenings are complicated in postcommunist societies, where both victimhood and collaboration were so widespread – and the lines between them so often blurred – a sound solution could have been found, as in the Czech Republic.
Doing nothing left Russia’s security structures unscathed and able to make a political comeback, which they have now achieved.
The political resurrection of KGB structures under Putin, and their efforts to silence dissent, has once again turned Russia into a country of defectors.
It is impossible to silence independent politicians and independent media without choking off independent sources of money, which is why Putin’s Kremlin has concentrated its attacks on the so-called “oligarchs.”
Mikhail Khodorkovsky’s arrest and trial were orchestrated for precisely this reason.
By removing independent sources of money, the security services that dominate the Kremlin hope to destroy independent political life in Russia.
Without independent bases of thought, a climate of fear is taking hold. But fear is not only degrading; it makes for poor governance.
Yeltsin intuitively understood that fear and top-down, centralized decision-making were no way to rule a modern country, and he therefore insisted on reforming relations between citizens and the state.
Putin still doesn’t understand that a centralized political system is as incapable of comprehending and correcting mistakes now as it was in the Soviet era.
Not being a well-educated man Putin is, in full and deep sincerity, leading Russia toward the same disintegration that accompanied the collapse of the Soviet state.
People are beginning to realize this.
They see that Putin’s desire to create a strong and effective modern state cannot be realized, because a modern state is governed not from above, but by an informed citizenry that forces its rulers to acknowledge and correct their mistakes.
Putin, too, also seems to suspect his regime’s impotence.
This is one reason why Russia has become so aggressive with its neighbors, Ukraine and Georgia, and seeks to maintain a military presence in places like Transdniestria, the breakaway region of Moldova.
By throwing its weight around in Russia’s near abroad, the Kremlin thinks that it can convince Russians back home of its omnipotence.
Given the neutered debates in Russia, and the Kremlin’s ability to manipulate elections, regime change is the only option left for those who want to preserve the democratic idea in Russia.
There is no use holding onto illusions.
Those who oppose Putin must decide what they want and declare that, if the regime fails to uphold the constitution, they have the right to force it to do so by any means necessary.
Today, the question of power in Russia can no longer be decided solely at the ballot box.
As in Ukraine, Lebanon, and Kyrgizstan, it will be decided in the streets.
The Perfect Storm of a Global Recession
NEW YORK – The probability is growing that the global economy – not just the United States – will experience a serious recession.
Recent developments suggest that all G7 economies are already in recession or close to tipping into one.
This looming global recession is being fed by several factors: the collapse of housing bubbles in the US, United Kingdom, Spain, Ireland and other euro-zone members; punctured credit bubbles where money and credit was too easy for too long; the severe credit and liquidity crunch following the US mortgage crisis; the negative wealth and investment effects of falling stock markets (already down by more than 20% globally); the global effects via trade links of the recession in the US (which still counts for about 30% of global GDP); the US dollar’s weakness, which reduces American trading partners’ competitiveness; and the stagflationary effects of high oil and commodity prices, which are forcing central banks to increase interest rates to fight inflation at a time when there are severe downside risks to growth and financial stability.
Official data suggest that the US economy entered into a recession in the first quarter of this year.
The economy rebounded – in a double-dip, W-shaped recession – in the second quarter, boosted by the temporary effects on consumption of $100 billion in tax rebates.
But those effects will fade by late summer.
The UK, Spain, and Ireland are experiencing similar developments, with housing bubbles deflating and excessive consumer debt undercutting retail sales, thus leading to recession.
Even in Italy, France, Greece, Portugal, Iceland, and the Baltic states, frothy housing markets are starting to slacken.
Small wonder, then, that production, sales, and consumer and business confidence are falling throughout the euro zone.
Elsewhere, Japan is contracting, too.
Japan used to grow modestly for two reasons: strong exports to the US and a weak yen.
Now, exports to the US are falling while the yen has strengthened.
Moreover, high oil prices in a country that imports all of its oil needs, together with falling business profitability and confidence, are pushing Japan into a recession.
The last of the G7 economies, Canada, should have benefited from high energy and commodity prices, but its GDP shrank in the first quarter, owing to the contracting US economy.
Indeed, three quarters of Canada’s exports go to the US, while foreign demand accounts for a quarter of its GDP.
So every G7 economy is now headed toward recession.
Other smaller economies (mostly the new members of the EU, which all have large current-account deficits) risk a sudden reversal of capital inflows; this may already be occurring in Latvia and Estonia, as well as in Iceland and New Zealand. 
This G7 recession will lead to a sharp growth slowdown in emerging markets and likely tip the overall global economy into a recession.
Those economies that are dependent on exports to the US and Europe and that have large current-account surpluses (China, most of Asia, and most other emerging markets) will suffer from the G7 recession.
Those with large current-account deficits (India, South Africa, and more than 20 economies in East Europe from the Baltics to Turkey) may suffer from the global credit crunch.
Commodity exporters (Russia, Brazil, and others in the Middle East, Asia, Africa, and Latin America) will suffer as the G7 recession and global slowdown drive down energy and other commodity prices by as much as 30%.
Countries that allowed their currencies to appreciate relative to the dollar will experience a sharp slowdown in export growth.
Those experiencing rising and now double-digit inflation will have to raise interest rates, while other high-inflation countries will lose export competitiveness.
Falling oil and commodity prices – already down 15% from their peaks – will somewhat reduce stagflationary forces in the global economy, yet inflation is becoming more entrenched via a vicious circle of rising prices, wages, and costs.
This will constrain the ability of central banks to respond to the downside risks to growth.
In advanced economies, however, inflation will become less of a problem for central banks by the end of this year, as slack in product markets reduces firms’ pricing power and higher unemployment constrains wage growth.
To be sure, all G7 central banks are worried about the temporary rise in headline inflation, and all are threatening to hike interest rates.
Nevertheless, the risk of a severe recession – and of a serious banking and financial crisis – will ultimately force all G7 central banks to cut rates.
The problem is that, especially outside the US, this monetary loosening will occur only when the G7 and global recession become entrenched.
Thus, the policy response will be too little, and will come too late, to prevent it.
The Perilous Fantasy of Energy Independence
The paradox of today’s quest for energy independence is that pursuing it actually increases energy insecurity.
However much politicians who call for energy independence might prefer it otherwise, the market has chosen oil as a staple energy source.
So governments should ignore neither the valid interests of oil exporters, on whom consumers in their countries depend, nor exporters’ reaction to the rhetoric of energy independence or to steps taken to achieve it.
Isolationist politicians may not care about other countries, but they should think twice lest they harm their own.
The biggest threats to the world’s energy security are not terrorist attacks or embargoes by oil-producing countries – short-term events that can be dealt with quickly and effectively through various measures, including reliance on strategic petroleum reserves, increases in production, and diversion of oil shipments.
Instead, the main threat to the long-term sustainability of energy supplies is the mismatch between investment in additional capacity and energy infrastructure, on one hand, and growth in demand for energy on the other.
Major oil exporters could respond in a variety of ways to political posturing on energy, most of which would exacerbate rather than ameliorate the global energy situation.
One of the most plausible scenarios in response to calls by governments and politicians around the world to reduce or even eliminate dependence on oil is a relative decline in investment in additional production capacity in the oil-producing countries.
An energy crisis in this case is almost certain if those who press for energy independence fail to provide a workable alternative in a timely manner.
Of course, these efforts will almost surely fail to replace oil within a reasonable time, as they are not market-driven and require heavy subsidies.
Indeed, confronted by political leaders’ hostile rhetoric, oil producers have a strong incentive to increase production in order to lower oil prices to levels that undermine the economic feasibility of alternative energy sources – a logical interventionist policy to counter the anti-oil interventionist policies of consuming countries.
After all, a collapse in oil prices would be a death sentence for several new energy technologies, and, not incidentally, would increase demand for oil.
Even if the oil producing countries do not intentionally bring about an oil price collapse, they might accelerate production as much as they could in the short term, while oil still had some value.
But lower oil prices, coupled with expectations of a decline in demand, would in turn put pressure on oil-producing countries to reduce planned investments in production capacity or even to mothball major projects, as they have done in the past, leading to a decline in oil supplies.
Thus, if alternative energy technologies did not come on-line by the time oil production started to fall, global shortages would become inevitable, while closing the investment deficit would take years, even in the face of rising oil prices.
In spite of these possibilities, let’s assume that plans for energy independence succeed, and that several European countries, the United States, Japan, China, and India become self-sufficient.
Major oil exporters could then seek to use their now less-valuable oil at home as cheap fuel for an expanded heavy industrial sector.
Instead of exporting oil directly, they could export their energy embedded in metals, chemicals, and manufactured products at prices that undercut anything producers in the oil-consuming countries, especially Europe and the US, could match, given their dependence on higher-cost alternative energy sources.
Energy independence thus could destroy entire industries, especially petrochemicals, aluminum, and steel.
In fact, cheap energy in oil-producing countries might make their new industries competitive with those in China, India, and Southeast Asia.
The net result would be a loss of jobs and weakened economies.
Countries might end up energy-independent, only to become steel-dependent or petrochemical-dependent.
So what would come next?
Would politicians, with their perpetual fascination with “independence,” attempt to eliminate dependence one commodity at a time?
Put another way, would the cause of “energy independence” seek to reverse globalization?
Oil is a finite resource.
Only long-term, market-oriented, economically viable, and sustainable energy options can ensure economic growth in both producing and consuming countries.
Isolationist policies, by contrast, always lead to shortages and discontent.
No matter how energy independence is pursued, it will never amount to anything other than an unattainable – and potentially dangerous – fantasy.
The Perils of 2012
KOLKATA – The year 2011 will be remembered as the time when many ever-optimistic Americans began to give up hope.
President John F. Kennedy once said that a rising tide lifts all boats.
But now, in the receding tide, Americans are beginning to see not only that those with taller masts had been lifted far higher, but also that many of the smaller boats had been dashed to pieces in their wake.
In that brief moment when the rising tide was indeed rising, millions of people believed that they might have a fair chance of realizing the “American Dream.”
Now those dreams, too, are receding.
By 2011, the savings of those who had lost their jobs in 2008 or 2009 had been spent.
Unemployment checks had run out.
Headlines announcing new hiring – still not enough to keep pace with the number of those who would normally have entered the labor force – meant little to the 50 year olds with little hope of ever holding a job again.
Indeed, middle-aged people who thought that they would be unemployed for a few months have now realized that they were, in fact, forcibly retired.
Young people who graduated from college with tens of thousands of dollars of education debt cannot find any jobs at all.
People who moved in with friends and relatives have become homeless.
Houses bought during the property boom are still on the market or have been sold at a loss.
More than seven million American families have lost their homes.
The dark underbelly of the previous decade’s financial boom has been fully exposed in Europe as well.
Dithering over Greece and key national governments’ devotion to austerity began to exact a heavy toll last year.
Contagion spread to Italy.
Spain’s unemployment, which had been near 20% since the beginning of the recession, crept even higher.
The unthinkable – the end of the euro – began to seem like a real possibility.
This year is set to be even worse.
It is possible, of course, that the United States will solve its political problems and finally adopt the stimulus measures that it needs to bring down unemployment to 6% or 7% (the pre-crisis level of 4% or 5% is too much to hope for).
But this is as unlikely as it is that Europe will figure out that austerity alone will not solve its problems.&nbsp; &nbsp;On the contrary, austerity will only exacerbate the economic slowdown.
Without growth, the debt crisis – and the euro crisis – will only worsen.
And the long crisis that began with the collapse of the housing bubble in 2007 and the subsequent recession will continue.&nbsp;
Moreover, the major emerging-market countries, which steered successfully through the storms of 2008 and 2009, may not cope as well with the problems looming on the horizon.
Brazil’s growth has already stalled, fueling anxiety among its neighbors in Latin America.
Meanwhile, long-term problems – including climate change and other environmental threats, and increasing inequality in most countries around the world – have not gone away.
Some have grown more severe.
For example, high unemployment has depressed wages and increased poverty.
The good news is that addressing these long-term problems would actually help to solve the short-term problems.
Increased investment to retrofit the economy for global warming would help to stimulate economic activity, growth, and job creation.
More progressive taxation, in effect redistributing income from the top to the middle and bottom, would simultaneously reduce inequality and increase employment by boosting total demand.
Higher taxes at the top could generate revenues to finance needed public investment, and to provide some social protection for those at the bottom, including the unemployed.
Even without widening the fiscal deficit, such “balanced budget” increases in taxes and spending would lower unemployment and increase output.
The worry, however, is that politics and ideology on both sides of the Atlantic, but especially in the US, will not allow any of this to occur.
As a result, global economic rebalancing is likely to accelerate, almost inevitably giving rise to political tensions.
With all of the problems confronting the global economy, we will be lucky if these strains do not begin to manifest themselves within the next twelve months.
Going Against Conventional Wisdom
CAMBRIDGE – When I finished my graduate studies in 1974, I had the wonderful fortune of doing postdoctoral work with Harvard Medical School’s Judah Folkman.
Dr. Folkman had a theory that the progression of tumors could be arrested by cutting off their source of nourishment.
He suggested that tumors emit a substance called tumor-angiogenesis factor, which causes surrounding blood vessels to grow toward it, supplying nutrition and removing waste.
Folkman hypothesized that this process, angiogenesis, is crucial to the tumor’s survival.
This theory went strongly against conventional wisdom.
Scientists who reviewed Folkman’s grants said that the new blood vessels were simply due to inflammation.
But Folkman persevered, and eventually he proved that such chemical substances do exist.
Today, four decades later, such substances have been used to treat more than 10 million people with neovascular diseases such as macular degeneration and many different forms of cancer.
I had a similar experience when I was working in his lab, trying to isolate the first inhibitors of blood-vessel growth (which were large-molecular-weight substances).
This required developing a bioassay that would enable us to observe the inhibition of blood-vessel growth in the presence of tumors.
Given that tumors take several months to grow, biocompatible systems had to be developed that could release proteins and other large-molecular-weight substances slowly and continuously in the body – something that scientists were convinced was impossible.
However, after two years of work, I discovered that I could modify certain types of polymers to release molecules of virtually any size over a 100-day period.
For several years, many of the field’s most respected chemists and engineers said that our work had to be incorrect.
The negative feedback had practical consequences, inhibiting my ability not only to secure research grants, but also to find faculty positions (especially given the work’s interdisciplinary nature, which made it difficult to fit into a single university department).
But I kept at it, and, step by step, addressed different key issues – such as biocompatibility, manufacturing, reproducibility of release, and bioactivity.
Today, systems based on these principles have been used to treat more than 20 million people.
Another area I started thinking about involved creating new polymer materials.
Working in a hospital, I saw that almost all polymers used in medicine were derived from household objects.
For example, the materials used in girdles for women are used in artificial hearts because of their good flex life.
The polymers in mattress stuffing are used in breast implants.
Yet such an approach often leads to problems.
Artificial hearts, for example, can cause clots to form when blood hits their surface – the girdle material – and these clots can cause strokes and death.
So I began thinking that we needed to find alternatives to solving medical problems other than by searching for materials in everyday settings.
I believed that researchers could take an engineering-design approach: Ask the question, “What do we really want in a biomaterial from the standpoints of engineering, chemistry, and biology?” and then synthesize the materials from first principles.
As a proof of principle, we decided to synthesize a new family of biodegradable polymers, called polyanhydrides, for medical use.
The first step was to select monomers – a polymer’s building blocks – that would be safe in the human body.
We then synthesized these polymers and discovered that by changing their composition, we could make them last in the body for a period ranging from days to years.
With Henry Brem, now the chief of neurosurgery at Johns Hopkins Hospital, we thought we could use these polymers to deliver drugs locally in the treatment of brain cancer.
But I had to raise money for this project, so I wrote grant applications to government agencies that were reviewed by other professors.
Their reviews were very negative.
In our first grant proposal, in 1981, the reviewers said that we would never be able to synthesize the polymers.
Yet one of my graduate students synthesized the polymers for his doctoral thesis.
We sent the proposal back for another review, only to be told that the grant should still not be funded, because the polymers would react with whatever drug we wanted to deliver.
Several researchers in our lab showed that there was no reaction.
We returned the proposal for another review; it came back with the comment that the polymers were fragile and would break.
This time, two other researchers addressed the problem.
The revised proposal was sent again for evaluation, and now the reviewers’ reason for rejecting it was that new polymers would not be safe to test on animals or people.
Another graduate student showed that the polymers were safe.
Such reviews continued for a long time; but, in 1996, the Food and Drug Administration approved the treatment – the first new treatment for brain cancer to be approved in more than 20 years.
Moreover, the FDA’s approval of polymer-based local chemotherapy created a new paradigm in the drug-delivery field, helping to pave the way for drug-eluting stents and other local delivery systems.
Something similar happened when Jay Vacanti, a surgeon at Massachusetts General Hospital, and I had an idea in the 1980’s to combine three-dimensional synthetic polymer scaffolds with cells to create new tissues and organs.
Once again, the idea was met with great skepticism, and it was extremely difficult to obtain peer-reviewed government grants.
Today, this concept has become a cornerstone of tissue engineering and regenerative medicine, leading to the creation of artificial skin for patients with burns or skin ulcers – and someday, one hopes, to the creation of many other tissues and organs.
My experiences are hardly unique.
Scientists throughout history have often had to fight conventional wisdom to validate their discoveries.
In modern times, Stanley Prusiner’s discovery of prions, Barry Marshall and Robin Warren’s findings that bacteria can cause peptic ulcers, and Dan Shechtman’s determination of the structure of quasicrystals are just a few examples (all received Nobel Prizes for their research).
The lessons are simple to understand, if difficult to master: Don’t believe everything you read, be willing to challenge dogma, and recognize that you may pay a price for it career-wise in the short run, even if you are correct.
But the rewards of scientific discovery are worth it: technology advances, and the world can become much better for it.
The Perils of Financial Historicism