For many democrats, it was a force for peace and social justice, minimizing the power of special interests and teaching citizens about fairness and international understanding.
We should not romanticize this earlier era of free trade.
Poverty did not vanish.
Many British people believed in a “Free Trade Empire.”
Others fanned the flames of Anglo-German antagonism, caricaturing protectionist Germany as a barbarian society surviving on horse sausages and dog-meat; Lloyd George, the future prime minister, told audiences that he was more afraid of the German sausage than he was of the German navy.
One reason that free trade defeated protectionism in Britain a century ago was that its supporters appealed to people’s emotions and identities, not just their rational interest in more wealth and cheap food.
Liberals and radicals organized traveling shows, color posters, and political entertainment.
In towns, displays in shop windows illustrated the costs of tariffs to ordinary consumers.
In the countryside, people watched political slide shows late into the night.
Meetings in seaside resorts reached almost a million people in 1910.
When was the last time you went to the beach and found yourself pulled into a debate about tariffs?
The First World War and the 1920’s shattered any naïve belief in pure free trade.
Like today, consumers discovered that markets could leave them helpless, leading to calls for regulation.
Internationalists had to come to terms with the simple fact that, on its own, trade did not automatically enable peace.
Economic globalization had outpaced politics, creating new tensions over oil and other strategic resources.
Political institutions needed to catch up.
Bretton Woods and the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade created a new order after the Second World War.
In economic terms, they have had considerable success.
Tariffs have fallen, although non-tariff barriers and preferential agreements have been on the rise.
But in terms of democratic culture, GATT also led to a further separation of trade from everyday politics.
This is why free trade has been left so defenseless in the face of anti-globalization protests.
The good news is that people have not stopped caring about the ethics of trade.
On the contrary, they have switched to other movements like fair trade and trade justice.
To be fair, the WTO under Pascal Lamy has tried to reach out to such groups.
Still, there is a long way to go to reconnect freer trade with citizenship and global solidarity.
History shows that doing so is both possible and necessary.
The Forty-Year Palestinian Tragedy
Forty years ago, Israel captured the West Bank, Gaza, and the Golan Heights after a lightning six-day war that repelled the armies of Egypt, Jordan, and Syria.
Today, ending the occupation of Palestinian territories that began that June seems as distant a dream as ever.
The Somalia-like chaos and civil war that is now unfolding in Gaza as a result of this decades-old stalemate can be blamed partly on ill-conceived Israeli policies, and partly on an American administration that, for six long years, relegated the cause of Israeli-Palestinian peace to the bottom of its agenda.
But it is misleading to attribute the failure of the Palestinians to develop an orderly system of self-government only to the pernicious effects of Israeli occupation and American policies.
The Palestinian crisis is first and foremost one of leadership.
True, Yasser Arafat was not a model democrat, but his charisma and political acumen were crucial for holding all the Palestinian factions together.
Now, not even Fatah, Arafat’s own party, can claim to be a coherent organization.
Hamas’ electoral victory in January 2006 was to a large extent due to Fatah’s fragmentation under Arafat’s successor, Mahmoud Abbas.
With no effective central authority to inspire fear or respect and the PLO devoid of legitimacy precisely because of its refusal to give Hamas its rightful share in the organization, a grotesquely ineffective brand of “cohabitation” between a Fatah president and a Hamas prime minister has emerged.
As a result, Palestinian politics has degenerated into a naked struggle for the spoils of power.
Last February’s Mecca agreement, which created the Fatah-Hamas unity government, was supposed to establish a civilized system of power-sharing.
But that deal now appears to be collapsing.
The current flare-up is largely due to the fact that Fatah, encouraged by the international community’s boycott of Hamas, never really accepted its electoral defeat and Hamas’s right to govern.
Moreover, since Hamas’s rise to power, Fatah’s challenge to the new Palestinian rulers was enhanced by lavish financial support it secured from the United States and Europe, and by a generous supply of weapons from both the US and Arab countries.
Thus, the current conflict is essentially a pre-emptive war by Hamas – aggravated by lawlessness and banditry, clashing free-lance militias, tribes, and families, and a spiral of senseless massacres – to prevent Fatah from being turned by the international community into a formidable challenger to its democratic right to govern.
For Hamas, this is a life-and-death struggle.
It has not shrunk from bombarding Abbas’s presidential compound, attacking Fatah’s command centers, and targeting Fatah military leaders like Rashid Abu Shbak, the commander of Fatah’s internal security and many others, all of them lieutenants of the supreme Fatah military authority in the Gaza strip, Mohamed Dahlan.
Hamas’s determination to assert its authority can be gauged by the desecrated corpses of Fatah fighters, many of them with bullets fired at their heads, a practice dubbed “confirmation of death.”
The rocket attacks against Israeli territory are a transparent attempt to divert attention and rally the masses around Hamas as the true champions of the Palestinian cause.
Tragically, all this is not only about human victims, but also about the Palestinians’ political horizon.
Three times in their history – in 1937,1947, and 2000 – the Palestinians were offered a state, and three times their leaders failed to meet the challenge – admittedly never an easy one for a nation built on such an unwavering ethos of dispossession.
Today, when America finally understands how vital an Israeli-Palestinian peace is for its fortunes in the broader Middle East, and the Arab world is for the first time committed to pursuing a comprehensive settlement with Israel, anarchic Palestinian politics is making a decision for peace well nigh impossible.
However vibrant, Israel’s democracy is not exactly manageable or predictable, either.
But although Prime Minister Ehud Olmert might seek to regain his popular credibility by a major new peace demarche, the two-headed Palestinian Authority, always a dubious partner in the eyes of the Israelis, is now more suspect than ever.
“Every day that goes by only causes more people to wish for the renewal of the Israeli occupation of Gaza.
Let the Jews come already and save us!”
But that despairing hope, uttered by a desperate Gazan, will not materialize.
Israel will avoid at all costs a large ground incursion.
Yet, engaged in a war driven by fury and vengeance, the Israelis are now focused again on a manhunt for gang chieftains, targeted killings of Hamas squads, and the arrest of its political leaders, not on peace overtures.
Only a dramatic move by external powers can still save Gaza from becoming a second Mogadishu and both Palestinians and Israelis from a total war that would only breed more rage and desperation.
For the building blocks of a renewed peace process to be sustainable, an international force must be deployed along Gaza’s border with Egypt to prevent the constant smuggling of weapons and isolate the conflict.
Simultaneously, the international community must help make the unity government work by recognizing Hamas’ right to govern in exchange for a performance-based stability plan.
The Fragility of a Flat World
The world is flat!
So says the columnist Thomas Friedman, who chose that provocative title for his bestselling book to awaken people to the dramatic effects that technology is having on the world economy.
Distance is shrinking.
Geographical barriers no longer provide easy protection.
Manufacturing workers and high-tech professionals alike in Europe and America are being challenged by global competition.
Western consumers who call a local company are likely to speak to someone in India.
Skeptics have pointed to the limits of Friedman’s metaphor.
As one put it, the world is not flat, but “spiky.”
A contour map of economic activity in the world would show mountains of prosperity and many ravines of deprivation.
Moreover, distance is far from dead.
Even neighbors with low tariff barriers, like Canada and the United States, trade more internally than across borders.
Seattle and Vancouver are close geographically, but Vancouver trades more with distant Toronto than with nearby Seattle.
Such criticism notwithstanding, Friedman makes an important point.
Globalization, which can be defined as interdependence at inter-continental distances, is as old as human history. Witness the migration of peoples and religions, or trade along the ancient silk route that connected medieval Europe and Asia.
But globalization today is different, because it is becoming quicker and thicker.
After the first trans-Atlantic cable in 1868, Europe and America could communicate in a minute.
In 1919, the economist John Maynard Keynes described the possibility of an Englishman in London using a telephone to order goods from around the world to be delivered to his house by the afternoon.
But Keynes’s Englishman was wealthy and thus exceptional.
Today, hundreds of millions of people around the world have access to global goods in their local supermarkets.
Similarly, as recently as two decades ago, instantaneous global communication existed, but was economically out of reach for most people.
Now, virtually anyone can enter an Internet café and enjoy a capability that was once available only to governments, multinational corporations, and a few individuals or organizations with large budgets.
Tremendous declines in computing, communication, and transport costs have democratized technology.
Only a decade ago, two-thirds of all Internet users were in the US.
Today, less than a quarter are located there.
Knowledge is power, and more people have access to information today than at any time in human history.
Non-state actors now have capabilities that were once limited to governments.
The nation-state is not about to be replaced as the dominant institution of world politics, but it will have to share the stage with more actors, including organizations like Oxfam, celebrities like Bono, and transnational terrorist networks like Al Qaeda.
But flattening is reversible.
It has happened before.
The world economy was highly integrated in 1914, but economic interdependence declined during the next three decades.
The global economy did not recover that same level of integration until 1970, and even then it remained divided by the Iron Curtain.
World War I was the trigger that set off the reversal, with economic globalization declining while military globalization increased, as witnessed by two world wars and a global cold war.
This reflected deeper problems of domestic inequality created by nineteenth-century economic progress.
Politics did not keep pace, and the result was the rise of pathological ideologies – fascism and communism – that divided nations and the world.
The creation of the welfare state in Western countries after World War II helped to create a safety net for people disadvantaged by economic change, thereby encouraging them to accept the return of international economic interdependence.
Some analysts see China playing a role today similar to Germany’s role in the twentieth century.
A rising power, beset with internal inequality, turns to nationalism and challenges the dominant power, provoking a war that turns back the progress of economic globalization.
While the American and Chinese economies are highly interdependent today, so, too, were Germany and Britain before 1914.
But the analogy is imperfect.
Germany had surpassed Britain in industrial production by 1900.
Even at its current high rates of growth, China’s economy is unlikely to equal that of the US for at least two more decades.
The greater threat to a flat world is likely to come from the non-state and transnational forces that have been unleashed by the diffusion of technology.
On September 11, 2001, a non-state network killed more Americans in a surprise attack than the government of Japan did at Pearl Harbor in 1941.
I have called this the privatization of war.
If such actors obtain nuclear and biological materials, the world will look very different.
Borders will become harder to cross for both people and goods.
And if such actors disrupt the flow of oil from the Persian Gulf, home to two-thirds of the world’s reserves, a global depression like that of the 1930’s could strengthen protectionism further.
Globalization has two driving forces: technology and policy.
Thus far, policy has reinforced the flattening effects of technology.
As the world’s largest economy, the US has taken the lead in promoting policies that reduce barriers.
But the events described above could reverse such policies.
Some critics of globalization might welcome such an outcome.
But the result, as we saw after 1914, would be the worst of both worlds – reversal of the economic globalization that spreads technology and power, but reinforcement of negative dimensions of military and ecological globalization, such as war, terror, climate change, and the spread of infectious diseases.
In that case, the flat world could become a desert.
The French Cul de Sac
PARIS – As France’s presidential election looms, the country is approaching a breaking point.
For three decades, under both the right and the left, the country has pursued the same incompatible, if not contradictory, goals.
With the sovereign-debt crisis pushing French banks – and thus the French economy – to the wall, something will have to give, and soon.
When the crunch comes – almost certainly in the year or two following the election – it will cause radical, wrenching change, perhaps even more far-reaching than Charles de Gaulle’s coup d’état, which led to the establishment of the Fifth Republic in 1958.
Most French politicians and bureaucrats call such notions scaremongering.
After all, aren’t key indicators like debt ratios or budget-deficit trends worse in the United States and Britain?
Indeed, France’s predicament might seem comparable with the “Anglo Saxons,” were it not for the French political class’s beloved baby, the euro.
While the euro has not caused France’s economic problems, its politicians’ commitment to the single currency represents an insurmountable barrier to solving them.
The basic problem is that the country’s super-generous welfare state (public spending amounts to about 57% of GDP in 2010, compared to 51% in the United Kingdom and 48% in Germany) stifles the growth needed for the euro to remain viable.
The most serious structural flaws concern high payroll taxes and labor-market regulation, which make it difficult – or at least prohibitively expensive – for firms to reduce their workforce when business conditions worsen.
The OECD reports that in 2010, France’s “tax wedge” (income taxes plus employee and employer social-security contributions minus cash transfers as a percentage of total labor costs) was at least 13 percentage points above the OECD average at every level of household income.
The result has been elevated unit labor costs relative to France’s peer group (especially Germany) and stubbornly high unemployment.
During Valery Giscard d’Estaing’s presidency in the 1970’s, unemployment rose every year, reaching 6.3% by 1980.
François Mitterrand promised rapid growth and lower unemployment when he came to power in 1981, but presided over an economic slowdown and rising unemployment.
By 1997, unemployment reached 11.4%, and dipped below 8% in only one year since then (2008).
High unit labor costs and unemployment rates are responsible, in turn, for reducing the trend rate of economic growth, mainly owing to under-utilized labor, while the combination of lackluster growth and an ever-mounting welfare burden has resulted in chronic budget deficits.
The last surplus was in 1974.
The current election campaign is accordingly centered on France’s fiscal position.
Everyone agrees that deficit reduction is required, while differing on how to go about it.
Sarkozy’s proposed cure is to boost growth by reducing the tax burden on employers, while simultaneously hiking the rate of value-added tax.
His main opponent, Socialist leader François Hollande, would impose higher taxes mainly on the wealthy and the financial sector, but also on big business.
With the only effective solutions – full-blown eurozone political union, or abandoning the euro – ruled out, muddling through is all that is left.
Another name for this approach is “transfer union,” which implies relentless economic austerity and declining living standards, because strong countries – first and foremost, Germany – are determined to limit their liability for bailing out deficit countries by making all transfers conditional on tough budget retrenchment.
At the same time, financial markets are forcing fiscal retrenchment on governments, as will the planned new fiscal treaty (on which Germany, among others, insisted).
Demand is therefore being drained out of the eurozone economies, with stronger external demand, stemming from the euro’s depreciation against other major currencies, unable to offset the effect on growth.
The French government expects budget revenues to match all spending except debt service by 2014.
But that forecast assumes continued growth, whereas France is slipping into recession.
So the budget deficit will persist, and more retrenchment will be required.
Will the public grin and bear it, or demand a radical change of direction?
In the latter scenario, the change would be delivered either by a part of the mainstream political class that breaks ranks, or through a successful challenge by a political outsider, whether National Front leader Marine Le Pen on the right or Jean-Luc Mélenchon’s Left Front.
Both parties are campaigning on an anti-euro, protectionist platform.
Sarkozy has adopted a statesmanlike pose, as befits the incumbent, warning voters of the hard grind to come, such as the need to work longer hours for lower hourly pay.
But selling to the French public painful structural change as the price to be paid for “Europe” no longer works.
Hollande’s program, meanwhile, implies that pain can be avoided altogether by loosening European constraints.
He has indicated that, if elected, he would re-negotiate the fiscal treaty and seek to alter the statutes of the European Central Bank – perhaps as an early sign of willingness to break with European orthodoxy.
He is also promising to emulate his predecessors by bringing Germany around to the French point of view – that is, use German fiscal transfers.
That way, France could hold onto its European project at a lower medium-term cost to domestic living standards.
This is the sort of trick that Hollande’s mentor, Mitterrand, was able to pull off.
But that was possible not because of Mitterrand’s superior wiles, but rather because France had a stronger position vis à vis Germany than it does today.
France’s response to the tension between preserving the European project (equated with the single currency) and avoiding a chronically depressed economy will be to put off the day of reckoning for as long as possible.
This dead-end strategy will feature vain attempts to game Germany and desperate economic expedients, such as the essentially coercive capture of domestic savings to finance government debt.
But the day of reckoning will come, and France’s ruling establishment will be judged harshly when it does.
The French Don’t Get It
CAMBRIDGE – The French government just doesn’t seem to understand the real implications of the euro, the single currency that France shares with 16 other European Union countries.
French officials have now reacted to the prospect of a credit rating downgrade by lashing out at Britain.
The head of the central bank, Christian Noyer, has argued that the rating agencies should begin by downgrading Britain.
The finance minister, Francois Baroin, recently declared that, “You’d rather be French than British in economic terms.”
And even the French Prime minister, Francois Fillar, noted that Britain had higher debt and larger deficits than France.
French officials apparently don’t recognize the importance of the fact that Britain is outside the eurozone, and therefore has its own currency, which means that there is no risk that Britain will default on its debt.
When interest and principal on British government debt come due, the British government can always create additional pounds to meet those obligations.
By contrast, the French government and the French central bank cannot create euros.
Indeed, that is precisely what Britain has been doing with its monetary policy: bringing the sterling-euro and sterling-dollar exchange rates down to more competitive levels.
The eurozone fiscal deficits and current-account deficits are now the most obvious symptoms of the euro’s failure.
But the credit crisis in Europe, and the weakness of eurozone banks, may be even more important.
The persistent unemployment differentials within the eurozone are yet another reflection of the adverse effect of imposing a single currency and a single monetary policy on a heterogeneous group of countries.
President Nicolas Sarkozy and other French politicians are no doubt unhappy that the recent European summit failed to advance the cause of further EU political integration.
It was French officials Jean Monnet and Robert Schuman who launched the initiative for European political union just after World War II with the call for a United States of Europe.
The French regarded the creation of the euro as an important symbol of progress toward that goal.
In the 1960’s, Jacques Delors, then the French finance minister, pressed for a single currency with a report, “One Market, One Money,” which implied that the European free-trade agreement would work only if its members used a single currency.
For the French, achieving a European political union is a way to increase Europe’s role in the world and France’s role within Europe.
But that goal looks harder to reach now than it did before the beginning of the European crisis.
By attacking Britain and seeking to increase British borrowing costs, France is only creating more conflict between itself and Britain, while creating more tensions within Europe as a whole.
Looking ahead, stopping the eurozone financial crisis does not require political union or a commitment of German financial support.
It depends on individual eurozone countries – especially Italy, Spain, and France – making the changes in their domestic spending and taxation that will convince global financial investors that they are moving toward budget surpluses and putting their debt-to-GDP ratios on a downward path.
France should focus its attention on its domestic fiscal problems and the dire situation of its commercial banks, rather than lashing out at Britain or calling for political changes that are not going to occur.
The French Death Rattle
As proof of this new realism, the government has been trumpeting its response to the set of policy recommendations that an expert panel led by the business executive Louis Gallois presented two weeks before the downgrade.
The response is centered on a payroll-tax cut, which will be offset by spending cuts and a higher value-added tax.
In the run-up to the downgrade, an analyst at Moody’s said that the decision would be based largely on whether the government heeded the Gallois report’s call for a “competitiveness shock” to France’s economy.
The downgrade thus suggests that Moody’s considered the government’s response insufficient.
In fact, this negative verdict barely scratches the surface of France’s predicament.
The full picture emerges only after examining the motivations behind the government’s inadequate response.
The underlying explanation lies in the culture and prejudices of France’s governing elite, the so-called grands commis formed by the National Civil Service School of which Hollande – like virtually all of his predecessors, except Nicolas Sarkozy – is an alumnus.
In this cloistered world, a prosperous and just society requires a state-directed economy.
This dedication to dirigisme has spawned among the ruling elite a sense of entitlement and hostility to business.
Indeed, for France’s political leaders, business amounts to a zero-sum competition to capture a higher share of total value added for owners and managers, at the expense of labor.
Criticism of this anti-business approach is usually dismissed in France as “ultra-liberal” flailing against the “social model” that the French nation has embraced.
But the example set by Scandinavian countries, which combine a generous welfare state with pro-business policies and traditions, repudiates such claims.
The main difference between the failing French model and the more successful Scandinavian approach lies not in welfare “outputs” (many public services in France, such as the health-care system, remain among the best in the world), but in how they are financed.
The Scandinavian social compact rests on the understanding that citizens must pay high taxes in exchange for public services.
While French public spending – which stood at 56% of GDP in 2011 – is at or above Scandinavian levels, French households pay lower tax rates on consumption and personal income.
The gap is bridged by a mixture of deficit spending and high taxation on employment.
Relentless government borrowing and high payroll taxes (employer-paid social security) have long sustained citizens’ illusion that they are getting something for nothing, while perpetuating successive governments’ misconception that taxing business is a painless way of financing welfare and public services.
But it is increasingly apparent that this approach has undermined public finances and competitiveness – and that households end up picking up the tab.
(In fact, chronically high unemployment has meant that they have been doing so for years.)
Now, citizens are facing higher taxes and cuts to public services.
Defenders of the French system quibble over labor-cost statistics in their efforts to prove that France is not so different from its main European trading partners.
But the facts of the last decade – including a significant loss of export-market share and a 5%-of-GDP deterioration in the current-account balance – paint a different picture.
Moreover, this line of defense misses the point.
The burden of payroll taxes, together with overweening labor-market regulation, stifles entrepreneurship.
If Hollande’s tax hikes – on income (including a temporary 75% tax rate for the country’s wealthiest households), dividends, capital gains, and capital assets – are not enough to deter entrepreneurs, the cost of hiring workers and the difficulty of firing them remain powerful disincentives.
Far from signifying a pro-business shift, Hollande’s government’s response to the Gallois report reflects the French elite’s enduring interventionist mentality.
Instead of implementing deep and permanent cuts in payroll taxes on businesses, the government will give companies a €20 billion ($26 billion) income-tax credit over the next two years.
And, with companies required to apply the rebated cash to investment and job creation, the government has portrayed the measure as a cut in taxes on labor that will boost employment.
But a temporary tax break cannot change incentives.
Furthermore, companies will not receive the cash until 2014-2015, owing to the complexity of France’s tax administration.
And, when they do get it, the state cannot possibly know that reinvesting in the same enterprise will be more beneficial than, say, paying out dividends that shareholders could then use to finance a new venture.
Once again, French lawmakers are acting on the conviction that they know better than market participants.
Apart from promises to reduce employment regulation, all of the new measures boil down to officials directing state money and subsidies to companies and projects of their choosing.
So the death rattle of the French economic model continues.
What remains to be seen is how the end will come.
And, whether it comes in the form of a capital strike by foreign bondholders, or of domestic labor strikes and wider social and political unrest, France’s leaders remain entirely unprepared for the inevitable.
The French Socialists’ New European Identity
The French Socialist Party may well have just saved ratification of the European Union’s draft Constitutional Treaty by France in next summer’s referendum.
At the beginning of December, party members and supporters voted overwhelmingly in favor of the treaty. 
With the popularity of President Jacques Chirac and Prime Minister Jean-Pierre Raffarin – and French rightist forces more broadly – in steep decline, a “no” vote could have tipped the public against ratification.
But the French Socialists’ vote is also important for the European Left.
The French Socialist Party never had its “aggiornamento” or “Bad Godesberg” (where the German SPD in 1959 renounced its last vestiges of Marxism).
Instead, the party long defended the theory of a revolutionary “rupture” with capitalism, never clearly acknowledging its reformist nature.
As a result, French Socialists always positioned themselves to the left of their European partners, giving a major economic role to the state following the big nationalizations that took place in 1981 after François Mitterrand was first elected president.
Later it fought against Tony Blair’s “Third Way” and Gerhard Schröder’s “new center” in the late 1990’s.
The party did choose Europe over dogma in 1983, when Mitterrand decided to remain in the European Monetary System.
But the party never debated or theorized this choice, simply accepting former Prime Minister Lionel Jospin’s claim that the fiscal stability and financial modernization resulting from the decision was but a “parenthesis.”
That December vote on the EU Constitutional Treaty closed this parenthesis: by approving of it, the Socialists consciously accepted a reformist, social democratic, European identity.
They have positioned themselves as a great power on the left, with a central position in the European Socialist Party, offering an alternative to the prescriptions of New Labour and the SPD. 
This outcome did not come without a fight.
Powerful mainstream Socialists, such as former Prime Minister Laurent Fabius, joined traditional leftist minorities in the party – either rigidly euroskeptic or unrealistically euromaximalist – to rally around refusal.
This stance came as a shock from Fabius, a signatory of the Single Act of 1986, a party leader during the Maastricht Treaty negotiations, and Finance Minister when France adopted the euro in 2001.
Clearly, political calculations played a role: Fabius intuitively felt that the French, especially those on the left, oppose the construction of Europe in its current form, and that carrying the banner of rejection could win him the party leadership – and thus its presidential nomination in 2007.
This reasoning proved wrong: the Socialists’ members and voters know that there is no alternative to Europe and accepted the Treaty as a means of going further, despite its imperfections.
But limiting the significance of the “no” vote to mere political calculation would be a mistake, for it also reflects the importance of the “French malaise” about Europe.
The French perceive Europe as distant, technocratic, and often the Trojan horse of liberal globalization and deindustrialization.
These doubts are even stronger among those who consider the ideals of a social Europe insufficiently fulfilled, owing to the right’s political dominance: control of 18 of 25 governments, the same number of European commissioners, and a majority in the European Parliament.
Moreover, Lionel Jospin’s elimination from the presidential election in 2002 by the far-right Jean-Marie Le Pen is widely interpreted – wrongly in my opinion – as the result of the Socialists’ pro-European position.
But the Socialist “yes” to Europe should not be confused with the “yes” given by the right.
French Socialists support the Constitutional Treaty as a way to strengthen political effectiveness and democratic accountability in the EU, and because it advances the cause of social progress by integrating the Charter of Fundamental Rights and defining goals such as full employment, sustainable development, anti-discrimination, and gender equality.
The Socialist “yes” also means support for increasing Europe’s standing as a global power through the creation of an EU ministry of foreign affairs.
This doesn’t amount to a conversion to liberal principles or a substitution of Europe for the ideals of the left and of socialism.
The treaty is but a necessary step to successful EU enlargement and further progress on Europe’s construction; it is not an end in itself. 
The essential task for the European Socialist Party now is to build a vision for Europe that addresses its constituencies’ concerns and inspires their hopes.
The party cannot evade demands for a more social Europe and for solutions to weak growth and high unemployment.
The European Socialists will also have to define a more ambitious budget strategy, with higher spending for research, education, and other social investments, develop an industrial policy that transcends the simplistic logic of competitiveness, affirm a legal framework for European public services, and support greater EU-wide social and fiscal homogeneity.
There has been progress on all these issues, guided by a report entitled “For a progressive Europe” delivered by Pascal Lamy to the European Socialist Party’s leader, former Danish Prime Minister Poul Nyrup Rasmussen.
But European Socialists remain divided: German and British members oppose higher spending and fiscal homogeneity.
Clearly, the French “yes” did not solve everything.
Europe’s left must still clarify its vision of the future.
The internal debates will be heated and their conclusions difficult for some to accept.
The atmosphere in parliament is execrable, and may be enough to topple the government in a no-confidence motion.
But the constitution established by General Charles de Gaulle is strong, and Sarkozy will keep his position until the end of his mandate in 2012. The main opposition Socialist Party’s weak electoral prospects are also helping Sarkozy.
The size of France’s political crisis seems to be out of proportion with the country’s real situation.
To be sure, France has been severely hit by the global financial crisis and economic downturn.
But the consequences have been somewhat less dramatic than in many other European countries.
Two of the three Baltic countries and Greece are in deep financial distress. Much the same is true of Portugal, Spain, Hungary, and Iceland.
Ireland, Belgium, Italy, and the United Kingdom are still under threat, owing to large public debts or current-account deficits.
But the Netherlands, and Austria – and, to a lesser extent, Germany and France – are faring slightly better.
In the short term, the situation in Germany is less severe than in France. Its trade balance is positive, and total public debt is not as high as it is in other countries.
Despite high unemployment and low growth, Germany does not face a short-term threat to macroeconomic stability, though the country’s population is declining and aging, implying huge challenges in the decades ahead.
The short-term situation for France is more worrying.
The fiscal deficit is higher than 6% of GDP, the trade balance is negative, and public debt – albeit lower than in all other European countries except Germany and the Netherlands – is nonetheless 80% of GDP. France urgently needs structural reforms – and thus a strong government.
Of course, unethical behavior by officials – the root of the current crisis – is unacceptable.
But if growth were higher and unemployment were falling, such scandals would not be treated as such a drama.
Two factors are intensifying the pressure on Sarkozy.
First, the public is increasingly aware that urgent and straightforward policies are desperately needed in the areas of pension and healthcare payments, and in state organization.
Since the first polling companies were created in the US, the UK, and France in the 1930's, they have asked questions about happiness and attitudes about the future.
At first, the French gave the same answer as other people.
But, in June 1940, the sky fell on their heads.
Balancing cuts in public spending in order not to endanger growth and employment requires a stable and smart government – and time.
The UK and Germany are, with their excessive restrictions, are preparing the ground for recessions at home. Will France address the issue with greater subtlety and avoid this risk?
The grumpy, moaning, and intractable people of France have demonstrated many times that they can wake up and meet the challenges of the day. The Enlightenment, after all, was born in France.
There is the French Revolution, the Napoleonic epic, the Battle of the Marne – won in 1914 thanks to spontaneous initiative when the government and the state failed – and the great revival of 1945-1950.
France also has a higher birth rate than all other European countries, and is the only one that renews each generation.
Thirty years ago, there was not a single French enterprise among the world’s top 100 enterprises, whereas today there are 15.
France’s education and health-care systems, despite difficulties, are still among the best in the world. Its intelligentsia and its scientists remain very creative, and are among the best in many fields.
So don’t bury France just yet.
The French will undergo major shocks in the years to come, but France might be the only European country standing tall 30 years from now.
The Front Line of Democracy
BENGHAZI – This week, I flew to Benghazi to meet Libya’s Transitional National Council (TNC), a visit coordinated with European Union High Representative Catherine Ashton and NATO allies. I was the first Western foreign minister to travel to Libya since the crisis began.
What I saw reminded me of my country 20 years ago, just after Poland’s first free elections, which, together with the fall of the Berlin Wall barely six months later, came to symbolize the Cold War’s end.
Peoples in transition from authoritarian rule – peaceful in Poland in 1989, bloody in Libya today – grapple with decisions that determine their fate for decades.
How should the former regime’s worst wrongdoers and security police, with their insidious archives, be treated? Should the former ruling party be banned?
How can civilian, democratic control of the army and police be secured?
What role should religion play in public affairs?
Should the constitution establish a presidential or parliamentary system?
The former communist world made those choices 20 years ago.
But very different choices – for better and for worse – were made in Poland, Hungary, and Czechoslovakia, in the Baltic states, across the former Soviet Union, in Central Asia, and in East Germany.
The results form a crucial database of experience.
Today’s Arab reformers thus can draw on our successes – and avoid our mistakes.
We central Europeans knew the misery of communism. Yet we knew what we wanted to replace it with – a system based on modern European democratic market values.
Building democratic structures requires time, discipline, pain, and patience. But it pays off.
In July, Poland will assume the EU presidency for the first time; we have earned this responsibility to lead European affairs over the next six months.
Poland learned the hard way that demanding change and defying oppression are much less difficult than formulating and delivering a clear, reasonable program for a better future.
Not all popular demands for freedom succeed: in the confusion, reactionary forces can make their move.
The fall of the Shah in Iran had ruinous consequences for that country.
Belarus won independence in 1991, but, since 1994, President Alexander Lukashenko has shamelessly embraced communist symbols – and methods – to cling to power.
Europe has unfinished business here.
Today, across North Africa, millions of people are demanding a voice in their own destiny.
Each country is looking to change and move forward.
In Morocco, the King has announced constitutional reforms, including guarantees for public participation in national decision-making, an independent judiciary, and new regional authorities.
This measured, inclusive reform can be a model for others.
And reformers in the Arab world have had tremendous support from Qatar, which has provided an example of strong leadership, particularly in Libya, but also through the news channel Al Jazeera – a real force for change in the region.
Libya is experiencing a deadly struggle between people insisting on change, and a desperate, greedy regime determined to cling to power after 40 years of crass misrule.
The United Nations Security Council, supported by the Arab League, has authorized the use of all necessary means to protect Libyans from the cruelty of their own leaders.
Our NATO allies launched proportionate military operations aimed at denying Col. Muammar Qaddafi’s regime the means to attack civilian targets.
Governments worldwide have frozen illicit assets stashed abroad by the regime – money that should be used to help the opposition to build a new society.
I went to Benghazi to assess the intentions and credibility of the Transitional National Council and Libyan opposition.
We brought medical supplies for the Benghazi Medical Center, where injured people from Misurata and elsewhere are being treated.
Around the table sat improbable allies: some had been prominent officials in Qaddafi’s regime; others had spent many years in prison under sentence of death.
They were united in recognizing that their country deserved a new start.
I was reminded of Poland’s “roundtable” in 1989, when Solidarity sat with the ruling communists to negotiate the end of the regime.
I talked frankly with TNC Chairman Mustafa Abdul Jalil, Deputy Chairman Abdul Hafez Ghoga, and TNC Defense Minister Jalal Dheili, himself a former political prisoner.
They were grateful for the international community’s involvement, but described in moving terms the huge loss of life that Qaddafi had inflicted on his own people.
I told them that we considered the TNC to be our new legitimate political interlocutors in Libya and were ready to support them, but that in return we expected the TNC to work towards the best standards of transparent democratic government.
They had to realize that they need a plan – revolutionary moments are moments to be seized.
Poland would help by offering training for TNC officials.
Following this visit, my message to European leaders is twofold. First, Libya’s TNC is the best bet we can make now for Libya’s future.
Its leaders are cooperating in an effort to bring about real reform in a way that was unthinkable a few months ago.
They deserve the world’s energetic support.
Second, while Europe has much to offer its North African neighbors in terms of financial support, advice, and training, the region needs to find its own path to freedom and success.
Let us approach this task in the best spirit of European solidarity, but also with a certain humility.
Europe’s former communist countries can make a special contribution to the process of transition across North Africa.
Above all, we understand that sustained reform requires assuming responsibility by mobilizing the energy of one’s own people, not relying on well-intentioned but often ill-focused outside help.
Poland is ready to lead the way, on its own and as EU President.
For example, former President Lech Wałesa recently visited Tunisia to offer advice as part of a Polish program to help Tunisia devise robust constitutional reforms and election laws.
North Africa’s people know what they don’t want – and won’t accept.
But they are struggling to identify what they do want, and how to build it.
As I saw in Benghazi, there is a fair chance that Libya’s emerging leaders will be good, realistic partners for good realistic policies.
The Fukushima Syndrome
BIRMINGHAM – The dramatic events that unfolded at Japan’s Fukushima Daiichi nuclear-power plant after last year’s tsunami are commonly referred to as “the Fukushima disaster.”
We need look no further than this description to begin to understand the significant misconceptions that surround nuclear energy.
It was the tsunami, caused by the largest earthquake ever to strike Japan, that killed more than 16,000 people, destroyed or damaged roughly 125,000 buildings, and left the country facing what its prime minister described as its biggest crisis since World War II.
Yet it is Fukushima that is habitually accorded the “disaster” label.
In fact, although what happened was shocking, the events in the hours and days after a giant wave slammed over the nuclear plant’s protective seawall might be interpreted as a remarkable testament to nuclear power’s sound credentials.
To be sure, the environmental impact on those living close to Fukushima may take many years to remediate.
But the response in many quarters – not least in Germany, Switzerland, and other countries that immediately condemned and retreated from nuclear energy – once again typified an enduring lack of knowledge concerning two fundamental issues.
The first is safety; the second is radiation.
We need to promote a much more inclusive and informed dialogue about both if nuclear power is to be assessed on its genuine merits, rather than dismissed on the grounds of little more than ignorance and intransigence.
Would the many people who would ban nuclear power also prohibit air travel?
After all, the parallels between the two industries are central to the question of safety.
We are often told that air travel, statistically speaking, has a better safety record than any other form of transport.
The numerous interrelated reasons for this might usefully be summarized by comparing an airplane to a bicycle.
We all appreciate that an airplane is a sophisticated device, and that a bicycle is not.
We also acknowledge that the consequences of an airplane crash are liable to be far more catastrophic than, say, those of a cyclist clipping a curb on his way home from the shops.
Accordingly, designing and manufacturing an airplane is many times more demanding and thorough than designing and assembling a bicycle is.
The same can be said of the approximately 450 nuclear reactors around the world.
The fact is that the industry’s safety record is second to none when measured against those of its rivals.
Like airplanes, nuclear reactors are conceived and constructed to mind-boggling standards.
For all of the tension and fear surrounding the fight against a nuclear meltdown at Fukushima, we should not forget that the plant – and with it the notion of a nuclear-energy industry – was subjected to an extraordinary test, in the strictest sense of the word.
Were it not for some design flaws that would not be repeated today, Fukushima might well have survived intact – and history would be so different.
Indeed, nuclear energy is a safer proposition now than ever before, but, for many people, the mere spectacle of an event like Fukushima – regardless of the outcome – is sufficient to draw the opposite conclusion.
If a 747 crashed into a nuclear facility, we would be unlikely to hear calls for all airplanes to be outlawed, but the clamor for every reactor on the planet to be shut down immediately would probably be deafening.
Remember, too, that Fukushima was built in the 1970’s, and that the technology on which it was based dated from a decade earlier.
Its successors are radically different in how they work, as is the regulatory framework, which sets astonishing new benchmarks for the care and quality required at every stage of the process.
The case against nuclear power is deeply rooted in concerns over safety in general and radiation in particular.
The Fukushima accident, having reinforced too many opinions and reshaped too few, makes it vital that we try to bring clarity to these issues – especially in those countries, including the United Kingdom, where the notion of a sustainable energy policy remains undetermined.
While we know the corollaries of high levels of radiation exposure, what happens at the other end of the scale is less clear.
The world is full of radioactivity – walls, concrete, even bananas contain traces – and our bodies have adapted to it.
In countries like Brazil and India, people live in environments that have 20-200 times the radiation commonly found in the UK, apparently with no negative genetic effects.
Some experts even argue that we may need a degree of radioactivity to stimulate our immune systems.
Of course, there remain concerns around the vital issues of waste disposal and proliferation.
Again, consensual debate is required.
But that requires formulating a roadmap that tells us where we stand and what we must do.
We need to create the necessary culture of dialogue within industry and academia. And we need to encourage people to think and reflect more.
Above all, we need to enhance the public’s grasp of the energy sector as a whole.
Currently, there is too much “I know” and “This is what I firmly believe,” frequently from influential people, in cases where there is no incontestable right or wrong.
Fukushima is one of them.
It is still not too late – not quite – to start couching the broader discussion of nuclear energy in language that will inform rather than alarm, and in terms that will nurture well-balanced judgments rather than entrench long-held biases.
The Fusion Myth
France is now rushing to construct the International Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor, (ITER), which is supposed to show that nuclear fusion can be used to power nuclear power stations.
ITER is often presented as the long-term solution to the problem of global warming, because nuclear fusion can provide an infinite and clean source of energy.
But ITER will do nothing of the sort.
In the fission reactions that nuclear power generation relies on today, heavy elements such as uranium break into smaller ones, while in nuclear fusion small elements such as hydrogen stick together and form heavier elements (helium).
Both fission and fusion produce a lot of energy.
Some political leaders explain that nuclear fusion is at work in the sun, and that, thanks to ITER, we will harness it.
They often add that, since fusion burns hydrogen, which can be found in seawater, it is an infinite source of energy.
Unfortunately, political leaders know little about the scientific issues involved.
That nuclear fusion is a source of energy has been known since the invention of the hydrogen bomb.
But its control is still a fundamental challenge for research institutes, not some minor technical difficulty that can be easily overcome.
Confining a little sun inside a box is an extremely difficult task for three main reasons.
First, the nuclear fuel is not seawater, but a mixture of the two heavy isotopes of hydrogen, deuterium and tritium, a radioactive element that has been produced in small quantities for hydrogen bombs.
Any development of fusion reactors would require producing tritium with industrial methods that have yet to be invented.
Second, the deuterium-tritium fusion reaction starts at around 100 million degrees.
To achieve this requires using a magnet to accelerate a plasma that is a big flame of deuterium and tritium nuclei.
This must be done in a ultra-high vacuum in a large chamber.
ITER is not designed to produce electricity, but to study the stability of the flame in the magnet.
Since the fusion reactions produce alpha particles, which pollute the plasma, one has to insert a “divertor” inside the flame at 100 million degrees in order to clean it.
Nobody has ever accomplished this, but ITER may be able to try around 2030 – that is, if it solves the previous problem.
Third, fusion also emits neutrons that will produce helium gas bubbles inside the wall material, which tends to explode.
The supporters of ITER explain that if the walls are porous, the bubbles can escape.
But nothing can be both leak-proof and porous, and ITER is not designed to study this contradiction.
In the future, a “blanket” should be inserted between the plasma and the walls, with two objectives: to protect the outer walls and to produce tritium from nuclear reactions within a circulating fluid containing lithium.
This might work, but the first wall of the blanket will need to be not only leak-proof and porous, but also sufficiently permeable to neutrons, which have to hit the lithium atoms beyond it.
The problem of materials is an entire research field in itself.
In order to study it, it has been decided to build the International Fusion Materials Irradiation Facility (IFMIF) in Japan.
Some scientists have argued that the neutron irradiation in IFMIF won’t be the same as in fusion reactors, but it should be noted that its cost, at one billion euros, will be one-tenth that of ITER.
A drastic reduction of CO2 emissions is an urgent priority, but fusion is unlikely to produce sufficient energy to achieve that goal before the twenty-second century.
In fact, ITER is a big instrument for fundamental research, so its €500 million Euros annual cost needs to be compared with similar scientific initiatives, such as the European Organization for Nuclear Research (CERN), which costs one billion Swiss francs per year.
In my opinion, searching for the fundamental structure of particles is far more important than studying the stability of a plasma. 
In France, the contribution to ITER is more than all the available funding for research projects in all our physics laboratories.
So the danger is that ITER will squeeze out funding for other vital research.
We already have the bad example of the International Space Station, a waste of $100 billion that has produced no scientific results.
ITER will not solve our energy problem.
Although it has some scientific interest in plasma physics, the participating countries should clearly state that funding it won’t affect the rest of their research efforts.
At the same time, the international community should support research on energy saving and storage, and accelerate the development of fourth-generation nuclear reactors, which will use fission and be both clean and durable.
The Future of China’s Growth
BEIJING – The slowdown of China’s economy has captured the headlines in recent weeks.
Whether it is a permanent or temporary adjustment, the Chinese authorities have much work to do in laying the groundwork for strong economic performance in the medium and long term.
Despite extraordinary growth since the start of its transition to a market economy in 1979, China is facing serious challenges simultaneously: rising inequality, large and growing levels of environmental degradation, stubborn external imbalances, and an aging society.
Fortunately, China’s 12th Five-Year Plan (2011-2015) recognizes the need to deepen market-oriented reform, change the country’s development model, and focus on the quality of growth, structural reforms, and social inclusion to overcome the rural-urban divide and stem the rise in income inequality.
In line with this bold, long-term approach, a new report, China 2030: Building a Modern, Harmonious, and Creative High-Income Society, proposes reforms that my country needs to develop a mature, well-functioning market economy by 2030.
The report is the result of a longstanding China-World Bank partnership.
Commemorating the 30th anniversary of China’s membership, World Bank President Robert B. Zoellick proposed to the country’s leaders a joint effort to identify and analyze China’s medium-term development challenges.
China 2030 calls for structural reforms that would redefine the role of government, overhaul state-owned enterprises and banks, develop the private sector, promote competition, and deepen liberalization of the land, labor, and financial markets.
While providing relatively fewer tangible public goods and services directly, the Chinese government will need to provide more intangible public goods and services like rules, standards, and policies.
Such policies and institutional improvements increase productivity, promote competition, facilitate specialization, enhance the efficiency of resource allocation, protect the environment, and reduce risks and uncertainties.
In the enterprise sector, the focus will need to be on increasing competition in all sectors, reducing barriers to entry and exit for private companies, and strengthening state-owned enterprises’ competitiveness.
In the financial sector, the banking system must be commercialized, thereby gradually allowing interest rates to be set by market forces, while capital markets must be deepened in tandem with the development of the legal and supervisory infrastructure needed to ensure financial stability.
In the labor market, China needs to accelerate reforms of the hukou (household registration) system to ensure that, by 2030, workers can move more freely in response to market signals.
Currently, anyone who moves to another part of the country without a hukou risks losing access to education, social services, and the housing market.
China’s policymakers also need to introduce measures to increase labor-force participation rates, rethink wage policy, and make social-insurance programs portable nationwide.
Finally, farmers’ rights need to be protected, the efficiency of land use must be increased, and policies for acquisition of rural land for urban use should be overhauled.
China’s medium-term success will also require creating an open system in which competitive pressures encourage Chinesecompanies to engage in product and processinnovation, not only through their ownresearch-and-development efforts, but also through participationin global Rampamp;Dnetworks.
The priority is to increase the quality of Rampamp;D, rather than just its quantity.
Policymakers will need to focus on increasing the technical and cognitive skills of university graduates, and on building a few world-class research universities with strong links to industry.
An enlightened strategy must encourage China to “grow green,” as opposed to growing rapidly now and facing massive environmental costs later.
Encouraging new investments in low-pollution, energy- and resource-efficient industries would lead to greener development, spur investments in related upstream and downstream manufacturing and services, and build an international competitive advantage in a global sunrise industry.
China 2030 also calls for expanding opportunities, promoting social security, and reducing the country’s relatively high social and economic inequality by addressing the rural-urban disparities in access to jobs, finance, and high-quality public services.
Doing so will require greater sustained attention to underserved rural areas and migrant populations, and to restructuring social policies in order to ensure secure safety nets.
Moreover, it is vital to strengthen China’s fiscal positionby mobilizing additional revenues and ensuring that local governments have adequate financing to meet their rising expenditure responsibilities.
Such reforms can help to ensure that budgetary resources are available at different levels of government (central, provincial, prefectural, county, township, and village), and are commensurate with expenditure responsibilities.
Last but not least, China should become a proactive stakeholder in the global economy.
By continuing to intensify its global trade, investment, and financial links, which have served it well over the past three decades, China would benefit from further specialization, increased investment opportunities, and higher returns to capital, as well as mutually beneficial flows of ideas and knowledge.
China must remain committed to resuscitating the stalled Doha Round of multilateral trade negotiations, and support a global agreement on investment flows.
Global integration of China’s financial sector will require opening the capital account, which will have to be carried out steadily and with considerable care; but it will be a key step toward internationalizing the renminbi as a global reserve currency.
The proposals contained in China 2030 could provide a framework for Chinese policymakers as they seek to achieve their goal of sustainable and harmonious growth.
With the global economy entering a dangerous phase, China’s government will need to respond to new risks, shocks, and vulnerabilities as they arise.
But, in doing so, it should adhere to the principle that policy responses to short-term problems must uphold, not undermine, long-term reform priorities.
The Future of Facts
BUDAPEST – At a recent conference of newspaper editors in which I took part, a small crowd gathered to talk about journalism and new media.
When I told the group that I had begun my career as a magazine fact-checker, several of them grew misty-eyed, as if someone had told a group of priests about his childhood as an altar boy.
I brought up my past because I think that fact-checking is the single best training not just for journalism, but for life in general.
It teaches you to think skeptically.
It is easy to believe something when someone who appears knowledgeable asserts it.
But if you have a responsibility for checking facts, you listen more carefully.
On what sources does the speaker base his facts?
Is there something in it for him – a higher stock price, an advertising fee, or someone else’s gratitude?
Or is he simply biased because of the people he knows, the company he works for, or the attitudes he picked up at home?
I spent hours picking through sources – mostly dusty papers in the years before the Internet, or strangers on the telephone – to clarify questions of fact: Was this really the first such product?
Was Mr. Smith 42 or already 43?
Was his claim that revenues had grown for the last five years true merely because of acquisitions that his company had made?
And so on.
My life was ruled by tk – which stands for “to kum,” or “to come,” in the jargon of reporters.
We fact-checkers would joke about the lazy reporters who would hand us copy such as, “Juan Tigar, tk years old, grew up in tk before studying at tk.
Now tk title at Widgets Corp., he…” Our job was to fill in the tk’s.
But we learned an enormous amount.
We learned not just thousands of facts that I have since forgotten, but an attitude of skepticism coupled with reverence for the truth.
That attitude contrasts with the skepticism I once heard from a Russian reporter about her early days on the job.
“Whenever we read an article about the health dangers of butter, we would immediately run out and buy as much butter as we could find,” she told me.
“We knew it meant there was about to be a butter shortage.”
In other words, Russians looked only for the agenda, the motivation behind the assertion.
The actual truth was irrelevant.
Of course, spin, propaganda, and censorship persist in journalism, but with one big difference: Almost anyone can now operate as a reporter.
How can we ensure that these self-nominated reporters respect the truth?
In the United States, the Federal Trade Commission has announced plans to require bloggers and celebrity endorsers to disclose gifts or payments from vendors and others seeking the bloggers’ positive comments online.
But what about other kinds of bias?
As the journalistic priesthood erodes and everyone can become a citizen reporter or commentator, regulating or training all would-be journalists is not the answer.
In line with the bottom-up, do-it-yourself ethos of the Internet, where people book their own flights, publish their own photos, and sell their own second-hand goods, it should be the users’ responsibility to do their own fact-checking.
This is not to say that journalists should not check their own facts (or that priests should not observe the tenets of their own religion).
But in the end, everyone has to become a better reader – more skeptical and more curious.
Why is this story getting so much attention?
Does this blogger ever say anything negative, or is she always talking about the great products she uses?
Does she have any kind of disclosures on her blog?
Why is this politician saying nice things about that politician?
What company does the product reviewer work for?
Governments can impose regulations, but in the end we will get the kind of journalism for which we ask.
If we ask for it, Web sites will offer not just content but reputation systems, so that contributors will have reputations as reliable sources (or not). 
We should not outlaw anonymity (which has its uses), but we can ask for details about the people whose words we are reading.
Someone may legitimately want to remain anonymous, but we can draw our own conclusions about their reasons. 
That much thinking may sound like a lot of work, but it is what is required of a responsible adult these days.
Compared to a century ago, more people spend less time laboring to ensure their physical existence.
But, in this increasingly confusing world, we need to spend a little more time laboring to ensure our own intellectual integrity – a task that we cannot outsource to governments or even to media.
Facts are holy, but not all media that claim to report them, “new” or old, can be trusted.
The Future of Ideological Conflict
WARWICK – The just-concluded French presidential election seemed to suggest that the old left-right divisions are as potent as they have ever been – and certainly in their birthplace.
But are they?
The modern political spectrum is an artifact of the seating arrangements at the French National Assembly after the revolution of 1789.
To the right of the Assembly’s president sat the supporters of King and Church, while to the left sat their opponents, whose only point of agreement was the need for institutional reform.
The distinction capitalized on long-standing cultural associations of right- and left-handedness with, respectively, trust and suspicion – in this case, of the status quo.
In retrospect, it is remarkable that this distinction managed to define partisan political allegiances for more than 200 years, absorbing both the great reactionary and radical movements of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries.
But the decline in voter turnout in most of today’s democracies suggests that this way of conceptualizing ideological differences may have become obsolete.
Some have even argued that ideologies and parties are irrelevant in an increasingly fragmented political landscape.
But one division that looms on the horizon could reinvent the right-left distinction for the twenty-first century: precautionary versus “proactionary” attitudes toward risk as principles of policymaking.
In social psychological terms, precautionary policymakers set their regulatory focus on the prevention of worst outcomes, whereas proactionary policymakers seek the promotion of the best available opportunities.
The precautionary principle is the better known of the two, and increasingly figures in environmental and health legislation.
It is normally understood as the Hippocratic Oath applied to the global ecology: above all, do no harm.
By contrast, the proactionary principle is associated with self-styled futurists, for whom being “human” is defined by our capacity to keep ahead of the game when taking calculated risks, whether by benefiting from success or learning from failure.