His hope is that some EU members’ interest in securing Russian gas supplies during the winter will cause them to forget their allies’ security interests – a classic divide-and-rule strategy, served chilled.
Europe cannot afford to be taken in by it.
Ukraine may now only be passing through the eye of the storm.
Putin, knowing that the Russian Army’s current logistical systems for supplying Crimea are insufficient, appears to be readying plans to secure a land corridor from the Russian border through southeastern Ukraine.
That is why some of the most sinister figures behind Russia’s other frozen conflicts, such as Lieutenant-General Vladimir Antyufeyev, the long-serving “state security minister” in Moldova’s breakaway Transnistria region, are now calling the shots among eastern Ukraine’s armed militants.
Antyufeyev is using the tenuous ceasefire agreed under the Minsk Protocol to create a cloned KGB service, called the MGB, to intimidate Ukrainian citizens trapped in Donbas into submitting to proxy Kremlin rule.
And, with the Donbas economy’s crown jewels having been “nationalized” (and the rest eviscerated), the region’s emerging industries are crime and kidnapping, of the sort seen in Transnistria, Georgia’s breakaway provinces of Abkhazia and South Ossetia, and other Kremlin-backed statelets.
The desire to secure access to Crimea is also why the Russian Army is now focused on the strategic port of Mariupol, a gateway on the Sea of Azov, for a land bridge.
Europeans should understand the inherent dangers in creating a land corridor through another country, given the Nazis’ use of the Danzig Corridor as a pretext to invade Poland in 1939.
Surely, a day of reckoning will come for Putin, whose aggression is slowly wrecking the Russian economy.
But when that day arrives remains too uncertain for Europe and the world to let down their guard and ease their pressure on the Kremlin.
Indeed, if peace is to come to Ukraine – and if Putin is to be prevented from using the same strategy elsewhere – the world must let him know that some lines may never be crossed.
After all, Ukraine is not the only country under the gun, as Putin’s recent threats to “protect” Russian citizens in Kazakhstan, not to mention his intimidation of the Baltic states, attest.
This is not an issue that concerns only the West.
China may soon need to decide whether it can sit back and let the Kremlin whittle away the geo-strategic gains and enhanced security that came with the Soviet empire’s demise.
After all, it is no coincidence that China’s quarter-century of extraordinary economic growth came after the Soviet threat on its border was eliminated.
Indeed, contrary to what Putin claims to the Russian public, the Chinese are not fully committed to backing him in his confrontation with the West.
One sign of this is the hard bargain that President Xi Jinping struck in negotiating China’s recent huge gas contracts with Russia; another is that Chinese lending to Russia since the invasion of Crimea has actually declined.
As Ukraine prepares for another year of confrontation, the world should understand that one fact is non-negotiable: our country will be an independent, fully sovereign state.
No foreign government will gain a veto over any aspect of our internal decision-making.
Our future is for Ukraine’s citizens to decide, period.
This rules out our recognition – at any time and in any form – of Russia’s annexation of Crimea and occupation of Donbas.
Ukrainians’ unity, spirit, and devotion to their freedom remain undented.
War has forged a new patriotism that peace will not extinguish.
We will continue to defy Putin and his efforts to reduce Ukraine to a semi-sovereign buffer state.
But Ukraine’s ability to resist, and the international community’s ability to prevent brute force from having free rein, depends on whether world leaders understand that appeasement begets only further aggression.
If they do not, 2015 could mark the return of a European and world order that was supposedly overcome seven decades ago.
Putin’s Gas Problem
HOUSTON – Russia watchers are rightly focusing on the latest brittle ceasefire in Ukraine, seeking to discern President Vladimir Putin's intentions there.
But they would be wise not to overlook another unfolding struggle – one that will have profound long-term consequences for Europe and for Putin's ability to exert pressure on the continent.
Last December, Russian's giant gas firm, Gazprom, and a Turkish pipeline company signed a memorandum of understanding to construct a pipeline from Russia to Turkey under the Black Sea.
This new “Turkish Stream" is an alternative to the “South Stream" Black Sea pipeline from Russia to Bulgaria – a project that the Kremlin abandoned in December, in response to the sanctions imposed by the European Union after Russia's invasion of Ukraine and annexation of Crimea.
The South Stream project failed to comply with EU competition and energy directives, and the announcement of the $12 billion Turkish Stream is likely to reinforce Russia's reputation as an unreliable partner, thus accelerating Europe's search for alternate supply sources.
Indeed, in risking his most lucrative market, Putin is exhibiting an almost suicidal disregard for the Russian economy – apparently for no other reason than to cement enmity with Ukraine.
The Kremlin intends to remove Ukraine from a gas-delivery system that has been in place since the 1980s, routing supplies instead through a new and untried network to a market that may not even exist.
Last month, Gazprom announced its intention to cease shipments through Ukraine when the contracts with the country's gas pipeline company, Naftogaz, expire in 2019.
Gas from the Turkish Stream will be delivered to the Greek border on a take-it-or-leave-it basis.
Gazprom expects permission to carry out design and survey work “soon," with its first delivery to Turkey to arrive in 2017.
Gazprom's erratic behavior is not a matter of minor concern for Europe.
The continent relies on Russia for some 30% of its natural gas, 80% of which is transported through Ukraine.
And the continent has been left out in the cold once before.
In January 2009, Gazprom ordered cutbacks of deliveries through Ukraine, causing severe shortages in six countries in eastern and southeastern Europe.
In late 2014, Russia cut off Ukraine completely, again signaling its readiness to use gas supplies as a weapon of foreign policy.
The EU rushed in to broker a settlement that some contend was against Ukraine's interests.
But, contrary to what Putin seems to believe, neither Europe nor Ukraine is likely to be the biggest loser in Russia's effort to redirect its gas exports.
Gazprom receives two-thirds of its hard-currency revenues from Europe, and a period of falling exports and domestic economic crisis is not the ideal time to play games with your best customer.
Indeed, the European market is already slipping away.
Gazprom's European sales plummeted in the third quarter of last year and fell by 25% in the fourth quarter.
The slump in demand is coming at a time when Russia is desperate for hard currency, owing to sanctions that exclude it from credit markets.
Its major companies are facing huge debt refinancing needs, its currency reserves are collapsing, its economy is heading toward a deep recession, and the ruble is plumbing new lows.
In redirecting its exports, Russia is in effect demanding that Europe spend billions of euros on new infrastructure to replace a perfectly good pipeline, only to satisfy Putin's desire to cause trouble in Ukraine.
In January, Gazprom's CEO, Alexey Miller, imperiously brushed off European concerns, stating, “We have informed our European partners, and now it is up to them to put in place the necessary infrastructure starting from the Turkish-Greek border."
The initial reaction in Europe was that Putin either was bluffing or had taken leave of his senses.
“The decision makes no economic sense," was how Maroš Šefčovič, the European Commission's vice president for energy union, put it.
“We're good customers.
We're paying a lot of money.
We're paying on time, and we're paying in hard currency.
So I think we should be treated accordingly."
Putin's erratic and economically oblivious policies are frittering away the last remnants of what was once Gazprom's monopoly position in the European gas market.
Clearly, if Europe is to spend billions on pipelines, it would be better off doing so as part of an effort to diversify its sources of natural gas, rather than deepen its dependence on Russia.
After all, memories are long, especially when it comes to frigid winters of unheated homes and closed factories.
When one of Joseph Stalin's chief planners was asked why he was willing to defend a series of ludicrous proposals, he famously replied, “I'd rather stand for unrealistic plans than sit [in jail] for realistic ones."
One can imagine that Gazprom officials are thinking along the same lines.
If so, they should start thinking differently.
Russia cannot afford more economic pain and suffering.
But that is what it will get unless sober heads prevail.
Sadat’s Journey, 30 Years After
TOLEDO &#45;&#45; If “one man of courage makes a majority,” as Andrew Jackson said, then 30 years ago, in November 1977, Egyptian President Anwar Sadat was such a man.
His peace overture to Israel stunned the Middle East.
He had, as he put it, gone “to the end of the earth” (the Knesset in Jerusalem), and in doing so transformed the region’s politics beyond recognition.
From that moment, the question for the Arabs was no longer how to destroy Israel, but how to reach an accomodation with it.
In his dramatic leap into the future, Sadat taught Arab leaders the realities of a changing world.
For Sadat’s peace overture was born out of a sober strategic analysis of the regional balance of power.
It was clear to him that Israel was a nuclear power that, in October 1973, had once again proven itself to be unbeatable in a conventional war – a war Sadat himself had never expected to win when he launched it.
Understanding Clausewitz’s dictum that war is a continuation of politics by other means, Sadat had sent the Egyptian Army across the Suez Canal in order to unleash a peace process.
He was defeated militarily, but his decision to go to Jerusalem meant that he would succeed politically.
During all of their abortive attempts to destroy Israel, the Arabs had relied on the military backing of the Soviet Union.
But a strategy of peace with Israel, Sadat knew, required an alliance with the United States.
This alliance was so vital an objective for Sadat that one may rightly wonder what came first in his strategy.
Perhaps Sadat might have opted to secure the American alliance without making peace with Israel if he had been able to do so.
But he could not, and he knew it.
Indeed, in 1974, when General Gamasy, the architect of the 1973 war, questioned Sadat’s flexibility in the disengagement talks with Israel, Egypt’s president calmed him down by saying, “Don’t forget, General, we are talking here about peace with the Americans!”
Another shift implicit in Sadat’s strategy was to keep Egypt at a distance from pan-Arabism.
Weary of inter-Arab politics, and tired of the high price Egypt had paid for the Palestinian cause, Sadat wanted to move away from Nasser’s pan-Arab ambitions and an excessive focus on the question of Palestine toward an emphasis on Egypt’s role as a power lying at the strategic crossroads between Asia and Africa.
Sadat would, of course, continue to champion the Palestinian cause as the heart of an Arab consensus and sometimes as a fig leaf for his own Egypt-focused foreign policy.
But, for all practical purposes, Sadat had embarked on a path leading to a separate peace with Israel.
One lesson of Sadat’s initiative is that in protracted conflicts where deep emotions and historical hatreds are involved, when almost every conceivable diplomatic formula has been tried and failed, the shock of a visionary, generous, and imaginative step can open new paths.
The major problem in the Arab-Isreli conflict, as in many other intricate disputes, has always been the incapacity or unwillingness of leaders to conduct a peace policy that is not supported by their societies’ prevailing, and frequently paralyzing, consensus.
Leaders, more often than not, are hostage to the socio-political environment that produces them, rather than its shapers.
Sadat gained a privileged place in history and achieved immortality the moment he fled from the comfortable prison of inertia, and from the pantomime solidarity and hollow rhetorical cohesion of Arab summits.
The test of statesmanship did not end there.
Sadat’s spectacular leap into the future needed to be met by Israel’s prime minister, Menachem Begin, at almost every juncture down a tortuous road to peace.
Arguably, only a political “hawk” like Begin, a man with a keen sense of the dramatic and a political romantic with a beady eye to the judgment of history, could have responded in such a way to Sadat’s initiative.
That Begin was able to rise to the occasion had much to do with the psychological impact of Sadat’s astonishing initiative.
Through his visit to Jerusalem, Sadat made more ordinary the nature of the Arab-Israeli conflict.
Sadat’s initiative transformed the conflict from a fight about Israel’s right to exist into a negotiation of interests between legitimate sovereign states.
Here, indeed, is the central point: the need to move away from mythological, mutually exclusive rights of existence, conflicting historical narratives, and religious claims of ownership.
Sadly, this is where the Palestinian-Israeli tragedy remains stuck to this very day, thus making the conflict practically insoluble.
Through his visit to Jerusalem, Sadat shook away Israel’s siege mentality and gave psychological living space to an otherwise claustrophobic nation in the midst of a hostile Arab world.
Peace is never a zero-sum game.
In its peace with Israel, Egypt reached its strategic objective of an alliance with the US.
But Israel was wrong to believe that Egypt could be a gateway into the Arab world.
The gate to Israeli-Arab reconciliation remains where it was always been – in the hands of the Palestinians.
Saddam Hussein Before the Law
What is at stake in the trial of Saddam Hussein, which is set to begin on October 19?
Coming just four days after the referendum on Iraq’s constitution and touted as a “constitutional moment” akin to the trials of Kings Charles X and Louis XVI, the proceedings are supposed to help advance Iraq’s transition from tyranny to democracy.
Will they?
So far, all signs suggest that the trial is unlikely to meet its ambitious aims.
From the outset in postwar Iraq, criminal justice resembled deracinated constitutionalism: atomistic trials, radical purges, and compromised elections.
Most egregious was the post-invasion rush to “de-Ba’athification,” which eviscerated many of the country’s existing institutions.
The mix of individual and collective responsibility associated with repressive regimes often creates a dilemma concerning how to deal with the old institutions.
But, in Iraq, flushing out the military and the police merely left the country in a domestic security vacuum.
By the time that mistake was recognized, the damage was done, needlessly sacrificing security.
Moreover, potential sources of legitimacy in Iraq’s ongoing constitutional reform, such as parliament, were also destroyed.
The lack of legitimate institutions needed to rebuild the rule of law is evident in the debate over what authority and whose judgment ought to be exercised over Saddam Hussein.
Should the tribunal be national or international?
This question highlights the problematic relationship of international humanitarian law to the use of force.
In the Balkans, the indictment of Slobodan Milosevic by the United Nations’ International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) provided a boost to political change in the region.
Regime delegitimation has become a leading function of the new permanent International Criminal Court.
Ultimately, the debate over international versus national jurisdiction reflects a dichotomy that is no longer apt in contemporary political conditions, for it obscures the fact that international law is increasingly embedded within domestic law.
Despite being putatively “national,” the Iraq tribunal couches the relevant offenses in terms of “crimes against humanity.”
But it is only now, after the war, that successor justice is being aimed at refining and consolidating the message of delegitimation and regime change.
Despite its close links to the invasion, Saddam’s trial is expected somehow to represent an independent Iraqi judgment, thereby constituting local accountability without exacerbating tensions and destabilizing the country further.
Can it succeed?
From the start, the IST must constitute a robust symbol of Iraqi sovereignty.
But its close association with the United States-led invasion leaves it vulnerable to the charge of “victor’s justice.”
Although officially adopted in December 2003 by the Iraqi Governing Council, the IST’s statute was framed under contract to the US government and approved by L. Paul Bremer, the Coalition Provisional Authority’s Administrator.
The US remains the driving force behind the IST, supplying the needed expertise.
For many Iraqis, it is hard to view the IST as anything other than an expression of the occupiers’ will.
Indeed, the IST’s close association with the US-backed establishment of a successor regime is fraught with political pitfalls.
Transitional criminal justice must be broad enough to reconcile a divided Iraq, and, therefore, include Shi’a and Kurdish crimes against humanity, while it apparently must also avoid embarrassing the US or its allies, particularly regarding their extensive dealings with Saddam’s regime.
But the appearance of selective or controlled justice will defeat the tribunal’s purpose.
So will the specter of illiberal trial procedures – another reason for the lack of international support for the IST.
The original selection of judges by what was widely viewed as a wing of the occupation exposes the tribunal to allegations of bias and partiality, as have issues regarding access and transparency for defendants and others.
Moreover, the IST statute says nothing about the standard of proof, which means that guilt does not clearly have to be established beyond a reasonable doubt.
While the first set of charges concerns the well-documented killings in Dujail and elsewhere in the 1980’s, Milosevic’s trial by the ICTY shows that it is far more difficult to establish “superior authority,” linking the killings to the leader.
According to Iraqi President Jalal Talabani, this problem has ostensibly been “solved” by means of extracted confessions.
Of course, if the IST’s aim is to evoke the possibility of show trials rather than bolstering the rule of law, Talabani is quite right: problem solved.
Criminal proceedings may then be downsized to a confession of a single massacre, as subsequent trials are shelved to open the way for punishment – unlike, say, the Milosevic trial, which is now dragging into its fourth year.
But rapid punishment – most likely execution – threatens to bury the full record of decades of tyranny under the apparently overriding purpose of fighting the insurgency by other means.
Saddam’s trial will thus demonstrate the limits of the law in jumpstarting regime transition.
An intractable dilemma of transitional justice is that societies ravaged by brutal human rights legacies often appeal to the law to shore up the legitimacy of the successor regime, only to see these salutary aims subverted by the challenges and compromises that are inherent to the transition itself.
Sadiq Khan’s Democratic Islam
PARIS – The man of the hour in the United Kingdom, if not in Europe, is obviously Sadiq Khan – Pakistani by origin, Muslim by faith, and newly elected Mayor of London.
There are several ways to look at Khan’s victory.
One can repeat the litany of complaints that his Conservative opponent leveled against him, legitimately, throughout the campaign.
There was Khan’s September 2004 meeting with Islamic radicals under the auspices of the pro-Palestinian organization Friends of Al-Aqsa. There was his 2009 interview on Iranian television, in which he compared Britain's moderate Muslims to “Uncle Toms.”
There were also his reported contacts with unsavory characters.
One, Yasser al-Sirri, is the Egyptian author of a statement on Osama bin Laden’s “honorable death,” among other pearls.
Another, Sajeel Abu Ibrahim, is a jihadist militant who likely trained others at a camp in Pakistan.
And Yusuf al-Qaradawi is a Qatar-based theologian and Al Jazeera preacher who is affiliated with the Muslim Brotherhood’s most radical wing.
Another way to view Khan's election is to listen to what he has consistently said in response to accusations of closet extremism.
He has explained that one does not always know in advance with whom one will share a stage.
The interview on Iranian television was a mistake.
Muslims wounded by his invocation in that interview of the subservient black slave in Harriet Beecher Stowe’s US Civil War-era novel should accept his deepest apologies.
As for al-Qaradawi, everyone, however bad, has the right to a legal defense, and their relationship was always that of a lawyer and his client.
True? False?
Is election as the first Muslim mayor of a European capital worth, if not a mass (as Henry IV said of Paris and his conversion to Roman Catholicism), then at least accommodation with the facts of life?
It’s hard to know, but Khan certainly persists in saying so.
The fact that he distances himself so emphatically from the same Islamist movement with which he has on occasion rubbed elbows, is, at worst, vice’s tribute to virtue.
At best, it is a disavowal by the man he has become of the man he once was, a man who no longer exhibits any sign of complacency about his ambiguous past.
What is certain – and this is the third way of viewing the issue – is that Khan, while maintaining possibly dangerous contacts, simultaneously held a firm line on the principle that Islam is compatible with secular government.
For Europe, that is a necessary principle.
Moreover, he has never wavered on the critical questions of legal and practical equality for women or about expressing his dismay at the growing number of niqabs and hijabs now seen on London’s streets – which prevent people, he notes, from speaking face to face.
Likewise, Khan’s position in favor of gay marriage has earned him a fatwa for apostasy from the fearsome head imam of a Bradford mosque.
One might say that no less could be expected from a Labour leader with a bright future in the country of Churchill.
But one must still follow through, and it must be admitted that Khan has not yielded in these matters to the facile communitarianism common on the other side of the Channel.
Khan also is among those Labourites who have taken the loftiest position in the face of the wave of anti-Semitism sweeping through their party.
A former Labour MP stigmatized the “nose” of British Jews over social networks.
A current MP proposed to relocate Israel to the United States.
The charismatic Ken Livingstone, London’s first elected mayor and one of Khan’s predecessors, compared Zionism to Nazism.
And Jeremy Corbyn, the party’s leader, refused in a debate with Prime Minister David Cameron to disavow his “friends” in Hezbollah and Hamas.
The past few weeks have seemed like a contest to see who in Labour would go the farthest down the path of Islamo-leftism, which is, alas, a strong tendency within the European left and among Britain’s Labourites in particular.
In the face of this British socialism of fools, which some portray as inoffensive support for the wretched of the earth in Palestine, Khan has had no trouble voicing strong condemnation.
His stance was apparent in his insistence that his first act as mayor, on Sunday, May 8, would be to honor, alongside the chief rabbi of London and Israel’s ambassador to the UK, the memory of six million Jews murdered by the Nazis.
All of this is to say that, while we must of course remain watchful, Khan’s election can and should be seen as a clear victory of enlightened Islam against benighted, reactionary, and intolerant Islam.
Michel Houellebecq’s prediction in his last novel, Submission, that France would elect a president from an Islamic party in 2022 has been inverted.
What we are witnessing with the election of Khan is the submission not of democracy to Islam, but of Islam to democracy.
That democracy – British democracy – should be proud not only to have welcomed Islam but also to have helped it reform.
Safeguarding Asia’s Growth
SEOUL – Emerging Asian countries should be proud of their economic resilience.
Despite a global economy plagued by weak growth, persistently high unemployment, and heavy debt loads, the region’s emerging and developing economies grew at an average annual rate of 6.8% from 2000-2010, propping up global output and buttressing recovery efforts.
Already, spillover effects from trade and financial transmission channels are beginning to take their toll: China’s GDP growth rate in the second quarter of 2012 averaged 7.6%, reflecting a significant slowdown, and India’s growth rate is expected to decline to roughly 6% this year.
China’s potentially strong domestic-demand base and ample room for policy maneuvers can help it to avoid a hard landing.
It has already aggressively loosened monetary policy, and it can employ further fiscal stimulus.
But policy mismanagement and structural weaknesses in the financial sector and local governments could undermine efforts to safeguard growth.
Meanwhile, India, constrained by a high fiscal deficit and persistent inflationary pressure, has less scope for expansionary policies and faces significant challenges in pursuing credible structural reform.
This has serious implications for the rest of Asia.
Over the last three decades, increased economic and trade integration has bolstered the region’s growth.
For example, segmented production for global supply chains has stimulated trade in intermediate goods and promoted foreign direct investment.
Now, however, closer economic integration means that sluggish growth in China and India will reduce job opportunities and slow the rate of poverty reduction throughout the region.
Faced with weak demand in advanced countries, Asian economies are working to rebalance their sources of growth by shifting toward domestic and regional markets.
As a result, growth in intra-regional trade has outpaced overall trade growth, with intra-Asian trade now accounting for more than half of the continent’s total trade turnover.
But China’s established role as the assembly hub for the region’s production-sharing networks means that it is becoming a source of autonomous shocks – with a large and persistent impact on business-cycle fluctuations.
So, what policies must emerging Asian economies pursue to reduce their vulnerability to regional and global volatility?
The most immediate challenge is to safeguard the financial system’s stability against external shocks.
Policy reform should aim to promote market transparency, improve risk management, and strengthen effective supervision and regulations.
Second, emerging countries must develop more effective macroeconomic frameworks, including better macro-prudential regulation and a broader monetary-policy framework that takes into account asset prices and financial-market stability.
A wide range of official measures could be employed to support domestic demand while protecting medium-term fiscal sustainability.
And, to address volatile capital flows, countries should increase exchange-rate flexibility, maintain adequate international reserves, and implement carefully designed capital controls.
Third, emerging economies must further rebalance their sources of growth.
Reducing dependence on external demand – for example, by promoting private-sector investment and encouraging household expenditure – is crucial.
Supply-side policies that promote small and medium-size enterprises and service industries accommodating domestic demand are also critical to ensuring more inclusive and sustainable growth.
Finally, enhanced regional and global financial cooperation – including closer policy coordination at the G-20 and International Monetary Fund – would help countries to respond more effectively to shocks and crises.
A key regional initiative is the $240 billion multilateral reserve pool of the ASEAN+3 (the Association of Southeast Asian Nations plus China, Japan, and South Korea), which can provide short-term liquidity to members when needed.
Institutional arrangements in regional liquidity provision and economic surveillance must be enhanced.
Asians need not be pessimistic; the perfect storm of a hard landing in China, a double-dip recession in the United States, and a collapse of the eurozone is unlikely.
But they cannot rule out the downside risk of a synchronized global downturn.
Only with preemptive policies designed to manage risk better can emerging Asian countries protect economic growth from the threat of current and future crises.
The Trouble With Schrems
PARIS – In October 2015, a court case launched by Max Schrems, a 28-year-old Austrian privacy activist and graduate student at the University of Vienna, led to the annulment of the so-called Safe Harbor agreement that governs how United States firms comply with the European Union’s privacy laws.
The decision, by the European Court of Justice (ECJ), threw into legal uncertainty the collection, handling, transfer, and storage of user data by about 4,500 US companies.
The ruling led many in Europe to draw comparisons between Schrems and Edward Snowden, the intelligence contractor who leaked classified information detailing America’s global surveillance programs.
And, in fact, Schrems’s lawsuit was heavily informed by Snowden’s disclosures, which included details of a US National Security Agency program whereby US companies allegedly handed over to the NSA personal information stored on their computer systems.
According to the ECJ’s ruling, the cooperation between US companies and the country’s intelligence agencies violates the right to privacy and data protection guaranteed by the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights.
The court’s message was clear: Unless the US government modified the way it gathers intelligence, by restricting access to personal data and adopting a case-by-case approach to its investigations, it would be impossible for consumer information to be transferred from the EU to the US through the Safe Harbor framework.
On February 2, the US and Europe struck a new agreement – the Privacy Shield – to satisfy the court’s stipulations, including “clear limitations, safeguards, and oversight mechanisms” on the use of personal data from Europe by law enforcement and national security officials.
In addition, EU citizens will be given the right to bring civil action related to the protection of their personal data in the US against a US government agency.
The Privacy Shield, which the EU’s 28 member states must formally approve, still needs to be endorsed by an “adequacy decision” of the EU Commission, probably in April.
In the meantime, it will be reviewed by the Article 29 Working Party, comprising representatives of member states’ data-protection authorities.
Until the Privacy Shield is approved, the Article 29 Working Party requests that US companies in Europe use alternative instruments – “Standard Contractual Clauses” and “Binding Corporate Rules” – to transfer their data to the US, so as to avoid being pursued by national data protection regulators in Europe.
It is unsurprising that a deal was reached.
In the wake of the attacks in Paris in November, most EU citizens have placed the highest priority on the fight against Islamic terrorism.
Governments also want to improve the effectiveness of their intelligence gathering – and isolating themselves from the US would be no way to achieve that.
The intense pressure to expand intelligence agencies’ capabilities is evident in the pressure that national governments have put on the European Parliament to adopt legislation allowing for the collection of airline passenger data.
The directive, which would oblige airlines to provide governments with the names, addresses, phone numbers, credit card details, and travel itineraries of people traveling to and from airports in the EU, is expected to be voted on early this year.
Despite the Privacy Shield agreement, Schrems’s lawsuit will likely continue to reverberate across the EU.
The court’s ruling urges data-protection authorities to ensure that countries to which European citizens’ data are transferred comply with European legislation, and to suspend data transfers to those that don’t.
As a consequence, in addition to its implications for companies and US intelligence gathering, the ECJ’s decision may call into question the behavior of the intelligence agencies of the EU member states.
Indeed, even though the EU Treaty dictates that each member state is solely responsible for its own national security, the way national intelligence agencies use personal data can be expected to come under special scrutiny.
Moreover, the application of the court’s jurisprudence to the transfer of data to third-party countries like China, Russia, or India could well cause diplomatic incidents.
It is unlikely that EU regulators have heard the last from Schrems, who has already filed several claims similar to the one that overturned the Safe Harbor Privacy Principles.
He has suggested a radical solution that would become a condition of doing business in the EU: All data relating to Europeans, he and others argue, must be hosted on EU-based servers.
If that proposal gains traction, the implications could be far-reaching; indeed, it could prohibit the use of the Internet, with its myriad services valued at hundreds of billions of euros, in its current form.
Can Rouhani Deliver?
NEW YORK – As world powers meet in Geneva to begin nuclear talks with Iran, the world awaits the follow-up to the phone call between Iranian President Hassan Rouhani and US President Barack Obama after Rouhani’s visit to the United Nations General Assembly last month.
That brief conversation – the first between the two countries’ presidents since 1979 – recalls the last attempt to revive bilateral diplomacy, undertaken 12 years ago by Iran’s then-President Mohammad Khatami.
In both episodes, a missing handshake symbolized the countries’ persistent rift.
Back then, Khatami and Foreign Minister Kamal Kharrazi “went shopping,” rather than attend a cultural event at the Asia Society and risk crossing paths – and shaking hands – with US Secretary of State Madeleine Albright.
This time, despite Iran’s avoidance of a presidential handshake at the UN, Rouhani delivered a major address at the Asia Society asserting that his government would pursue policies of “moderation and common sense” and would be willing to work with the West on resolving questions about its nuclear program.
Moreover, handshakes were exchanged by the two countries’ foreign ministers, when John Kerry and Javad Zarif, joined by the European Union’s top diplomat, Catherine Ashton, held a formal meeting to organize the upcoming nuclear negotiations in Geneva.
Kerry and Zarif shook hands again when the two met separately.
So what changed?
Back then, Iran’s supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, had forbidden Khatami to speak with the Americans.
Rouhani, by contrast, proceeded with Khamenei’s blessing.
Khamenei, concerned with repairing the damage caused by his acceptance of the fraudulent reelection in 2009 of former President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, was willing to accept the victory in June of Rouhani, a conservative reformist whom he trusted.
He must have calculated that the new president would have to ameliorate the consequences of Ahmadinejad’s foreign-policy freelancing and economic mismanagement, which has had as much to do with the collapse of the Iranian economy as US-led international sanctions.
There had been earlier attempts to improve relations with the Americans.
Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani, who became Iran’s president after Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini’s death in 1989, sought such an outcome.
In 1995, he sent clear signals of a desire to restore diplomatic relations.
President Bill Clinton’s administration ignored the overtures and allowed the US Congress to take the initiative.
Congress responded by unanimously adopting the Iran and Libya Sanctions Act of 1996.
Rafsanjani was in a much stronger position vis-à-vis Khamenei, who had just been selected to succeed Khomeini as Supreme Leader, than any of Iran’s subsequent presidents.
His trouble was with powerful opponents in Iran’s security apparatus, who sabotaged his pragmatic foreign-policy initiatives by staging terrorist attacks in France, Germany, and Argentina.
Khatami’s proposal for a “dialogue among civilizations” in 2000 was an attempt to open a crack in what he described as the wall of mistrust that continued to separate Iran and the US.
It was only in the last year of his second term that Clinton made a serious effort to respond to Khatami.
But Khatami lacked the support of Khamenei, who firmly opposed his reforms.
The aggressive rhetoric of Clinton’s successor, George W. Bush, who called Iran part of an “axis of evil” prior to the US-led invasion of Iraq, made Khamenei apprehensive, and he endorsed an initiative for a dialogue with the Americans in 2003.
The Bush administration, in thrall to the idea of regime change, ignored this initiative and rejected the “Big Deal” on nuclear energy negotiated with the EU-3 in Paris in November 2004 by Rouhani, who was then Khamenei’s representative and Chairman of Iran’s National Security Council.
The formal rejection of the Iran-EU nuclear agreement in February 2005 was an unintended gift to Iran’s hardliners, led by Ahmadinejad.
The return of hardliners after the ascendancy of moderates is a little-understood but fairly typical feature of twentieth-century revolutions.
Ahmadinejad’s election in 2005 was a throwback to the populism of Khomeini’s Islamic Revolution and his cult of revolutionary martyrs.
It went hand in hand with an aggressive foreign policy and a determined nuclear strategy of uranium enrichment that repeatedly frustrated EU negotiators and forced world leaders to fall into line behind America’s crippling sanctions regime.
There can be no doubt that before coming to the US, Iran’s new president studied Obama’s letter to Khamenei, who promised “heroic flexibility” in negotiations.
With Khamenei’s support, Rouhani will be able to rein in recalcitrant forces in Iran’s power structure in a way that his pragmatic predecessors, Rafsanjani and Khatami, could not.
More than any Iranian president since 1979, Rouhani can deliver his part of the bargain – that is, if and when a bargain is struck.
Remaking Iran
TEHRAN – Iranian President Hassan Rouhani recently marked the end of his first year in office not only with smiles, but also with further evidence of his efforts at domestic reform and geostrategic reorientation.
In Iran’s case, these two imperatives have long gone hand in hand.
Rouhani now says that Iran would be willing to work with the United States in Iraq.
The dire threat to both Iranian and US interests posed by the Islamic State (formerly the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria) has, evidently, brought the two countries closer together.
In the days since the anniversary of Rouhani’s election, Iran’s foreign minister, Mohammad Javad Zarif, overcame his earlier reservations and expressed optimism about reaching an international deal on his country’s nuclear program by the original deadline of July 20.
If rapprochement with the West can be achieved, the removal of the international sanctions stemming from the nuclear program would give a tremendous boost to Rouhani’s economic policy.
And it is here that Rouhani has invested much of his energy and political capital.
Coming into office, Rouhani had a clear priority: fix an economy devastated by eight years of former President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad’s demagogic mismanagement.
He replaced Ahmadinejad’s incompetent thugs with a reasonably qualified cabinet and capable administrators, and has embarked on an ambitious program of economic development, expanded health care, and environmental protection.
Though Rouhani has made little headway combating rampant inflation, small business and the entrepreneurial middle class seem to be thriving.
In early June, I found a recently opened complex of expensive restaurants opposite the new luxury Grand Hotel in Shiraz packed with affluent customers.
Rouhani is vigorously cultivating economic ties with Gulf states, including Kuwait, whose ruler he entertained in Tehran in early June before leaving on an official visit to Turkey, where he signed ten deals aimed at doubling bilateral trade, to $30 billion, in 2015.
On the environmental front, Rouhani is also busy undoing his predecessor’s damage.
Tehran’s air pollution, widely blamed by those with respiratory illness on low-octane “Ahmadinejad gasoline,” has visibly declined with the introduction of high-octane fuel and other restrictions.
Last but not least, Rouhani has launched his national health-insurance program, and ordered state hospitals, which dominate the health sector, to limit patients’ copayments for all medical expenses to 10%.
Rouhani has made it clear that he wants to pay for the new health care by phasing out the monthly state stipends paid to more than seventy-four million registered citizens, which Ahmadinejad offered when he eliminated a wide range of subsidies.
The strongest factor working in Rouhani’s favor is the support of Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, the country’s Supreme Leader, for the president’s domestic policies – just as he has fully backed the nuclear negotiations.
Unlike Ahmadinejad’s reformist predecessor, Mohammad Khatami, who acted more like the leader of the loyal opposition than head of the executive, Rouhani has worked closely with Khamenei.
In his speech to commemorate the 25th anniversary of Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini’s death on June 4, Khamenei fully appropriated the discourse of the dissident clerics aligned with Khatami.
Thus, he described the regime instituted by Khomeini as a religious democracy in which all high state offices, including his own, derive their legitimacy from the will of the people as expressed in elections.
But Rouhani needs more than Khamenei’s backing.
Khamenei is 74 and has health problems.
With Mohammad Reza Mahdavi Kani, the 83-year-old chairman of the Council of Experts (the body of clerics that elects the supreme leader) gravely ill, Ghorbanali Dorri-Najafabadi, an influential member and former intelligence and security minister, has suggested that the Council should proceed to elect Khamenei’s successor now.
Clearly, the clerical elite is concerned about the future of its leadership after Khamenei.
Should a succession process begin soon, it would significantly constrain Rouhani’s room for maneuver.
Rouhani’s relations with the Iranian Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC) and other security forces are of more immediate concern.
Last month’s unceremonious killing of a billionaire businessman detained by security forces on corruption charges seemed to reflect the tacit division of power between the president and Iran’s security apparatus.
Nonetheless, tension is simmering beneath the surface.
Rouhani seems to have halted the expansion of the IRGC’s economic empire.
The IRGC’s commander, General Mohammad Ali Jafari, has publicly expressed his hostility to Rouhani’s administration, while General Hassan Firouzabadi, Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces, has countered by expressing his support for the president.
It is in Iraq, however, that Iran faces its most complicated mix of challenge and opportunity.
Determined to prevent the disintegration of the country, Iran has provided military and political support to Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki’s government.
This appears to align Iranian and American policies, with both determined to counter the gains of radical Islamist forces in Iraq and Syria.
Rouhani’s circle is fully prepared to address this crisis by talking to the US.
After a year in power, Rouhani’s program of economic development, environmental cleanup, and improved health care is proceeding smoothly and quietly.
But, given the uncertainty of the domestic and international political context, there are no guarantees of success.
Much depends on whether a nuclear deal with the international community is achieved, and the likelihood of that outcome has unexpectedly increased, owing to the common interest of Iran and the US in coping with the collapse of Iraq.
Bangladesh’s Fundamentalist Challenge
NEW DELHI – In February, while returning from a book fair at Dhaka University, Avijit Roy, a Bangladeshi-American blogger known for his atheism, and his wife were dragged from their rickshaw and hacked with machetes.
The book fair, held annually to commemorate the 1952 protests that culminated in the Pakistani military opening fire on students at the university, is a typically Bengali response to violence.
To turn the Nazi leader Hermann Göring’s notorious barb on its head, when Bengalis hear the word “gun,” they reach for their culture.
But Roy’s brutal murder (his wife was maimed, but survived) – together with the fatal stabbing of another atheist blogger, Washiqur Rahman, barely a month later – exposes another force at work in Bangladesh, one that is subverting the country’s tradition of secularism and intellectual discourse.
That force is Salafist Islamic fundamentalism.
The change in Bangladesh is stark.
The irreverent secularism and thoughtful inquiry reflected in the works of Roy and Washiqur have long been a hallmark of Bengali writing.
A generation ago, their views would have been considered perfectly acceptable, if not mainstream, in the vibrant intellectual culture of Bengal (the Western portion of which is the Indian state of West Bengal).
That is no longer true.
Backed by lavish financing from abroad, Salafist fundamentalism – an intolerant version of Islam at odds with the more moderate Sufi-influenced variant that prevailed in India for centuries – has been spreading across Bangladesh in recent years.
While Bengal’s long secular tradition, which drove its efforts to break away from Pakistan, is still alive and well, the corrosive impact of the radical Islamists – who use force to silence those with whom they disagree – is undeniable.
Roy and Washiqur are far from the first Bengali intellectuals to face the Islamists’ particular brand of censorship.
The writer Humayun Azad was severely injured in an attack at the annual book fair in 2004.
(He survived, but died later that year in Germany.)
Last year, the atheist blogger Ahmed Rajib Haider was, like Roy, hacked to death in Dhaka.
Why engage in theoretical debates with your ideological opponents, the Islamists are saying, when one can simply shut them up for good?
Many Bangladeshi intellectuals have seen the writing on the wall and fled the country, sacrificing daily contact with their rich cultural heritage for the sake of self-preservation.
The novelist Taslima Nasrin went into exile in 1994 to escape death threats from Islamist radicals; she now lives in Delhi.
Daud Haider, a journalist and poet, languishes in Berlin.
Public intellectuals are not the only people in danger.
Ordinary secular Muslims who turn to atheism are more vulnerable to charges of apostasy and, worse, blasphemy.
In the old days, such charges might have attracted a fatwa or two and, at worst, social ostracism.
Today, the threats – say, being murdered in cold blood on a crowded street – are more viscerally compelling.
For Muslim-majority Bangladesh, this struggle within Islam amounts to a battle for the soul of the country.
But it is not an entirely new battle.
Bangladesh has long faced the claim that, in accordance with the logic of the 1947 Partition of India, which produced what was then East Pakistan, it should be more Islamic.
Others, opposing this claim, insist that the country must live up to the legacy of its 1971 secession from Pakistan, in a revolution that proclaimed Islam insufficient grounds for nationhood and asserted the primacy of Bangladesh’s secular culture and Bengali language over its allegiance to Islamabad.
This conflict is also reflected in the country’s often bitterly divisive politics.
Each camp has taken its turn controlling the government, under two formidable female leaders: the Awami League’s Sheikh Hasina Wazed, the current prime minister, and her two-term predecessor, the Bangladesh Nationalist Party’s Begum Khaleda Zia.
Though the secularists are currently in power, Zia retains wide support, including among the Islamists.
Her party boycotted the last election, and has provoked political violence that has claimed more than 100 lives this year and left hundreds more injured.
The recent killings have inflamed public opinion, sparking mass demonstrations to demand justice for the victims and more effective government protection of secularist writers.
HT Imam, a senior adviser to Hasina, squarely challenged the police for their inaction on Roy’s murder, telling top police officers to “identify the black sheep among the force and bring them under law and justice to uphold your image.”
Bangladesh is a democracy that upholds freedom of expression, but within limits.
Though the government is seen as sympathetic to liberal intellectuals, it is also anxious to maintain law and order and avoid provoking the extremists.
As a result, the government has not hesitated to try to curry favor with the Islamists by using legislation that prohibits “hurting religious sentiments” to harass and arrest atheists and liberals.
The Islamists, however, want the government to pass a blasphemy law like that in Pakistan, which decrees death for religious dissent.
Though the government has so far stoutly resisted this, its weak-kneed defense of secularism has raised fears that its resistance to theocratic pressure could collapse under sustained pressure.
It must continue to do so.
Hasina – the daughter of Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, the “father” of independent Bangladesh who was assassinated in 1975 – knows that compromising with the Islamists will get her nowhere; she will never be acceptable to them.
Her government must not succumb to the temptation to accommodate the extremists in the name of good governance (or in the cause of political survival).
The principles for which Bangladesh bled when it won its independence from Pakistan must not be compromised.
If Hasina gives in to the machete-wielding Islamists, she will sacrifice the Bangladesh that her father fought to free.
Syria’s Kurdish Hope
QAMISHLI, SYRIA – The civil war now engulfing Syria emerged from its people’s desire for political change.
But the war is not universal: since the outbreak of protests in 2011 against President Bashar al-Assad’s regime – and long before – one group of Syrians, the Kurdish community, has consistently sought peaceful change and respect for the rights of all.
For Syria’s Kurds, the struggle against more than four decades of the Assad family’s Ba’athist dictatorship became particularly harsh after 2004, when security forces killed dozens of unarmed protesters in the northeastern town of Qamishli.
This ignited the spark for democratic reform, and we were spurred on by the knowledge that our kinsmen had won political autonomy in northern Iraq and were creating a vibrant democracy.
When protests erupted across Syria in 2011, Kurds were at the forefront.
Unfortunately, foreign fighters across the Arab and wider Muslim world soon joined the fray, some supporting the regime, and others backing the rebels.
For the Kurds, the widening conflict meant that, in addition to fighting a brutal dictatorship, we were now confronted by Al Qaeda militants seeking to establish an Islamic emirate in the Middle East.
The Kurds have never sought to achieve democratic goals through violence.
We wanted no part of a revolution that massacred children, drove families from their homes, and left millions destitute.
We took up arms only to protect ourselves and our property from an immediate extreme Islamist threat that tolerated no dissent.
Radical Islamists targeted us because our people generally hold secular views of politics and society, with women, for example, playing a prominent role in public and professional life.
Islamists also abhor us because we demand self-determination, whereas they seek an amorphous emirate that lumps all Muslims together without regard for cultural and historical differences.
Indeed, they aim to suppress, and even eliminate, any such difference.
While defending ourselves, we have also established our own government in Syria’s Kurdish regions, the only areas that enjoy both order and democracy.
The streets of Qamishli, Amuda, and Malikiyya are calm and safe.
The armed gangs that move freely through rebel-controlled cities such as Aleppo are absent in Kurdish areas.
When people go to the markets they do not fear being kidnapped or killed.
This is the case for people of all ethnic or religious communities in the Kurdish regions.
Kurds have long been proud of their tolerance.
Christians who have fled rebel-controlled areas live peacefully and with equal rights in Kurdish areas.
Indeed, these areas have become safe havens for all religious and ethnic groups escaping the war.
We also know that violence will not solve this conflict.
That is why Syrian Kurds’ political representatives advocate a negotiated settlement, and are willing to sit down with anyone – regime or rebels – to achieve a peace agreement.
Other rebel factions demand Assad’s resignation; we insist on no such preconditions.
We do not even seek the creation of an independent Kurdish state – just a guarantee of Kurdish rights in a unified Syria.
Centralized power has suppressed the country’s diversity and led to appalling abuses.
Our chief goal is to end the persecution and discrimination, including the ban on the Kurdish language and our exclusion from certain professions, and we believe that this can best be achieved through a decentralized political system that devolves power to the provinces.
Yet, despite consistently demonstrating a commitment to democracy, the international community has been deaf to our appeals.
The United States, Europe, and other Western governments refuse to negotiate with us, even though neighboring Iraq and Turkey have done so willingly.
The region’s new geopolitical realities demand new political arrangements.
Syria’s Kurds are ready to build a more democratic country.
But we need Western support and expertise to consolidate the free society to which everyone aspires.
By ignoring us, Western governments are disregarding the secular, democratic values that they claim to uphold.
Worse, our fragile democracy risks falling victim to extremists who pose a mortal danger not just to Syria, but to the wider Middle East and the world.
Gays and the New Public Philosophy
LONDON – With humanity’s millennia-old focus on collective survival no longer a primary concern, a few fortunate societies in the West have become preoccupied with matters of human, or individual, rights.
In recent decades, we have experienced a second flowering of the individualism associated with such nineteenth-century thinkers as John Stuart Mill.
The rights of the individual were submerged by the horrors of the first half of the twentieth century.
But since the 1960’s, the passions expended until then on righting collective wrongs have been increasingly channeled into securing the rights of humans as individuals.
Indeed, if the West can be said to have a public philosophy nowadays, it is a philosophy of human rights.
A small but significant example of this is the United Kingdom’s recent debate in Parliament of a bill recognizing the right to same-sex marriage, which follows a decision taken in France this spring to legalize same-sex marriage.
Indeed, the UK is something of a latecomer: thirteen countries already allow gay marriage, and the usually conservative current US Supreme Court recently struck down the “Defense of Marriage Act,” adopted in 1996 explicitly to ban gay marriages, and a law prohibiting gay marriage in California.
Only in 2004 were British gays allowed to form “civil partnerships” – relationships with the same legal status as marriage, but denied the title.
This did not settle the matter; the passion for human rights simply moved to the next level.
Denial of gay couples’ legal right to call themselves married is – has become – intolerably discriminatory.
But allowing them to marry has proved a harder legislative nut to crack than allowing them civil partnerships.
The parliamentary debate that has preceded the likely passage of this legislation revealed a classic case of an institution (marriage) coming into conflict with a cause (human rights).
Both opponents and supporters of the bill concede that marriage has changed in various ways over time.
They also agree that a central core has remained constant.
But they disagree about what that core is.
The chief argument of those opposed to the bill is that marriage has always meant a lifelong union aimed at procreation and child-rearing.
This is its “normative” meaning – the best that the human race has come up with to secure its survival.
As such, marriage is inescapably to a member of the opposite sex.
Against this, supporters of same-sex marriage argue that the one constant that defines the married state is a loving couple’s commitment to “share their journey.”
Love and commitment are the only relevant criteria.
It is simply unfair to withhold the status of marriage from those who want to make this public vow.
Many and ingenious have been the attempts to split the difference.
In the House of Lords, Lord Mackay of Clashfern, a former Lord Chancellor, moved an amendment requiring the bill to distinguish between marriage (same sex) and marriage (opposite sex).
The common word marriage, he argued, would remove any discrimination, but the brackets would recognize that the two states were different.
Supporters of the bill allowing same-sex marriage pooh-poohed “marriage in brackets.”
With the defeat of the Clashfern amendment by 314 votes to 119, much of the bill’s original form remains intact.
Churches would not be required to consecrate same-sex unions, or teachers to promote them (against their conscience); but, as far as the state is concerned, marriage would be gender-blind.
The arguments on both sides have been of high quality, especially in the House of Lords.
But, as I have sat and listened to the debate, I cannot help wondering what a break it is in human history for so much intellect and feeling to be focused on such a small matter as the state’s withholding of a word, marriage, but not its substance.
On the lexicographic point, opponents of same-sex marriage are surely right.
Historically, marriage has not been, as one peer described it, an “elongated envelope,” into which any expression of love and commitment can be packed.
It is not so regarded in contemporary Britain; and even less so in the non-Western world, where unions of men and women are considered the norm.
But there is a glaring weakness in the arguments of the bill’s opponents: while they hint darkly at the “unintended consequences” of legalizing same-sex marriage, they cannot spell out exactly what these consequences would be.
It is not obvious that “normal” marriage, procreation, or child-rearing would be threatened by this “add on.”
In fact, opponents of the bill fail to mention that traditional marriage is in a fairly advanced state of decay in Western societies.
Fewer and fewer people are bothering to get married, and marriage is regarded less and less as a lifelong union.
Families are having fewer and fewer children, and more and more children are born out of wedlock.
So one of the “unintended consequences” of the bill might be to add welcome recruits to the ranks of the married, even if these recruits are of a historically unusual kind.
After much soul-searching, I voted for the bill, though without any acute sense that I was striking a blow for freedom.
There is a clear status benefit to the minority; no obvious harm is being done to the majority; and the long-term consequences are unfathomable.
In the end, it seemed a no-brainer.
Yet it left me uncomfortable.
Every institution, Mill wrote in On Liberty, had to justify its keep; if it could not, it deserved to be swept away.
But what counts as justification?
The very institution in which I sit, the House of Lords, has no rational justification in terms of its composition or powers, as reformers have been quick to point out.
But the very longevity of an institution like marriage is some mark of its worth.
At the least, prudence should give the reformer pause.
The Maternal Thread of Life
ISLAMABAD – Last month, Oxford University’s Green Templeton College held its annual Emerging Markets Symposium at Egrove Park.
The theme this year was “Maternal and Child Health and Nutrition.”
The final slide of the opening presentation, delivered by GTC fellow Stephen Kennedy, was a cartoon depicting two young contestants set to begin a race: one was strong and healthy, while the other was emaciated, shackled, carrying the baggage of disease, and confronting the massive barrier of malnutrition.
The message was clear: not everyone begins life with the same chance of success.
Of course, this is not a groundbreaking insight.
The impact of factors like poverty, maternal literacy, sanitation, and housing conditions on children’s health – and, in turn, on social and economic outcomes – is well documented.
The problem is that these factors are not amenable to isolated public-health interventions.
But another, less widely discussed social determinant – maternal nutrition – could be.
Since Hippocrates, people have been discussing how “nature” and “nurture” interact to shape a person’s development.
Indeed, even in ancient civilizations, adequate maternal nutrition was considered essential to ensuring future generations’ survival and prosperity.
But poverty and ignorance can thwart even the best intentions.
The consequences of maternal malnutrition are far-reaching, including higher child-mortality rates, more birth defects, increased susceptibility to infection, and specific nutritional deficiencies that can lock a child into a vicious cycle of poor health early in life.
Moreover, intrauterine malnutrition can increase the risk of chronic conditions like obesity, diabetes, and cardiovascular disease during adulthood.
It is telling that most of the symposium’s 47 participants – influential public- and private-sector figures from around the world – were unaware of the extent to which a mother’s nutrition affects her offspring’s wellbeing.
They were surprised by evidence that babies grow in the same way worldwide, as long as they receive the same care and are not constrained by environmental factors – evidence that challenged the widely held notion that ethnicity and gender are major determinants of a child’s development.
This reflects a fundamental failing on the part of the scientific community to relay relevant data to decision-makers.
In fact, upon hearing the evidence, a former Pakistani prime minister confessed that he would have been more proactive in this area had he known while he was in office what he knows now.
The meeting’s participants agreed that strong efforts to support pre-conception care in the context of maternal- and child-health services were vital.
After all, if an adequately nourished mother provides critical health benefits to her offspring throughout their lives, women can be viewed as the custodians of future generations’ health.
These inter-generational biological connections are particularly pronounced in the case of female children.
The influence of the levels and composition of maternal nutrition on a female fetus will carry through to adulthood, when she, too, becomes a mother.
Given how few scientists have recognized the extent to which a woman’s eggs shape her grandchildren’s prospects, it is not surprising that policymakers remain so oblivious to the long-term impact of women’s health.
But the evidence is clear, and it demands action.
The good news is that there are solutions.
Conditional cash transfers, text-message-based initiatives, school-based food programs, vitamin-fortification schemes, and local leadership have all proved effective in improving maternal nutrition.
Such initiatives should be backed by policies that foster positive nutritional choices.
Compelling policymakers to implement such policies will require a new set of skills that draws upon lessons from around the world.
In Brazil, a television program on the role that folic-acid supplementation could play in the prevention of spina bifida (a congenital neural tube defect) immediately grabbed politicians’ attention.
Initiatives aimed at enhancing the public’s knowledge of nutrition are also crucial – not least because they can motivate citizens to pressure their governments to take action.
To this end, entertainment media like soap operas, which have emerged as important tools for empowering women in conservative Middle Eastern societies, could be employed.
Forums like the Emerging Market Symposium can help to bridge the increasingly obvious gap between science and public policy.
But, without strong domestic support for change, the impact of such meetings is limited.
It is time to demand action – and past time for policymakers to deliver it.
India’s East Asian Dream
SINGAPORE – On August 15, Narendra Modi delivered his first Independence Day speech as Prime Minister.
Though he continued the tradition of addressing the country from the ramparts of Delhi’s historic Red Fort, the speech broke with convention.
Shunning a written text, Modi extemporized for an hour, mapping out an explicit vision for India, including an economic model that constitutes a clean break from India’s past.
Since 1991, India has been slowly changing its policy framework away from the socialist vision of its first prime minister, Jawaharlal Nehru.
However, for political reasons, the changes were always justified in an almost apologetic way.
Indeed, many Nehru-era institutions continue to exist – and even thrive.
In one fell swoop, Modi announced the abolition of one of the most important of these institutions: the powerful Planning Commission, which had continued to churn out Soviet-style “Five-Year Plans” and remained at the heart of a centralized resource-allocation process.
Its successor, the National Development and Reform Commission, will probably function more as a think tank – providing ideas and ensuring policy coherence, but with no power to allocate.
Modi also argued for a new economic-growth model based on export-oriented manufacturing.
This means encouraging domestic entrepreneurs to manufacture goods for export and inviting the world’s top companies to relocate production to India.
This effort is important, because India’s economy and exports are dominated by services, which have grown steadily relative to overall output, now accounting for almost 60% of GDP.
By contrast, the industrial sector’s share of GDP has remain unchanged, at around 26%, for the last three decades (the manufacturing segment is even smaller, at 14.9% of GDP).
When Modi’s emphasis on export-led manufacturing is viewed in the context of his government’s focus on heavy infrastructure projects – ranging from power generation to railways – it becomes clear that his growth model, with its mass deployment of labor and capital in industry, looks similar to East Asian countries’ strategy. It is also consistent with his frequent references to the need to create new cities, because urbanization is the spatial manifestation of industrialization.
The shift to an “East Asian” growth model should not be surprising, given India’s demographic pipeline.
India needs to create jobs for the ten million people per year who join the working-age population.
It also needs to accommodate the millions who wish to shift away from agriculture, which still employs half of the workforce.
Although the service sector was able to generate growth in the past, it has proved to be a poor job creator and only employs 27% of workers, far lower than its share of the economy.
By contrast, construction and manufacturing are rightly seen to be more promising outlets for the mass deployment of semi-skilled workers.
There are, of course, many obstacles in Modi’s path.
India’s tax and regulatory regime is widely regarded as unfriendly to business; but Modi’s track record in government suggests that he is sensitive to this problem and will be able to make significant improvements.
The greater challenge for Modi will be financing his growth model.
The success of the East Asian model was predicated on a sharp increase in the investment rate.
Beginning with Japan, every rapidly growing East Asian economy sustained investment rates in the range of 38-40% of GDP over its rapid-growth phase.
China is currently investing almost half of its GDP.
India’s fixed-investment ratio, by contrast, has declined in recent years to around 30% of GDP.
Foreign capital can play a role in supporting rapid growth, but international experience shows that domestic savings is key to sustaining high investment rates.
Mobilizing these savings will require careful thinking about how the domestic financial system can be expanded by an order of magnitude without risking a future crisis.
Another major problem will be the migration of tens of millions of people as they are sucked into the expanding industrial economy.
India does not have China’s sociopolitical controls, such as the hukou residential-permit system, to manage such a large-scale movement of people.
Japan and South Korea are perhaps too small to serve as useful precedents.
Modi may be hoping to preempt the problem through his project to create 100 “smart cities,” though how the program will be implemented remains unknown.
Despite all of the obstacles and risks, Modi has articulated an explicit economic vision for the first time since Nehru.
Unlike the apologetic reforms of the past two decades, Indians have been promised a confident new beginning.
It is now a matter of implementation.