Pertemuan Majelis Umum PBB pekan ini di New York memunculkan peluang lain untuk kepemimpinan global dalam pengendalian AMR.
Isu tersebut juga termuat dalam agenda untuk pertama kalinya dan Sekjen PBB Ban Ki-moon dan para pemimpin dunia akan menorehkan janji untuk melawan resistensi obat di forum tingkat tinggi.
AMR harus diakhiri dan PBB harus meneruskan upaya yang dimulai G-20.
Sebagai forum pemerintahan global yang paling inklusif, PBB adalah satu-satunya badan yang bisa mengatur sumber daya dan komitmen kepemimpinan yang diperlukan dalam pemecahan masalah.
Akan tetapi PBB hanya akan berfungsi dengan baik jika berhasil memenuhi sejumlah langkah pokok.
Pertama, negara-negara anggota PBB harus mulai memadukan aksi pengendalian AMR yang lintas sektoral, termasuk bidang kesehatan, pertanian, dan keuangan.
Peran PBB sangat strategis.
Badan internasional ini mempertemukan para pemimpin dunia dan bisa menguatkan kerja sama antar bangsa dan antar lembaga internasional mengenai isu-isu sosial dan perekonomian dunia; juga bisa menggunakan kekuasaan yang dimilikinya untuk mengerahkan sumber daya global melawan AMR.
Kedua, agar semua berjalan sesuai rencana, PBB harus menetapkan batas-batas jelas, berdasarkan outcome yang dapat diukur dan berkomitmen terhadap pencantuman kembali isu AMR ke dalam agenda Majelis Umum setiap dua tahun.
Tindakan ini akan menghasilkan kerangka kerja untuk mengukur capaian global, sekaligus mengirim pesan kuat bahwa PBB memiliki komitmen jangka panjang dan AMR senantiasa dijadikan prioritas utama oleh sekretaris-jenderal berikutnya.
Terakhir, PBB perlu menunjuk seorang Utusan Khusus untuk AMR demi menjadi keberlanjutan proses dan capaian di tahun-tahun mendatang.
Perwakilan yang ditunjuk hendaknya memiliki posisi tinggi dan berwenang bekerja sama dengan negara-negara dan badan-badan multilateral untuk mempertahankan momentum pengendalian AMR.
Kita boleh merasa optimis sebab AMR akhirnya memperoleh perhatian global.
Namun ini biasanya tidak permanen, kita tahu karena debat-debat terdahulu dan terkini mengenai penyakit-penyakit menular biasa redup setelah beberapa lama.
Jika kita gagal menuntut akuntabilitas dan komitmen para pemimpin kita, efeknya bisa mematikan.
Perjanjian Benih yang Anti Ilmu Pengetahuan
STANFORD – Pada bulan September, Amerika Serikat meratifikasi Perjanjian International Sumber Daya Genetik Tanaman Pangan dan Pertanian, atau lebih dikenal dengan Perjanjian Benih Internasional.
Seperti halnya banyak perjanjian internasional yang dibuat dibawah naungan PBB, perjanjian ini mempunyai banyak kekurangan.
Lebih tepatnya, perjanjian ini adalah sebuah langkah anti teknologi yang diplomatis.    
Memang betul bahwa perjanjian ini, yang mulai berlaku pada tahun 2004, berawal dari sebuah niat yang mulia.
Namun niat mulia tersebut kemudian dituangkan dalam bentuk perjanjian yang malah menjadi kendala hukum yang sangat mengekang pertukaran sumber daya genetik (terutama benih) antar negara.
Perjanjian ini memiliki tujuan yang tidak mungkin tercapai, yaitu: “pelestarian dan penggunaan berkelanjutan dari seluruh sumber daya genetik tanaman pangan dan pertanian serta pembagian yang adil dan merata dari penggunaan sumber daya tersebut, selaras dengan Perjanjian Keanekaragaman Hayati, untuk pertanian berkelanjutan dan ketahanan pangan.”  
Prinsip dasar dari Perjanjian Benih adalah sumber daya genetik termasuk dalam hak kedaulatan dari negara-negara anggota.
Hal ini bertentangan dengan prinsip yang selama ini dipegang yaitu sumber daya tanaman dan hewan merupakan “warisan bersama umat manusia.”
Prinsip perjanjian ini bertentangan dengan landasan bahwa beberapa sumber daya global, yang bermanfaat bagi seluruh umat manusia, tidak boleh digunakan sepihak dan di monopoli oleh individu, negara, perusahaan, atau entitas lain, namun harus dikelola dengan cara yang bermanfaat bagi seluruh umat manusia.   
Perjanjian ini dimotivasi oleh ketakutan akan pembajakan sumber daya hayati – pencurian sumber daya genetik oleh perusahaan pertanian, yang kemudian bisa mempatenkan dan bisa memonopoli benih.
Namun, meski pembajakan sumber daya hayati merupakan ide yang menakutkan, analisa yang netral telah menunjukkan bahwa ide ini tidak didukung oleh fakta.
Pada kenyataannya, pembajakan sumber daya hayati sangat jarang terjadi – sehingga hal ini bisa ditangani secara langsung.             
Sebaliknya, dunia telah menciptakan sebuah sistem yang berbelit-belit, birokratis dan terpolitisasi yang secara sistematis menghambat penelitian ilmiah, pemuliaan tanaman, dan menciptakan kekayaan intelektual.
Hal ini terlihat dari dibuatnya sistem multilateral yang memberikan akses terhadap daftar sumber daya genetik yang dirundingkan.
Perjanjian ini juga membawahi 15 lembaga penelitian yang mencakup Kelompok Penasehat Penelitian Pertanian Internasional (CGIAR) yang merupakan sebuah kemitraan penelitian global yang berpengaruh.
Ketika sebuah negara meratifiaksi Perjanjian Benih, negara tersebut setuju bahwa bank benih milik negara tersebut – yang berada di Amerika, sebuah tempat penyimpanan di Fort Collins, Colorado – akan mengikuti peraturan yang sama dengan pusat penelitian CGIAR. 
Namun peraturan tidak banyak berarti.
Sayangnya, dampak perjanjian ini adalah negara-negara justru semakin memberlakukan sumber daya genetik mereka seperti anjing memberlakukan tulang: tidak mau berbagi, bahkan diantara sesama peneliti dari negara mereka dan pemulia tanaman, sementara pertukaran internasional sumber daya genetik telah terhenti selama 12 tahun terakhir.
Pusat penelitian CGIAR tetap dapat melakukan pertukaran sumber daya genetik, namun prosesnya kini lebih rumit dan sulit dibandingkan sebelum diberlakukannya Perjanjian Benih.  
Dampak diberlakukannya Perjanjian Benih di Amerika sulit untuk dipastikan, tidak hanya karena perjanjian ini mengandung kata-kata yang berbelit-belit dan ambigu sehingga mengaburkan arti dan persyaratan yang dimaksud.
Yang jelas, pengalaman negara-negara yang telah melaksanakan perjanjian ini tidak sepenuhnya baik, kecuali jika negara tersebut tidak keberatan dengan banyaknya birokrasi yang mencegah inovasi dan perkembangan demi tujuan yang tidak bisa dicapai.
Perjanjian benih ini mempunyai prinsip anti kapitalis, anti ilmu pengetahuan dan anti inovasi seperti yang terdapat pada Perjanjian Keanekaragaman Hayati (CBD).
Perjanjian ini juga meniru pendekatan yang tidak ilmiah dan anti rekayasa genetis dari Protokol Keamanan Hayati Cartagena pada  CBD.
Selain itu, terlihat juga adanya banyak persamaan dengan Protokol Tambahan Kewajiban dan Ganti Rugi Nagoya – Kuala Lumpur pada Protokol Cartagena – yang merupakan perjanjian anti genetik lain yang hanya menakut-nakuti calon wirausahawan dari sektor bioteknologi pertanian.
Hal ini melelahkan, membingungkan, dan rumit – dan pada intinya, hal ini bertentangan dengan inovasi yang bisa bermanfaat bagi orang miskin.        
Perjanjian Benih ini bertentangan dengan ilmu pengetahuan, perkembangan pertanian, dan hak kekayaan intelektual.
Dalam pembuatan keputusan, hal ini harusnya sudah dianggap kelewatan dan patut diakhiri.
Senat Amerika, yang meratifikasi Perjanjian Benih, harus mempertimbangkan kembali keikutsertaan mereka, dan hal ini dibolehkan dalam Pasal 32 perjanjian tersebut.
Setelah itu, Kementrian Luar Negeri Amerika akan memberitahukan sekretariat perjanjian ini, dan kemudian penarikan diri dari perjanjian ini akan mulai berlaku setahun kemudian.
Presiden terpilih, Donald Trump, penulis buku Seni Membuat Perjanjian telah berjanji pada warga Amerika bahwa beliau akan mengakhiri segala keburukan.
Penarikan diri dari Perjanjian Benih akan menjadi pertanda baik bahwa beliau akan menepati janji tersebut.
In Defense of the Jews, Again
MADRID – Despite the impression given by massive unity rallies throughout France, the recent attack on the satirical magazine Charlie Hebdo does not mean that freedom of expression is under any serious threat in Western Europe.
Nor does it indicate that Islamic radicalism is somehow about to engulf or transform Western societies.
The threat that it does highlight is a less publicized one: the resurgence of discrimination and violence against Europe’s Jews.
Charlie Hebdo – the last vestige of a bawdy and somewhat savage nineteenth-century French tradition of outrageous caricature of religious and political figures – may well be an ideal icon of free expression.
Europeans rose to defend a vital principle; free speech, however vicious, retains a place in any democracy.
Likewise, “Eurabia,” Bat Ye’Or’s prophecy of Islamic doom for the West, simply is not emerging.
No Islamic parties hold seats in European parliaments; few leading Muslim figures feature in Europe’s major centers of cultural and political power; and European Union institutions are practically bereft of Arabs and Muslims.
Efforts by radicals to recruit and indoctrinate young European Muslims do not reflect the inexorable rise of Islamist – or even Islamic – influence in Europe.
Rather, they highlight the radicals’ desperation to influence a region where the overwhelming majority of Muslims aspire to integrate into, rather than challenge, the established order.
What is truly under threat in Europe is its Jewish community.
In 2006, the French Jew Ilan Halimi was kidnapped and brutally tortured in a cellar for three weeks, resulting in his death.
In 2012, three Jewish schoolchildren and a rabbi were gunned down in Toulouse.
And last April, a Jewish couple in a Parisian suburb were robbed, because, as the attackers put it, “Jews must have money” (though that did not explain why they then raped the woman).
A month later, a French jihadist attacked the Jewish museum in Brussels, leaving three dead and one critically wounded.
A few months after that, a mob assaulted a synagogue in Paris.
None of these events sparked anything remotely resembling the public outrage of recent weeks.
Had the murder of four Jews at a kosher supermarket in Paris, carried out by a confederate of the Charlie Hebdo attackers prior to their capture, occurred in other circumstances, one can assume that it would not have fueled a widespread movement to defend the values of the French Republic.
Some argue that the surge in anti-Semitic violence in Europe is motivated primarily by the plight of the Palestinians.
But, according to a 2012 poll, more Europeans believe that violence against Jews is fueled by long-standing anti-Semitic attitudes, rather than anti-Israel sentiment.
Radical Islam propagated hatred for Jews long before Zionism, and it will continue to do so after the creation of a Palestinian state.
Given this, it is not surprising that the increasing visibility of Islamist extremism has, by capturing the attention of frustrated young Muslim men in Europe and elsewhere, spurred increased violence against Jews.
But the problem runs deeper, giving Jews the impression that they have no future in Europe.
A recent YouGov poll found that a substantial share of the French and British populations hold anti-Semitic views.
Another poll, conducted by the Center for Research on Prejudice at Warsaw University, showed that, in 2013, some 63% of Poles believed Jews conspire to control the banking system and the world media.
This has serious implications not just for Jews, but for Europe as a whole.
As Hannah Arendt pointed out six decades ago, the rise of anti-Semitism fueled Europe’s descent into totalitarianism.
With right-wing extremist and populist&nbsp;movements gaining traction in many countries, Europe’s political system – and the values that underpin it – is at risk.
He then warned that the revival of anti-Semitism in France – apparent, for example, in the anxiety over the Holocaust’s inclusion in the French school curriculum – indicates a crisis of democracy.
But Valls remains the only European politician to have highlighted the danger with the sense of urgency that it merits.
It is time for his counterparts to step up, and doing so should not rule out bold policies, free of any complexes, aimed at influencing Israel’s policy toward Palestine.
At the same time, it is a dangerous fallacy to seek redemption for a problem that is so deeply ingrained in Europe’s history – and in Islam’s – by blaming it on the Israel-Palestine conflict or on young, alienated Muslims.
Europeans must take a good hard look at themselves if they are to avoid falling back into the clutches of fear, hatred, and appalling politics.
An Ugly Peace for Sudan
STANFORD – Well, America is involved at last.
President Barack Obama has dispatched Senator John Kerry to Sudan with a proposal for peace between the country’s North and South. It’s a giant step toward avoiding the kind of bloodshed that killed more than two million people in Sudan’s previous 20-year North-South civil war, which ended only in 2005 – and is threatening to erupt once again.
In recent months, Obama has stepped up his own involvement and that of senior figures in his administration in support of a peace strategy for Sudan.
On his behalf, Kerry has delivered a package of proposals designed to break the logjam that has brought the North and South to a dangerous crossroads.
The government in Khartoum (the capital in the North) is led by Omar al-Bashir, whose accomplishments, which include overseeing war crimes during the previous North-South war and engineering the atrocities in Darfur, have brought him arrest warrants for war crimes and genocide from the International Criminal Court.
And yet renewed war in Sudan is not inevitable.
A complex but workable peace can be brokered if all interested parties become more deeply involved.
The current moment requires robust diplomacy – the kind that can leave a bad taste in your mouth, but that gets the job done.
We believe that Kerry is a skilled emissary and can help the parties find the compromises necessary for peace.
Any agreement preventing a return to war would necessarily involve the National Congress Party, representing the North, and the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement, representing the South.
But it would also involve the United States, whose post-referendum relationship with the two parties will have enormous influence over whether a deal gets done.
We believe that a grand bargain to lay the foundation for lasting peace between the North and South would oblige the parties to:
·        hold the Southern Sudan referendum on time and fully respect and implement the results;
·        reach a mutually satisfactory agreement concerning the territory of Abyei, a key disputed border area;
·        craft a multi-year revenue-sharing arrangement in which the oil wealth of Abyei and key border areas could be divided equitably between the North and South, with a small percentage going to the Arab Misseriya border populations for development purposes;
·        demarcate the uncontested 80% of the border and refer the remaining 20% to binding international arbitration;
·        create serious protections for minority groups, with consideration of joint citizenship for certain populations, backed by significant international consequences for attacks on southerners in the North or northerners in the South.
The US role as the invisible third party to the agreement involves a series of incentives offered to the regime in Khartoum to ensure agreement and implementation of a peace deal.
In exchange for action on the North-South and Darfur peace efforts, the US would implement a clear, sequenced, and binding path to normalization of relations.
This would involve – in order – removal of Sudan from the State Sponsors of Terrorism list, exchange of ambassadors, lifting of unilateral sanctions, and support for bilateral and multilateral debt relief, together with other economic measures by international financial institutions.
Conversely, the US must be prepared to lead international efforts to impose severe consequences on any party that plunges the country back into war.
Peace and security in Darfur should be an essential benchmark for normalized relations between the US and Sudan.
The Obama administration should hold firm on this through the coming rounds of negotiation, and should appoint a senior official to help coordinate US policy on Darfur in order to ensure that peace efforts there receive the same level of attention as the North-South efforts.
What is needed now is political will – and not only in the US – to sustain this diplomacy.
The European Union and Sudan’s neighbors – in particular Egypt, Ethiopia, Kenya, and Uganda – will also need to play a robust role.
And China’s diplomacy in Sudan, where it has invested massively in developing the country’s oil resources, will be a test of whether or not it intends to be a responsible stakeholder in Africa and the wider world.
There are hard choices to be made.
We can make those choices now, or we can persuade ourselves that peace is too hard or too complex, and then look on resignedly from the sidelines as hundreds of thousands of innocent men, women, and children needlessly die.
It’s up to us.
A Partnership for Peace in the Hindu Kush
Khyber Pass, Northwest Frontier Province, Pakistan &#45;&#45; Pakistani President Pervez Musharraf and Afghan President Hamid Karzai never had a shared border strategy.
But, standing at Michni Post, the highest point of the Khyber Pass, staring down at the thousands of trucks and buses buzzing through Afghanistan into Pakistan under the shadows of the Hindu Kush, the answer is obvious: controlling the Afghan-Pakistan border requires a counterinsurgency policy that looks at Afghanistan and Pakistan together. Pakistan’s new government has a great opportunity to make this change.
In order to cut off the Taliban and al-Qaeda’s recruitment and supplies, both countries should fight the militants in tandem.
That means, first, improving security training for the border forces, starting with Pakistan’s Frontier Corps, the 50,000-man combat force along the 1,600-mile Afghan border.
These “sons of the soil” are in bad shape.
They receive no more than two dollars a day to patrol the area, which ranges from 25,000-foot-high mountains to barren deserts.
They also fight with old weapons.
As one senior commander told me, “the Taliban are better equipped and have more fire power.”
They have no air mobility, and worse, no rapid reaction force to support them.
Two Frontier battalions have been under siege at Ladha Fort in South Waziristan for the past few months.
Security along the border can run on parallel tracks.
Major General Muhammad Alam Khattak, the Frontier Corps’ Inspector General, made a suggestion to me: “Take our Frontier Corps. Train them somewhere and bring them back.”
Afghanistan should do just that.
Through NATO’s International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) Afghan National Army training program, it should rotate the Frontier Corps battalions with their Pashtun brothers one at a time.
Additional resources provided by Pakistan for proper equipment and force buildup – including the creation of a Frontier Corps Rapid Reaction Force – should be committed so that Frontier Corps soldiers become the counterinsurgency partners in Pakistan that Afghanistan needs. Second, reconciliation with the insurgents should begin by inducing defections.
This was recommended by a senior US military commander, who said that “60% of insurgent activity could be curbed by reconciliation.”
Despite overwhelming support for this process, methods to do so are absent.
In Afghanistan’s Helmand Province, 2,000 Taliban fighters were rounded up and vetted by ISAF forces, only to be abandoned after the initiative was not supported by Afghanistan’s central government.
In Khost, dozens of former Taliban members from the Tribal Areas defected, promising to lay down their arms in exchange for – only to be given nothing.
In both cases, the defecting insurgents said the same thing: they could recruit dozens more; they just need incentives.
A regional reconciliation program targeting mid- and lower-tier Taliban and al-Qaeda commanders should be developed and implemented by Pakistan and Afghanistan. Third, the drug lords should be arrested and detained.
As one senior Afghan government official said, “If you can’t remove a corrupt judge, how can you deal with the Taliban?”
There are a hundred top drug lords in Afghanistan.
Everyone knows who they are. Yet none has been arrested.
Not doing so, due to fear of backlash, only enhances their power.
And allowing them to continue to control the smuggling routes creates a ripple effect that bankrolls corruption of provincial officials and the Afghan National Police, which in turn feeds the insurgency.
Finally, reform the madrassa system.
Not all madrassas are hotbeds of terrorist training.
The problem is that Afghan religious students must go to Pakistan for any religious education after 19 or 20 years of age.
They are then quickly pressured to become “bad Taliban” through money, propaganda, and pressure from Pakistani mullahs.
To address this problem, Afghan Education Minister Hanif Atmar – perhaps the most reform-minded member of the government – is seeking to build 34 new madrassas (his goal is 2,000) in Afghanistan for higher learning.
His proposal, which aims to reform the curriculum to include Islamic studies, gender studies, computer science, and English, should receive overwhelming support.
With fewer students from Afghanistan going to Pakistan, Pakistan could turn its attention to the country’s own madrassas and to the mullahs who convert students into suicide bombers.
The curriculum for both countries, based on Minister Atmar’s proposal, should be coordinated.
Madrassas that meet these curriculum standards should be registered, supported, and encouraged. Only an effective Afghan-Pakistan partnership can begin to control the insurgency in the border area.
The war in Afghanistan, and destabilization in Pakistan, will not end without it.
A Path through Europe’s Minefield
LONDON – Earlier this week, a group of almost 100 prominent Europeans delivered an open letter to the leaders of all 17 eurozone countries.
The letter said, in so many words, what the leaders of Europe now appear to have understood: they cannot go on “kicking the can down the road.”
And, just as importantly, they now understand that it is not enough to ensure that governments can finance their debt at reasonable interest rates; they must also address the weakness of Europe’s banking system.
Indeed, Europe’s banking and sovereign-debt problems are mutually self-reinforcing.
The decline in government bond prices has exposed the banks’ undercapitalization, while the prospect that governments will have to finance banks’ recapitalization has driven up risk premiums on government bonds.
Facing the prospect of having to raise additional capital at a time when their shares are selling at a fraction of book value, banks have a powerful incentive to reduce their balance sheets by withdrawing credit lines and shrinking their loan portfolios.
Europe’s leaders are now contemplating what to do, and their next move will have fateful consequences, either calming the markets or driving them to new extremes.
All agree that Greece needs an orderly restructuring, because a disorderly default could cause a eurozone meltdown.
But, when it comes to the banks, I am afraid that the eurozone’s leaders are contemplating some inappropriate steps.
Specifically, they are talking about recapitalizing the banking system, rather than guaranteeing it.
And they want to do it on a country-by-country basis, rather than on the basis of the eurozone as a whole.
There is a good reason for this: Germany does not want to pay for recapitalizing French banks.
But, while Chancellor Angela Merkel is justified in insisting on this, it is driving her in the wrong direction.
Let me stake out more precisely the narrow path that would allow Europe to pass through this minefield.
The banking system needs to be guaranteed first, and recapitalized later.
Governments cannot afford to recapitalize the banks now; it would leave them with insufficient funds to deal with the sovereign-debt problem.
It will cost much less to recapitalize the banks after the crisis has abated and both government bonds and bank shares have returned to more normal levels.
Governments can, however, provide a credible guarantee, given their power to tax.
A new, legally binding agreement – not a change to the Lisbon Treaty (which would encounter too many hurdles), but a new agreement – will be needed for the eurozone to mobilize that power, and such an accord will take time to negotiate and ratify.
But, in the meantime, governments can call upon the European Central Bank, which the eurozone member states already fully guarantee on a pro rata basis.
In exchange for a guarantee, the eurozone’s major banks would have to agree to abide by the ECB’s instructions.
This is a radical step, but a necessary one under the circumstances.
Acting at the behest of the member states, the ECB has sufficient powers of persuasion: it could close its discount window to the banks, and the governments could seize institutions that refuse to cooperate.
The ECB would then instruct the banks to maintain their credit lines and loan portfolios while strictly monitoring the risks they take for their own account.
This would remove one of the two main driving forces of the current market turmoil.
The ECB could deal with the other driving force, the lack of financing for sovereign debt, by lowering its discount rate, encouraging distressed governments to issue treasury bills, and encouraging the banks to subscribe (an idea I owe to Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa).
The T-bills could be sold to the ECB at any time, making them tantamount to cash; but, as long as they yield more than deposits with the ECB, the banks would find it advantageous to hold them.
Governments could meet their financing needs within agreed limits at very low cost during this emergency period, and the ECB would not violate Article 123 of the Lisbon Treaty.
These measures would be sufficient to calm markets and bring the acute phase of the crisis to an end.
Recapitalization of the banks should wait until then; only the holes created by restructuring the Greek debt would have to be filled immediately.
In conformity with Germany’s demand, the additional capital would come first from the market and then from individual governments – and from the European Financial Stability Facility only as a last resort, thereby preserving the EFSF’s firepower.
A new agreement for the eurozone, negotiated in a calmer atmosphere, should not only codify the practices established during the emergency, but also lay the groundwork for an economic-growth strategy.
During the emergency period, fiscal retrenchment and austerity are unavoidable; but, in the longer term, the debt burden will become unsustainable without growth – and so will the European Union itself.
A Peace Agenda for Global Development
MONROVIA, LIBERIA – This week, the 27 members of the High-level Panel of Eminent Persons on the Post-2015 Development Agenda gather in Monrovia, Liberia, to advise United Nations Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon.
At the meeting, the Panel will establish a “bold yet practical” vision for joint action on sustainable development.
While these discussions – hosted by Liberian President and Nobel Peace Prize laureate Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, Indonesian President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono, and British Prime Minister David Cameron – take place, the nearby Sahel and the Great Lakes region continue to be plagued by violence and conflict.
Indeed, large-scale displacement of people and unspeakable human suffering are occurring in many African countries (not to mention in Syria and elsewhere), threatening to reverse the continent’s unprecedented economic progress during the last decade.
The Panel (of which I am a member) must seize the opportunity presented by the Monrovia meeting to contribute to a global development agenda that addresses the vicious cycle of conflict and poverty that hampers economic activity and undermines human well-being.
For more than a decade, the Millennium Development Goals, which expire in two years, have provided the framework for international development cooperation, with a focus on combating poverty worldwide.
In developing a new, comprehensive follow-up agenda, global leaders should recognize that, although the MDGs have enabled millions of people worldwide to escape illiteracy, disease, and hunger, their overall impact has been inadequate, particularly in fragile, conflict-ridden countries.
World Bank statistics show that no conflict-affected low-income country has achieved a single MDG, reflecting the framework’s failure to address problems caused by organized violence and insecurity effectively.
That is why the post-2015 agenda should be centered on peace, security, and freedom from fear.
It should aim to make justice and prosperity a reality for everyone.
And it should reflect the understanding that development is impossible without peace, just as peace is impossible without development – and that lasting peace and sustainable development are impossible without respect for human rights and the rule of law.
Furthermore, as the Monrovia meeting’s theme, “National Building Blocks for Sustained Prosperity,” suggests, post-2015 global development initiatives should emphasize support for national efforts to achieve strong, stable, long-term prosperity.
Strategies that would help countries to overcome domestic insecurity and conflict, transform their economies, and, ultimately, meet their potential include strengthening governance institutions and the rule of law, ensuring multi-stakeholder participation, and guaranteeing that all citizens have equal access to justice.
International support for such efforts would mean giving African leaders and stakeholders the opportunity – and the responsibility – to eliminate underdevelopment and boost prosperity.
Moreover, while poverty eradication will remain a paramount concern after 2015, the focus must shift from national averages to local disparities.
Measures must move beyond overall social needs to bolster progress in productive job-creating and income-generating sectors.
And strong efforts must be made in conflict-affected countries to promote reconciliation and prevent the revival of violence.
Given Liberia’s recent success in post-conflict reconstruction and human development, following a 14-year civil war, it is a fitting setting for the Panel’s deliberations.
Since 2003, domestic vision and commitment, together with international support, have enabled Liberia to hold democratic elections, reintroduce some essential public services, reestablish a public-finance management system, and make progress in addressing endemic corruption, rebuilding public institutions, and reconstructing national infrastructure.
The Panel should view Liberia’s ongoing efforts to secure peace, maintain stability, and initiate economic and social transformation as a blueprint for successful post-conflict transition.
Other inspiring models can be found in Rwanda, Mozambique, and Sierra Leone.
The Panel is committed to creating an ambitious, coherent, and practical proposal for a sustainable global development agenda.
The process will be open, inclusive, and transparent, and will be informed by the opinions and experiences of experts and stakeholders representing young people, women, the elderly, and the disabled, as well as legislative, academic, and inter-governmental actors.
The Panel will also take advantage of extensive online and offline efforts to engage with people worldwide and gain insight into the future that they envision.
Their perspectives will enrich efforts to develop an agenda that addresses their priorities.
In a world roiled by conflict, development efforts will always fall short.
The post-2015 global development agenda must take a comprehensive approach, combining poverty-reduction measures with peace-building initiatives and strategies for economic transformation.
In this way, global leaders can begin to lay the foundations for prosperity, justice, and sustainable development worldwide.
Future generations are counting on it.
The Asian Paradox
SEOUL – Given that the 21 members of the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation forum account for some 54% of global GDP and about 44% of world trade, the agenda for this month’s APEC summit should be drawing much global attention.
Yet the only issue in which anyone seems interested is whether or not Chinese President Xi Jinping and Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe will meet on the sidelines, and, if they do, whether a substantive discussion to ease bilateral tensions will take place.
Of course, this is not altogether unreasonable, given the two countries’ importance in shaping East Asia’s future.
Indeed, the uncertainty about whether two of APEC’s key leaders will even speak to each other highlights the grim reality of Asian international relations today.
The supposed “Asian century” is being thwarted by a paradox: deep economic interdependence has done nothing to alleviate strategic mistrust.
Given the recent deterioration of Sino-Japanese relations – a decline that accelerated in 2012, when Japan purchased the disputed Senkaku Islands (Diaoyu Islands in Chinese) from their private owner to prevent Japanese nationalists from taking control of them – the mere fact that Abe will attend the summit is a major step.
A meeting between Abe and Xi – their first since either came to power – would offer concrete grounds for hope.
The Japanese government has made significant diplomatic efforts to orchestrate a meeting, with former Prime Minister Yasuo Fukuda visiting Beijing in July to try to ease tensions.
According to some media reports, in order to secure China’s agreement to participate in a meeting during the APEC summit, Abe even agreed to acknowledge that Japan’s claim to the Senkaku Islands is disputed.
Given that such a move would imply that China’s claim to the islands may have some legitimacy, Abe’s possible concession on this point is no trivial matter; it could even mean that he will agree with China to restore the status quo ante.
In that case, one hopes that Xi will follow Deng Xiaoping’s counsel and allow the issue to be “shelved for some time” so that the “wiser” next generation can “find a solution acceptable to all.”
That now seems to be a realistic possibility.
Indeed, lately Xi seems to have softened his tone, if not necessarily his diplomatic line.
For example, he allowed Li Xiaolin, the daughter of a former Chinese president, to meet with Abe, with whom she watched a performance by a visiting Chinese dance troupe in Tokyo.
And Chinese Prime Minister Li Keqiang shook hands with Abe at the recent Asia-Europe Meeting in Milan.
One reason for Abe and Xi’s newfound flexibility may be domestic political shifts in both countries, which have created a more equal balance between conservative, nationalist groups and more internationally-oriented business interests.
With both leaders having spent the last two years overcoming domestic opponents and consolidating their power, they may have gained confidence in their ability to compromise.
In Japan, Abe has satisfied his conservative supporters with cabinet resolutions to allow for expanded self-defense.
Despite domestic opposition to Japan’s new security doctrine, no politically influential group was able to organize an effective challenge to Abe’s approach.
Now, as Japan’s economic recovery stalls, the country’s business sector seems to be pressuring Abe’s government to work harder to mitigate the impact of its deteriorating relationship with China.
According to a Chinese government report, in the first half of 2014, Japanese direct investment in China was almost 50% lower than during the same period last year – a clear sign that Japanese business leaders fear for the future in Japan’s second largest market.
Meanwhile, in China, Xi has gained considerable confidence through his massive anti-corruption campaign, with the punishment of top military officers indicating that he has solidified his control over the People’s Liberation Army (PLA).
As a result, Xi may believe that he now has more space to address the country’s economic slowdown, including by lessening the damage wrought by weakening ties with Japan.
If this assessment is accurate, the obvious next question is how much further Abe and Xi can move toward détente, thereby appeasing their business sectors, without losing the backing of nationalists, who tend to view the bilateral relationship as a zero-sum game.
For Abe, the choice is whether to tone down his nationalist rhetoric and moderate his position on contentious historical issues.
This would include halting visits to the controversial Yasukuni shrine (which honors, among others, 14 Class A war criminals who were executed after World War II) and abandoning revisionism regarding the Korean “comfort women” who were forced to provide sexual services to the Japanese Imperial Army.
How Abe decides is likely to depend on his confidence in his political position.
Similarly, if Xi remains confident enough in his control of the PLA and truly follows China’s official policy of “peaceful development,” he will be able to take the kind of prudent approach that Deng advocated.
This would entail recognizing and trying to assuage the fears that China’s rise is causing among its neighbors, as Otto von Bismarck did after German unification in 1871.
Observers might then read his recent efforts to improve relations with Japan, not to mention Vietnam, as a genuine strategic shift, rather than a temporary tactical adjustment.
In this uncertain context, the APEC summit could shed much-needed light on the intentions of Abe and Xi, thereby providing crucial insight into the trajectory of Sino-Japanese relations – and thus the future of East Asia.
A People’s Economics
NEW HAVEN – We are in the midst of a boom in popular economics: books, articles, blogs, public lectures, all followed closely by the general public.
I recently participated in a panel discussion of this phenomenon at the American Economic Association annual meeting in Denver.
An apparent paradox emerged from the discussion: the boom in popular economics comes at a time when the general public seems to have lost faith in professional economists, because almost all of us failed to predict, or even warn of, the current economic crisis, the biggest since the Great Depression.
So, why is the public buying more books by professional economists?
The most interesting explanation I heard was that economics has become more interesting, because it no longer seems to be a finished and closed discipline.
It is no fun to read a book or article that says that economic forecasting is best left to computer models that you, the general reader, would need a Ph.D. to understand.
And, in truth, the public is right: while there is a somewhat scientific basis for these models, they can go spectacularly wrong.
Sometimes we need to turn off autopilot and think for ourselves, and when a crisis occurs, use our best human intellect.
The panelists all said, in one way or another, that popular economics facilitates an exchange between specialized economists and the broader public – a dialogue that has never been more important.
After all, most economists did not see this crisis coming in part because they had removed themselves from what real-world people were doing and thinking.
Successful popular economics involves the reader or listener, in some sense, as a collaborator.
That, of course, means that economists must be willing to include new and original theories that are not yet received doctrine among professional specialists.
Until recently, many professional economists would be reluctant to write a popular book.
Certainly, it would not be viewed favorably in considering a candidate for tenure or a promotion.
Since it does not include equations or statistical tables, they would argue, it is not serious work that is worthy of scholarly attention.
Worse than that, at least until recently, a committee evaluating an economist would likely think that writing a popular economics book that does not repeat the received wisdom of the discipline might even be professionally unethical.
Imagine how the medical profession would view one of its members who recommended to the general public some therapy that had not yet passed scrutiny from the appropriate authorities.
Medical professionals know how often seemingly promising new therapies turn out, after careful study, not to work, or even to be harmful.
There is a rigorous process of scholarly review of proposed new therapies, associated with professional journals that uphold high research standards.
Circumventing that process and promoting new, untested ideas to the general public is unprofessional.
In the decades prior to the current financial crisis, economists gradually came to view themselves and their profession in the same way, encouraged by research trends.
For example, after 1960, when the University of Chicago started creating a Univac computer tape that contained systematic information about millions of stock prices, a great deal of scientific research on the properties of stock prices was taken as confirming the “efficient markets hypothesis.”
The competitive forces that underlie stock exchanges were seen to force all securities prices to their true fundamental values.
All trading schemes not based on this hypothesis were labeled as either misguided or outright frauds.
Science had triumphed over stock-market punditry – or so it seemed.
The financial crisis delivered a fatal blow to that overconfidence in scientific economics.
It is not just that the profession didn’t forecast the crisis. Their models, taken literally, sometimes suggested that a crisis of this magnitude couldn’t happen.
Their views could never be submitted to a scholarly journal and evaluated the way a new medical procedure is.
There is no established scientific procedure that could prove their validity.
Of course, economics is in many ways a science, and the work of our scholars and their computer models really does matter.
But, as the economist Edwin R. A. Seligman put it in 1889, “Economics is a social science, i.e., it is an ethical and therefore an historical science….It is not a natural science, and therefore not an exact or purely abstract science.”
Others, including me, argued that, given the excesses of private-sector leverage (in households, financial institutions, and corporate firms), this would be a U-shaped recession – long and deep.
It would last about 24 months, and the world would not decouple from the US contraction.
Today, 20 months into the US recession – a recession that became global in the summer of 2008 with a massive re-coupling – the V-shaped decoupling view is out the window. This is the worst US and global recession in 60 years.
If the US recession were – as most likely - to be over at the end of the year, as is likely, it will have been three times as long and about fives times as deep – in term of the cumulative decline in output – as the previous two.
Today’s consensus among economists is that the recession is already over, that the US and global economy will rapidly return to growth, and that there is no risk of a relapse.
Unfortunately, this new consensus could be as wrong now as the defenders of the V-shaped scenario were for the past three years.
Data from the US – rising unemployment, falling household consumption, still declining industrial production, and a weak housing market – suggest that America’s recession is not over yet.
A similar analysis of many other advanced economies suggests that, as in the US, the bottom is quite close but it has not yet been reached.
Second, the financial system – both banks and non-bank institutions – is severely damaged.
Lack of robust credit growth will hamper private consumption and investment spending.
Third, the corporate sector faces a glut of capacity, and a weak recovery of profitability is likely if growth is anemic and deflationary pressures still persist.
As a result, businesses are not likely to increase capital spending.
Fourth, the re-leveraging of the public sector through large fiscal deficits and debt accumulation risks crowding out a recovery in private-sector spending.
The effects of the policy stimulus, moreover, will fizzle out by early next year, requiring greater private demand to support continued growth.
Domestic private demand, especially consumption, is now weak or falling in over-spending countries (the US, the United Kingdom, Spain, Ireland, Australia, New Zealand, etc.), while not increasing fast enough in over-saving countries (China, Asia, Germany, Japan, etc.) to compensate for the reduction in these countries’ net exports.
Thus, there is a global slackening of aggregate demand relative to the glut of supply capacity, which will impede a robust global economic recovery.
There are also now two reasons to fear a double-dip recession.
First, the exit strategy from monetary and fiscal easing could be botched, because policymakers are damned if they do and damned if they don’t.
If they take their fiscal deficits (and a potential monetization of these deficits) seriously and raise taxes, reduce spending, and mop up excess liquidity, they could undermine the already weak recovery.
But if they maintain large budget deficits and continue to monetize them, at some point – after the current deflationary forces become more subdued – bond markets will revolt.
At this point, inflationary expectations will increase, long-term government bond yields will rise, and the recovery will be crowded out.
A second reason to fear a double-dip recession concerns the fact that oil, energy, and food prices may be rising faster than economic fundamentals warrant, and could be driven higher by the wall of liquidity chasing assets, as well as by speculative demand.
Last year, oil at $145 a barrel was a tipping point for the global economy, as it created a major income shock for the US, Europe, Japan, China, India, and other oil-importing economies.
The global economy, barely rising from its knees, could not withstand the contractionary shock if similar speculative forces were to drive oil rapidly towards $100 a barrel.
So the end of this severe global recession will be closer at the end of this year than it is now, the recovery will be anemic rather than robust in advanced economies, and there is a rising risk of a double-dip recession.
The recent market rallies in stocks, commodities, and credit may have gotten ahead of the improvement in the real economy.
If so, a correction cannot be too far behind.
A Pivot to the People
PRINCETON – On February 1, the United Nations Security Council met to consider the Arab League’s proposal to end the violence in Syria.
Secretary of State Hillary Clinton represented the United States.
Midway through her remarks, she began speaking not to the Syrian ambassador, who was in the room, or even the Syrian government, but directly to the Syrian people.
She said that change in Syria would require Syrians of every faith and ethnicity to work together, protecting and respecting the rights of minorities.
Addressing those minorities, she continued: “We do hear your fears, and we do honor your aspirations.
Do not let the current regime exploit them to extend this crisis.”
She told Syria’s business, military, and other leaders that they must recognize that their futures lie with the state, not with the regime.
“Syria belongs to its 23 million citizens, not to one man or his family.”
Speaking directly to citizens – seeing a country’s people, as well as its government – is not just a rhetorical device.
While many foreign-policy pundits have focused on the US “pivot to Asia,” Clinton has also executed a less-publicized, but no less important, pivot to the people.
She has introduced policies, programs, and institutional reforms designed to support government-to-society and society-to-society diplomacy, alongside traditional government-to-government relations.
These initiatives do not get headlines, but they will gradually transform much of American foreign policy.
In January, the State Department unveiled a new “super-office” of Civilian Security, Democracy, and Human Rights, under the leadership of Under-Secretary Maria Otero.
The office brings together agencies that focus on international law enforcement, counter-terrorism, and reconstruction and stabilization with those charged with advancing democracy, human rights, and humanitarian assistance to refugees and migrants.
Otero explains the logic behind the initiative in terms of “protecting individuals.”
That, in turn, requires “not just engaging state to state,” but also working “with players and actors outside of the traditional [channels] we’ve engaged in.”
Viewed from this perspective, countering terrorism includes rebutting terrorist propaganda with a strategic communications campaign.
Countering narco-gang violence includes working with Mexican telecommunications mogul Carlos Slim to develop tools that allow ordinary citizens to report violence anonymously by text message and enable police to map the results.
Strengthening democracy means working with the Kenyan developers of a crisis-mapping platform that allows anyone with a cell phone to text information about election fraud or violence to a central monitoring station.
On a country-by-country basis, pivoting to the people means engaging with Egypt’s bloggers as well as with the ruling Supreme Council of the Armed Forces; convening young entrepreneurs in Tunisia, Algeria, and Morocco and connecting them to funding and mentoring; and using social media in Russia to rebut government efforts to smear the US ambassador.
And, working at an official level, it means co-sponsoring with Brazil the Open Government Partnership, which brings together governments committed to increasing transparency, accountability, and citizen participation, and uses mutual peer pressure and open reporting to hold them to their commitments.
Thinking about countries in these comprehensive terms also provides a different strategic perspective.
Clinton has created a raft of new positions at the State Department to spur outreach to different social segments.
The strategies and programs developed by the Ambassador for Global Women’s Issues, the Special Adviser for Global Youth Issues, the Senior Adviser for Civil Society and Emerging Democracies, the Special Representative for Outreach to Muslim Communities, the Special Representative for Global Partnerships, and the Special Representative for Commercial and Business Affairs often present a very different face of the US.
As a result, Clinton has launched an actual strategic dialogue with civil society.
For example, Ambassador Melanne Verveer has attended more than 1,000 events around the world focused on empowering women in areas ranging from peace negotiations to farming.
Similarly, she has launched programs such as mWomen, designed to expand and support mobile technology that increases women’s independence, security, and access to health care and vital knowledge.
The Office of Global Youth Affairs is building a local youth council at every US embassy around the world, to advise and help to implement embassy programming aimed at local youth.
Much of the programming aimed at youth, women, entrepreneurs, diasporas, technologists, and other social groups is partly funded and conducted by the private sector.
Indeed, the Obama administration’s National Security Strategy mentions “public-private partnerships” more than 30 times.
Clinton created the Global Partnership Initiative to build as many coalitions, networks, and partnerships as possible with corporations, foundations, NGOs, universities, and other civic organizations.
Here, the pivot to the people includes the American people: the dynamism, creativity, and resources of American business and non-profit organizations already engaged around the world.
One privately-funded initiative spearheaded by the State Department will send 300 dogwood trees to Japan this spring, to be planted in the tsunami-affected region and in Tokyo to express the American people’s support for the Japanese people; another will send English teachers throughout Southeast Asia.
From the perspective of US diplomats, the people of every country stand on the same footing as their government.
That assumption is the heart of democracy; it is a revolution for diplomacy.
A Planet for All Apes
MELBOURNE – Two new movies released this month – one a science-fiction blockbuster, the other a revealing documentary – raise the issue of our relations with our closest non-human relatives, the great apes. Both dramatize insights and lessons that should not be ignored.
Rupert Wyatt’s Rise of the Planet of the Apes is the seventh film in a series based on Pierre Boule’s 1963 novel, Planet of the Apes, about a world populated by highly intelligent simians. Publicity for the new film claims that it is “the first live-action film in the history of movies to star, and be told from the point of view of, a sentient animal.”
Yet no live apes were used.
Instead, “performance capture technology,” originally invented for the movie Avatar, enables a human actor, Andy Serkis, to play the role of the chimpanzee Caesar, not by dressing in a chimp suit, but by having every gesture and facial movement, even the twitch of an eyebrow, transformed into the movement of an ape.
When I spoke with Wyatt last month, he acknowledged that there were practical reasons for not using real apes in his movie. But he also understood the ethical issue.
“There are things I didn’t want to be involved in,” he told me.
“To get apes to do anything you want them to do, you have to dominate them; you have to manipulate them into performing.
That’s exploitative.”
Wyatt’s reluctance to join in the exploitation of great apes is understandable, given that the film itself tells the story of apes rising up in response to oppression from dominant humans.
The central human character, Will Rodman (played by James Franco), is a scientist seeking a cure for Alzheimer’s disease who experiments on apes.
Many films would have glorified a scientist seeking such a goal, and treated the use of animals for that purpose as obviously justified.
Rise of the Planet of the Apes, however, portrays Rodman as, in Franco’s words, “a cold, isolated person.”
Only when Rodman’s superiors cancel his experiments and he takes home Caesar, an infant chimpanzee, does the scientist begin to care about others.
The plot then takes another turn when Caesar becomes too big and aggressive to live in a human home, and is taken to what is supposed to be a primate sanctuary, but is in fact a dumping ground for unwanted apes, run by humans who display cruelty to the captive animals.
As far as the treatment of apes is concerned, much of the film is firmly grounded in reality, as a viewing of Project Nim, a documentary based on Elizabeth Hess’s book Nim Chimpsky: The Chimp Who Would be Human, clearly demonstrates.
Nim was born in 1973, in a primate research facility in Oklahoma, and was taken from his mother when he was only ten days old, to be used in a sign-language experiment.
Reared as part of a human family, he learned to use more than 100 signs from American Sign Language, the language used by Deaf Americans.
But he was taken from his first human family and handed over to other teachers with whom he did not have the same kind of bond.
He grew stronger and more aggressive and began biting his teachers.
Herbert Terrace, the Columbia University psychologist who was directing the project, decided to end it and sent Nim back to the primate facility in Oklahoma.
There, the pampered chimpanzee – who, when asked to sort photos of humans and apes, put his own photo among the humans – was locked in a cage with other chimps.
He demonstrated his view of that situation by signing “out” to passing humans.
Nim suffered various other vicissitudes – and narrowly escaped being infected with hepatitis as part of a medical experiment – until he was eventually released to an animal sanctuary, where he died in 2000.
In 1993, Paola Cavalieri and I founded The Great Ape Project, an organization dedicated to the idea of recognizing that great apes have a moral status befitting their nature as self-aware beings who are capable of thought and have rich and deep emotional lives.
At a minimum, they should have the rights to life, liberty, and protection from torture that we grant to all members of our own species, regardless of their intellectual abilities.
In the intervening years, that idea has made steady progress.
Since 2010, the European Union has essentially banned the use of great apes in experiments.
Experiments on great apes are now either banned or severely restricted in New Zealand, Australia, and Japan.
In the United States, a bipartisan group of members of Congress is supporting legislation to end the use of chimpanzees in invasive research.
In Spain in 2008, a parliamentary resolution urged the government to grant some basic legal rights to great apes, but the Spanish government has yet to implement it.
Perhaps the release of these two very different films will lead to a further push to bring great apes within the circle of beings with moral and legal rights.
In that way, our closest relatives could serve to bridge the moral gulf that we have dug between ourselves and other animals.
A “Portfolio” Approach to Climate Change
The world has tried with little success to cut carbon emissions under the Kyoto Protocol.
The enormous effort expended to bring the Protocol into force nonetheless indicates how much work will be required to produce the next treaty, due to be agreed in Copenhagen in December 2009.
Campaigners will push for tough and far-reaching policies, but strong resistance will continue from countries concerned about their economic vitality.
The new negotiations will have one advantage over the earlier efforts, because governments now understand the need for a portfolio of adaptation, mitigation, and research efforts.
New research that my colleagues and I undertook for the Copenhagen Consensus Center in Denmark explores the effectiveness of different responses to this global challenge, but it strongly supports the portfolio approach for several reasons.
First, we now know that adaptation will be essential, because temperatures will rise by another 0.6°C by 2100 even if greenhouse gas emissions are eliminated tomorrow.
We also know that the impact of climate change will not be evenly distributed across the globe.
In some areas, modestly warmer temperatures could produce higher crop yields if associated changes in precipitation patterns are not adverse and/or irrigation remains viable.
Even with 0.6°C warming, however, Africa and South Asia will experience almost immediate reductions in the viability of many crops and, eventually, increased vulnerability to infectious disease.
These impacts will clearly hit the planet’s worst-off inhabitants hardest: the “bottom billion” who already bear the heaviest burden of disease, poverty, conflict and malnutrition.&#160;
Ensuring that adaptive capacity is expanded and exploited where it is most needed is thus a key challenge.
Long-term development may give countries more capacity to soften the impact of climate change on the environment and citizens’ health, but in the meantime the planet’s poorest people will need help from the rich.
Our analysis investigated, for example, the merits of more targeted policies for the near term: purchasing mosquito-resistant bed nets and oral re-hydration malaria therapy for children in the poorest nations affected by climate change. The goal was to deal aggressively and proactively with some of the marginal health impacts of global warming.
Benefits would appear almost immediately, but would dissipate over time as economies developed.
Even as development improves conditions, however, reducing carbon emissions would become increasingly important over the longer term as the impact of climate change become more severe.
Since the effects of climate change have been observed in many areas around the world, thinking about mitigation makes sense everywhere.
But we found that mitigation
The Copenhagen Consensus study also examined a portfolio option of the sort heralded by the United Nations’ Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.
We allocated $50 billion to research into greener technology, so that only $750 billion could be absorbed by the economic cost of adaptation and mitigation.
The gap between the cost of carbon-free and carbon-emitting technology fell, and the taxes designed to mitigate emissions became more effective.
As a result, the research and development program essentially paid for itself, and total discounted benefits for the $800 billion investment climbed to more than $2.1 trillion.&#160;
Ensuring that research and development is part of the world’s climate change response portfolio would make mitigation efforts more efficient and significantly enhance their ability to reduce carbon emissions over the next century.
But these favorable net benefits reflect very conservative assumptions regarding the timing of emissions reductions and when the developing world would “come onboard.”
Optimizing investment in the portfolio over time would, for example, increase the discounted benefits by more than a factor of three.
Expected benefits would increase further if we included the chance that potentially higher climate sensitivities would exacerbate damages, even though doing so would require including similarly plausible lower climate sensitivities, which would push in the opposite direction.
Fighting climate change can be a sound investment, even though neither mitigation nor adaptation alone will be enough to “solve” the problem.
To make a real difference, especially in the near term, the world must combine mitigation and adaptation with increased research and development into carbon-saving and sequestering technology, which in turn requires designing and exploiting market-based incentives.
A Post-Nuclear Euro-Atlantic Security Order
WASHINGTON, DC – As we enter 2011, the Euro-Atlantic region is a study in strategic contrasts.
Over the past 20 years, no geo-political space has undergone as dramatic a transformation as that between the Atlantic and the Urals.
In our lifetimes, we have seen a welcome change from the darkest days of the Cold War, when a devastating conventional and nuclear war in Europe was a real possibility, to a new era in which no state faces this type of existential threat.
But, despite these positive developments, the two largest powers in the region – the United States and Russia – each still possesses thousands of nuclear weapons, accounting for more than 90% of the world’s nuclear inventory.
Many of these weapons remain deployed or designed for use within the Euro-Atlantic region.
Reduction and elimination of this Cold War-era nuclear infrastructure is the largest piece of unfinished business from that bygone time.
The continuing existence of large strategic nuclear forces deployed on high alert, and of tactical nuclear weapons deployed in certain NATO states and Russia, creates a risk of accidental, unauthorized, or mistaken use, and of terrorist groups acquiring these assets.
So security vigilance is essential.
To meet this challenge, the three of us – building on the action plan adopted by consensus at the 2010 Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) Review Conference – have endorsed a series of urgent, practical steps towards the long-term goal of a world free of nuclear weapons.
These include:
·        increasing assured warning and decision times for the launch of nuclear-armed ballistic missiles;
·        developing cooperative missile-defense and early-warning systems;
·        ensuring the highest possible standards of security for nuclear weapons and materials;
·        beginning a dialogue on tactical nuclear weapons involving Russia, the US, and NATO;
·        adopting a process to bring the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty into effect;
·        developing international and multilateral approaches to manage the risks of fuel production for civilian nuclear power; and
·        further reductions in US and Russian nuclear forces.
As former US Secretary of State George P. Shultz, former US Secretary of Defense William J. Perry, former US Secretary of State Henry A. Kissinger, and former US Senator Sam Nunn put it in 2007, “Without the bold vision [of a nuclear weapons-free world], the actions will not be perceived as fair or urgent.
Without the actions, the vision will not be perceived as realistic or possible.”
Perhaps the most crucial step toward realizing this vision is to redouble our efforts to resolve regional confrontations and conflicts that give rise to new nuclear powers.
The great swath of states stretching from North America across Europe through Russia has a vital role to play in stabilizing an increasingly fragmented and stressed international order.
These states can play this role, however, only if first they transform this geographic space into a genuinely inclusive and vibrant security community.
Failing that (and we are failing today) the Euro-Atlantic states and their organizations will settle for suboptimal – and too often utterly inadequate – responses to the twenty-first century’s security challenges, including the threat of nuclear proliferation.
Lately, several national leaders, including the Russian and US presidents and NATO secretary-general, have embraced the idea of a Euro-Atlantic security community, and begun stressing the importance of fashioning a stronger and more inclusive European security order.
The timing could not be better, as the Euro-Atlantic family has entered a critical period.
On November 19-20, NATO heads of states approved a new “strategic concept” to guide the organization for the next decade At the same time Russian President D. Medvedev and his NATO counterparts issued a joint statement, endorsing the first Joint Review of 21st Century Common Security Challenges and deciding to resume Threat Missile Defence Cooperation.
Two weeks later, the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) heads of state assembled in Astana, Kazakhstan, to help shape the OSCE’s next stage of development.
Joint action on nuclear-threat reduction must be a critical element in moving the Euro-Atlantic nations toward a level of stability and strength and allow them to exercise badly needed global leadership.
Achieving a genuinely collaborative approach to missile-defense matters will address a common threat and help remove misgivings that are blocking progress toward a common security space.
Similarly, the Euro-Atlantic states can mobilize behind efforts to strengthen the International Atomic Energy Agency’s safeguards system, which ensures the non-diversion of peaceful nuclear programs, in order to foster cooperation on countering the threat of nuclear terrorism, and to develop new mechanisms to protect jointly critical infrastructure from cyber attack.
Such actions are crucial to these states’ national security and global efforts to mitigate threats.
Pursuing arrangements that increase warning and decision-making time for all countries in the Euro-Atlantic region would introduce stability into the NATO-Russia relationship.
Adjustments in operational doctrine, as applied to strategic, tactical, and conventional forces, would constitute a giant step toward ending the relationship’s militarized framework.
This is only a partial list of what must be done if governments are serious about building a stronger, inclusive European security order, one where the roles and risks of nuclear weapons are reduced, and ultimately eliminated.
The three of us are working with a distinguished group from all corners of the Euro-Atlantic region to develop these and other concrete steps that are essential to creating a genuine security community, including its economic, energy, and environmental dimensions.
NATO, OSCE, and other key regional institutions must give this concept and process their essential support.
Appeasement Revisited
I vividly remember the slightly ludicrous, slightly risqué, and somewhat distressing predicament in which Western diplomats in Prague found themselves during the Cold War.
They regularly needed to resolve the delicate issue of whether to invite to their embassy celebrations various Charter 77 signatories, human rights activists, critics of the communist regime, displaced politicians, or even banned writers, scholars, and journalists – people with whom the diplomats were generally friends.
Sometimes we dissidents were not invited, but received an apology, and sometimes we were invited, but did not accept the invitation so as not to complicate the lives of our courageous diplomat friends.
Or we were invited to come at an earlier hour in the hope that we would leave before the official representatives arrived, which sometimes worked and sometimes didn’t.
When it didn’t, either the official representatives left in protest at our presence, or we left hurriedly, or we all pretended not to notice each other, or – albeit on rare occasions – we started to converse with each other, which frequently were the only moments of dialogue between the regime and the opposition (not counting our courthouse encounters).
This all happened when the Iron Curtain divided Europe – and the world – into opposing camps.
Western diplomats had their countries’ economic interests to consider, but, unlike the Soviet side, they took seriously the idea of “dissidents or trade.”
I cannot recall any occasion at that time when the West or any of its organizations (NATO, the European Community, etc.) issued some public appeal, recommendation, or edict stating that some specific group of independently-minded people – however defined – were not to be invited to diplomatic parties, celebrations, or receptions.
But today this is happening.
One of the strongest and most powerful democratic institutions in the world – the European Union – has no qualms in making a public promise to the Cuban dictatorship that it will re-institute diplomatic Apartheid.
The EU’s embassies in Havana will now craft their guest lists in accordance with the Cuban government’s wishes.
The shortsightedness of socialist Prime Minister José Zapatero of Spain has prevailed.
Try to imagine what will happen: at each European embassy, someone will be appointed to screen the list, name by name, and assess whether and to what extent the persons in question behave freely or speak out freely in public, to what extent they criticize the regime, or even whether they are former political prisoners.
Lists will be shortened and deletions made, and this will frequently entail eliminating even good personal friends of the diplomats in charge of the screening, people whom they have given various forms of intellectual, political, or material assistance.
It will be even worse if the EU countries try to mask their screening activities by inviting only diplomats to embassy celebrations in Cuba.
I can hardly think of a better way for the EU to dishonor the noble ideals of freedom, equality, and human rights that the Union espouses – indeed, principles that it reiterates in its constitutional agreement.
To protect European corporations’ profits from their Havana hotels, the Union will cease inviting open-minded people to EU embassies, and we will deduce who they are from the expression on the face of the dictator and his associates.
It is hard to imagine a more shameful deal.
Cuba’s dissidents will, of course, happily do without Western cocktail parties and polite conversation at receptions.
This persecution will admittedly aggravate their difficult struggle, but they will naturally survive it.
The question is whether the EU will survive it.
Today, the EU is dancing to Fidel’s tune.
That means that tomorrow it could bid for contracts to build missile bases on the coast of the People’s Republic of China. The following day it could allow its decisions on Chechnya to be dictated by Russian President Vladimir Putin’s advisers.
Then, for some unknown reason, it could make its assistance to Africa conditional on fraternal ties with the worst African dictators.
Where will it end?
The release of Milosevic?
Denying a visa to Russian human rights activist Sergey Kovalyov?
An apology to Saddam Hussein?
The opening of peace talks with Al Qaida?
It is suicidal for the EU to draw on Europe’s worst political traditions, the common denominator of which is the idea that evil must be appeased and that the best way to achieve peace is through indifference to the freedom of others.
Just the opposite is true: such policies expose an indifference to one’s own freedom and pave the way for war.
After all, Europe is uniting in order to defend its freedom and values, not to sacrifice them to the ideal of harmonious coexistence with dictators and thus risk gradual infiltration of its soul by the anti-democratic mindset.
I firmly believe that the new members of the EU will not forget their experience of totalitarianism and non-violent opposition to evil, and that that experience will be reflected in how they behave in EU bodies.
Indeed, this could be the best contribution they can make to the common spiritual, moral, and political foundations of a united Europe.
Apple Versus the G-Men
VIRGINIA BEACH – Apple’s refusal to unlock the iPhone linked to the extremist attack in San Bernardino, California, in December has triggered a public battle with the US Justice Department and the FBI – a dispute with far-reaching implications for data privacy worldwide.
But the case is not as straightforward as it seems.
Speaking as someone with a long presence in the US intelligence community, I believe that the FBI has already gained access to Syed Rizwan Farook’s iPhone.
It is an older Apple model using technology that, in other contexts, has already been compromised.
Here’s another strange thing about the FBI’s demand of Apple: Why would the United States government stoop to a public debate on this issue?
The FBI is the country’s most powerful law-enforcement organization, and Apple will ultimately be forced to comply with its request.
(Full disclosure: I own Apple stock.)
The FBI has already said that this is not about just one phone.
But few understand that this is not a simple matter of opposing interests: public safety versus an individual’s right to privacy.
For a better understanding of the FBI’s demand, we need to look at Apple’s latest line of phones, which differ from Farook’s in a fundamental respect: They contain a new chip that was designed using a technique developed by the US National Security Agency and then shared with the Israelis.
That technology is now finding its way into Apple products via the company’s Israeli chip-design division.
Each of the new chips has a unique signature used for encryption, which is coupled with its user’s fingerprint.
Without that signature, it is impossible to decrypt an Apple phone without physical access to the internals of its chip – which is itself impenetrable.
That encryption also applies to any information sent by the phone to a paired service, like Apple’s Messages system.
In the past, immediate access to telephony devices has been irrelevant to the FBI, because the authorities had unfettered access to communications as they traveled to and from a phone.
But, with its new security improvements, Apple is now closing that door.
The company is not simply denying new access; it will soon take away existing access.
This bothers the FBI, because its job is to collect evidence.
Interestingly, the NSA has taken a different stance.
Backdoors have been acknowledged as dangerous by NSA Director Admiral Mike Rogers, who says that “encryption is foundational to the future.”
When access to private communications is possible, anyone can use it for any purpose.
This complicates the FBI’s argument about public safety.
For example, do we really want a terrorist group to be capable of accessing a president’s or prime minister’s private information?
If a phone has a backdoor, it can be opened by anyone with enough motivation – criminals, extremists, and governments alike.
The Chinese authorities, for example, would be delighted if Apple complied with the FBI’s request.
They have been asking Apple for a backdoor for years.
Apple’s current stand could cause it to suffer in the massive Chinese market – or profit immensely if it complies.
The FBI’s request signals a new attempt at control.