Too many economists are tone-deaf to such distinctions.
They are prone to attribute concerns about globalization to crass protectionist motives or ignorance, even when there are genuine ethical issues at stake.
By ignoring the fact that international trade sometimes – certainly not always – involves redistributive outcomes that we would consider problematic at home, they fail to engage the public debate properly.
They also miss the opportunity to mount a more robust defense of trade when ethical concerns are less warranted.
While globalization occasionally raises difficult questions about the legitimacy of its redistributive effects, we should not respond automatically by restricting trade.
There are many difficult trade-offs to consider, including the consequences for others around the world who may be made significantly poorer than those hurt at home.
But democracies owe themselves a proper debate, so that they make such choices consciously and deliberately.
Fetishizing globalization simply because it expands the economic pie is the surest way to delegitimize it in the long run.
Free Trade Breakdown
COPENHAGEN – Last month, the Doha negotiations, promising freer trade, broke down, ostensibly over a small technicality in safeguard rules.
In reality, the talks collapsed because nobody – not Europe, not the United States, China, India, or the other main developing countries – was willing to take the political short-term hit by offending inefficient farmers and coddled domestic industries in order to create greater long-term benefits for virtually everyone.
And they broke down because we really don’t care.
After a few exasperated editorials, the world has pretty much dropped the subject and gone back to its usual concerns.
This is foolish.
Establishing significantly freer trade would help the world combat almost all of its biggest problems.
For an astonishingly low cost, we could improve education and health conditions, make the poorest people richer, and help everybody become better able to tackle the future.
We have known for centuries that free trade almost always benefits both parties.
The economist David Ricardo pointed out in 1817 that both Great Britain and Portugal would benefit if they exploited their comparative advantages.
Portugal could produce wine cheaply, whereas Great Britain could produce cloth much more cheaply than wine.
By selling cloth and buying wine, Great Britain obtains more of both, as does Portugal.
The same holds true today, when countries, doing what they do best, produce more and exchange it for more of all other goods.
Yet today, with international trade talks stalled and protectionist rhetoric rising, we are instead moving toward building bigger trade barriers.
These barriers are supported by deep-pocketed, self-serving corporations and lobby groups, and defended by politicians who are scared that the redistribution of jobs, income, and wealth resulting from freer trade will reduce their chances of remaining in power.
When the Doha trade round was launched shortly after September 11, 2001, there was plenty of international goodwill.
But a recent Financial Times/Harris poll in the US, Germany, France, the United Kingdom, Italy, and Spain found people nearly three times more likely to say that globalization is negative than positive.
Recently, the Copenhagen Consensus project gathered some of the world’s leading economists to decide how to do the most good for the planet in a world of finite resources.
The panel – including five Nobel laureates – found that one of the single best actions the planet could take would be completing the Doha negotiations.
They based their conclusions on new research for the Copenhagen Consensus project by Australian economist Kym Anderson.
Anderson showed that if developing countries cut their tariffs by the same proportion as high-income countries, and services and investment were also liberalized, the annual global gains could climb to $120 billion, with $17 billion going to the world's poorest countries by 2015.
This is a respectable sum, and certainly a benefit that the international community should try to achieve.
But what we often fail to realize is that the story only starts here.
As economies open up, as countries do what they do best, competition and innovation drive up rates of growth.
More competition means that previously sheltered companies must shape up and become more productive, innovating simply to survive.
Having more open economies allows more trade in innovation, so that new companies can almost instantly use smart ideas from around the globe.
Instead of every closed market having to re-invent the wheel, once is enough to get everyone’s economy going.
This means that over time, the advantage of moving toward freer trade grows dramatically bigger: the $120 billion benefit in 2015 grows to many trillions of dollars of annual benefits by the end of the century.
And the benefits would increasingly accrue to the developing world, which would achieve the biggest boosts to growth rates.
We have seen three very visible cases of such growth boosts in three different decades.
South Korea liberalized trade in 1965, Chile in 1974, and India in 1991; all saw annual growth rates increase by several percentage points thereafter.
If we recast these benefits as annual installments, a realistic Doha outcome could increase global income by more than $3 trillion every year throughout this century.
And about $2.5 trillion annually would go to today’s developing countries every year, or $500 a year on average for each individual in the third world, almost half of whom now survive on less than $2 a day.
There would, of course, be costs.
Freer trade would force some industries to downsize or close, although more industries would expand, and for some people and communities, the transition would be difficult.
Yet the overall benefits of a successful Doha Round would likely be hundreds of times greater than these costs.
It is interesting to contrast global skepticism about free trade with support for expensive, inefficient methods to combat global warming.
Many argue that we should act, even if such action will have no benefit for the next decades, because it will help lessen the impact of global warming by the century’s end.
But free trade also promises few benefits now and huge benefits in the future.
Moreover, if we could stop global warming (which we can’t), the benefit for future generations would be one-tenth or less of the benefit of freer trade (which we certainly can achieve).
Still, there are few celebrity campaigners calling on politicians to sort out the Doha Round.
Global fear about free trade leaves the planet at risk of missing out on the extraordinary benefits that it offers.
Free trade is good not only for big corporations, or for job growth.
It is simply good.
Free Trade, Free Labor, Free Growth
ADELAIDE – Protectionist sentiment and fear of globalization are on the rise.
In the United States, presidential candidates appeal to anxious voters by blaming the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) for the erosion of the country’s manufacturing base.
Liberal trade initiatives have run into trouble in Congress, while new trade barriers have been mooted for products flooding in from China.
Things are no better in Europe.
France has dealt the Doha round of World Trade Organization (WTO) negotiations a blow by rejecting the outline deal on agriculture.
European Commission President José Manuel Barroso believes that protectionist pressures are increasing. 
When the Doha trade round was launched shortly after September 11, 2001, there was plenty of international goodwill.
But disenchantment with globalization – and, in some regions, fear of immigration– has since set in.
A recent Financial Times/Harris poll in the US, Germany, France, the United Kingdom, Italy, and Spain found people nearly three times more likely to say that globalization is negative than positive.
Free trade would lead to an overwhelming boost to welfare everywhere, but especially in the developing world.
Grasping these benefits is potentially one of this generation’s greatest challenges.
Increased negative sentiment could have the worst possible result: not just Doha’s failure, but also the raising of trade and immigration barriers.
These barriers remain largely because further liberalization would redistribute jobs, income, and wealth in ways that governments fear would reduce their chances of remaining in power – and their own wealth in countries where corruption is rife.
The greatest hope is thus getting the Doha round back on track.
But there is a big difference between a low-quality result and one that is more comprehensive.
If little more is achieved than phasing out farm export subsidies and a modest reduction in agricultural domestic support, our analysis shows that developing countries as a group would gain nothing, while high-income countries would gain just US$18 billion per year by 2015.
By contrast, if developing countries cut their tariffs by the same proportion as high-income countries, and services and investment were also liberalized, the global annual gains could climb as high as US$120 billion, with US$17 billion going to the world’s poorest countries. Moreover, the long-term impact of free trade is huge.
Recast as after calculating the net present value of the stream of future benefits, a realistic Doha outcome could increase global income by more than $3000 billion per year, $2500 billion of which would go to the developing world.
In addition, the experiences of successful reformers like Korea, China, India, and Chile suggest that trade liberalization immediately boosts annual economic growth rates by several percentage points for many years.
Eliminating subsidies and trade barriers would mean that resources could be used more efficiently, so there would be more scope to reduce inequality and poverty, social tensions, environmental degradation, malnutrition, and disease.
There would, of course, be costs.
Firms and workers would need to adjust as reform forces some industries to downsize or close and allows others to expand.
In addition, there are social costs to consider.
Yet the benefits of a successful Doha round are between 45 and 440 times higher than these costs.
This is clearly an extremely sound investment.
An “alternative” to Doha, whereby other high-income countries would follow the European Union’s offer of duty-free access to products from Least-Developed Countries (LDCs) and African, Caribbean, and Pacific (ACP) small countries, would involve only a tiny fraction of global gains from trade reform.
Moreover, it may well hurt other poor countries – thereby worsening inequality – by encouraging resources to be allocated to activities that become uncompetitive following the next World Trade Organization agreement.
If trade liberalization in goods and services proves too politically difficult to achieve in this decade, the benefits of liberalizing international labor flows is worth contemplating – not least because otherwise illegal migration is likely to increase.
Historical experience shows that migration is the fastest way to bring about a convergence in living standards.
We examined the costs and benefits of an expansion in international migration over a 25-year period, amounting to a 3% boost in host countries’ labor forces by 2025.
The costs would include one-off expenses to migrants: transport, obtaining visas and permits, and finding housing, schooling, and employment, as well as the emotional cost of separation from family.
There are also one-off costs to host-country governments, such as processing applications and providing initial help with housing and welfare.
These costs have been estimated at between $14,000 and $42,000 per worker and family (shared equally by migrants and host governments).
The global net benefit of the increased flow of migrants for 25 years is between $13 trillion and $39 trillion – close to the median estimated gains from the Doha round.
The benefits are between 28 and 220 times higher than the costs.
Even if freeing up immigration multilaterally seems too difficult to include as part of a Doha round agreement, individual countries could do so unilaterally with the stroke of a pen.
The economic logic is compelling: removing trade and migration barriers would be an exceptionally wise investment.
The real hurdle is getting this message across to politicians and voters.
Free Trade or Freebies for the Powerful?
As the United States Congress begins to debate the Dominican Republic-Central American Free Trade Agreement (DR-CAFTA), a titanic struggle between the forces of free trade and protectionism promises to unfold.
But that debate should not be allowed to mask the truth behind this treaty: the DR-CAFTA is more a pleading of special interests than a free-trade deal.
It manages simultaneously to fleece the people of six poor countries and to put US workers in harm’s way.
To be sure, expanded trade holds great promise for promoting development and democracy.
But the trade rules inscribed in DR-CAFTA promote profits for a few at the expense of the well being of the many.
Ironically, the pact even limits market competition to protect powerful special interests, undercutting the core principles of free trade.
Consider pharmaceuticals.
For American drug companies, this agreement extends the time period during which brand-name pharmaceuticals have exclusive access to markets, postponing the entry of generic drugs and thus limiting competition.
For Central Americans, the cost of drugs will soar, straining budgets and gutting health care.
The result may be a death sentence for many.
In agriculture, small farmers would be placed on a collision course with US agro-business and their heavily subsidized farm exports.
The US exported paddy rice, for example, at a price almost 20% lower than the cost of production in 2003, making it impossible for Central Americans to compete.
As for labor rights, the agreement makes a devil’s bargain: it opens trade while locking in a status quo that is appalling.
Workers face everything from rampant discrimination against older people (those over 35) to physical abuse, lack of bathroom breaks, no overtime pay, and poverty wages.
In principle, workers can seek remedies by joining a union and bargaining collectively.
But this option is all but foreclosed, because union membership or organizing can lead to dismissal, blacklisting, violence, or worse.
In Guatemala, the largest economy, less than 3% of workers are unionized and their unions are marginal.
The DR-CAFTA pays lip service to international labor standards as enshrined in the International Labor Organization’s core labor rights, but promptly throws them overboard.
Instead, countries are committed only to enforcing their own labor laws, which often seem designed to prevent workers from joining a union.
Moreover, enforcement of the rights that do exist is trapped somewhere between ineptitude and corruption.
As if this were not bad enough, the agreement jettisons everything we’ve learned over the last 30 years or so about international pressure and labor law reform.
The stronger provisions of previous trade agreements, such as the Generalized System of Preferences (GSP) and the Caribbean Basin Initiative (CBI), have been dumped.
Although trade with Central America represents only about 1.5% of total US trade, the outcome of the debate on DR-CAFTA will shape US trade policy – which sets the tone for other rich countries’ stance in trade talks – for years to come.
A trade agreement such as this puts US and Central American workers in the same labor market.
If the whip is cracked in Tegucigalpa today, workers in Charlotte will feel it tomorrow.
If Salvadorans’ wages are squeezed, they won’t be buying many products made in Los Angeles — unless, of course, they wind up moving there.
The anemic labor standards enshrined in this agreement encourage firms to compete by taking the low road, a route that puts them on a collision course with China’s rock-bottom wages.
They could just as easily take the high road: much evidence indicates that workers who are rewarded rather than victimized can contribute to greater competitiveness for firms in the long run.
It is hypocritical to promote democracy and then sign a trade agreement that denies workers the basic democratic right to organize and join unions.
Without this right, elections may not add up to democracy.
The checks and balances that unions provide are essential in the workplace, but they are even more important in sustaining fledgling democratic regimes.
The issue is not free trade versus protectionism, but “smart trade” versus “polarizing trade.”
Smart trade creates balanced development, while polarizing trade rewards a small circle of winners at the expense of the many.
Smart trade requires two key provisions: core labor rights, backed up by tough enforcement, and a development fund targeting infrastructure and education to boost competitiveness.
DR-CAFTA does neither.
Instead, it condemns Central America to carry its dismal past far into the future.
Rejecting it opens the possibility for freer markets and faster income growth in Central America, as well as healthier democracies.
Free Trade with a Human Face
MEXICO CITY – Although many Americans believe immigration is a domestic issue that should be excluded from talks with other governments, this is not a view held by other nations – or by the United States.
Indeed, the US negotiated its first immigration deal in 1907, maintained for more than two decades a controversial treaty with Mexico covering immigration, and has kept up immigration talks and deals even with Fidel Castro since the early 1960’s.
For many Latin American nations, not just Mexico, immigration is the single most important issue in their relations with the US.
The Caribbean islands all have a similarly high proportion of their citizens residing in the US and depend as much as Mexico on remittances.
The same is true for much of Central America.
And no part of South America is exempt from this pattern.
So almost all of Latin America is deeply affected by the current immigration climate in the US, and would benefit greatly from the type of comprehensive immigration reform that both John McCain and Barack Obama have supported.
Bush had it right at the beginning: his willingness to negotiate an immigration agreement with Mexico at the start of his term was probably the only way to get it done.
Moving quickly is probably the only way the next president can succeed on this front as well.
If immigration is to become a less heated issue, the US must address the needs of Latin America’s economies.
Here, one of the key challenges facing the next US administration lies in the existing and pending free-trade agreements between the US and Latin America.
If John McCain is elected, tinkering with or overhauling NAFTA, CAFTA, and free-trade deals with Chile and Peru, as Barack Obama has proposed, will be unlikely.
But, given the likelihood that Democrats will retain their majorities in the US Congress, even McCain would need to modify the agreement with Colombia in order to get it passed.
The pressure to include similar provisions in the other deals would then grow.
If recession drags on and Americans continue to blame trade agreements – erroneously – for growing unemployment, falling wages, and yawning inequality, opposition to these deals will grow.
Instead of waiting for the pressure to mount, the next president would do well to preempt it with an ambitious agenda on free-trade reform that would benefit everyone.
In this respect, the US could learn from the European Union.
American trade agreements have been faulted for limiting themselves to trade.
The response has always been: the US is not Europe, nor is it in the business of nation-building or reconstruction.
But this is exactly what it did, successfully, with the post-1945 Marshall Plan and, unsuccessfully, with Iraq and Afghanistan today.
First, clear and explicit human rights and democracy clauses should be included, along the lines of similar clauses in the Mexican and Chilean Economic Association treaties with the EU.
Second, more specific provisions on labor, the environment, gender equality, and indigenous rights are needed, as well as anti-trust, regulatory, and judicial reform provisions, for reasons both of principle and political expediency.
Although there have been enormous improvements in most of these areas, there remains a huge agenda, particularly with regard to breaking up or regulating monopolies – public, private, commercial, trade union-based – that plague nearly every country in the region.
These revised agreements should include bold, enlightened provisions for infrastructure and “social-cohesion” funds, since these can make the difference between muddling through and true success.
Free-trade advocates should not view Obama’s demand that these deals be revisited as a mistake, but rather as an opportunity to improve and deepen them; McCain’s supporters should not see the incorporation of all of the aforementioned inclusions as “European nonsense,” but rather as a way to narrow the gap between the agreements’ promise and their actual results.
Improving Mexican and Central American infrastructure, education, and rule of law, or improving Colombian and Peruvian drug-enforcement efforts and respect for labor laws and human rights, are all in America’s interest, and-free trade agreements can help rather than harm such efforts.
If the US and Latin America can face up to the challenges of trade and immigration together, the next US president may leave a weightier mark on the hemispheric relationship than any American leader in three generations.
Freeze the Settlement Freeze
RAMALLAH – Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu’s decision to approve new Jewish settlements on the eve of a possible settlement freeze is the latest round in a cycle that has been repeated so many times over the past 40 years that it would seem mundane if it were not so dangerous.
The cycle goes something like this: American or international pressure mounts on Israel to stop settlement activities in the occupied territories.
Israeli settlers and their supporters then gather even more energy to expand onto more Palestinian land, build more exclusively Jewish settlements, and destroy more Arab homes before the so-called “freeze” comes into effect.
The peace process, not surprisingly, becomes a joke while this happens.
Eventually, world pressure subsides and the freeze fails to materialize. In the end, more Jewish settlements appear.
Indeed, the great paradox of this cycle is that more settlements are built during times of negotiations than during times of conflict.
This pattern can be traced to 1967.
Israelis understand that the only reality in politics is the reality on the ground.
So long as Israeli soldiers control the occupied territories, the idea of a settlement freeze will not take root.
In fact, the demand for a settlement freeze is nothing more than a call to arms to a wide group of Israelis and their supporters to go and build on stolen Palestinian land.
When Egyptian President Anwar Sadat was preparing for his historic visit to Jerusalem, a group of settlers created the settlement of Elon Moreh near Nablus, the most populated West Bank city.
When former United States Secretary of State James Baker began his shuttle diplomacy for peace, his ultimately unsuccessful efforts actually resulted in more settlements, with a new one started just hours before he was due to arrive for talks.
Baker postponed his visit and later vented his frustrations to the US Senate Committee on Appropriations.
He resented “being greeted” every time he came to the Middle East with yet “another settlement.”
Baker’s efforts eventually led to the Madrid peace conference in 1991, but that, too, failed to resolve the conflict.
And, while Palestinians and Israelis did reach a secret agreement a few years later that was publicly declared at a White House ceremony, construction of Jewish settlements didn’t stop.
In fact, since the 1993 Oslo Accords the number of Jewish settlers in the occupied territories has doubled.
The creation of new settlements has often been accompanied by hostile media reporting – even within Israel – as well as international condemnation, yet the settlement train has not stopped. It continued to race ahead even during the days when Israel’s government rotated between Likud’s Yitzhak Shamir and Labor’s Shimon Peres between 1984 and 1990.
The Shamir government would be defeated at the polls, and the incoming Labor government would declare a freeze on all settlement construction, even on buildings that had already been started.
But, despite the decrees, ways were found to continue building, to absorb new residents, and to increase the settler population.
For the US, the settlements have proven to be an equal-opportunity obstacle, obstructing both Republican and Democratic diplomacy.
The Clinton administration attempted to put brakes on then-Prime Minister Netanyahu’s efforts to construct a new settlement near Bethlehem. After a short hiatus, construction resumed.
The Bush-Cheney Administration, the most pro-Israeli in memory, fared no better.
Today, Har Homa, built on Jabal Abu Ghnaim with the aim of cutting off Bethlehem from Jerusalem, is home to 19,000 settlers.
This cycle has become so bizarre and confusing that Palestinians are not sure whether they should hope for continued tensions with Israel (which usually means no new settlements) or for continued negotiations (which usually provide cover for building settlements).
On January 5, 2007, the day Prime Minister Ehud Olmert met with US Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice to discuss a new round of talks, the Israeli Construction and Housing Ministry issued a tender for the construction of more units in Ma’ale Adumim, an exclusively Jewish settlement in the occupied West Bank.
Of course, whenever the Israelis defy the world over the settlements, as is now once again happening, US and other officials “denounce” and “regret” the decision.
But, at the end of the day, despite these few statements and perhaps even a UN resolution of opposition, the pattern established over the past 40 years is clear: the decision stands.
Jeff Aronson, a senior researcher at the Washington-based Foundation for Middle East Peace, concludes that Israeli leaders will continue to be able to fool their American counterparts on this issue.
Some Israeli right-wing leaders like Menachem Begin, Shamir, and Netanyahu trumpet their settlement achievements.
Others, including Yitzhak Rabin, Ehud Barak, and Ehud Olmert “talked left and built right.”
Palestinians are caught in a Catch-22: if they insist on a settlement freeze, Israel preemptively begins to build new settlements.
Unless and until Israel pays a heavy price for its illegal activities in the occupied territories, it is hard to imagine a successful peace process taking shape.
The French Exception?
PARIS – More than ever, the French economy is at the center of the global debate about how far one can push the limits of state size and control in a capitalist democracy.
To those on the left, France’s generous benefits and strong trade unions provide a formula for a more inclusive welfare state.
To those on the right, France’s oversized and intrusive government offers only a blueprint for secular decline.
For the moment, the right looks right.
Once nearly the economic equal of Germany, France has fallen well behind over the past decade, with per capita GDP now about 10% lower.
France may punch above its weight politically, but it punches far below its weight economically.
Whenever someone proposes turning the eurozone into a transfer union, as France’s economy minister, Emmanuel Macron, recently did, the presumption is that Germany will carry everyone else on its shoulders.
But why should only Germany have that responsibility?
France’s economy is roughly three-quarters the size of Germany’s.
Persuading the Germans that the French are willing and able to pay their fair share could make room for a lot of necessary compromises that until now have seemed impossible.
For now, few people feel confident about France’s economic future.
The good news is that France is not quite as French as it pretends to be.
Yes, there is a 35-hour workweek, but companies can negotiate around the limit by offering to pay more for overtime.
The effective workweek for most workers is perhaps closer to 39 hours.
Yes, France has sought to limit the car service Uber, whose business model has arguably been one of the most transformative and important advances of the decade.
But, while this is a triumph for taxi unions and a tragedy for passengers and Uber drivers, France has also started focusing on nurturing small, high-potential technology companies.
The French government is no longer placing all its bets on big, state-led projects, as it did in the 1970s heyday of massive investment in high-speed trains and Airbus.
President François Hollande has given Macron wide berth to try to implement desperately needed structural reforms of labor and product markets.
Of course, it remains to be seen just how much political support such market-oriented policies can sustain.
Progressive economists love the French government for spending a staggering 57% of GDP, compared to government expenditures of 44% of GDP for Germany.
And it must be acknowledged that the French government provides excellent value in some key areas.
France’s health service justly receives much better reviews than the United Kingdom’s.
French citizens might pay a lot of taxes and suffer a high degree of regulation, but at least they get something in return.
Still, France’s supersize government is hardly a source of unalloyed dynamism.
And indeed, one suspects that France’s GDP and productivity measures are flattered by the fact that, for lack of market prices, statisticians blindly assume that citizens get one dollar of value for each dollar spent on government, which might be an overstatement.
Worryingly, it is not clear how well France’s culture of inclusiveness can ever extend to immigrants.
The same strict firing laws and high levels of minimum wages that are intended to protect native French workers from globalization make it much more difficult for newcomers to land jobs.
Yet virtually every study of global inequality suggests that gains from allowing greater labor mobility dwarf gains from redistributing income among natives.
By contrast, the more liberal labor laws in the United States and the United Kingdom ensure more opportunities for outsiders.
The center of Paris and other French cities may be grand, but many immigrants from North Africa and elsewhere live in squalid ghettos on the outskirts.
Although the precise rate of unemployment for particular ethnic groups is not known (French law precludes collecting data by ethnic classification), anecdotal evidence suggests much higher levels of joblessness for immigrants and their descendants.
True, the government provides generous welfare benefits; but this alone does not produce inclusiveness.
Strong popular support for Marine Le Pen’s anti-immigration National Front party, together with French recalcitrance about accepting migrants escaping the war in Syria, indicates the problems with applying the French model in diverse societies.
Another obstacle to applying the French model elsewhere is that France enjoys certain unique advantages that are arguably critical to its success.
Elite French managers are widely considered among the best in the world, and are frequently selected to head major international corporations.
Corruption is certainly a problem, but significantly less so than in most of the eurozone’s south. (The Italian state is also large and intrusive, but it does not produce the high-quality public services that the French government does.)
Lastly, France arguably has one of the world’s most favorable natural environments, with fertile soil and an exceptionally temperate climate.
A healthy French economy would do wonders to help lift the eurozone out of its malaise.
It could also provide an example to countries everywhere of how inclusive capitalism can work.
But that assumes that the government will embrace the structural reforms that France’s economy so desperately needs.
The Monetarist Mistake
BERKELEY – Ideas matter.
That is the lesson of Hall of Mirrors, the American economist Barry Eichengreen’s chronicle of the two biggest economic crises of the past 100 years: the twentieth century’s Great Depression and the ongoing Great Recession, from which we are still struggling ineffectually to recover.
Eichengreen is my friend, teacher, and patron, and his book is to my mind the best explanation to date of why policymakers in Europe and the United States have reacted to the most dramatic economic collapse in almost four generations with half-hearted measures and half-finished interventions.
According to Eichengreen, the Great Depression and the Great Recession are related.
The inadequate response to our current troubles can be traced to the triumph of the monetarist disciples of Milton Friedman over their Keynesian and Minskyite peers in describing the history of the Great Depression.
In A Monetary History of the United States, published in 1963, Friedman and Anna Jacobson Schwartz famously argued that the Great Depression was due solely and completely to the failure of the US Federal Reserve to expand the country’s monetary base and thereby keep the economy on a path of stable growth.
Had there been no decline in the money stock, their argument goes, there would have been no Great Depression.
This interpretation makes a certain kind of sense, but it relies on a critical assumption.
Friedman and Schwartz’s prescription would have worked only if interest rates and what economists call the “velocity of money” – the rate at which money changes hands – were largely independent of one another.
What is more likely, however, is that the drop in interest rates resulting from the interventions needed to expand the country’s supply of money would have put a brake on the velocity of money, undermining the proposed cure.
In that case, ending the Great Depression would have also required the fiscal expansion called for by John Maynard Keynes and the supportive credit-market policies prescribed by Hyman Minsky.
The debate over which interventions would be needed to put a halt to something like the Great Depression should have been a simple matter of analyzing the evidence.
In economic hard times, did interest rates have little impact on the velocity of money, as Friedman suggested?
Was Keynes correct when he described the concept of a liquidity trap, a situation in which easing monetary policy further proves ineffective?
Is the stock of money in an economy an adequate predictor of total spending, as Friedman claimed, or is the smooth functioning of credit channels a more important factor, as Minsky argued?
These questions can be debated.
But it is fairly clear that even in the 1970s there was not enough empirical evidence in support of Friedman’s ideas to justify their growing dominance.
And, indeed, there can be no denying the fact that Friedman’s cure proved to be an inadequate response to the Great Recession – strongly suggesting that it would have fallen similarly short had it been tried during the Great Depression.
The dominance of Friedman’s ideas at the beginning of the Great Recession has less to do with the evidence supporting them than with the fact that the science of economics is all too often tainted by politics.
In this case, the contamination was so bad that policymakers were unwilling to go beyond Friedman and apply Keynesian and Minskyite policies on a large enough scale to address the problems that the Great Recession presented.
Admitting that the monetarist cure was inadequate would have required mainstream economists to swim against the neoliberal currents of our age.
It would have required acknowledging that the causes of the Great Depression ran much deeper than a technocratic failure to manage the money supply properly.
And doing that would have been tantamount to admitting the merits of social democracy and recognizing that the failure of markets can sometimes be a greater danger than the inefficiency of governments.
The result was a host of policies based not on evidence, but on inadequately examined ideas.
And we are still paying the price for that intellectual failure today.
From Central Bank to Central Planning?
BERKELEY – For more than 170 years, it has been accepted doctrine that markets are not to be trusted when there is a liquidity squeeze.
When the prices of even safe assets fall and interest rates climb to sky-high levels because traders and financiers collectively want more liquid assets than currently exist, it is simply not safe to let the market sort things out.
At such a time, central banks must step in and set the price of liquidity at a reasonable level – make it a centrally-planned and administered price – rather than let it swing free in response to private-sector supply and demand.
This is the doctrine of “lender-of-last-resort.”
For more than half that time – say, 85 years – it has been accepted doctrine that markets are also not to be trusted even in normal times, lest doing so lead to a liquidity squeeze or to an inflationary bubble.
So, central banks must set the price of liquidity in the market day in and day out.
According to the followers of Knut Wicksell, the central bank must keep the market rate of interest near the natural rate of interest.
No, said the followers of John Maynard Keynes, it must offset swings in business animal spirits in order to stabilize aggregate demand.
On the contrary, said the followers of Milton Friedman, it must keep the velocity-adjusted rate of growth of the money stock stable.
In fact, if you do any one of these things, you have done them all, for they are three ways of describing what is at bottom the same task and the same reality.
Thus, as social democracy, government guideposts, and centralized planning waxed and waned elsewhere in the economy, social democracy in short-term finance went from strength to strength.
First, central banks suspended the rules of the free market in liquidity squeezes.
Then they set the price of liquidity as an administered price in normal times.
Then they freed themselves of all but the lightest contact with their political masters: they became independent technocrats, a monetary priesthood that spoke in Delphic terms obscure to mere mortals.
The justification for this system was that it seemed to work well – or at least less badly than central banking that blindly adhered to the gold standard or no central banking at all.
This island of central planning in the midst of the market economy was a strange and puzzling feature – all the more so because so few remarked how strange it was.
There were no calls for a five-percent-growth-of-kilowatt-hours rule as there were calls for a five-percent-growth-of-M2 rule.
There was no Federal Automobile Board to set the price of vehicles the way the Federal Reserve Board set the price of federal funds.
But now it appears that, despite all this, we still have not had enough central planning in finance.
For, even as the central banking authority administered the price of liquidity, the price of risk was left to the tender mercies of the market.
And it is the price of risk that is the source of our current distress.
It is not that the world economy faces a liquidity squeeze.
Far from it: two-year United States Treasury notes with a face value of $1,000 will get you $998 in cash – the lowest liquidity price since the Great Depression and Japan in the 1990’s.
Yet the risk premia on non-Treasury assets have soared to barely believable heights: the annual interest-rate premium for holding a CD issued by a private bank now stands at five percentage points.
And it is this rise in risk premia that threatens to send the global economy into a deep recession, and turn the financial markets from a spectacle of schadenfreude into a malign source of unemployment and idle factories worldwide.
The US Federal Reserve, the US Treasury, the European Central Bank, the Bank of England, and other public financial regulatory entities are being pushed toward a further expansion of their roles.
The Treasury and Federal Reserve are adding preferred stock to the balance sheets of the US mortgage giants Fannie Mae and FHLBC and the insurance giant AIG in the hope of shoring up their capital cushions and lowering their borrowing costs so that they can buy more mortgages.
The Treasury has asked for authority to purchase $700 billion of mortgages to get them off of the private sector's books.
Expanding the demand and reducing the supply of these risky assets is a way of manipulating their price.
The Fed and the Treasury are walking down a road that ends with making the price of risk in financial markets, along with the price of liquidity, an administered price.
This was how central banking got started in the first place: letting the market and the market alone determine the price of liquidity was judged too costly for the businessmen who voted and the workers who could overthrow governments.
Now it looks as though letting the market alone determine the price of risk is similarly being judged too costly for today’s voters and campaign contributors to bear.
America’s Trouble with China
WASHINGTON, DC – Xi Jinping, China’s newly anointed president, made his first visit to the United States in May 1980.
He was a 27-year-old junior officer accompanying Geng Biao, then a vice premier and China’s leading military official.
Geng had been my host the previous January, when I was the first US defense secretary to visit China, acting as an interlocutor for President Jimmy Carter’s administration.
Americans had little reason to notice Xi back then, but his superiors clearly saw his potential.
In the ensuing 32 years, Xi’s stature rose, along with China’s economic and military strength.
His cohort’s ascent to the summit of power marks the retirement of the last generation of leaders designated by Deng Xiaoping (though they retain influence).
Despite China’s greater weight in world affairs, Xi faces internal strains that make China more fragile than is generally understood.
China’s export-led economic model has reached its limits, and the transition to domestic-led growth is intensifying internal frictions.
Managing unrest through repression is more difficult than in the past, as rapid urbanization, economic reform, and social change roils a country of 1.3 billion people.
Ethnic conflicts in outlying regions will also test Xi’s political control.
China’s foreign policy is another cause for concern –&#160;especially for the US.
History teaches us that rising powers inevitably compete with status quo leading powers, and that this conflict often leads to war.
For now, the large bilateral trade imbalance has exacerbated US-China tensions, and can be safely reduced only by changes in behavior on both sides – or, unsafely, though a dangerous crisis-driven correction.
More immediately, China’s territorial claims – particularly in the South China Sea, but also regarding its border with India – and its efforts to expand its influence over neighboring countries will force the US to navigate two overarching risks.
The first is confrontation, which could occur directly or as a result of the US being drawn into conflicts between China and its neighbors.
The other risk is that Japan, South Korea, Vietnam, the Philippines, Thailand, or Myanmar could fall into China’s strategic orbit.
Many of these countries will look to the US as a strategic counterweight should China seek to assert local dominance.
But some may conclude that it is safer to steer closer to China than away from it, because their economies depend so strongly on Chinese trade.
As recent events in the East and South China Seas show, China sometimes attempts to strong-arm its neighbors.
The US will need to defend its allies and interests by pushing back, but with actions modulated to limit Chinese concerns.
One way to do this is to understand China’s motives.
China’s drive for economic and political leadership in East Asia, and its increased military capability there, is inevitable.
But the world can be confident that the US will remain stronger, wealthier, and more influential in global affairs than China even in 2030.
That argues against American overreaction, which could fuel the kind of self-reinforcing downward spiral in bilateral relations that occurred between Great Britain and Germany prior to the conflagrations of the first half of the twentieth century.
Perhaps the best way to avoid confrontation is to cooperate on shared external threats, most notably nuclear proliferation, global climate change, and Islamic extremism.
But getting to 2030 without a major confrontation will be a major achievement.
While the US is likely to maintain the upper hand in terms of military power for at least another 15-20 years, asymmetric warfare could undercut America’s advantage should China engage in cyber-attacks on US electronic and satellite systems, along with attacks on infrastructure.
In response to China’s capability to project power many hundreds of miles from its borders, the US (as I have suggested for the last 25 years) should develop a long-range bomber capable of penetrating sophisticated defenses and delivering great force.
As US security interests shift to the Pacific, Americans now rely on increasingly vulnerable forward land bases and carrier fleets with tactical aircraft that have a combat radius of 300-500 miles (482-805 kilometers).
But a long-range bomber would be more cost-effective than standoff bombers with cruise missiles, and, unlike shorter-range tactical bombers, its bases would be invulnerable to attack.
That said, America’s most serious challenge right now is to get the US economy and its governance in order.
I believe that it can do that.
But, unless and until it does, thereby giving President Barack Obama a firm basis from which to engage Xi on issues requiring international statesmanship, the prospect of trouble between the US and China will continue to grow.
From Constitutional Crisis to European Crisis
Since the shock of the French and Dutch “no” votes against the European Union’s proposed Constitutional Treaty, events have followed their inevitable course, but more rapidly than expected. 
The French “no” was a massive blow to the political credibility of French President Jacques Chirac.
So he did what French Presidents usually do in such circumstances: rather than admit that French voters might be right, he sacked Prime Minister Jean-Pierre Raffarin as a scapegoat, replacing him with his protégé Dominique de Villepin, who has never held an elective office.
Opinions differ as to the reasons for France’s rejection of the Constitutional Treaty.
But most analyses suggest that it was directed against high unemployment, magnified by the perceived threat to jobs from the new Central and Eastern European EU members.
Naturally, Chirac immediately reaffirmed his faith in the French economic model.
The most undeniable implication of the French vote has been to raise a large question mark over the future of the EU’s traditional integration project.
Rather than admit any such thing, Chirac hurried to meet German Chancellor Gerhard Schröder, so that they could jointly reaffirm their traditional alliance as the spiritual leaders of this European project, in the hope that the Constitutional Treaty might yet be rescued.
Neither of them have been able to say how this should be done.
The British government tried to wriggle out of taking sides on the implications of the French and Dutch votes by saying that it would suspend its own plans for a referendum, but not cancel it outright.
But if the government thought that this mid-way position would finesse its European predicament by appeasing the large anti-European majority in the UK without gratuitously offending the EU’s other members, it was quickly disabused.
One consequence of last year’s enlargement is that it is forcing a far-reaching re-negotiation of all aspects of the EU budget.
Most of the ten new members are much poorer than the old members, and are thus much less able or willing to pay large financial contributions.
They expect to be net financial beneficiaries, which would help them modernize. 
But the old member states that have hitherto benefited most from the budget – poorer countries like Spain, Greece, and Portugal – want the budget to be expanded, so that they can continue to receive money.
Old member states that have traditionally contributed most, like Germany and the Netherlands, want to keep the budget as small as possible.
Given this looming negotiation between old and new – and between rich and poor – and because Chirac has no cunning proposal for resurrecting the EU Constitution, he has sought and found a second scapegoat: Britain has, for over 20 years, benefited from a large rebate in its outsized contribution to the EU budget. 
By design the EU Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) gives large financial benefits to countries with large farming sectors, like France, but imposes financial penalties on countries with small farming sectors, like Britain.
This inequity long rankled in Britain.
In 1984, Margaret Thatcher demanded and got a large rebate in the British net contribution, which this year is worth roughly €5bn.
Ever since, this concession has been resented by other member states.
Last week, Chirac decided to raise the stakes in the European crisis by going on the offensive against Britain.
The time has come, he said, for “our English friends” to understand that they have to make a gesture of solidarity, and renounce the rebate negotiated by Thatcher.
The British government’s first reflex was to reject any suggestion that the British rebate is open to discussion: it was justified in 1984, and it is justified today.
But Tony Blair has now gone on the counter-offensive, raising the stakes himself.
Britain, he says, might be prepared to put the British rebate on the table, but only if the French are prepared to remove the reasons for it by means of a radical renegotiation of EU farm policy.
From a narrowly British perspective, this might seem a shrewd and reasonable posture for defending British interests.
But, by picking up Chirac’s challenge, Blair has allowed himself to be drawn away from the general European dilemma (what to do about the Constitutional Treaty) – for which Britain is not to blame – to a specific policy problem (the CAP’s finances) on which Britain is isolated.
Coming from anyone else, Blair’s proposal to re-think the CAP might seem reasonable; indeed, over the years, the EU has tried (slowly) to reform its defects.
Unfortunately, in eight years of power, Tony Blair reinforced the widespread impression in the rest of the EU, that the UK is irremediably skeptical about European integration.
His proposal will thus be seen for what it is, a counter-attack on a founding policy of the European project.
The danger is that this week’s EU summit will not be devoted to finding a solution to the dilemma of the French and Dutch “no” votes, but instead will be turned into a confrontation between Britain and the rest about the budget.
This would be a pity for Europe and for Britain.
It would underscore the depth of the chasm between leaders who are seeking to advance the cause of European political integration but are out of touch with their electorates, and the British, who do not like European political integration at all.
The Biodiversity Bargain
NAIROBI – What will it cost to save the world’s forests and boost the life prospects of its seven billion people?
In a few days, India will host a meeting in Hyderabad of the United Nations Convention on Biological Diversity.
The assembled countries will consider how to raise the resources necessary to achieve the ambitious Aichi Biodiversity Targets, adopted two years ago at the last such meeting in Japan.
The Aichi targets call for cutting by half the rate of loss of the planet’s natural habitats, including forests, by 2020.
In Hyderabad, governments will be presented with the likely costs of scaling up efforts to achieve that goal.
One assessment estimates that about $40 billion a year will be needed to halve rates of deforestation and ensure sustainable management of forests in developing countries by the target date.
The cost may seem significant in a world of rising unemployment rates, with many countries still struggling with ongoing financial and economic crises, and others staring bankruptcy in the face.
But the cost of preserving the world’s biodiversity needs to be contrasted with the enormous economic and social value of forests in terms of the benefits that they provide locally and globally.
Forests ensure water supplies, counter soil erosion, and safeguard an abundance of genetic resources that will become increasingly important in developing the new products, pharmaceuticals, and crop strains needed to support the lives and livelihoods of more than nine billion people by 2050.
Moreover, investing in forest conservation and sustainable land use is one of the most cost-effective means of mitigating climate change.
The potential returns from targeted investments in forests are immense.
Restoring just 15% of degraded forest landscapes worldwide could generate up to $85 billion worth of ecosystem services every year, mostly benefiting rural and underprivileged communities.
Estimates of the value of the Mau forest complex to the Kenyan economy, for example, are $1.5 billion a year.
Similar estimates are underway in Brazil, Colombia, India, and elsewhere.
The cost of inaction would be considerably higher than the required investment.
The annual cost of adapting to climate change has now passed the $40 billion mark, and is expected to rise every year unless we can significantly reduce greenhouse-gas emissions.
Some countries are already stepping up to the challenge.
Norway is investing $3 billion to support national and international initiatives, including the UN-REDD (Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation) Program, a joint effort of three UN agencies to support developing countries’ efforts to save, sustainably manage, and restore tropical forests (a range of activities known as REDD+).
Brazil has reduced deforestation rates in the Amazon by roughly 80% since 2005, and Norway’s pledge of $1 billion is helping to achieve further reductions.
Brazil’s efforts have led to perhaps the biggest emission reduction of any country in the world – at a time when deforestation accounts for around 15% of global greenhouse-gas emissions.
The UN-REDD Program, launched in 2008, currently supports 44 developing countries, with 16 countries receiving direct financial and technical support.
The funding is preparing them, for example, to develop monitoring systems and build support and awareness among local communities and indigenous peoples for a fresh start to forest management.
Some are already seizing the funding opportunities under what is essentially a climate-change initiative to pursue broader sustainability goals.
For example, Indonesia is seeking to establish a Green Corridor in Kalimantan (the Indonesian portion of the island of Borneo), where deforestation is not only fueling greenhouse-gas emissions, but also diminishing river flows, making it difficult in some months to transport goods by barge.
Given that transportation by barge costs about $10 a ton, compared to close to $60 a ton by road, REDD+ offers a chance to hold down greenhouse-gas emissions while preserving an economically important sector.
While Norway has made the biggest commitment to UN-REDD and other initiatives to date, other donors – including the European Commission, Denmark, Japan, and Spain – are also contributing.
Enlightened businesses, which will be key to meeting the 2020 funding goals, are also investing in sustainable forest management.
Countering deforestation is not without its challenges.
Governance and land-tenure systems must be improved in many countries, and the risk of corruption must be addressed rigorously.
In Hyderabad, countries and experts will consider how safeguards can ensure that both people and nature benefit from REDD+ activities.
Nevertheless the challenges should not mask or deflect attention from the opportunities.
The UN-REDD Program is just four years old, and the best is yet to come.
Whether to combat climate change or to realize wider environmental benefits, the need for enhanced financing of forests can no longer be ignored.
And there is a final imperative: 1.4 billion people currently depend for their livelihoods on forests.
Annual investments of $40 billion per year could generate five million new jobs globally.
The world is struggling to fight climate change, sustain a growing global population, and find decent jobs for millions of young people.
Investing in forests and biodiversity represents a root-and-branch response to these challenges.
But it requires more ambitious and wider public- and private-sector support.
With a price tag of around $40 billion per year, the cost of that support is, to be frank, a bargain.
From Depression to Freedom
Clinical depression affects roughly one in four people at some point in their lives.
It is a severe and prolonged state of mind in which normal sadness grows into a painful state of hopelessness, listlessness, lack of motivation, and fatigue.
But, however well defined, clinical depression is many things to many people, varying from mild to severe.
Mild depression can result in brooding on negative aspects of self or others, feeling resentful, irritable or angry much of the time, feeling sorry for oneself, and needing constant reassurance from someone.
It can also result in various physical complaints that do not seem to be caused by any physical illness.
As depression worsens, feelings of extreme sadness and hopelessness combine with low self-esteem, guilt, memory loss, and concentration difficulties to bring about a severely painful state of mind.
To make things worse, there may be a change in basic bodily functions.
The usual daily rhythms seem to go wrong: can’t sleep, or sleep too much, can’t eat, or eat too much. Enthusiasm for what are usually enjoyable activities fades.
Sometimes, there is even a feeling that life is not worth living and that one would be better off dead.
The most commonly used treatment for major depression is antidepressant medication.
It is relatively cheap, and it is easy for family practitioners, who treat the majority of depressed people, to prescribe.
However, when the episode has passed, and medication ceases, depression tends to return, and at least 50% of those who experienced an initial episode of depression find that depression comes back, despite appearing to have made a full recovery.
After a second or third episode, the risk of recurrence rises to 80-90%.
Early onset depression (before 20 years of age) is particularly associated with a significantly higher risk of relapse and recurrence.
For those who have been suicidal in the past, any depressed mood is likely to be accompanied by a return of suicidal thinking.
The problem with viewing antidepressants as the main method for preventing recurrence is that many people do not want to stay on medication for indefinite periods, and when the medication stops, the risk of becoming depressed again returns.
Finding new ways of helping people stay well after depression demands an understanding of why depression keeps returning.
During a period of crisis in which someone becomes depressed and suicidal, an association is learned between the various symptoms (low mood, physical pain, suicidal tendencies, and so on).
This means that when the negative mood returns, for any reason, it will tend to trigger all the other symptoms – a process called “cognitive reactivity”).
The discovery that the link between negative moods and negative thoughts remains ready to be reactivated even when people feel well is hugely important: it means that preventing future crises depends on learning how to keep mild upsets from spiraling out of control.
The classes also include basic education about our moods, and several exercises from cognitive therapy that show the links between thinking and feeling and how participants can best look after themselves when a crisis threatens to overwhelm them.
The MBCT approach helps participants in the classes to see more clearly the patterns of the mind and to learn how to recognize when their mood is starting to sink.
It helps break the normal link between negative mood and negative thinking.
Participants develop the capacity to allow distressing moods, thoughts, and sensations to come and go, without having to battle with them.
They find that they can stay in touch with the present moment without having to ruminate about the past or worry about the future.
Thus, they come to see with greater clarity and conviction how to approach moment-by-moment experience skillfully, taking more pleasure in the good things that often go unnoticed or unappreciated while dealing more effectively with the difficulties encountered, whether real or imagined.
Two controlled clinical trials have demonstrated that MBCT can reduce the likelihood of relapse by about 40-50% in people who have suffered three or more previous episodes of depression.
As a result of such findings, MBCT has now been included in the British government’s national guidelines for treating recurrent major depression.
But this implies a redefinition of treatment itself.
As our understanding of depression grows and we see that it is a recurring problem, the emphasis is shifting from cure to prevention.
Mindfulness-based approaches have already proven that they will play an enormously important role in this.
From Football to Fascism in Russia
MOSCOW – In Russia, 2010 ended with an unprecedented upsurge of ultra-nationalist violence.
Images of rioting, fascist-minded thugs have dominated TV broadcasts.
The violence began following an ordinary conflict between two small groups of young people over a taxi.
One group consisted of young people from the Northern Caucasus, the other of fans of a Moscow football (soccer) club.
One of the leaders of the Moscow fans, Yegor Sviridov, was murdered.
Rumors raced around the city the next day that the police had released all those accused of Sviridov’s murder (as it happens, the rumors were true).
Spontaneous protests erupted in front of police headquarters, but the police did not intervene.
On December 11, another rally was held at site of the murder, and moved into the very center of Moscow, Manezhnaya Square, just outside the Kremlin’s walls.
The crowd began to chant nationalist slogans, and then proceeded to beat up passersby who did not look Slavic.
The police were slow to arrive.
The beatings continued and spread to the subway, where the police were essentially powerless.
The night finished with many wounded and one more killed.
The next day, back on Manezhnaya Square, beside the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier, a huge swastika appeared.
These events are not without precedent.
In 2002, Moscow authorities mounted huge TV-screens on Manezhnaya Square to broadcast a World Cup match between Russia and Japan.
By the start of the game, tens of thousands of young fans were on the square, many of them drunk and agitated.
When the final whistle sounded on a 1-0 victory for Japan, the crowd, infuriated, burst into spontaneous pogroms and beatings.
Those events were preceded by a propaganda campaign in which government-controlled newspapers, television stations, and radio broadcasters took part.
It was decided to exploit the forthcoming world championship for “patriotic” purposes.
In pumping up football-induced hysteria, Russian politicians – headed by then-President Vladimir Putin – took the lead.
The government had erected the TV screens outside the Kremlin in order to ensure patriotic exultation of the victory that they assumed was coming.
No one was prepared for defeat.
Clearly, careless manipulation by the authorities of patriotic sentiments has proven to be a risky business in Russia.
But the Kremlin still seems addicted to this means of buttressing its legitimacy among ordinary Russians.
Indeed, the vast popular protests that took place during the “Orange Revolution” in Ukraine five years ago convinced the Kremlin that they could not allow any spontaneous outburst of public emotions.
Officials evidently decided that it is better to flirt with and control public passion than allow it to erupt on its own.
Back then, the Kremlin was frightened by the possibility of a so-called “color revolution” breaking out in Russia.
As a result, enormous resources – both funds and officials’ time – were invested in youth movements created by Kremlin puppeteers, with two aims: control street political activity and prepare brigades for a future struggle – which might include ballot rigging – against political opponents.
For this purpose, contingents of football fans were also used.
This sort of manipulation is now a Kremlin staple.
Indeed, by coincidence, on the Sunday the young football fan was murdered in Moscow, Vladislav Surkov, the first deputy in President Dmitri Medvedev’s administration, was meeting Michael McFaul of President Barack Obama’s National Security Council. That meeting was taking place as part of a gathering, led by Surkov, of Russian youth-movement activists.
One quote from Surkov that day is particularly telling: “Make ready for the elections, train your brains and muscles. You can always rely on our support.”
Those muscles were put to use outside the Kremlin walls that very day.
To understand what is at stake, it is sufficient to consider the name of the main youth movement fathered by the Kremlin: Nashi, or “Ours.”
It is difficult to invent a more potentially explosive moniker, for the name proudly proclaims a division between “us” and “them” – the most ancient and most destructive of human instincts. And it is hard to rationalize so atavistic an effort being initiated by a government and supported with taxpayers’ money.
As a result, special youth brigades fostered by the Kremlin nowadays beat up activists of “not ours.” If the policedetain Nashi members, a telephone call from the President’s administration follows, and the detainees are released.
That is why the police fail to take tough action against rioting young thugs.
Only when the Kremlin was seized by panic at the level of the disturbances that Nashi had initiated, did it demand that the police take control of events.
It is not clear yet whether the nationalist youth rebellion has been suppressed, and whether Muscovites will be able to use the subway without fear during Russia’s New Year and Orthodox Christmas holidays.
But it is absolutely certain that the Kremlin’s unconstitutional activities – its division of citizens into “ours” and aliens, and its flirtation with hard-core xenophobes – has led to serious social and political destabilization.
In a society with weakened immunity to extremism – and with an utterly dysfunctional government – the authorities are, perhaps literally, playing with fire.
From Global Imbalances to Effective Global Governance
STANFORD, CALIFORNIA – The current credit crisis has led to scaled-back projections for growth around the world.
Governments and central banks are responding to damaged balance sheets and credit lockups in an attempt to limit extreme harm to their economies outside the financial sector.
In the United States, the financial sector is undergoing a high-speed but permanent structural transformation, the effects of which could be severe for developing countries’ economic growth.
Indeed, these countries are already experiencing large relative price increases for food and oil, a food emergency for the poor, and higher rates of inflation induced by commodity price shifts.
While rapid growth in developing countries has been an important factor in the rising commodity prices, much of this is beyond their control.
For the past two years, my colleagues and I on the Growth Commission have sought to learn how 13 developing countries managed to record growth rates averaging 7% or more for 25 years or longer.
In The Growth Report , published in May, we tried to understand why most developing countries fell far short of this achievement, and explored how they might emulate the fast growers.
Sustained high growth is enabled by and requires engagement with the global economy that goes beyond simply being able to produce for a potentially massive export market.
It also involves, crucially, importing an essential intangible asset: knowledge.
Economies can learn faster than they can invent, so less developed countries can achieve much faster growth than was experienced by today’s industrialized countries when they were becoming wealthy.
Because of the importance of the global economy, the destiny of developing countries is not entirely in the hands of their leaders, workforces, and entrepreneurs.
Today, there are potential adverse global trends and challenges, many of which are relatively new developments that the 13 high-growth cases did not face.
The most immediate is financial distress emanating mainly, but not exclusively, from the US and spilling out to hit all sectors of the global economy.
This was and is the result of an asset bubble fueled by excessive leverage and by the massive transparency issues associated with complex securities and derivatives that were supposed to spread risk, but instead mainly increased the systemic risk already present with excess debt. 
Much has become clear.
First, extreme financial distress can bring down the real economy, with a shortage of credit being the most potent channel.
Second, the current regulatory structure is not adequate to ensure stability in the US economy.
America’s light, incomplete, and fragmented pattern of regulation will not survive, and it will not be used as a model in other parts of the world.
Third, contributing factors included low interest rates, compressed risk spreads, and global imbalances that accommodated low savings in the US, consumption in excess of output, and a mounting trade deficit.
Absent the willingness of large developing countries to run trade surpluses and high savings rates relative to investment, the asset bubble in the US – leading to a rise in domestic consumption and a fall in the savings rate – would have triggered inflation and higher interest rates.
That would have put a partial brake on growth in asset prices, raised savings, reduced investment, and probably lowered the trade deficit. But the automatic stabilizers that normally kick in did not.
In general, automatic stabilizers may not kick in across the global economy, which means that policies need to be coordinated.
Fourth, regulatory structures will need to be rebuilt, and this will require a global effort.
Absent international coordination, the opportunities for destructive regulatory competition will defeat regulatory reform.
Finally, both the interdependence and global risk that are evident in this crisis will and probably should cause countries to adopt policies with respect to financial structures that provide for some insulation from external shocks, even if such policies impose a cost. 