As a result, there are no public health advisories about Lyme Disease there.
But some of the ticks are closely related to known carriers, and thus are potential carriers themselves.
This debilitating – and difficult to diagnose – illness could thus be introduced to Costa Rica inadvertently by something as simple as an asymptomatic eco-tourist.
The information about Costa Rican deer ticks comes from an inventory of parasites of vertebrates in northern Costa Rica, but it is the only inventory of its kind ever undertaken.
We must do better.
More than 50% of the species on this planet are parasites of some form, including pathogens affecting humans, livestock, crops, and wildlife.
But, relative to our overall knowledge of biodiversity, we have documented less than 10% of the world’s pathogens.
The remaining 90% are potential EID’s.
We face a potential crisis, therefore, that stems from our fundamental ignorance about the biosphere, for it is impossible to be proactive about species of pathogens whose existence has not been documented.
This makes many pathogens “evolutionary land mines” awaiting us as we relocate to novel habitats, move species around, and alter existing ecosystems.
Nevertheless, most resources are still being allocated for responses to known EID’s rather than to assessing the risk of potential EID’s.
Simply put, we must complete the global inventory of species.
Now.
Five hundred thousand years of experience in hunting and gathering, coupled with cheaper and faster molecular analysis, performed by faster and cheaper computers makes this task economically feasible.
Rapid identification using genetic “bar codes” can increase the rate of discovering species and determining the transmission dynamics of potential EID’s.
Pathogens have highly specialized transmission modes, and groups of closely related species tend to be very similar.
All species of malaria, for example, are transmitted by mosquitos.
Once classified, we will then be able to make predictions about two closely related species based on incomplete information about either, buying time and saving money.
Finally, this information should be digitized and made freely available over the Internet to all concerned researchers and parties.
If EID’s were rare, management through crisis response might be cost-effective.
But EID’s are not rare at all.
Rather, they are a common outcome of geographic dispersal associated with large-scale environmental changes.
So we must cease being ignorant and reactive, and become informed and proactive.
As a common sports adage puts it: never change a winning game, but always change a losing one.
The Coming Emerging-Market Debt Squeeze
SANTIAGO – Consider the following scenario, one that has played out time and again in emerging-market countries.
Local banks and firms go on a borrowing binge and pile up dollar-denominated debt – debt that pundits consider perfectly sustainable, as long as the local currency is strong.
Suddenly, something (an increase in United States interest rates, a drop in commodity prices, a domestic political conflict) causes the local currency to drop in value against the dollar.
The debt burden, measured in domestic currency, is now much higher.
Some borrowers miss interest payments; others are unable to roll over principal.
Financial mayhem ensues.
This is how the Latin American debt crisis of the 1980s, the Mexican Tequila crisis of 1994, the Asian debt crisis of 1997, and the Russian crisis of 1998 unfolded.
It was also how the financial crisis of 2008-2009 transmitted itself to emerging markets.
Every time, borrowers and lenders claimed to have learned their lesson.
Not only could it happen again today; it could happen on a much larger scale than in the past.
Taking advantage of ultra-low interest rates in advanced countries, emerging-market banks and firms have been borrowing like never before.
A recent paper by the Bank of International Settlements shows that since the global financial crisis, outstanding dollar credit to non-bank borrowers outside the US has risen by half, from $6 trillion to $9 trillion.
The bulk of that debt is in Asia, with China alone accounting for approximately $1 trillion.
Other big dollar borrowers include Brazil (over $300 billion) and India ($125 billion).
Countries such as Malaysia, South Africa, and Turkey, plus Latin America’s more financially open economies, also have rising foreign-currency debts.
Yes, the almighty dollar is not as mighty as it was before the US Federal Reserve surprised markets with a more-dovish-than-expected communiqué earlier this month.
But, given the likely interest-rate differential between the US and other advanced economies (particularly the eurozone and Japan), together with a more robust US economic recovery, an era of dollar strength – and, almost by definition, weak emerging-market currencies – is here to stay.
This likely means trouble for the firm that borrowed in dollars to build a shopping mall in São Paulo or Kuala Lumpur, and now must devote a much larger share of its revenues in depreciated real or ringgit to service its debt.
How did we get here?
Once upon a time, conventional wisdom maintained that curbing governments’ appetite for debt would put an end to over-borrowing, because private agents would know to act prudently and weigh the costs and benefits of one more dollar of debt.
Not even stern University of Chicago economists believe that anymore.
The fiscal and debt position of many emerging economies (though not of Argentina, Venezuela, and other poster children for mismanagement) is much stronger than it once was.
But private-sector CFOs seem determined to prove that they can borrow as lavishly as their public-sector colleagues once did.
Conventional wisdom also once held that dollar borrowing binges occur only in countries with fixed exchange rates, with the central bank de facto insuring borrowers against currency risk.
Today, most emerging-market economies have (or at least pretend to have) floating exchange rates, and yet locals continue to borrow heavily in foreign currency.
This partly reflects borrowing-cost differentials.
If the local interest rate is 17% per year and the dollar interest rate is 2%, it still makes sense to borrow in dollars as long as the domestic currency is expected to depreciate 15% or less.
The other part of the explanation follows from what the economists Guillermo Calvo and Carmen Reinhart call “fear of floating.”
Many market participants know from past experience (recall 2008-2009, for example) that emerging economies’ central banks fear sharp depreciations, and that in moments of stress they tend to intervene, at least temporarily, to support the exchange rate, “smoothing” its decline.
So a speculator who is quick on his feet can make a handsome profit and get out while the music is still playing.
How vulnerable are emerging economies because of all this dollar debt?
Optimists like to point out that emerging markets have accumulated a huge stock of international reserves since 2010, enabling them to self-insure against a run on their currencies or their foreign debt.
That is true, but only up to a point.
Having tens or even hundreds of billions of dollars in the central bank’s vault sounds reassuring until you realize that dollar debt coming due in the next 12 months may not be that much smaller.
The data are not fully reliable or comparable across countries, but quick calculations reveal that there are many emerging markets where such short-term debt is 50% or more of the stock of international reserves.
And dollar debtors may not be alone in staking a claim on those reserves.
In a squeeze, holders of domestic currency will want to exchange it for greenbacks.
If the central bank is serious about floating, it will hike local interest rates to limit price increases, causing a painful recession.
Alternatively, it may intervene and sell international reserves, reducing the stock available to repay dollar debt.
Optimists also argue that some local borrowers are naturally hedged.
Yes, some export companies that borrow dollars also earn dollars.
But they are in the minority, and even they can have problems, because depreciation reduces the dollar value of their domestic assets, causing breaches in loan covenants and potentially impairing access to credit.
There are risks even for banks that make the effort to match their dollar borrowing from abroad with dollar loans extended at home.
There may be no obvious currency mismatch for the bank, but if the local borrowers’ revenues are only in domestic currency, they may become unable to service their debt.
Risk eliminated by regulations in one place reappears somewhere else.
For the many emerging-market firms that borrowed in dollars to generate local-currency revenue, the recent depreciation is triggering plenty of financial trouble.
How much trouble will ultimately depend on factors that are very hard to forecast, including markets’ responses to Fed tightening and political shocks (say, the scandal enveloping Petrobras in Brazil) that shake investors’ faith in local policies and markets.
One can predict only one outcome with confidence: a bumpy ride.
The Future for Emerging Markets
BERKELEY – Over the past year, the global economic environment changed markedly and in unexpected ways.
Energy and commodity prices plunged.
Growth in China (which accounts for about 40% of global growth) fell to its lowest rate since 1996, even as its stock market soared to unsustainable heights.
The United States and the European Union ratcheted up economic sanctions on Russia in response to its military excursions in Ukraine, highlighting the geopolitical risks associated with cross-border investments.
And there have been large swings in exchange rates, fueled by actual or, in the case of the Federal Reserve, anticipated changes in monetary policy.
These rapid changes have rattled global financial markets and spooked investors, reducing their appetite for risk – a cautious attitude that has been reflected in emerging markets.
Investors have sat on the sidelines, and the MSCI index that tracks returns on emerging-market equities has stagnated.
During the second half of last year, the 15 largest emerging-market economies experienced the biggest capital outflows since the 2008 global financial crisis.
And the aggregate foreign-exchange reserves held by emerging countries declined for the first time since 1994, when they began the steep upward climb that has been a defining feature of the global economy during the last two decades.
One major factor driving the lackluster performance of investments in emerging markets is the expectation that the Fed will begin to raise interest rates and normalize monetary policy later this year.
In a recent speech, Fed Chair Janet Yellen confirmed that such steps would be “appropriate” if the economy continues to improve, stating that “delaying action to tighten monetary policy until employment and inflation are already back to our objectives would risk overheating the economy.”
Expectations of a rate hike have restricted flows to emerging markets ever since 2013, when the Fed triggered what came to be called the “taper tantrum” by announcing that it was likely to reduce its bond-buying program.
The resulting alarm roiled US financial markets and spilled over internationally.
Emerging-market economies came under intense pressure, with inflows to investment funds falling sharply, asset prices declining, and many currencies losing value against the dollar.
Fortunately, the worst of the taper tantrum proved temporary.
Capital inflows recovered somewhat, and most emerging-market economies weathered the financial distress in their capital markets.
But the experience raised questions about the effects of future moves by the Fed.
Stanley Fischer, the Fed’s vice chairman, said recently that he expects the anticipated increase in the Fed’s policy interest rate later this year to “prove manageable” for emerging-market economies.
But sudden steep declines in foreign capital inflows triggered by the Fed’s action could exacerbate the challenges that even the best-performing Asian economies are facing, as anemic demand in their export markets causes growth to slow.
The Fed has tried hard to be very clear about its policy intentions, strategies, and timing to ensure that investors are not surprised.
In recent years, assets in emerging-market economies – especially currencies – have depreciated by 5-50% relative to the dollar, reflecting both external imbalances and the broader macro conditions of individual countries.
There is a widespread view that most emerging financial markets have already priced in the effects of a gradual increase in interest rates.
But that does not mean that these effects will be insignificant for countries that investors already regard as risky.
As investors have become more cautious, they have also become more discriminating.
The difference in returns across emerging countries and among sectors within them has grown.
The countries at greatest risk of large capital outflows include those that are dependent on external financing, those with commodity-heavy economies, and those with uncertain political conditions.
Many of the best performers are in Asia – the only region where several economies have grown by 5% or more for at least four decades.
Over the last year, the MSCI index for Asia increased by 10%, even as it fell by roughly 14% for emerging and frontier markets and by 21% for emerging markets in Latin America.
And, indeed, Asia’s two largest emerging economies offer reasons for cautious optimism.
China is certainly not free from risk.
The recent equity-market rally is largely divorced from fundamentals and is driven by speculative, debt-financed purchases.
The outlook for corporate profits remains weak; the country’s equity supply is growing; and valuations are stretched.
Up to 10% of China’s equity market cap is funded by credit – five times the average in developed economies.
But China also has substantial wriggle room in its monetary and fiscal policy to contain the adverse consequences of its debt buildup, real-estate boom, and irrationally exuberant stock market, while simultaneously pursuing bold structural reforms in its economy and capital markets.
China’s growth rate may have dropped from a three-decade average of 10% to a 25-year low of 7%, but that slowdown has been largely the result of policies to reduce fixed investment and move the economy from manufacturing to services.
Employment remains strong, and the middle class is growing rapidly.
Meanwhile, in India, the implementation of Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s ambitious reform agenda has been slower than anticipated.
But inflation is down; the fiscal situation has improved; and the economy has benefitted from the drop in oil and commodity prices.
Growth of 6-7% seems achievable, and Modi remains a popular reform-minded leader whose policies are attracting the support of domestic investors.
As global investors navigate the uncertain waters of emerging markets in the next few years, they should remember that, for these economies, the wave of industrialization and urbanization and the associated productivity gains are far from over.
With their faster-growing populations and productivity, they will enjoy a growth advantage over developed economies for some time to come.
Back to Fundamentals in Emerging Markets
CAMBRIDGE – Following 15 years of hype, a new conventional wisdom has taken hold: emerging markets are in deep trouble.
Many analysts had extrapolated rapid growth in countries such as Brazil, Russia, Turkey, and India into the indefinite future, calling them the new engines of the world economy.
Now growth is down in almost all of them, and investors are pulling their money out – prompted in part by the expectation that the US Federal Reserve will raise interest rates in September.
Their currencies have tumbled, while corruption scandals and other political difficulties have overwhelmed the economic narrative in places like Brazil and Turkey.
With hindsight, it has become clear that there was in fact no coherent growth story for most emerging markets.
Scratch the surface, and you found high growth rates driven not by productive transformation but by domestic demand, in turn fueled by temporary commodity booms and unsustainable levels of public or, more often, private borrowing.
Yes, there are plenty of world-class firms in emerging markets, and the expansion of the middle-class is unmistakable.
But only a tiny share of these economies’ labor is employed in productive enterprises, while informal, unproductive firms absorb the rest.
Compare this with the experience of the few countries that did emerge successfully, “graduating” to advanced-country status, and you can see the missing ingredient.
South Korea and Taiwan grew on the back of rapid industrialization.
As South Korean and Taiwanese peasants became factory workers, the economies of both countries – and, with a lag, their politics – were transformed.
South Korea and Taiwan eventually became rich democracies.
By contrast, most of today’s emerging markets are deindustrializing prematurely.
Services are not tradable to the same extent as manufactured goods, and for the most part do not exhibit the same technological dynamism.
As a result, services have proved to be a poor substitute to export-oriented industrialization so far.
But emerging markets do not deserve the doom-and-gloom treatment they are getting these days.
The real lesson from the collapse of the emerging-market hype is the need to pay closer attention to growth fundamentals and to recognize the diversity of circumstances among a group of economies needlessly lumped together.
For developing economies, the three key growth fundamentals are acquisition of skills and education by the workforce; improvement of institutions and governance; and structural transformation from low-productivity to high-productivity activities (as typified by industrialization).
East Asian-style rapid growth has typically required a heavy dose of structural transformation for a number of decades, with steady progress on education and institutions providing the longer-term underpinnings of convergence with advanced economies.
Unlike East Asian economies, today’s emerging markets cannot rely on export surpluses in manufactures as their engine of structural transformation and growth.
So they are forced to rely more on the longer-term fundamentals of education and institutions.
These do generate growth – and indeed are ultimately indispensable to it.
But they generate 2-3% annual growth at best, not East Asia’s 7-8% rates.
Compare China and India.
China grew by building factories and filling them with peasants who had little education, which generated an instant boost in productivity.
India’s comparative advantage lies in relatively skill-intensive services – such as information technology – which can absorb no more than a tiny slice of the country’s largely unskilled labor force.
It will take many decades for the average skill level in India to rise to the point that it can pull the economy’s overall productivity significantly higher.
So India’s medium-term growth potential lies well below that of China in recent decades.
A significant boost in infrastructure spending and policy reforms can make a difference, but it cannot close the gap.
On the other hand, being the tortoise rather than the hare in the growth race can be an advantage.
Countries that rely on steady, economy-wide accumulation of skills and improved governance may not grow as fast, but they may be more stable, less prone to crises, and more likely to converge with advanced countries eventually.
China’s economic achievements are undeniable.
But it remains an authoritarian country where the Communist Party retains its political monopoly.
So the challenges of political and institutional transformation are immeasurably greater than in India. The uncertainty that confronts a long-term investor in China is correspondingly higher.
Or compare Brazil with other emerging markets.
Among these countries, Brazil has arguably taken the greatest hit recently.
The corruption scandal surrounding the flagship state-owned oil company, Petrobras, has produced an economic crisis, with the currency tanking and growth grinding to a halt.
Yet Brazil’s political crisis demonstrates the country’s democratic maturity, and arguably is a sign of strength rather than weakness.
The ability of prosecutors to investigate payment irregularities reaching into the highest ranks of Brazilian society and government without political interference – or the process turning into a witch hunt – would be exemplary in many advanced countries.
The contrast with Turkey could not be more striking.
Corruption of a much greater magnitude there, implicating President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan and his family, has gone untouched.
A probe by Turkish prosecutors against Erdoğan in 2013 was clearly politically motivated (and driven by Erdoğan’s foes in the movement headed by Fethullah Gülen, a self-exiled Islamic preacher), which gave the government the cover needed to quash the investigation.
Turkey’s economy has not suffered nearly as much as Brazil’s, but its rot will cause greater long-term damage.
Cheap external finance, plentiful capital inflows, and commodity booms helped hide many such shortcomings and fueled 15 years of emerging-market growth.
As the world economy generates stronger headwinds in the years ahead, it will become easier to distinguish countries that have truly strengthened their economic and political fundamentals from those that have coasted on false narratives and the tenuous strength of fickle investor sentiment.
The Emerging-Market Currency Rout
SANTIAGO – With the currencies of Malaysia, Indonesia, South Africa, Turkey, Brazil, Colombia, Chile, and Mexico hitting record lows recently, currency traders around the world are asking: How much further can emerging-market currencies weaken?
The standard approach to answering this question takes a relatively normal base year and measures how much a country’s currency has depreciated since then.
That number is then adjusted for the inflation differential between the country and its trading partners.
If the resulting real exchange rate is not too far from that of the base year, the market is said to be in equilibrium, and little or no further depreciation should be expected.
Now consider an alternative method.
Take the same country’s current-account deficit and ask how large a real depreciation is needed (making some assumptions about trade elasticities along the way) to close that external gap.
If the recent real depreciation achieves that threshold, no further change in the exchange rate should be expected.
These are the right answers, but to the wrong question.
Over the medium to long term, exchange rates are indeed driven by what happens in the real economy.
Or, more precisely, they reflect the requirement that the real exchange rate be such that the economy attains both external balance (a small and manageable current-account deficit) and internal balance (no inflationary pressures at home).
But that need not happen until many months – perhaps years – after a shock.
In the short run, exchange rates are driven by purely financial considerations.
That is why they are prone to overshooting.
Even small changes in fundamentals can have large effects on exchange rates, with up-front movements that far exceed what long-run adjustment requires.
And the potential for volatility is particularly great if domestic corporations have large foreign-currency debts, which is true in all of the emerging economies under stress today.
Consider the case of a hypothetical Latin American retail company that borrowed abroad in dollars to build a shopping mall at home.
Such borrowing calls for collateral – in this case, the land on which construction will take place.
The larger the value of the collateral, typically measured in domestic currency (or in an inflation-indexed unit, such as Chile’s Unidad de Fomento), the larger the size of the dollar loan.
Next, suppose that the price of the natural resource that is the country’s largest export suddenly dips sharply (as has happened recently).
The exchange rate (both nominal and real) will depreciate accordingly, thereby setting in motion the standard, textbook adjustment process.
But in this case, a second, non-standard factor comes into play.
After the depreciation, the collateral, valued in dollars, is worth less.
Loan covenants have likely been broken, and lenders begin demanding that the borrower either put up new collateral or deleverage and repay part of the loan.
To repay, the firm must purchase dollars.
If there are large dollar debts outstanding, and many firms find themselves in the same position, the additional demand for dollars will cause the exchange rate to depreciate even further.
And that, of course, causes the dollar value of the collateral to fall yet again.
You can see where this story is going.
The process plays out until the domestic currency has lost a good deal of its value.
After a few days or weeks, the exchange rate is likely to be weaker than is warranted by the need to adjust the current account.
The overshooting is caused by the coexistence of sizeable foreign-currency debts and financial (collateral) constraints.
Notice that if in the long run the debt is reduced sufficiently, and the terms-of-trade shock abates somewhat, the real exchange rate need not depreciate that much, and may even end up appreciating a bit.
This is overshooting on steroids: a very sharp initial loss of value for the domestic currency, followed by a gain that may leave the exchange rate, measured in inflation-adjusted terms, stronger than it was at the start.
For many emerging-market economies, this is, alas, a painfully realistic scenario.
Since the subprime crisis, ultra-low interest rates in the rich world have caused emerging-market firms to borrow like never before.
Some of the debt does not even appear in the official statistics of borrowing countries, because it was often taken on not by domestically-based firms, but by their offshore subsidiaries.
The Bank for International Settlements estimates outstanding dollar credit to non-bank borrowers outside the United States at $9 trillion.
Big debtors include some of those countries whose currencies have come under downward pressure recently: China ($1 trillion), Brazil (more than $300 billion), India ($125 billion), plus Malaysia, South Africa, Turkey, and Latin America’s financially open economies: Colombia, Chile, Peru, and Mexico.
Central banks can intervene in the currency markets and sell reserves, thereby offsetting the withdrawal of financing by foreign lenders.
But intervention requires that the authorities first have both the reserves and the will to abandon (at least temporarily) their hands-off commitment to a floating exchange rate.
Not all emerging-market central banks are in a position to fulfill both of these requirements.
A sharp growth slowdown is the other component of this overshooting adjustment pattern.
The initial export shock was likely to reduce growth.
The sudden deleveraging imposed by foreign creditors requires the current-account balance to adjust further and faster.
The additional exports triggered by the depreciated currency can help, but they are often slow in coming.
The fastest way to adjust is via reduced demand and imports, and that is what almost always ends up happening.
Growth and job creation take the hit, as we are seeing today in emerging market economies around the world.
In these circumstances, currency traders suffer.
But citizens of indebted middle-income countries are likely to suffer far more.
Today’s emerging-market turmoil is here to stay, and they are the true victims.
Emerging Markets’ Europe Problem
PARIS – From Hong Kong to São Paulo, and all points between, one word dominates all others&nbsp;among big investors: Greece.
Will the Greeks remain in the eurozone?
What will happen to the European Union and the global economy if they do not?
Until recently, Europe was a sort of mirror that confirmed for the major emerging economies the spectacular nature of their own success.
They could contrast their high growth rates with Europe’s high levels of debt.
They could oppose their “positive energy” with the pessimism dominating European minds.
They were only too willing to advise Europe to work harder and spend less, as legitimate pride mingled with an understandable desire to settle historical scores and attenuate their legacies of colonial submission and humiliation.
But, today, emerging countries are growing very concerned with what they rightly perceive as the serious risks to their own economies implied by excessive weakness in Europe, which remains the world’s trade leader.
Moreover, Europe’s malaise threatens many of these countries’ political stability as well, given the close connection –&nbsp;especially in China – between the legitimacy of existing arrangements and the continuation of rapid economic growth.
If the crisis in Europe were to cause annual GDP growth to fall below 7% in China, 5% in India, and 3% in Brazil, these countries’ most vulnerable citizens would be hardest hit.
They were never part of the “culture of hope,” based largely on material success, that played a key role in these countries’&nbsp;success. If social inequalities were to reach new heights, their frustration and resentment could manifest itself fully.
In that case, Europe could suddenly become a very different mirror for emerging countries, revealing, if not accentuating, their own structural weaknesses.
And that is why, just as Europe must save the Greek economy or Spain’s banks at all costs, emerging countries must do whatever they can to contribute to the rescue of the European economy.
As Europe has learned, the longer one waits, the higher the cost – and the lower the chance of success.
Unfortunately, a group of countries that are united above all by a common denial of their global responsibilities is unlikely to reach such a conclusion.
Indeed, most emerging countries would balk at the idea of coming to Europe’s financial rescue for several reasons.
First, there is no such thing as a bloc of emerging countries.
They are not united by a common vision of their future, or by a common political ideal, such as democracy in the Western world.
Whatever the limits or contradictions of shared values, it would be naive to dismiss their importance.
Europe and the United States will remain allies even if Barack Obama, like Nicolas Sarkozy in France, turns out to be a one-term president.
Second, emerging countries are more Europe’s rivals than its partners.
They are united only by their shared suspicion of China.
In such a context, a common long-term strategy is extremely difficult to conceive.
The Chinese may proclaim that they tend to think over a “longer” term than Americans, who think more “broadly,” and Europeans, who think more “deeply,” as a well-known Chinese international relations expert has put it.
But, when it comes to the European financial crisis, China’s behavior seems to be determined by purely short-term tactical considerations, even as Chinese investments in Europe tripled in 2011.
To buy half of the Piraeus harbor at a knockdown price may seem more advantageous than investing in the long-term consolidation of the Greek economy and its finances, but is that really the case?
Third, emerging countries’ short-term opportunism is based on a double distrust: towards Europe, of course, but also, paradoxically, towards themselves.
That is, they lack confidence in their ability to do their part to save the sick man of the global economy that Europe has become.
To be sure, this runs counter to the triumphalism emanating from Asia, in particular.
Kishore Mahbubani, a leading foreign-policy thinker from Singapore, recently proclaimed in Vienna, at a conference organized by my institute, that the next millennium would be Asian.
And yet one senses among elites from emerging countries something akin to existential doubt, which the European crisis has served to reinforce.
This insecurity manifests itself in many ways: from the accumulation of liquid wealth as insurance against foreign and domestic uncertainties to the choice of many, if not most, to educate their children abroad.
In fact, the sick man – undeniably European, if not Western – could reveal himself to be more resilient, owing to the strength of his own natural defenses: democracy and the rule of law.
That is why the current European crisis may well prove to be a crucial test for emerging countries that are more dynamic than Europe economically, but ultimately more fragile politically.
The Great Emerging-Market Bubble
LONDON – Something has gone badly wrong in the emerging economies that were supposed to be shaping, even dominating, the future of the world.
The search for culprits is under way: commodity prices, fracking, US interest rates, El Nino, China, these and others lead the field.
But the answer is simpler and more traditional. It is politics.
Look at Brazil.
There an economy once tipped for ever-lasting boom has barely grown for more than two years, and is currently shrinking.
Falling prices for its commodity exports haven’t helped, but Brazil’s economy was supposed to be about far more than just harvests and extractive industries.
Or look at Indonesia.
That economy is still expanding, but at a rate – 4.7% annually in the latest quarter – that is disappointing in terms both of previous expectations and of population growth.
The same can be said of Turkey, where growth has sagged to 2.3% in the latest quarter – which at least beats population growth but is meager compared with the country’s go-go years of 2010 and 2011, when it expanded by 9%.
Or South Africa, where economic progress has constantly been too slow, whether in boom years for gold and other resources or busts, to make any real dent in poverty levels.
Then there is China itself, whose slowdown is everybody else’s favorite explanation for their own sluggishness.
There, private economists are back enjoying their favorite pastime during periods of economic stress, namely trying to construct their own indices for GDP growth as at such times they do not believe the official statistics.
Officially, Chinese growth is rock-steady at 7% per year, which happens to be the government’s declared target, but private economists’ estimates mostly range between 4% and 6%.
One mantra of recent years has been that, whatever the twists and turns of global economic growth, of commodities or of financial markets, “the emerging-economy story remains intact.”
By this, corporate boards and investment strategists mean that they still believe that emerging economies are destined to grow a lot faster than the developed world, importing technology and management techniques while exporting goods and services, thereby exploiting a winning combination of low wages and rising productivity.
There is, however, a problem with this mantra, beyond the simple fact that it must by definition be too general to cover such a wide range of economies in Asia, Latin America, Africa, and Eastern Europe.
It is that if convergence and outperformance were merely a matter of logic and destiny, as the idea of an “emerging-economy story” implies, then that logic ought also to have applied during the decades before developing-country growth started to catch the eye.
But it didn’t.
The reason why it didn’t is the same reason why so many emerging economies are having trouble now. It is that the main determinants of an emerging-economy’s ability actually to emerge, sustainably, are politics, policy and all that is meant by the institutions of governance.
More precisely, although countries can ride waves of growth and exploit commodity cycles despite having dysfunctional political institutions, the real test comes when times turn less favorable and a country needs to change course.
That is what Brazil has been finding so difficult for the past four disappointing years.
Unable to keep inflation under control without causing a recession, the country has, since 2010, got stuck not because of bad luck, or any loss of entrepreneurial spirit in its private sector, but because of political failings.
Brazil’s government has been unwilling or unable to cut back its bloated public sector, has been mired in vast corruption scandals, and yet its president Dilma Rousseff continues to evince a fondness for just the sort of state-led capitalism that leads to exactly these problems.
The democracies of Brazil, Indonesia, Turkey, and South Africa are all currently failing to perform what is a basic task for any political system: to mediate smoothly between competing interest groups and power blocs in order to permit a broader public interest to prevail.
By that is meant essentially a public interest in allowing the economy to evolve flexibly, so that resources move from uses that have become unprofitable to ones that have a higher potential.
A clogged up economy, one that does not permit such creative destruction and adaptation to new circumstances, is one that will not grow sustainably.
Is this something that democracies, especially immature ones with fragile institutions of the rule of law and freedom of speech, are simply bad at, when compared with authoritarian regimes?
Certainly, what these stumbling economies are guilty of is a failure to learn from Singapore, a system whose managed democracy is celebrating its 50th anniversary this year, and which has successfully avoided the sort of interest-group sclerosis and corruption that is holding back Brazil, for example.
One comfort, perhaps, for the democrats is that right now China is failing to learn the Singaporean lesson, too.
Its current slowdown appears to arise from a failure by the Communist Party to challenge the monopoly powers of state-owned enterprises and to free up new sectors for private enterprise.
No matter.
It is not a question of whether democracy or authoritarianism is best.
The bottom line is that unless emerging economies can ensure that they remain flexible and adaptable, they will not continue to “emerge.”
And the determinant of that flexibility and ability to adapt lies in political institutions and their willingness to challenge interest groups, mediate social conflicts, and maintain the rule of law.
It’s the politics, stupid.
Worker Protection in the Gig Economy
BERKELEY – Today’s labor markets are undergoing radical change, as digital platforms transform how they operate and revolutionize the nature of work.
In many ways, this is a positive development, one that has the potential to match workers with jobs more efficiently and transparently than ever before.
But the increasing digitization of the labor market also has at least one very worrying drawback: it is undermining the traditional employer-employee relationships that have been the primary channel through which worker benefits and protections have been provided.
The ecosystem of digital labor platforms is still in its infancy, but it is developing rapidly.
Large popular platforms like LinkedIn have so far mainly been used to match high-skill workers with high-end jobs.
But these platforms are already expanding to accommodate middle-skill workers and jobs.
Nearly 400 million people have posted their resumes on LinkedIn, and in 2014 the site facilitated more than one million new hires worldwide.
Meanwhile, other types of digital platforms are emerging, linking workers with customers or companies for specific tasks or services.
Such platforms play a growing role in the market for “contingent” or “on-demand” workers, broadly defined as workers whose jobs are temporary and who do not have standard part-time or full-time contracts with employers.
Well-known digital platforms that link contingent workers directly to customers include Lyft, TaskRabbit, Uber, and Angie’s List.
Freelancer.com and Upwork are examples of platforms that help companies find and hire contingent workers for a range of specialized tasks such as software or website development.
Freelancer.com has more than 17 million users worldwide.
The trouble is that even as these sites provide new opportunities for workers and companies, they are bypassing the traditional channels through which the US and many countries deliver benefits and protections to their workforce.
In the US, in particular, the “social contract” has long relied on employers to deliver unemployment insurance, disability insurance, pensions and retirement plans, worker’s compensation for job-related injuries, paid time off, and protections under the Fair Labor Standards Act.
Although the Affordable Care Act has made it easier for workers to acquire health insurance on their own, most workers continue to receive health insurance through their employers.
With the proliferation of digital job platforms, the social safety net for workers in the US – threadbare to begin with – is at risk of unraveling for a growing share of the workforce.
This is because most individuals who find work through digital job platforms operate as independent contractors, leaving them without the benefits and protections provided in standard employment contracts for full-time and part-time workers.
The difference between the cost of a full-time employee with benefits and an independent contractor can be 30% or more, so there is a strong incentive for companies to replace workers on standard full-time employment contracts with independent contractors as long as companies can attract the talent they need.
Digital job platforms also make it easier for businesses to hire and fire workers on temporary contingent contracts.
This creates the potential for a race to the bottom, with employers competing on labor costs through regulatory arbitrage.
Unless policymakers act, the US will continue to drift toward a two-tier labor market.
One tier will be populated by fully employed high-skill workers with generous employer-provided (and tax-advantaged) benefits, as well as high-skill individuals who finance their own benefits from high incomes earned as independent contractors or from self-employment. The other tier will include a large pool of contingent middle- and low-skill workers without the benefits, income, or security on which a robust and resilient middle class depends.
New policies are needed to provide workers in contingent employment relationships access to benefits, and new institutions are needed to deliver them.
There is growing support for the view that benefits should satisfy at least three conditions. They should be portable, attached to individual workers rather than to their employers.
They should be universal, applying to all workers and all forms of employment. And they should be pro-rated, linking employer benefit contributions to time worked, jobs completed, or income earned.
Two recent proposals incorporating these conditions call for the creation of “individual security accounts” analogous to US Social Security accounts, but encompassing portable benefits that would be available to all workers, regardless of employment status, and would accrue via pro-rated automatic payroll contributions.
A group of strange bedfellows – “gig” employers, labor organizations, venture capitalists, and bipartisan think tanks – recently issued a letter calling for a stable and flexible safety net based on these conditions.
Meanwhile, in Congress, forward-looking policymakers like Senator Mark Warner of Virginia are seeking ways to get ahead of the issues and create momentum for bipartisan solutions.
Much remains to be done before a new safety net for all workers is in place: determining which benefits and protections to include, how to pay for them, and how to deliver them to workers.
Labor groups, including unions or new types of labor organizations like Coworker.org and the Freelancers Union, could fill the gap, providing benefits as unions have done in the construction industry and guilds have done in the entertainment industry.
In Silicon Valley, where thousands of contractors and freelancers are hired every week, new private companies like MBO Partners are emerging to handle the benefits of contingent workers who work for many employers.
The McKinsey Global Institute estimates that digital labor platforms could increase US GDP by 2.3% and US full-time equivalent employment by 2.7% by 2025.
But realizing these economy-wide gains while providing a secure and portable safety net for all workers will require new ways of thinking by companies and policymakers.
Empowering Africa’s Women
JOHANNESBURG – Africa is again high on the global agenda, and this time for all the right reasons. As the kickoff to the World Cup in South Africa approaches, people are seeing not just South Africa but our entire continent as equal partners in this extraordinary global celebration.
So, as the world’s eyes turn to Africa, we should take the opportunity to showcase the key role that Africa’s women are increasingly playing in the continent’s success.
Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf’s election as President of Liberia, the first women elected to run an African country, was symbolic of the progress of women across the continent.
We are proud as well that women make up more than 50% of MPs in Rwanda – the highest proportion in the world.
South Africa and Lesotho are just two other African countries that sit near the top of the gender-equality league table.
It is women as well who are helping to calm tensions and heal Africa’s terrible wounds of conflict and violence.
Women are in the lead in conflict resolution, in reconciliation, and in drafting the legal and constitutional framework to secure peace and prevent abuses.
In the media, civil society, and in communities up and down the African continent, women are taking on major responsibilities.
There is a huge amount more to do, but women are winning the fight to have their voices heard and help shape solutions and map priorities.
The gender gap in schooling remains a concern.
Africa still lags behind many parts of the world in educating its girls from primary school through to university.
But many more girls are attending and completing school now than a decade ago.
Education is the bedrock for progress and educated women will empower Africa, so the focus now must be on those countries that are failing to close the gap.
Governments need to implement the right strategies and find the political will and resources to succeed.
One of the major problems highlighted in the just-published Africa Progress Report, prepared by the African Progress Panel, is the gap between plans and change on the ground.
Another area where we have seen little progress is in harnessing women’s full talents and potential in the formal economy.
Women’s economic contribution is, of course, under-valued in many places around the world.
Wherever they live, women face greater obstacles and frustrations than their male counterparts.
But this is particularly true in Africa – a continent where the crucial role that women play in the economy cannot be missed by even the most casual visitor.
Look in our fields.
It is women who you will see planting and harvesting the crops.
Look in our markets.
It is women who you will see buying and selling the goods on offer.
Women, too, are setting up the small businesses that are creating jobs and spreading prosperity.
Women are truly the motors of Africa’s economies.
Yet at every turn, their contribution is downplayed and their ambitions are obstructed. Women find themselves cut off from training and support.
And they can face discrimination from the authorities and suppliers.
But it is in women’s treatment, deliberately and accidentally, by the financial sector that the most damage is done.
Women receive, for example, only 10% of the credit given to small farmers and less than 1% of total loans to agriculture.
Yet they are responsible for growing 80% of the food on our continent.
Inheritance rules dictating that land – and its proceeds – can be passed down only through the men of the family have put women at a terrible disadvantage.
Africa’s potential not only to feed its own people but to export food around the world is increasingly and rightly acknowledged.
But this ambition will be met only through policies that recognize the central role of women in agriculture and enable them to drive a green revolution on the continent.
Women’s lack of assets, together with out-dated social norms, is also a major barrier blocking their access to the capital they need to set up and expand small businesses.
Women-run start-ups are most likely to become established enterprises.
Yet they command less than 10% of the capital available for investment in new enterprises.
The discrimination continues, despite overwhelming evidence showing that women are more likely to invest business loans wisely and to meet repayment schedules.
Even micro-credit schemes often seem to lend less to women than to men in the same circumstances.
Nor are these problems limited to small businesses.
The African Women’s Economic Summit, which I attended recently in Nairobi, was electrified by the story of a woman who had set up her own construction firm in Cameroon.
Her capital needs run into hundreds of thousands of dollars.
Yet, when dealing with financial institutions, she faced the same obstacles and out-dated attitudes familiar to the smallest businesswomen across the continent.
Financial institutions must remove such barriers to fair and easy access to capital and financial services.
For Africa to reach the growth rates needed to meet the United Nation’s Millennium Development Goals, women must be brought fully into the formal economy and the financial sector.
This requires innovation in the financial services and products on offer, which in turn requires that women – locally, regionally, and internationally – are helping to formulate the solutions.
If governments and key stakeholders can lift the barriers that prevent women from playing their full role in our economy and societies, the future is bright – not just for women but our entire continent.
The Import of Exports
CAMBRIDGE – Should a country’s development strategy pay special attention to exports?
After all, exports have nothing to do with satisfying their people’s basic needs, such as education, health care, housing, power, water, telecoms, security, the rule of law, and recreation.
So why give precedence to satisfying the needs of distant foreign consumers?
That, in a nutshell, is what many opponents of free trade and economic globalization – as well as many on the right who believe that all industries should be treated equally – want to know.
But there are no right answers to wrong questions.
It is precisely because governments care about their own people that they should focus on exports.
To see this, consider what a market economy is all about.
Some, including Pope Francis, would say that it is about greed – a system in which everybody cares only about herself.
But a market economy should be understood as a system in which we are supposed to earn our keep by doing things for other people; how much we earn depends on how others value what we do for them.
The market economy forces us to be concerned about the needs of others, because it is their need that constitutes the source of our livelihood.
In some sense, a market economy is a gift-exchange system; money merely tracks the value of the gifts we give one another.
As a result, a market economy encourages specialization: We become very good in a narrow set of skills or products, and exchange them for millions of other things we have no clue how to do or make.
As a consequence, we end up doing remarkably few things and buying everything else from others.
This observation is as true about an individual as it is about a place, whether the place is a neighborhood, a town, a state or province, or a country.
Every town has grocery stores, beauty parlors, gas stations, and movie theaters that serve the local community.
Economists call these “non-tradable activities,” because they are not undertaken with distant customers in mind.
But the town’s people would also want access to things that nobody in the city even knows how to make.
For example, most towns and cities do not produce food, cars, gasoline, medicines, TVs, or films.
So they need to “import” these goods from elsewhere.
To pay for what they want from out-of-towners, they must sell them some of the things that they do know how to make.
Of course, the out-of-towners have the option of buying from somewhere else.
This is why the goods and services that a place can sell to non-residents have a disproportionate impact on its quality of life – and even its viability.
A mining town becomes a ghost town when the mine closes, because the grocery store, the pharmacy, and the movie theater no longer have the capacity to buy the “imported” food, medicine, and films they need.
In contrast to non-tradable activities, a place’s export activities need to be pretty good to convince out-of-town customers – who have ample other options – to buy from local producers.
That means that exports must have an attractive quality/cost ratio.
One way to increase this ratio is to improve quality and productivity. Another is to lower wages.
The higher the productivity and the quality of export activities, the higher the wages they can pay and still remain competitive. If employment in the export industry is significant, as is true in most places that do not rely on oil revenues, the wages that the export sector can afford will affect the wages of everybody in town.
Everyone thus has an interest in improving their export sector.
Because they are subject to greater competition, export activities tend to undergo faster technological and productivity improvements than other parts of the economy.
They are constantly under threat from innovation and new competitors that could disrupt their business.
Consider the iPhone’s devastating impact on Finland’s once-dominant national champion Nokia, or the effect of the shale-oil revolution on OPEC.
Successful places tend to move from a few technologically simple industries that are competitive enough to export their products to a greater number of industries that are increasingly complex.
For example, in 1963, 97% of Thailand’s export basket was composed of agricultural and mineral products such as rice, rubber, tin, and jute.
By 2013, these represented less than 20% of the total, while machinery and chemicals accounted for 56%.
A similar transformation can be seen in every successful non-OPEC developing country.
The success of a place is very much related to its people’s ability to accomplish this transformation, as exemplified by places such as Singapore, Turkey, and Israel.
So what should countries, provinces, and cities do?
Skeptics might say that they should just focus on fixing the things that locals care about, such as education or infrastructure, or improve everybody’s “business environment.”
Exports will take care of themselves.
But life is more complicated than this.
The needs of export activities are often quite distinct.
The specific rules, infrastructure, skills, and technological mastery that export activities require tend to be different from those needed for the non-tradable activities that usually generate the bulk of a place’s employment.
While diversification into new areas is always challenging, it is particularly difficult for tradable activities, which have to face foreign competition from the start.
By contrast, pioneers in non-tradable activities start with a captive market.
Moreover, exporters need particularly strong connections to knowhow found elsewhere on the planet, thus making them more sensitive to foreign investment, migration, and international professional links.
To survive and thrive, societies need to pay special attention to those activities that produce goods and services they can sell to non-residents.
Indeed, the need to act on new export opportunities and remove obstacles to success is probably the central lesson from the East Asian and Irish growth miracles.
Non-tradable activities are akin to a country’s sports leagues: different people like different teams.
Those engaged in tradable activities are like the national team: we should all root for them – and organize ourselves to make sure they succeed.
Ikan Bernama Pembangunan
JENEWA – Tujuan Pembangunan Berkelanjutan atau Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) yang baru saja diadopsi diperkirakan akan menandakan dimulainya era baru dalam pembangunan global, suatu era yang menjanjikan perubahan dunia atas nama manusia, bumi, kemakmuran, perdamaian, dan kemitraan.
Tetapi terdapat perbedaan besar antara menjanjikan dan melakukan.
Meskipun beberapa deklarasi global ini penting – untuk memprioritaskan pembiayaan dan menyalurkan kemauan politik – banyak janji hari ini sama dengan janji-janji sebelumnya.
Bahkan, keberhasilan SDGs tergantung pada seberapa besar pengaruhnya terhadap perundingan internasional lainnya, terutama yang paling kompleks dan kontroversial.
Hal ini merupakan tes awal menyangkut tujuan yang dikampanyekan secara aktif oleh Global Ocean Commission: “untuk melindungi dan melestarikan pemanfaatan lautan, samudera, dan sumber daya laut demi pembangunan berkelanjutan”.
Ketika pemimpin politik bertemu di Konferensi Tingkat Menteri WTO ke-10 di Nairobi pada bulan Desember, mereka memiliki kesempatan menuju pemenuhan salah satu target tujuan yang terpenting, yakni pelarangan subsidi yang berkontribusi terhadap penangkapan ikan yang berlebihan dan tidak sah, tidak dilaporkan, dan tidak sesuai aturan (overfishing and illegal, unreported, and unregulated fishing) selambatnya pada tahun 2020.
Hal ini bukan ambisi baru; kehendak ini telah menjadi agenda WTO selama bertahun-tahun dan telah termuat dalam deklarasi pembangunan berkelanjutan internasional lainnya.
Tetapi bahkan sekarang banyak negara mengeluarkan $30 miliar per tahun untuk subsidi perikanan, 60% diantaranya langsung memicu praktik yang tidak berkelanjutan, merusak, atau bahkan ilegal.
Distorsi pasar yang dihasilkan merupakan faktor utama terjadinya pengelolaan perikanan dunia yang buruk, dimana menurut perkiraan Bank Dunia telah mengakibatkan kerugian ekonomi global sebesar $83 miliar pada tahun 2012.
Selain kekhawatiran akan keuangan dan keberlanjutan, isu ini mengangkat persoalan mendesak tentang kesetaraan dan keadilan.
Negara-negara maju (khususnya Jepang, Amerika Serikat, Perancis, dan Spanyol), serta Tiongkok dan Korea Selatan, bertanggung jawab atas 70% subsidi perikanan global.
Subsidi ini menjadikan ribuan masyarakat yang penghidupannya bergantung pada perikanan berjuang untuk berkompetisi dengan pesaing-pesaing yang menerima subsidi dan mengancam ketahanan pangan jutaan orang seiring dengan armada industri dari negara lain yang menguras habis cadangan laut mereka.
Afrika Barat, tempat dimana perikanan adalah persoalan hidup dan mati, khususnya sangat menderita.
Sejak tahun 1990-an, ketika kapal-kapal asing, terutama dari Uni Eropa dan Tiongkok, memulai perikanan pada skala industri di luar wilayah pantainya, banyak nelayan lokal tidak lagi mampu mencari mencari nafkah atau menghidupi keluarganya.
Sejak tahun 1994 hingga 2005, menurut perkiraan pemerintah hasil tangkapan ikan Senegal berkurang dari 95.000 menjadi 45.000 ton dan Senegal kehilangan setengah dari armada kapal kayu tradisional/kano jenis pirogue.
Seiring dengan merosotnya cadangan ikan pada tahun 2005, 5.000 orang memutuskan untuk menggunakan kapal-kapal nelayan mereka yang sudah mubazir untuk kegunaan lain, dengan melarikan diri ke Kepulauan Canary di Spanyol.
Setahun kemudian, lebih dari 30.000 orang lainnya menempuh perjalanan berbahaya yang sama, dan diperkirakan 6.000 orang tenggelam.
Nelayan-nelayan yang berasal dari Senegal dan Mauritius dan keluarga mereka termasuk dalam ribuan orang yang kini mempertaruhkan hidup mereka demi menuju Eropa.
Di laut lepas, distorsinya bahkan lebih besar.
Menurut ekonom perikanan, subsidi yang dikeluarkan beberapa negara terkaya di dunia adalah satu-satunya alasan mengapa industri penangkapan ikan berskala besar di wilayah perairan di luar 200 mil zona ekonomi eksklusif negara pantai dianggap menguntungkan.
Tetapi ikan tidak tunduk pada batas-batas internasional, dan diperkirakan bahwa 42% dari ikan komersial yang ditangkap hidup dan berpindah dari zona ekonomi eksklusif dan laut lepas.
Akibatnya, industri penangkapan ikan yang jauh dari pantai merusak penangkapan ikan di negara-negara berkembang yang sebagian besarnya berskala kecil.
Penghapusan subsidi perikanan berbahaya pada tahun 2020 tidak hanya penting untuk melestarikan laut, namun ini juga akan mempengaruhi kemampuan kita untuk memenuhi tujuan-tujuan lain, seperti janji-janji kita untuk mengakhiri kelaparan dan mewujudkan ketahanan pangan serta mengurangi ketimpangan domestik dan antar negara.
Kredibilitas WTO dan SDGs yang baru diadopsi ini akan diuji di Nairobi.
Global Ocean Commission telah menetapkan program yang berisi tiga langkah yang jelas untuk menghapuskan subsidi perikanan berbahaya.
Yang dibutuhkan disini adalah pemerintah sepakat untuk mengakhiri ketidakadilan dan limbah yang dihasilkan.
Kita patut bersyukur terdapat tanda-tanda yang menggembirakan.
Hampir 60% anggota WTO mendukung pengendalian subsidi perikanan, dengan dukungan dari Kelompok negara-negara berkembang di Afrika, Karibia, dan Pasifik – bersama dengan kontribusi Uni Eropa untuk meningkatkan transparansi dan pelaporan – menciptakan momentum baru dalam upaya ini.
Diantara inisiatif yang diajukan sebelum pertemuan Nairobi adalah yang disebut "Usulan NZ+5."
Disponsori oleh Selandia Baru, Argentina, Islandia, Norwegia, Peru, dan Uruguay, rencana ini akan menghapuskan subsidi perikanan yang mempengaruhi cadangan ikan yang ditangkap secara berlebihan dan berdampak pada penangkapan ikan yang tidak sah, tidak dilaporkan, dan tidak sesuai aturan.
Global Ocean Commission mendesak 40% anggota WTO lainnya – terutama pelaku terbesar yang saat ini menghalangi proses – untuk menerima proposal yang relatif sederhana.
Masa depan yang berkelanjutan untuk planet kita dan lautan akan bergantung padanya.
Endgame in Kosovo
In the coming months, a fundamental decision will be made that will challenge the capacity of the international community, particularly Europe, for conflict resolution.
The issue is Kosovo’s status – the last unresolved piece of the bloodstained Balkans puzzle.
For Serbs and Albanians alike, Kosovo is a place haunted by history.
But the world must not allow their freighted narratives about the past to cloud our actions to build a better future.
In the 1990’s, following its atrocities in Bosnia, Slobodan Milosevic’s Serb regime abolished Kosovo’s long-standing autonomy, suppressing the rights of the province’s overwhelming Albanian majority.
Instead of simply watching in horror, as it did at the start of the Bosnian war, NATO decided to intervene before Milosevic’s forces could again devastate one of the constituent ethnic groups of the former Yugoslavia.
Security of the European Union and Europe’s moral responsibility after the crimes of World War II were at stake.
Following NATO’s intervention, the United Nations Security Council unanimously adopted Resolution 1244, placing Kosovo under UN administration.
Since 1999, the international community’s policies with regard to Kosovo have had wide international support, including from Russia.
Now the time has come to resolve Kosovo’s status permanently.
Otherwise, the stability that the UN has brought to Kosovo, and the region, will not last.
Unemployment is now running at over 40% in Kosovo and breeds political volatility.
Without access to sovereign lending from the World Bank or the IMF, Kosovo’s economy will continue to stagnate.
Resolving Kosovo’s status is also a necessity for the province’s Serb minority, who continue to live in uncertainty, not knowing whether to look to Belgrade or Pristina for protection of their rights.
It would free both Serbia and the EU to move forward on Serbia’s domestic reforms and international integration.
The UN Special Envoy for the Kosovo Future Status Process, former Finnish President Martti Ahtisaari, has now, after 14 months of intensive negotiations with Belgrade and Pristina, presented his settlement proposal to the Security Council.
Ahtisaari’s bold proposal, which recommends Kosovo’s independence with initial supervision by a strong international civilian and military presence, is the only viable option for the international community, and for Europe in particular.
Reintegrating Kosovo into Serbia is not tenable.
Since the end of the conflict in June 1999, Serbia has not exercised any governing authority over Kosovo.
Under UN administration, legitimate Kosovar institutions for managing domestic affairs have been created.
With these institutions in place, Kosovo’s people expect greater self-government.
Sadly, Belgrade’s vision of Kosovo returning to Serbian rule – albeit with autonomy – ignores these realities.
Indeed, Serbia has no viable strategy for integrating Kosovo’s two million people into Serbian political institutions and public life.
The UN simply cannot solve Kosovo’s structural problems, namely the need to develop a viable economy and to begin engagement with the EU – the most powerful motor for reform and economic development in the region.
But this does not mean that the international community and the EU should now leave Kosovo to its own devices.
Relations between Kosovo’s Albanian majority and Serb minority remain uneasy.
So it is imperative that strong safeguards are put in place to protect minorities, particularly the Serbs.
International supervision of Kosovo’s independence by a strong international civilian and military presence will be critical to ensure that it fulfills its obligations under the settlement proposal.
What is now required is the will to adopt and implement Ahtisaari’s plan.
In the coming weeks, the Security Council will decide Kosovo’s status, but it is the EU that will have to coexist with both Kosovo and Serbia.
In fact, Kosovo’s fate is intertwined with the EU’s own.
A strong and stable Kosovo will require a cohesive and united Europe.
If the EU is divided on an issue lying at its geographic heart – and at the heart of its interests – its credibility as a foreign policy actor on matters beyond its borders will suffer dramatically.
And only a united EU can bring Russia on board for a harmonized policy towards the Balkans.
This means that the EU cannot leave Serbia to its own devices, either.
The EU must make it clear that it is ready to support Serbia – and the region as a whole – in realizing its European aspirations.
European security is hinged on Serbian integration, just as Serbian aspirations hinge on the EU.
But the price of the EU’s support cannot be changed: the major war criminals Ratko Mladic and Radovan Karadzic must be delivered to the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) in The Hague.
Today, as yesterday, the first step towards Serbia’s European integration is full cooperation with the ICTY.
Serbia has a bright future with the EU, but getting there requires that it break with its own past – on both Kosovo and the atrocities of the Milosevic era.
Ground the Drones in 2013
LAHORE – Although 2012 saw an accelerating drawdown of United States and NATO forces’ in Afghanistan, a grim aspect of that decade-long war – reliance on air strikes by unmanned drones – continued unabated.
Indeed, those attacks were stepped up, with America’s use of drone warfare in Pakistan reaching an unprecedented height over the past year.
With President Barack Obama re-elected and no longer facing the pressure of a campaign, it would be in America’s interest – and certainly in the interests of my country, Pakistan – to use the first year of his new term to de-escalate the violence.
America’s drone strikes in Pakistan reflect an arrogant frame of mind that fails to distinguish between the guilty and the innocent, between the perpetrator and the afflicted, and between the criminal and the aggrieved.
By banishing all trappings of justice, this mindset is oblivious to the suffering of the peace-loving civilians who comprise the vast majority of those living in Pakistan’s tribal areas.
The US drone strikes have left behind a long trail of death of innocent civilians, with no one being held accountable.
These remote-controlled flying machines are programmed to decimate, brutally and indiscriminately.
It is shameful that a country known for its democratic values and its unparalleled commitment to human freedom should stoop so low as to kill innocent men, women, and children.
As a result, instead of winning hearts and minds, the US, with the constant humming of killer drones in the air, is driving fear into every living soul in the tribal areas.
Indeed, the bloody irony is that the strategy is utterly counter-productive; the people of the tribal areas, with their warrior past, end up joining the militants, justifying their actions as jihad against the forces occupying Afghanistan and their helpers in Pakistan.
Indeed, according to a recent report by researchers at New York University School of Law and Stanford Law School, the people in the areas targeted by the drone campaign are being&#160;systematically terrorized.
The drone strategy constitutes a campaign of terror – highly effective terror in which even funerals of drone victims have been targeted.