The fact is that only the US and the massively over-represented countries of the European Union supported the Greek bailout.
Indeed, the major emerging economies all strongly opposed it, with the Brazilian representative calling it “a bailout of Greece’s private debt holders, mainly European financial institutions.”
Even the Swiss representative condemned the measure.
As fears of a sudden collapse of the eurozone have given way to a prolonged debate about how the costs will be met through bail-ins and write-offs, the IMF’s position will become increasingly convoluted.
Though the IMF is supposed to have seniority over other creditors, there will be demands to write down a share of the loans that it has issued.
Poorer emerging-market countries would resist such a move, arguing that their citizens should not have to foot the bill for fiscal profligacy in much wealthier countries.
Even the original advocates of IMF involvement are turning against the Fund.
EU officials are outraged by the IMF’s apparent effort to gain support in Europe’s debtor countries by urging write-offs of all debt that it did not issue.
And the US Congress has refused to endorse the expansion of IMF resources – part of an international agreement brokered at the 2010 G-20 summit.
While the outrage that followed the appointment of another European as IMF Managing Director in 2011 is likely to ensure that the Fund’s next head will not hail from Europe, the IMF’s fast-diminishing role means that it will not matter much.
As 2008’s secret history shows, what matters is who has access to the Fed.
Falling for Germany
PRINCETON – Germany’s general election in September and the prolonged formation of a new government since then have highlighted a peculiar development.
Not only does Germany now seem to be running Europe, but the rest of Europe seems to be falling in love with Germany – not least because, in a time of political confusion and economic instability, Germans are the only Europeans who seem to know what they want.
Germany’s exceptionalism is obvious.
Whereas electorates across the European Union have punished their governments for the Great Recession and the euro crisis, Germans reelected Chancellor Angela Merkel and displayed strong support for her party, the Christian Democratic Union (CDU), in the recent election.
Indeed, as with postwar Germany’s first leader, Konrad Adenauer, there are jokes about Merkel being Chancellor for life (Germany has no term limits).
Elsewhere, populist anti-European parties of the right have been gaining ground with campaigns directed against immigrants and minorities, especially Muslims.
This has fueled concern that the populist bloc will be the largest in the European Parliament after next year’s EU-wide election.
Germany, by contrast, has no anti-European party with any serious support.
Even the newly formed Alternative for Germany – which did unexpectedly well in the recent election, finishing just short of the 5% threshold needed to enter the Bundestag – insists that its anti-euro agenda is not anti-Europe.
They want to end the common currency, because, in their view, it is undermining the European ideal.
Against this background, Germany’s neighbors have been showing their love – or at least admiration.
At the end of 2011, Polish Foreign Minister Radosław Sikorski called upon Germany to take a stronger leadership role in Europe.
This year, confronted with a revival of nationalist sentiment, former Polish President Lech Wałęsa – the leader of the anti-communist Solidarity movement – suggested that his country should enter into political union with Germany.
Likewise, as France slides into a governance crisis and its leaders’ credibility rapidly erodes, the leading French intellectual Alain Minc has published Vive l’Allemagne (“Long Live Germany”), in which he argues that Germany is Europe’s healthiest and most democratic country.
In Italy, the bourgeoisie of Milan and Rome have made a point of spending winter days dressed in characteristically German Loden overcoats.
When Italian philosopher Giorgio Agamben recently appealed for a Latin empire to assert itself against Germany, his call was widely rejected, with several of his contemporaries asserting that, on the contrary, Germany should serve as a model for Italy as it seeks to overcome its current malaise.
Even in the habitually Euro-skeptical United Kingdom, Prime Minister David Cameron has sought to boost his international credibility by highlighting his close ties with Merkel, rather than by emphasizing the UK’s “special relationship” with the United States.
Revealingly, the writer Miranda Seymour’s recently published book Noble Endeavours reminds Britain of the centuries-old love affair between Germany and England.
Maybe the royal family will go back to styling itself the House of Hanover?
While this admiration stems partly from Germany’s current economic success, the sentiment runs deeper – and extends beyond Europe.
China, for example, considers Germany to be much more than a model of export-led growth; for many Chinese, that success highlights the way Germany’s historical trajectory has been shaped by its struggle with the authoritarian spirit of the past.
Germany’s constitution – first adopted in West Germany in 1949 – lays out a striking vision, stating the country’s “resolve to preserve its national and political unity and to serve the peace of the World as an equal partner in a united Europe.”
With the division of Germany considered a microcosm of the broader European split during the Cold War, German reunification seemed possible only in the context of an integrated Europe – a point that Chancellor Helmut Kohl emphasized in the debates of 1990, as reunification beckoned.
The Germany that emerged from this process is uniquely suited to act as a model for Europe, owing to its federal character, which is reflected in strong constitutional guarantees of states’ rights.
Germany’s deeply embedded commitment to Europe and insistence on constitutionalism reflect its profound effort to understand what went wrong during the interwar period, the consequences of racism and extreme nationalism, and the legacy of Nazi crimes.
Few countries – if any – have so effectively internalized the lessons of their history.
When Merkel’s new government is in place, Germany will assume an even more important role in the pursuit of greater European integration – a process that will demand additional sacrifices, including the ceding of national sovereignty.
In a sense, this will be a continuation of Germany’s long history of self-abolition.
Roughly every hundred years since the Lutheran Reformation, the number of independent German political units has fallen by a factor of ten.
The 1648 Peace of Westphalia reduced the number of independent units in the Holy Roman Empire from 3,000-4,000 to 300-400.
In the aftermath of the Napoleonic wars, the number of German states fell to 39.
By 1866, only 34 members of the German confederation remained.
Another round of wars and peace treaties produced the kleindeutsch German Empire of 1871, and there were only three primarily German-speaking states left in Europe – the German Empire, Austria-Hungary (a dynastic unit, otherwise known as the Habsburg Empire), and the Swiss Confederation – none of which was a conventional nation-state.
While Germany’s 1949 split into the Federal Republic and the Democratic Republic raised the number to four (along with Austria and Switzerland), the overall trajectory has been clear.
If Germany’s new government leads the charge toward a stronger, more federal Europe, a century from now, there may well be no sovereign German political unit at all.
Germany and its lovers die in the end, only to live happily ever after.
History versus Europe
PRINCETON – History matters, but in different ways.
In some places and for some people, history means eternal clashes that are shaped by profound geopolitical forces: four centuries ago is the same as yesterday.
Elsewhere and for other people, history suggests a need to find ways to escape from ancient predicaments and outdated prejudices.
It is this cleavage that defines the intellectual battle now taking place in and around Europe.
With this year’s centennial of the outbreak of World War I, dozens of new analyses of “the war to end all wars” have rolled off the presses.
And it is tempting to see contemporary parallels in imperial Europe’s complacency, particularly its firm belief that the world was so interconnected and prosperous that any reversal was unthinkable.
Today, despite the supposed civilizing effects of global supply chains, tinderboxes like Syria or the South China Sea could blow up the world – just as the Bosnian conflict did in 1914.
Reflecting on the legacy of the Great War has also been an occasion for reviving the era’s mentalities.
In the United Kingdom, Education Secretary Michael Gove recently issued a polemic against historians who emphasized the futility of the war, calling it a “just war” directed against the “ruthless social Darwinism of the German elites.”
This looks like a thinly veiled allusion to the power struggles of contemporary Europe.
But 1914 is not the only possible or attractive point of comparison in interpreting Britain’s past.
Next year is the bicentennial of the Battle of Waterloo and the final defeat of Napoleon.
The right-wing British politician Enoch Powell used to claim that the European Common Market was the revenge that the Germans and the French imposed for the defeats that Britain inflicted on them.
The celebrations and commemorations will be full of symbolism related to contemporary disputes.
Already, British Prime Minister David Cameron has had to shift a summit meeting with French President François Hollande from the proposed site, Blenheim Palace, because French diplomats realized that it had been built to celebrate John Churchill, the Duke of Marlborough, who crushed Louis XIV’s forces in 1704, near the small Bavarian town that gave the palace its name.
The year 1704 is packed with meaning.
The victory over France laid the foundation for the 1707 Act of Union between England and Scotland.
That union is the subject of a vital referendum that will be held this year in Scotland.
Evocative historical dates are being used or abused in a similar way on the other edge of the European continent, to conjure up images of enemies that resonate in contemporary political debates.
A few years ago, a Russian film simply entitled 1612 evoked the Time of Troubles, when weak leadership caused Russia to be invaded and subverted by insidious Polish aristocrats and capitalists.
The film’s director, Vladimir Khotinenko, said that it was important that his audience “didn’t regard it as something that happened in ancient history but as a recent event… that they felt the link between what happened 400 years ago and today.”
As Russia struggles to bring Ukraine back into its orbit, another ancient date looms large: 1709, when Czar Peter the Great crushed the Swedish and Cossack armies at the Battle of Poltava.
That battle was also the subject of a recent Russian film, The Sovereign’s Servant.
Russian television commentators describe the countries most engaged in supporting a European-oriented Ukraine – Sweden, along with Poland and Lithuania, which had been brought into the Swedish orbit – as seeking revenge for Poltava.
Europe’s western and eastern fringes obsess about dates that recall their struggles with the core: 1914, 1815, 1709, 1707, 1704, and 1612, among others.
By contrast, the European core is obsessed with transcending history, with working out institutional mechanisms for overcoming the conflicts that scarred Europe in the first half of the twentieth century.
The European integration project is a sort of liberation from the pressures and constraints of the past.
After World War II, Charles de Gaulle evolved a complicated metaphysics to explain his country’s relationship with its problematic past.
Every European country had been betrayed.
“France suffered more than others because it was more betrayed than the others.
That is why it is France that must make the gesture of pardon....It is only I who can reconcile France and Germany, because only I can raise Germany from its decadence.”
Winston Churchill (a direct descendant of the Duke of Marlborough) had a similar postwar vision for overcoming past divisions and nationalistic quarrels. “[T]his noble continent…is the fountain of Christian faith and Christian ethics,” he claimed.
“If Europe were once united in the sharing of its common inheritance, there would be no limit to the happiness, to the prosperity and glory which its three or four hundred million people would enjoy.”
Is the European center currently too naive, or too idealistic?
Is it really possible to escape from history?
Or, on the contrary, is there something odd in the way that the European fringes obsessively resort to historical milestones?
In Britain and Russia, this obsession appears to be not just a way to assert national interests, but also a mechanism for appealing to a population disenchanted with the contemporary realities of decline from the imperial past.
De Gaulle and Churchill knew plenty about war, and they wanted to transcend the blood-soaked legacy of Poltava, Blenheim, and Waterloo.
They viewed history as offering concrete lessons about the necessity of escaping from the past.
Today, Europe’s fringes, by contrast, appear determined to escape into it.
Harvests of Hunger
New York – Lack of food is rarely the reason people go hungry.
Even now, there is enough food in the world, with a bumper harvest this year, but more people cannot afford to buy the food they need.
Addressing this growing crisis is the aim of the Global Conference on Food Security in Rome on June 3-5.
Even before the recent food price spikes, an estimated billion people were suffering from chronic hunger, while another two billion were experiencing malnutrition, bringing the total number of food-insecure people to around three billion, or almost half the world’s population.
Roughly 18,000 children died daily as a direct or indirect consequence of malnutrition.
Obviously, the recent increases in food prices are likely to drive the number of people vulnerable to food stress even higher.
There is now an urgent need to finance existing food aid programs to address mounting food demands, avert further social unrest, and ensure that farmers get the costlier farm inputs they need for the next planting season.
But, as we respond to the current humanitarian emergency due to higher food prices, we must not lose sight of the longer-term problems that have undermined food security in recent decades.
Clearly, a “new deal” for food security is urgently needed.
The major increases in food production associated with the Green Revolution in the 1960’s – with considerable government and international not-for-profit support – gave way to new policy priorities in the 1980’s.
As food supply growth slowed, demand continued to grow, and not only due to population increase.
With higher incomes, rising meat consumption requires more grain for animal feed.
Since the 1980’s, governments have been pressed to promote exports to earn foreign exchange and import food.
But food cannot be treated as just another commodity, and governments should develop appropriate policies, infrastructure, and institutions to ensure food security (not to be equated with total self-sufficiency) at the national or regional level.
The problem is that, having neglected food security and the productive sectors of their economies for several decades, many developing countries’ governments now lack the fiscal capacity to increase public spending in order to increase food production and agricultural productivity.
Moreover, growing urbanization and other non-agricultural uses of land have reduced acreage available for food production, while agricultural land is increasingly used to produce commodities other than food, such as bio-fuels.
But we should not rush to abandon bio-fuels, despite some undoubtedly poor policies in recent years.
Some bio-fuels are far more cost-effective and energy-efficient than others, and different bio-fuel stocks have very different opportunity costs for food agriculture (sugar has not experienced any significant price increase).
Another problem is that fewer and fewer transnational agro-businesses now dominate marketing, production, and inputs. This comes largely at the expense of small farmers and consumers, particularly the poor.
Moreover, with less government support, rural credit has often become prohibitively expensive.
In addition, more securitization, easier online trading, and other financial market developments in recent years have facilitated greater speculative investments, especially in commodity futures and options markets, including those affecting food.
Falling asset prices in other financial market segments, following the sub-prime mortgage meltdown in the United States, may be more important for explaining the recent surge in food prices than supply constraints or other factors underlying longer-term gradual upward price trends.
Meanwhile, rich countries’ agricultural subsidies and tariffs have undoubtedly undermined food production in developing countries.
However, cutting farm subsidies will increase food prices, at least initially, while reducing agricultural tariffs alone will not necessarily lead to an increase in food production in poor countries without complementary support.
Instead, some food security advocates have called for rich countries to compensate for the adverse consequences of their own agricultural subsidies and protectionism by providing additional foreign aid to the developing world, targeting production efforts that enhance food security.
To avoid catastrophe, the world community must also meet the urgent emergency food and planting requirements mentioned above, including more generous budget and balance-of-payments support for low-income food-importing countries.
Finally, as world leaders gather in Rome, the international community must secure a meaningful global commitment to food security that will not be undermined by contradictory policies.
Has America Lost its Mojo?
Cambridge – You know that American self-confidence is shaken when even the President starts expressing fear that the financial crisis may turn out worse than the Great Depression of the 1930’s.
George Bush is not alone in worrying that things might get a lot worse before they get better.
A growing number of savvy business people are also starting to wonder whether the United States will be able to right its economy anytime soon.
Professional forecasters are considerably more sanguine, with the consensus forecast for US growth in 2009 at around -1.5%, after a similar contraction in the second half of 2008.
This would be a painful recession, but far short of the 10-15% output drop normally associated with a full-blown depression.
Of course, economic forecasters have generally been far too optimistic at every turn of late, so the public is understandably leery of their prognostications.
Consensus forecasts do still seem optimistic.
With its financial system on life support, housing prices continuing to plummet, and unemployment rising, the US economy is looking more vulnerable than it has at any time since the 1970’s, and perhaps since World War II.
Still, it must be noted that negative output growth for more than two years is a relatively rare event, even in the aftermath of severe banking crises.
Historical statistical relationships are perhaps cold comfort in a downturn that now seems so insidiously different from previous catastrophes.
But they should not be dismissed.
Japan may have taken what seemed like forever to recover from its 1990’s crisis, but it is an exception – the crisis occurred as the Japanese economy needed to restructure in the face of the huge challenges posed by China’s emergence.
The complete policy paralysis that has prevailed during the interregnum between Presidents Bush and Obama has not helped.
US policy has devolved into a sort of “wheel of fortune” game for financial firms.
One day you get bankruptcy, another day loans with few strings attached.
One hopes that President-elect Obama’s all-star economic team will at least adopt a coherent and consistent policy.
Consistency alone would be a big boost for confidence. 
The basic elements of a recovery package include, first and foremost, a rational approach to rebooting the financial system.
This means mark-to-market pricing of assets, restructuring and recapitalizing banks, and a new approach to regulation that allows creativity while better protecting the public against some of the madness that has prevailed for more than a decade.  Help for housing is required to prevent overshooting in home prices, as is massive macroeconomic stimulus, including a moderately inflationary monetary policy.
A number of leaders, most prominently German Chancellor Angela Merkel, are understandably worried about the longer-term consequences of aggressive macroeconomic stimulus.
These concerns are valid, even more so given government’s growing role in the economy.
But, as in wartime, one hopes these effects are temporary.
Besides, is inaction a real alternative?
Prior to the 1950’s, output drops of 15-20% in a single year were routine (admittedly, national income accounting was more primitive.)
A number of academic economists say we should simply tough it out as we did back then.
Recessions have important cleansing effects, helping to facilitate painful restructuring.
But today’s social, economic, and political systems – at least in developed countries – are unable to withstand a peacetime decline in output of 15-20% within a short period.
Massive stimulus and intervention – the US Federal Reserve’s current stance – is unavoidable.
One can only hope that the state can get out of the economy half as fast as it is getting in.
Nevertheless, the distinct possibility that stimulus and restructuring may work is further cause to hope that the deepening recession will not morph into a full-blown depression.
The US may be ground zero for the global financial crisis, but it is not the only country riven by self-doubt.
Britain, Ireland, and Spain each face financial crises of a similar magnitude.
Some countries that depend on energy exports, particularly governance-challenged ones such as Russia and Venezuela, are experiencing even worse downturns.
Even once-invulnerable China must contemplate a halving of its growth rate.
Europe and Japan do not have quite as complex financial messes as the US. But these regions are nevertheless mired in recession.
The global economy is in a pickle.
But, just as optimists were too sanguine in the boom, ultra-pessimists probably go too far in forecasting a depression around the corner.
2009 will be a tough year.
Yet, absent a large-scale conflagration, there is a fair chance that 2010 will see a restoration of weak growth in the US, Europe, and Japan, and probably robust growth in most emerging markets.
The US economy may have lost a fair chunk of its mojo, but it will require a lot more bad luck and policy blunders to get to a second worldwide Great Depression.
Has Cuba Lost its Last Chance?
BUENOS AIRES – Raúl Castro’s consolidation of his position as successor to his brother Fidel confirms that his Cuba will give the military domestic hegemony, which makes any serious political or economic opening in the near future seemingly impossible.
The Cuban Communist Party’s recent Sixth Congress reflected this, offering little new and rehashing a lot of the old.
Since ill health forced Fidel Castro to retire from Cuba’s leadership, Raúl has opened the doors to the military and pushed out even those civilians who had been his brother’s trusted associates.
While Fidel wrote doctrinaire articles in the official press, the armed forces took over politics and production.
Fidel’s appearance at the Party’s congress – an event full of political significance, because he has only rarely participated in public events since becoming sick in 2006 – seemed to confirm his support for this outcome.
We now know that the congress had been put off for 14 years, owing to deep divisions among Cuban leaders.
The civilian group that was ousted wanted to adapt the “Chinese model” of gradual economic reforms initiated by the Party. Raúl and his military cronies, however, cornered Fidel and imposed their group’s criteria.
In Asian communism – as practiced in China and Vietnam, in particular – the Party leadership rotates periodically, and a civilian leadership controls the military.
Systemic nepotism in the top political and military leadership exists only in North Korea.
By contrast, Cuba’s new Raúlist political structure takes its inspiration from the purest tradition of Latin American military caudillismo, using communist ideology pragmatically.
The model is clearly revealed in the nature of Raúl’s proposed reforms.
The economy’s most dynamic industries – namely, mining and tourism – are reserved for the military, which manages them in a business-like, profit-seeking way.
Only in these privileged sectors can some reforms be seen.
The “new class” that populates them does not demonize foreign capital.
Indeed, there are talks centered on debt, with some creditors interested in the mechanics of capitalization.
For the rest of the economy, the Party’s position recalls the famous line from Lampedusa’s Il Gattopardo (The Leopard): something must change so that everything else can remain the same.
The sale of buildings and vehicles will be legalized and self-employment authorized, mainly in the service sector.
But, lacking capital and forced to pay taxes, what fate awaits industries driven by the state into the market?
Nearly 1.5 million Cubans will never have a stake in the industries controlled by the military bourgeoisie. Nor was the issue of land ownership resolved: only a few plots will be leased in some form.
As a result, Cuba will continue to import a lot of food, most of it at a price that the population cannot afford.
Moreover, ordinary Cubans fear that their ration cards – their only means of getting food – will be canceled.
Indeed, according to Raúl, the state-controlled food-rationing system is a “factor of immobility,” but no one knows what might replace it.
The Sixth Congress ignored questions of human rights.
Neither freedom of the press nor access to information was on the agenda, and the opposition will continue to be ignored, its only options being conditional freedom or exile.
Migration, an option financed by remittances from relatives in the United States, was not made any more flexible, either.
When the Soviet Union collapsed, many believed that the Cuban regime would take the road to reform, however grudgingly.
But the democratic transitions in Eastern Europe made Fidel Castro wary, so the first opportunity for a similar transition in Cuba was lost.
Now an opportunity to introduce young blood and new ideas has similarly been missed: although the Sixth Congress adopted a ten-year limit for holding office, the two people designated to succeed Raúl Castro are both octogenarians.
In the 1980’s, Deng Xiaoping warned that China would collapse if it didn’t change; Raúl has said the same thing.
But Deng chose real reform and real change, appealing to overseas Chinese, whom the Party had demonized for many years, to bet on the country’s future and invest. The diaspora listened – the beginning and the secret of the reforms that put China on the path to its current economic success.
Cuba cannot remain isolated, dependent on Venezuelan petrodollars and penalized by America’s ill-conceived trade embargo.
Any realistic agenda for change in Cuba inexorably requires opening up to the world, along with ensuring full freedom within the country.
Unfortunately, the Sixth Congress demonstrated that the Cuban Communist Party remains in denial about the country’s prospects and options.
Has Financial Innovation Been Discredited?
MOSCOW – Skeptics of financial liberalization and innovation have been emboldened by the crisis in the world’s credit markets that erupted in mid-2007, when the problems with sub-prime mortgages first appeared in the United States.
Are these skeptics right?
Should we halt financial liberalization and innovation in order to prevent crises like the sub-prime disaster from recurring?
The entire sub-prime market is largely a decade-old innovation – the word “sub-prime” did not exist in any language before 1994 – built on such things as option adjustable-rate mortgages (option-ARM’s), new kinds of collateralized debt obligations, and structured investment vehicles.
Previously, private investors in the US simply did not lend to mortgage seekers whose credit history was below prime.
But, while it does sometimes appear that the current crisis is due, at least in part, to financial innovation, financial-market liberalization has been shown to be a good thing overall.
A study published in 2005 by economists Geert Bekaert, Campbell Harvey, and Christian Lundblad found that when countries liberalize their stock markets, allowing them to operate freely without government intervention, economic growth rises by an average of one percentage point annually.
The higher growth tends to be associated with an investment boom, which in turn seems to be propelled by the lower cost of capital for firms.
Of course, while complicated financial arrangements allow us to move forward economically, they also can create hazards.
Think of the scaffolding and equipment around construction sites.
Sometimes people trip over the equipment, or a piece of scaffolding falls, with disastrous consequences.
Any time you build something, there is always a chance of a setback.
But, with every setback, we learn.
Governments and insurance companies implement better safety requirements in response to construction accidents.
The same is true, over time, with financial disasters.
The US is one of the world’s most financially liberal countries.
Its financial markets’ high quality must be an important reason for America’s relatively strong economic growth.
Indeed, given a very low savings rate and high fiscal deficit over the past few decades, the US might otherwise have faced economic disaster.
The reason is simple.
Individual firms might have splendid investment opportunities – to enlarge plant and equipment, capitalize on new software, or exploit new research and new training of key personnel – but might be deterred by cash shortages or perceived macroeconomic risks.
Effective financial markets enable them to pursue such opportunities despite these constraints by enlisting investors to provide the capital.
These investors can, in turn, be encouraged when financial hedging devices and financial diversification protect them.
There has been a longstanding discussion about whether new derivative markets, which provide such financial hedging, tend to increase preexisting financial markets’ volatility.
The consensus is that they do not.
In 2000, Stewart Mayhew, Assistant Chief Economist at the US Securities and Exchange Commission’s Office of Economic Analysis, surveyed the extensive literature on this topic.
Mayhew concluded that it is rather difficult to tell whether derivative markets worsen financial-market volatility, because their creation tends to come when existing financial markets already are more volatile, or can be predicted to become so.
Moreover, he found that there is no evidence that derivative markets create volatility in underlying cash markets; in fact, they may even reduce it.
The effect on underlying financial markets’ volatility may not even be the right question to consider in deciding whether to permit new derivative products.
The right question is whether these products are conducive to economic success and growth.
Here, Mayhew concludes that new derivative markets clearly increase the liquidity and quality of information in existing financial markets.
And it is this liquidity and quality of information that ultimately propels economic growth.
The sub-prime crisis has exposed serious problems that we must address.
For example, we need stronger consumer protection for retail financial products, stricter disclosure requirements for new securities, and better-designed vehicles for hedging risks.
Some of the innovations associated with the sub-prime crisis – notably option-ARM’s, when extended to borrowers who couldn’t handle them – seem to have little redeeming value.
But others – those involved with the securitization of mortgages – were clearly important long-run innovations, because they can help spread risks better around the world.
So, we should not slow down financial innovation in general.
On the contrary, some of the fixes that result from the sub-prime crisis will probably take the form of still more innovation, further increasing the sophistication of our financial markets.
Has Global Stag-Deflation Arrived?
NEW YORK – The latest macroeconomic news from the United States, other advanced economies, and emerging markets confirms that the global economy will face a severe recession in 2009.
In the US, recession started in December 2007, and will last at least until December 2009 – the longest and deepest US recession since World War II, with the cumulative fall in GDP possibly exceeding 5%.
The recession in other advanced economies (the euro zone, United Kingdom, European Union, Canada, Japan, Australia, and New Zealand) started in the second quarter of 2008, before the financial turmoil in September and October further aggravated the global credit crunch.
This contraction has become even more severe since then.
There is now also the beginning of a hard landing in emerging markets as the recession in advanced economies, falling commodity prices, and capital flight take their toll on growth.
Indeed, the world should expect a near recession in Russia and Brazil in 2009, owing to low commodity prices, and a sharp slowdown in China and India that will be the equivalent of a hard landing (growth well below potential) for these countries.
Other emerging markets in Asia, Africa, Latin America, and Europe will not fare better, and some may experience full-fledged financial crises.
Indeed, more than a dozen emerging-market economies now face severe financial pressures: Belarus, Bulgaria, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Romania, Turkey, and Ukraine in Europe; Indonesia, Korea, and Pakistan in Asia; and Argentina, Ecuador, and Venezuela in Latin America.
Most of these economies can avoid the worst if they implement the appropriate policy adjustments and if the international financial institutions (including the IMF) provide enough lending to cover their external financing needs.
With a global recession a near certainty, deflation – rather than inflation – will become the main concern for policymakers.
The fall in aggregate demand while potential aggregate supply has been rising because of overinvestment by China and other emerging markets will sharply reduce inflation.
And, while traditional fiscal policy (government spending and tax cuts) will be pursued aggressively, non- traditional fiscal policy (expenditures to bail out financial institutions, lenders, and borrowers) will also become increasingly important.
In the process, the role of states and governments in economic activity will be vastly expanded.
Traditionally, central banks have been the lenders of last resort, but now they are becoming the lenders of first and only resort.
As banks curtail lending to each other, to other financial institutions, and to the corporate sector, central banks are becoming the only lenders around.
Likewise, with household consumption and business investment collapsing, governments will soon become the spenders of first and only resort, stimulating demand and rescuing banks, firms, and households.
The long-term consequences of the resulting surge in fiscal deficits are serious.
If the deficits are monetized by central banks, inflation will follow the short-term deflationary pressures; if they are financed by debt, the long-term solvency of some governments may be at stake unless medium-term fiscal discipline is restored.
Nevertheless, in the short run, very aggressive monetary and fiscal policy actions – both traditional and non-traditional – must be undertaken to ensure that the inevitable stag-deflation of 2009 does not persist into 2010 and beyond.
So far, the US response appears to be more aggressive than that of the euro zone, as the European Central Bank falls behind the curve on interest rates and the EU’s fiscal stance remains weak.
Given the severity of this economic and financial crisis, financial markets will not mend for a while.
The downside risks to the prices of a wide variety of risky assets (equities, corporate bonds, commodities, housing, and emerging-market asset classes) will remain until there are true signs – towards the end of 2009 – that the global economy may recover in 2010.
Has Neo-Liberalism Failed Mexico?
Six years ago, I was ready to conclude that the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) was a major success.
The key argument in favor of NAFTA had been that it was the most promising road the United States could take to raise the chances for Mexico to become democratic and prosperous, and that the US had both a strong selfish interest and a strong neighborly duty to try to help Mexico develop.
Since NAFTA, Mexican real GDP has grown at 3.6% per year, and exports have boomed, going from 10% of GDP in 1990 and 17% of GDP in 1999 to 28% of GDP today.
Next year, Mexico’s real exports will be five times what they were in 1990.
It is here – in the rapid development of export industries and the dramatic rise in export volumes – that NAFTA made the difference.
NAFTA guarantees Mexican producers tariff and quota-free access to the US market, the largest consumer market in the world.
Without this guarantee, fewer would have invested in the capacity to satisfy the US market.
Increasing trade between the US and Mexico moves both countries toward a greater degree of specialization and a finer division of labor in important industries like autos, where labor-intensive portions are increasingly accomplished in Mexico, and textiles, where high-tech spinning and weaving is increasingly done in the US, while Mexico carries out lower-tech cutting and sewing.
Such efficiency gains from increasing the extent of the market and promoting specialization should have produced rapid growth in Mexican productivity.
Likewise, greater efficiency should have been reinforced by a boom in capital formation, which should have accompanied the guarantee that no future wave of protectionism in the US would shut factories in Mexico.
The key word here is “should.”
(Indeed, the only part of Mexican development that has been a great success has been the rise in incomes and living standards that comes from increased migration to the US, and increased remittances sent back to Mexico.)
Intellectually, this is a great puzzle: we believe in market forces, and in the benefits of trade, specialization, and the international division of labor.
We see the enormous increase in Mexican exports to the US over the past decade.
We see great strengths in the Mexican economy – a stable macroeconomic environment, fiscal prudence, low inflation, little country risk, a flexible labor force, a strengthened and solvent banking system, successfully reformed poverty-reduction programs, high earnings from oil, and so on.
Yet successful neo-liberal policies have not delivered the rapid increases in productivity and working-class wages that neo-liberals like me would have confidently predicted had we been told back in 1995 that Mexican exports would multiply five-fold in the next twelve years.
But these deficiencies should not be enough to neutralize Mexico’s powerful geographic advantages and the potent benefits of neo-liberal policies, should they?
Apparently they are.
The demographic burden of a rapidly growing labor force appears to be greatly increased when that labor force is not very literate, especially when inadequate infrastructure, crime, and official corruption also take their toll.
We neo-liberals point out that NAFTA did not cause poor infrastructure, high crime, and official corruption.
We thus implicitly suggest that Mexicans would be far wose off today without NAFTA and its effects weighing in on the positive side of the scale.
That neo-liberal story may be true.
But it is an excuse. It may not be true.
Having witnessed Mexico’s slow growth over the past 15 years, we can no longer repeat the old mantra that the neo-liberal road of NAFTA and associated reforms is clearly and obviously the right one.
Has Oil Production Peaked?
OXFORD – Throughout the history of the oil industry, fear and concern about the imminent exhaustion of oil reserves has been a recurring theme.
Such sentiments often spread and capture the public imagination at times of rapidly rising oil demand, sharp spikes in energy prices, and geo-political uncertainty.
So today’s talk of oil scarcity, which began at the turn of the last century, should come as no surprise.
Believers in oil scarcity point to the sustained annual average increase of oil prices from 2002 to 2008, declining output in many areas of the world, and the absence (until recently off the coast of Brazil) of large-scale oil discoveries in the last few decades. All these factors lend credence to the view that oil production has peaked.
In the face of relentless demand-side pressure, driven mainly by high-growth countries like China and India, some predict stratospheric energy prices, supply shortages, economic and social hardship, and even resource wars.
Given that oil is a non-renewable resource, in a sense the world is always running out of it.
Unless global demand collapses, at some point in the future oil production will peak and eventually be exhausted.
But this prediction is close to a tautology.
For it to be useful, believers in scarce oil must be able to predict such things as the timing of the oil peak, the state of demand when oil production reaches it, and the pattern of decline.
But the track record of “peak oil” theorists on such matters has not been impressive: their predictions have steadily moved forward the date that global oil production will peak.
Worse still, they have made no serious attempt to identify why their earlier predictions have had to be revised.
A major problem is that such predictions often confuse resources with reserves.
Resources are the available volumes of hydrocarbon without reference to constraints as to their accessibility and/or cost.
Resources impose an upper bound on what ultimately can be produced; thus, it is the relevant concept for determining the likely dates of peak production and ultimate exhaustion.
If the volume of oil resources were known with certainty, and if we could accurately predict the growth of oil consumption, calculating the imminence of exhaustion would be simple.
But these are big “ifs” – especially given the high level of uncertainty regarding the ultimate volume of oil resources.
While peak oil theorists have strong views about that, they do not allow for all the current and future technological possibilities that might increase resources.
Indeed, given the difficulty in estimating the total size of resources, many consider peak oil theories irrelevant.
Fortunately, the focus of the debate is on reserves and not resources.
Reserves are defined as the quantities of petroleum that are expected to be commercially recoverable from known fields.
The concept of reserves is technical and economic, not geological.
It is also a non-static concept, as estimates of reserves will generally be revised upwards or downwards as additional geologic or engineering data become available, as technology improves, and/or as economic conditions (such as oil prices and production costs) change.
In fact, the bulk of recent growth in world reserves is due not to new discoveries, but mainly to reserve growth and improved recovery rates.
Moreover, despite what many believe, crude oil is far from being a homogenous product.
There is a fossil carbon continuum ranging from easy, conventional oil, to deep and ultra-deep offshore oil, to extra-heavy crude oil.
With technological progress and rising oil prices, most of these reserves will become conventional, helping to push back peak oil for years.
The failure to distinguish clearly between resources and reserves – and to recognize the importance of prices, costs, and technology in transforming resources into reserves – results in bad predictions about an imminent peak in oil production and misinformation that has had a negative impact on policymaking.
Rather than focusing on the major short- and long-term challenges facing the oil industry, the debate about peak oil diverts attention to the wrong problems.
In the short term, there are concerns that oil production will peak soon, owing not to the unavailability of reserves, but to obstacles to investment – for example, access to reserves, sanctions, and policy uncertainty.
Some who believe in the imminence of peak oil consider these barriers essentially irrelevant, arguing that their removal would merely delay the peak for a few years.
But, in the long term, the challenge is how to make the transition to a new and sustainable energy path, and to evaluate the political, economic, social and climate costs associated with this transition.
Unfortunately, that debate has not yet started.
The current tone surrounding the peak oil debate is reminiscent of that surrounding the global war on terror, with the phrase “you’re either with us or against us” recycled to polarize observers and analysts.
But as in any other debate, once extreme positions dominate, the real problems are trivialized and marginalized.
Healing the Depressed Brain
Scientists and mental health professionals have made major strides in understanding and treating major depression, including the discovery of the role played by imbalances in brain chemicals such as serotonin and noradrenaline.
But there is increasing evidence that there is more to the story: depression also involves structural changes in areas of the brain that are involved in mood, memory, and decision-making.
Depression is often precipitated by stressful experiences.
The brain interprets our experiences and decides if they are threatening, and then controls our behavioral and physiological responses to them.
Data obtained from animal experiments show that harmful physiological changes result from the inability of the brain and body to respond to repeated stress with adaptive modifications in structure and function.
Three brain areas - the hippocampus, the prefrontal cortex, and the amygdala - are particularly susceptible to pathological changes in size and function.
These areas are instrumental in interpreting what is stressful and in determining appropriate responses.
Many chemical mediators are involved, including cortisol and adrenalin from the adrenal glands, other hormones and neurotransmitters (such as serotonin and noradrenalin), and responses from the autonomic and immune systems.
Depression thus leads to changes in the rest of the body, owing to long-term chemical imbalances in the systems that control the heart, the immune system, and metabolism.
The hippocampus, a key structure in the formation of memories of events and contexts, expresses receptors that enable it to respond to stress hormones in the blood.
We now know that it atrophies in a number of psychiatric disorders.
Within the hippocampus - a curved elongated ridge located in each of the brain's two temporal lobes - is a structure called the dentate gyrus, which produces new neurons throughout adult life.
Chronic stress inhibits neurogenesis and also causes many hippocampal neurons to shrink - a process called "remodeling."
Animal studies have shown that the stress hormone cortisol, together with neurotransmitters in the brain, also plays an important role in the remodeling of neurons.
Similarly, there is evidence that the prefrontal cortex - a key structure in emotional regulation as well as in decision-making and working memory - shrinks in major depression.
On the other hand, rather than atrophying, the amygdala, the seat of emotional memories, becomes hyperactive both in post-traumatic stress disorder and depressive illness, and there is evidence from animal studies of a hypertrophy of nerve cells after repeated stress.
A hyperactive amygdala, along with abnormal activity in other regions of the brain, leads to disrupted patterns of sleep and physical activity, as well as irregular patterns of secretion of hormones and other chemical mediators that control many of the body's structures.
For example, levels of the stress hormone cortisol increase in the evening, when they are normally low.
Over time, if uncorrected, major depression can cause such conditions as progressive mineral loss from bones, accumulation of abdominal fat, increased blood platelet reactivity, and increased risk of cardiovascular disease.
Moreover, certain types of antidepressants may contribute to some of these conditions.
Nevertheless, one of the most interesting features of these structural changes is that they can be prevented, and potentially reversed, with medication.
Indeed, in key respects depression is comparable to Cushing's disease, a disorder cause by excessive production of cortisol.
The elevated cortisol in Cushing's patients is higher than that found in major depression, but the psychiatric and somatic features of Cushing's disease are strikingly similar: melancholia, depression, abdominal obesity, bone mineral loss, and increased risk for cardiovascular disease, along with shrinkage of the hippocampus and memory impairment.
The good news from Cushing's disease is that hippocampal shrinkage and memory impairment is at least partially reversible over several years after correction of the excess cortisol.
This encourages the belief that structural changes in the brain that are associated with major depression can be prevented or even reversed with the right medications and other treatments.
For example, neurogenesis in the dentate gyrus that is suppressed by acute and chronic stress is elevated by many antidepressant treatments.
Still, one of the problems with many of the current medications is that, even with treatment, the recurrence of major depression is very high - around 70-80%.
This suggests that physiological processes underlying depression - the ones that may also lead to structural changes in the brain - are not being completely arrested, and thus that a new generation of anti-depressant medications is urgently needed.
If so, new, the new antidepressants would have to target what appear to be progressive neurodegenerative changes in the brain, which we infer are taking place because recurrence of depression is so high under currently available treatments.
Lithium, a mood stabilizer and neuroprotective agent, has the properties we are seeking, although its toxicity makes it less than ideal.
As ever, the challenge facing medical researchers is to develop more effective treatments without reducing their safety.
Healing the Sick Man of South Asia
LAHORE – Pakistan is undergoing three transitions simultaneously.
How they unfold matters not only for Pakistan, but also for much of the Muslim world, particularly as the Arab Spring forces change upon governments across the wider Middle East.
Most Muslim countries were governed for decades by autocrats who had either emerged directly from the armed forces, or had strong “khaki” support.
That was the case in Egypt, Libya, Yemen, Syria, and, of course, Pakistan.
The Arab Spring drained away whatever spurious legitimacy that style of governance ever had.
But, in Pakistan, delegitimation of military rule had actually occurred three years earlier, and the pressure for change came from much the same source – a restive and mobilized new middle class.
Several decades ago, the American political scientist Samuel P. Huntington argued that economic prosperity in developing countries with weak governing institutions would not necessarily lead to political stability.
On the contrary, economic growth in such contexts can be – and often is – politically destabilizing.
That proved to be the case in Turkey and Pakistan in the 1990’s and early 2000’s, and later in much of the Arab world.
Indeed, the rising aspirations of Arab youth in Egypt and Tunisia, the wellspring of the Arab Spring, followed impressive economic growth that had failed to trickle down.
And such rising expectations have been visible in all large Muslim countries.
As Huntington suggested, when young people see their economies grow, they begin to demand participation in decisions that affect all aspects of their lives, not just their economic well-being.
Military-dominated political systems precluded such participation, so, with economic growth, demilitarization of politics became a rallying cry in all large military-led Muslim states, from Indonesia to the Mediterranean coast.
Even Iran, where the Revolutionary Guards control roughly one-third of the economy, was affected when the result of the presidential election in 2009 triggered large anti-government protests in Tehran and other major cities.
But demilitarization means more than transferring power and policymaking from the armed forces to elected parliaments.
In their recent book Why Nations Fail, the economists Daron Acemoglu and James Robinson suggest that elections – even those that are free and fair – do not necessarily move societies from what they call “extractive” to “inclusive” systems.
Indeed, extraction of a country’s wealth for use by the elite can occur even in democratic societies when those who dominate the political system face no constraints other than periodic elections.
This is where the effort to devise institutional mechanisms to check and balance elite behavior enters the picture.
Indeed, the search for such mechanisms is precisely what is now underway in Pakistan.
In Pakistan, a discredited military was forced by public opinion to withdraw from power, creating political space for elected representatives.
They assumed control (though not over the military), but did not govern wisely.
While their personal wealth increased, living standards for everyone else either stagnated or, for lower-income groups, declined.
So, as Pakistan negotiated its political transition, it experienced significant economic decline.
As a result, Pakistan’s judiciary, media, and many civil-society organizations are now engaged in attempts not only to keep the soldiers in their barracks, but also to constrain the political establishment’s rapacious behavior.
Three cases before the country’s increasingly assertive Supreme Court promise to take Pakistan from the phase of demilitarization to a system in which meaningful checks can be exercised on those who wield power.
One case is an attempt to force Prime Minister Yusuf Raza Gilani’s administration to reopen proceedings in a Swiss court that were examining charges of money-laundering and misuse of public funds by President Asif Ali Zardari.
The Swiss proceedings were stopped at the request of the Pakistani government when Zardari became president.
In the second case, the Supreme Court wants Pakistan’s military intelligence agencies to account for hundreds, if not thousands, of missing people who were detained as part of the agencies’ campaign to contain the rise of Islamic extremism, or to undermine separatist aspirations in restive Baluchistan.
The third case opened an old complaint lodged by a politician decades ago against the “troika” – composed of the president, the prime minister, and the chief of army staff – that then governed Pakistan.
The plaintiff alleged that large amounts of funds were channeled to the troika’s favored candidates to contest the 1990 general election, in which Nawaz Sharif’s party won a big victory over Benazir Bhutto’s Peoples’ Party.
Finally, Pakistan is undergoing a transition in which power is moving from the central administration to sub-national governments.
The 18th amendment to the constitution, adopted in 2010, does precisely that, but implementation is being delayed by parties that prefer a highly centralized political structure.
If Pakistan’s transformation of its political system succeeds, it could serve as a model for other Muslim countries that are attempting to move from extractive to inclusive systems of governance.
Turkey has already traveled some distance along this path.
If Pakistan also advances, demilitarization of politics elsewhere in the Islamic world might not be far behind.
New Life in Old Age
ZURICH – Many of us have seen our aging parents or grandparents lose their independence.
In 2012, more than 2.4 million Americans over the age of 65 were treated in emergency rooms for injuries from falls alone.
With populations worldwide aging fast, the scale of such challenges is growing exponentially, affecting not only health-care systems, but also economies, government policies, and, of course, families.
The United Nations estimates that, by the middle of this century, the number of people older than 60 will double, with people over the age of 65 outnumbering – for the first time in history – children under the age of five.
The explanation for this demographic trend is straightforward: global fertility rates have plummeted, from five children per woman, on average, in 1950-1955, to 2.5 children per woman in 2010-2015.
Of course, aging citizens should not be viewed simply as an economic burden.
In fact, they can play a positive role as active consumers – a potential that many industries have already recognized and begun to tap.
According to Bank of America Merrill Lynch, people over 50 are responsible for almost 60% of consumer spending in the United States.
But that does not ameliorate the seemingly intractable underlying challenge: a shrinking pool of taxpayers to support a growing number of retirees.
This imbalance has already driven some governments to raise their retirement ages and change their pension policies to delay or reduce benefits and keep people in the workforce.
To keep people working longer, it is crucial to keep them healthy.
That is why the health-care industry must play a significant role in efforts to address the challenges of population aging.
Old age must be viewed not simply as an inevitable stage of life, but as an opportunity for health-care companies and systems to help people thrive.
To this end, health-care companies should shift the focus of their research-and-development efforts toward conditions that are prevalent among older patients, including chronic diseases like diabetes, heart disease, glaucoma, rheumatoid arthritis, and cancer.
Such efforts are also vital to find ways to stem more effectively the deterioration of people’s productivity and independence, by preserving their physical strength, mental acuity, and senses like hearing and vision.
This is important not only for older patients themselves, but also for their families and caregivers.
One particularly promising area is regenerative medicine, which has many potential applications – including for preventing or reversing hearing loss.
As it stands, one-third of people aged 65-70 (and half of those over 75) experience significant hearing loss, often caused by damage to or loss of inner-ear hair cells, which sense and transform sound waves into signals that register in the brain.
To address this issue, my company, Novartis, is testing a compound called CGF166, which targets certain healthy cells in the inner ear in order to “turn on” a specific gene that stimulates hair-cell development.
We have already entered the clinical-trial phase of our research, during which we will assess the tolerability and efficacy of CGF166 in treating patients with severe hearing loss.
But such treatments will mean little if they are not affordable or accessible to ordinary people.
And the current trajectory, with the burden of rising health-care costs increasingly being shifted onto patients themselves, is not encouraging.
To reverse this trend, the health-care industry must work with all stakeholders to support the financial sustainability of health-care systems, so that they can better handle the growing demand for care.
Success will require innovative strategies for improving patient outcomes in a financially sustainable way.
For example, the health-care industry could work with governments to offer health-enhancing services – such as remote patient monitoring, health apps, and patient-engagement tools – in addition to medications.
Ensuring the availability of trained health workers or counselors to answer patients’ questions about their treatment or related issues like insurance could also help.
For their part, payers – both governments and private insurers – should create a mechanism for rewarding health-care companies based on the real-world benefits of their products and services.
Beyond the annual payment per patient, the health-care company could receive a bonus or penalty, depending on the outcomes achieved.
Addressing the needs of aging populations is the biggest challenge facing health-care companies and payers.
A successful model will lower health-care costs, increase life expectancy, and improve elderly people’s quality of life.
And, by providing a more comprehensive understanding of the aging process, it could also guide us toward treatments and cures for other diseases – including those affecting the young.
Ensuring that every person lives as healthy a life as possible, for as long as possible, is in everyone’s interest.
That is why it makes sense now to focus on the most senior among us.
A New Era of Health-Care Innovation
ZURICH – We are experiencing a new wave of innovation in health care – one that promises to create the smartest, most connected, and most efficient health systems the world has ever seen.
Game-changing new technologies and treatments are transforming the practice of medicine, dramatically altering the patient experience, and creating conditions for even more breakthroughs.
The proof is in the data.
Last year, a record 61 drugs were introduced worldwide, compared with an annual average of 34 in the previous decade.
More than 40% of these treatments were for rare or difficult-to-treat conditions, including hepatitis C, meningococcal B, and metastatic melanoma.
And more new breakthroughs are on the horizon.
It is estimated that about 70% of the drugs currently in development across the industry are potential “first in class” treatments, meaning that they use a completely new mechanism of action against disease.
The new wave of innovation is attributable to three key factors: the ability to personalize therapy, the capacity to get treatments to market faster, and improved engagement with patients.
First, major advances in our knowledge of genomics – specifically, the way diseases manifest and develop in the body at the genetic level – are improving our ability to target illness at each stage and improve the patient experience.
Genetic markers, for example, can indicate which patients are likely to benefit from a drug, thereby improving outcomes while allowing patients to avoid potentially painful side effects of treatments that are unlikely to work.
For early-stage breast cancer patients, genetic markers show whether chemotherapy is likely to have an impact, or if hormone therapy alone is the better option.
A new lung cancer drug developed by my company, Novartis, is effective only in patients with non-small-cell lung cancer who have a particular genetic mutation.
The use of genomic expertise to improve health care is just beginning.
One promising area of investigation is CRISPR – a cutting-edge tool that could allow us to delete, repair, or replace the genes that cause disease.
As our understanding of the characteristics of a particular patient’s illness becomes increasingly precise, treatment will become increasingly effective and will reduce the risk of side effects.
Moreover, advances in our understanding of disease are boosting the efficiency of the drug development process, making it possible to bring new innovations to market faster.
For example, genetic testing is being used to pre-select participants for clinical trials, cutting recruitment times.
With this approach, research can begin in as little as three weeks, compared to the 34 weeks, on average, for a standard trial.
Add to that our ability to analyze data more quickly, and to make more precise decisions about dosing, and the clinical trial timeframe shrinks considerably.
Finally, real-time data and emerging technology tools have the potential to improve patient engagement and adherence, especially among those with chronic conditions caused by non-communicable diseases (NCDs).
As the world’s population ages, the incidence of NCDs is expected to rise, accounting for 52 million deaths annually by 2030.
More than 80% of NCD deaths are the result of chronic conditions such as cardiovascular and respiratory diseases, cancer, and diabetes.
As it stands, noncompliance with medication regimes is a major problem in treating NCDs.
For example, diabetes patients in the United States with the lowest level of compliance have a 30% yearly risk of hospitalization, compared to a 13% risk for patients with a high level of adherence.
That implies large costs for health-care systems – about $200 billion in the US and €125 billion ($133 billion) in the European Union each year.
Technologies that engage patients in their own health care and enable more seamless adherence to medication regimes have the potential to improve disease management, reduce hospitalization, and lower costs.
Today’s transformational advances in health care owe much to new genomics information, to the availability of big data to influence decisions in real time, to more targeted and individualized therapies, and to smarter, more connected delivery systems.
But they are just the beginning.
Further breakthroughs, enabled by the convergence of science and technology, can be expected, especially as unconventional players enter the health-care sector.
In this process, partnerships between health-care and technology companies will become increasingly important.
It is an exciting time for health care, with many disruptive innovations on the horizon.
For patients and providers alike, this is very good news.
Health Care’s Frequent Flyers
NEW YORK – For those of you who have seen the (American) movie “Up in the Air,” think of the scene where George Clooney meets Vera Farmiga.
He’s an outsourced human-resources executive who flies around the country firing people on behalf of timid managers; she’s a counterpart female road warrior.
Their courtship ritual revolves around loyalty cards: he pulls out his American Airlines Executive Platinum card; she matches.
Next, his Diamond VIP Hilton HHonors card; she calmly slaps hers on the rickety table where they are sharing drinks.
The unspoken message: points make you sexy. Airlines and hotels have known this for a long time.
Dean Margolis, who long ago consulted for major airlines and is now applying the same techniques to healthy behavior, recalls wondering how to get executives to fly just a little more.  It’s not by offering discounts, which benefit an executive’s company rather than the executive.
Margolis asks: “When the boss says ‘Who wants to come to Philadelphia with me?’, what’s going to get two people instead of one to say yes?
To abandon their families, stand in line, and perhaps take a middle seat...”
Points, of course, will do the trick.
The promise of being recognized at the airline counter, ushered to the front of the line, and, yes, looking like a big shot at the airport bar.
Margolis’s new company, MedRewards, plans to give people points for healthy behavior – everything from taking their medications regularly to signing in at the gym more than five times a week.
As in the airline business, the actual customers won’t be the users, but rather the vendors who want to influence users’ behavior: pharmaceutical companies who want patients to buy their drugs, along with insurers and employers who want to lower long-term costs. (Employers, bless them, even have an interest in keeping people healthy!)
How do you translate healthy behavior into status?
First, of course, you can have cards identifying your compliance behavior – e.g., not how many drugs you take, but how regularly you take them.
As for the rewards, they could be everything from discounts on energy-saving appliances and posture-enhancing furniture to vouchers from suppliers of “healthy” foods.
With the right partner, such a scheme could also include better treatment from the medical establishment: perhaps a separate phone line to call your care provider, free WiFi while you sit in the waiting room (others have to pay), and even room upgrades if you’re unlucky enough to need surgery.
Just as with flying, which most people (George Clooney’s character excepted) don’t particularly like, users may eagerly sign up in order to collect points. 
MedRewards is not alone. A variety of other companies are taking different approaches, but all of them have the same goal – to motivate people to engage in healthy behavior.
And all of them avoid simply paying them, which is counterproductive over the long run, and may lead to cheating.
While some may think it worth cheating to get money, most people don’t want a gold card that they know in their heart is a fraud.
Yet many people will do all they can to game the system, a challenge that each company must confront.
Contagion Health, in which I am an investor, uses multi-person game mechanics to turn healthy behavior into status and rewards.
Its initial service, at http://imoveyou.com, allows you to challenge someone else by filling in a form, which is then published on the person’s Facebook wall or on Twitter.
For example, Alice could fill in the blanks: “I will walk three extra miles if @JuanTigar spends 30 minutes on the elliptical machine.”
Of course, people use imoveyou for other purposes – everything from challenging a roommate to make his bed to encouraging a colleague to beat a sales record.
So much the better. Getting people engaged in general is healthy, too – though the corporations and health providers that sponsor subscriptions will probably put some restrictions on subject matter.
Then there’s HealthRally, which uses insights from behavioral economics to motivate people to achieve their own health and wellness goals.
The basic insight is that owing something to your friends is a far more powerful incentive than getting something for yourself.
The user signs up and recruits friends and family to sponsor a reward of their choice for a specified goal.
(We can imagine a wish-list revenue opportunity here, where vendors can offer specific motivational products or services.)
From then on, the sponsors have an implicit right to check on the user’s progress, offering support or criticism far more compelling than any stranger could.
It’s relatively easy to fail on your own, but if your friends have put up real money, it’s much harder.
While the service is currently designed for individuals, companies could also use HealthRally to enhance their corporate wellness programs.
By providing matching financial rewards, for example, a company could leverage its employees’ natural support networks and provide a valuable boost to the pot.
All three of these companies let us use our own quirks and psychology to motivate ourselves.
Over time, MedRewards, Contagion Health, HealthRally, and others will have to prove their worth with data.
If people who use their services actually stay healthy, work harder, and cost less, the evidence will be hard to ignore.
And people who might not have adopted these tools on their own will be encouraged to do so by others with evidence and incentives on their side. 
Disclosure: I am an investor in Contagion Health, and am considering investments in MedRewards and HealthRally.
Health Food Truths
“Low-carbohydrate” pasta is in a category of health foods known in the trade as “lesser evils” – foods with fewer unwanted calories, fat, trans fat, sugars, salt, or carbohydrates.
There is now a whole industry of such products, as well as health foods classified as “natural,” “organic,” and “functional.”
But are these foods really better for you?
In the United States, “organic” has a precise meaning established by the US Department of Agriculture.
“Natural,” however, means whatever the food producer or manufacturer says it means.
So-called “functional” foods – or “techno-foods” – are those to which manufacturers add omega-3 oils, artificial sweeteners, indigestible starches, cholesterol reducers, soy or milk (whey) proteins, phytochemicals, and other ingredients to enable them to take advantage of “qualified” health claims permitted by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA).
Sales of lesser-evil and functional foods have done well in recent years, bringing in about $85 billion in US sales in 2004.
If you routinely buy such foods, you are among LOHAS (Lifestyles of Health and Sustainability) consumers – the health food industry’s cherished demographic base.
You buy low-carbohydrate products, energy and nutrition bars, vitamin- and mineral-fortified foods and beverages, soy foods, and practically anything with a health claim.
Like many people, I thought that small, innovative companies dominated functional foods.
In fact, PepsiCo holds a 25% share of the market with products like Quaker cereals and fortified Tropicana juices, which qualify for FDA-approved health claims.