Dengan demikian, sekedar menambah pekerjaan di sektor formal saja tidak cukup kecuali kondisi pemuda yang bekerja di sektor informal dengan upah rendah juga diperbaiki.
Akan tetapi kebijakan ketenagakerjaan pasca-konflik hampir selalu mengabaikan sektor informal.
Lebih parahnya lagi, peraturan-peraturan terbaru – seperti larangan untuk ojek di Freetown, Sierra Leone – kadang menghalangi bentuk aktivitas informal produktif yang dilakukan pemuda.
Tapi bahkan fokus pada sektor informal saja masih kurang, sebuah riset menunjukkan bahwa kemiskinan dan marginalisasi tersendiri tidak cukup untuk menyebabkan konflik.
Jika ini benar maka negara-negara termiskin di dunia pasti selalu mengalami konflik.
Dan faktanya tidak seperti itu.
Konflik kekerasan terjadi ketika pemimpin terdorong untuk menggerakkan pendukungnya untuk menyulut konflik.
Motivasi tersebut bisa muncul dari berbagai sumber, salah satu yang paling umum ialah penyingkiran dari kekuasaan.
Dalam kondisi ini, pemimpin akan menyerukan satu identitas bersama – misalnya agama bila bicara konflik dewasa ini di Timur Tengah, atau etnis dalam  hal konflik di mayoritas negara Afrika – untuk menggerakkan pendukungnya.
Tentu saja diperlukan lebih dari sekadar identitas bersama untuk menghasilkan dorongan tersebut.
Individu atau kelompok biasanya akan merespon apabila mereka sudah memiliki dendam tertentu – terutama jika mereka merasa kelompoknya mengalami diskriminasi dalam memperoleh akses kepada sumber daya dan pekerjaan.
Dengan demikian, pekerjaan itu penting, namun yang terpenting bukanlah jumlah lapangan kerja tapi distribusi pekerjaan yang layak di antara kelompok-kelompok agama dan etnis.
Dengan kata lain, sekadar penambahan lapangan kerja baru tanpa memikirkan alokasinya, tidak akan melunakkan konflik, jika ketimpangan terus terjadi, penciptaan lapangan kerja justru akan memperburuknya.
Akan tetapi kebijakan ketenagakerjaan pasca-konflik hampir pasti selalu meniadakan “ketidaksetaraan horizontal”.
Contohnya, kebijakan ketenagakerjaan kurang berperan dalam mengurangi ketimpangan regional yang besar dan diskriminasi yang berkepanjangan pasca perang di Bosnia dan Herzegovina pada tahun 1990-an.
Mengingat kegagalan tersebut, tidak mengejutkan bahwa dampak kebijakan ketenagakerjaan biasanya relatif kecil dibandingkan ukuran permasalahan.
Di Kosovo dan Bosnia-Herzegovina, penciptaan lapangan kerja pada awalnya dipandang sebagai keutamaan dalam upaya pemeliharaan perdamaian pasca konflik.
Namun, di Kosovo, angka pengangguran bertahan di 45% enam tahun setelah perang berakhir.
Di Bosnia, program-program baru hanya menghasilkan 8.300 pekerjaan, sementara 450.000 orang dibebastugaskan dari militer; 20 tahun setelah berakhirnya konflik, angka pengangguran bertahan di 44%.
Terdapat satu contoh sukses kebijakan ketenagakerjaan pasca-krisis.
Pemerintah Nepal berupaya memperluas kesempatan di sektor informal pasca perang saudara yang menimpa negaranya, melalui penerapan sejumlah program berfokus pada pembangunan infrastruktur, pemberian pinjaman mikro, dan penyediaan bantuan teknis, yang ditargetkan kepada beberapa daerah dan kasta yang paling menderita.
Dengan menyadari peran akibat ketegangan serta diskriminasi etnis dan kasta dalam memicu konflik, pemerintah merancang skema jaminan lapangan kerja khusus bagi wilayah pedesaan, serupa dengan skema yang diterapkan India, yaitu setiap keluarga pedesaan dijamin upah selama 100 hari kerja.
Program tersebut didukung oleh pemerintah Nepal dan donor-donor eksternal, dan berpusat di desa-desa dan wilayah termiskin (tempat bermukimnya kasta-kasta termiskin).
Periode segera setelah berakhirnya konflik adalah masa-masa sensitif dan genting.
Pemimpin harus memanfaatkan betul waktu tersebut dan menjamin agar setiap kebijakan yang ditetapkan harus seefektif mungkin.
Bicara mengenai lapangan kerja berarti merancang program-program yang mencerminkan bagaimana seseorang menghabiskan waktunya dalam pekerjaan, serta mengatasi ketidakpuasan atau kebencian sebenarnya yang menyebabkan ketegangan.
A central reason is that the nature of US economic recoveries has changed.
From 1960 until 1991, US recoveries were typically rapid. From the trough of recessions, recovery to pre-recession output levels took less than two quarters on average, and employment recovered within eight months.
But the recoveries from the recessions of 1991 and 2001 were different.
For example, in 2001, it took just one quarter for output to recover, but 38 months for jobs to come back. The current recovery appears to be similarly slow in creating jobs.
Some economists argue that, unlike past recoveries, when workers who were temporarily laid off were rehired, job losses starting in 1991 were more permanent.
Unemployed workers had to find jobs in new industries, which took more time and training.
Others suggest that the Internet has made it easier for firms to hire quickly.
So, rather than hire in panic at the first sign of a recovery for fear that they will be unable to do so later and lose sales, firms would rather make sure that the recovery is well established before adding workers.
Regardless of the true explanation, the US is singularly unprepared for jobless recoveries.
Typically, unemployment benefits last only six months.
Moreover, because health-care benefits are often tied to jobs, an unemployed worker also risks losing access to affordable health care.
Short-duration benefits may have been appropriate when recoveries were fast and jobs plentiful, because the fear of losing benefits before finding a job may have given workers an incentive to look harder.
But, with few jobs being created, a positive incentive has turned into a source of great anxiety.
Even those who have jobs fear that they could lose them and be cast adrift.
Politicians ignore popular anxiety at their peril.
President George H.W. Bush is widely believed to have lost his re-election bid, despite winning a popular war in Iraq, because he seemed out of touch with public hardship following the 1991 recession.
That lesson has been fully internalized.
Economic recovery is all about jobs, not output, and politicians are willing to push for economic stimulus, both fiscal (tax cuts or government spending) and monetary (lower short-term interest rates), until jobs start reappearing.
In theory, this is what democracy is all about – policy responding to the needs of the people.
In practice, though, public pressure to do something quickly enables politicians to run roughshod over the usual checks and balances on government policy making.
Long-term spending and tax policies are enacted under the shadow of an emergency, with the party that happens to be in power at the time of the downturn getting to push its pet agenda.
Much of what is enacted as stimulus has little immediate effect on job creation, but does have an adverse long-term effect on government finances.
For example, the 2009 stimulus package enacted by the Obama administration had many billions of dollars devoted to cancer research, though such research employs few people directly and is spent over a long time horizon – far beyond that of even a prolonged recovery.
Equally deleterious to economic health is the recent vogue of cutting interest rates to near zero and holding them there for a sustained period.
It is far from clear that near-zero short-term interest rates (as compared to just low interest rates) have much additional effect in encouraging firms to create jobs when powerful economic forces make them reluctant to hire.
But prolonged near-zero rates can foster the wrong kinds of activities.
For example, households and investment managers, reluctant to keep money in safe money-market funds, instead seek to invest in securities with longer maturities and higher credit risk, so long as they offer extra yield.
Likewise, money fleeing low US interest rates (and, more generally, industrial countries) has pushed up emerging-market equity and real-estate prices, setting them up for a fall (as we witnessed recently with the flight to safety following Europe’s financial turmoil).
Moreover, even if corporations in the US are not hiring, corporations elsewhere are.
Brazil’s unemployment rate, for example, is at lows not seen for decades.
If the Fed were to accept the responsibilities of its de facto role as the world’s central banker, it would have to admit that its policy rates are not conducive to stable world growth.
Policy would still be accommodative if the Fed maintained low interest rates rather than the zero level that was appropriate for a panic.
And this would give savers less of an incentive to search for yield, thus avoiding financial instability.
Politicians will not sit quietly, however, if the Fed attempts to raise rates.
Their thinking – and the Fed’s – follows the misguided calculus that if low rates are good for jobs, ultra-low rates must be even better.
Emerging studies on the risk-taking and asset-price inflation engendered by ultra-low policy rates will eventually convince Fed policymakers to change their stance.
But, if politicians are to become less anxious about jobs, perhaps we need to start discussing whether jobless recoveries are here to stay, and whether the US safety net, devised for a different era, needs to be modified.
The Mosquito Menace
STANFORD – Mosquito-borne diseases kill millions of people annually, and cause suffering for many more.
In 2012, there were an estimated 207 million cases of malaria, leading to some 627,000 deaths.
Dengue fever is a leading cause of illness and death in the tropics and subtropics, with as many as 100 million people infected each year.
And there are an estimated 200,000 cases of yellow fever annually, leading to 30,000 deaths worldwide.
It takes only one bite from a disease-carrying mosquito to transmit a debilitating or deadly infection – and mosquitoes breed and multiply with astonishing speed.
Given that there are no vaccines or drug treatments for illnesses like dengue fever and West Nile virus, and that treatments for diseases like malaria are difficult to access in many at-risk areas, more effective mechanisms for controlling mosquito populations are desperately needed.
The good news is that a promising new technology is ready for field-testing.
It is now up to government agencies to facilitate its development.
Today, the dominant method for reducing insect populations – the so-called “sterile insect technique” (SIT) – relies on radiation to sterilize males, which are then released into infested areas to mate.
But this approach, which has been used since the middle of the last century, has not been effective with mosquitoes, owing to their fragility.
Advances in molecular biology offer analogous – but far more sophisticated – solutions.
Using molecular genetic-engineering techniques, the British company Oxitec has created a new way to control the mosquito species that transmits dengue fever.
Male mosquitoes are bred in the laboratory with a specific genetic mutation.
As a result, their offspring produce high levels of a protein that prevents their cells from functioning normally, causing them to die before reaching maturity.
Male mosquitoes do not bite, so their release presents no health risk, and, because their progeny die, no genetically engineered mosquitoes persist in the environment.
If the males are released over a period of several months, this would, in theory, result in a marked reduction in the mosquito population.
All that is needed now is to determine whether it works in practice.
Scientific research to develop products like irradiated sterile insects or the Oxitec mosquitoes proceeds progressively from more to less contained conditions – from the laboratory to confined trials to limited field trials.
Now that Oxitec has conducted promising field trials in the Cayman Islands, Malaysia, and Brazil, it is preparing to conduct trials in other countries, including the United States.
Such trials are always appropriately controlled and monitored to ensure that they are safe and effective, with government regulation providing an extra safeguard.
In order to determine the appropriate level of oversight, government bodies would presumably conduct a science-based risk analysis.
When it comes to genetic engineering, however, science seems to matter less than politics.
The fact is that molecular genetic engineering is more precise and predictable than older, cruder techniques like irradiation.
But, while SIT remains unregulated in most places, the regulatory reviews of genetically engineered living organisms have tended to be drawn out and excessive worldwide, with politics delaying – and sometimes even preventing – approvals.
As a result, research and development in genetic engineering is more expensive, discouraging investment and hampering innovation.
This is all the more problematic in the case of mosquito control, given the urgency of the problem.
The World Health Organization’s Special Program for Research and Training in Tropical Diseases has called upon regulatory agencies to emphasize “science-based, case-by-case targeted requirements with a degree of practical parsimony,” instead of relying on “a precautionary approach that can require data to address all theoretical risks.”
In other words, regulators should consider these innovations’ public-health costs and benefits, and expedite their review.
Given the degree of suffering caused by mosquito-borne diseases, government leaders must not subject genetic-engineering solutions for controlling them to the same kinds of political and populist headwinds that have impeded the approval of genetically engineered agricultural products.
Only with pragmatic, fact-based regulation can the world realize genetic engineering’s full disease-fighting potential.
Israel’s Neglected Peace Dividend
TEL AVIV – Twenty years after the Oslo Accords, the prospects for a comprehensive Israeli-Palestinian peace deal are dimmer than ever.
Indeed, roughly a half-million Israeli settlers in the occupied territories (including East Jerusalem) make the creation of a contiguous Palestinian state an almost impossible mission.
So, is the renewed vigor of US President Barack Obama’s administration in the quest for peace too little, too late?
Israeli Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu claims that his government has no preconditions for resuming negotiations with the Palestinians.
Meanwhile, his housing minister, Uri Ariel (himself a settler and a member of the annexationist Jewish Home party), unleashes a new wave of settlement expansion that threatens to link the 1967 border with the Jordan Valley, thus bisecting Palestinian territory.
Netanyahu’s own insistence on “ironclad” security arrangements is a euphemism for an Israeli presence in the Jordan Valley – and no return to the “Auschwitz borders” of 1967.
Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas is too weak and too burdened by his rivalry with the hard-line Islamist Hamas – which rules in Gaza – to allow himself the political luxury of departing from the core demands of Palestinian nationalism.
Nor does Netanyahu, an ideologue who is visibly uncomfortable with his forced support of the two-state idea, truly have a governing coalition for peace.
Thus, US Secretary of State John Kerry will require great deal of creativity to reconcile Netanyahu’s position and the Palestinian precondition, recently reiterated by Abbas’s close associate Nabil Shaath, that Israel must agree to negotiate on the basis of the 1967 borders.
Mahmoud Al-Habbash, the Palestinian minister of religious affairs, even went so far as to demand “assurances that the talks won’t fail,” because if they do, a new intifada would surely erupt.
Moreover, Kerry’s peace drive is taking place in a regional environment that is not amenable to a negotiated resolution of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
The Arab Spring has turned bloody and unpredictably turbulent, further diminishing the odds for peace in Palestine.
Nor does the election of Hassan Rowhani, a relative moderate, to Iran’s presidency improve Kerry’s chances.
Rowhani’s victory is certainly good news for Iranians, and it may lead to a more civilized dialogue between the Islamic Republic and the international community.
But Rowhani’s presidency can hardly be expected to change Iran’s strategic objectives.
Iran will continue its nuclear program, fight for the survival of Bashar al-Assad’s regime in Syria, seek to maintain its vital alliance with key regional proxies such as Hezbollah, and defend Palestine and al-Quds (Jerusalem).
If Assad defeats his opponents with the help of Hezbollah and Iran, his survival is bound to be perceived as a victory for the regional “axis of resistance” to Israel.
And a permanent Iranian presence in Syria would make a war between Israel and Iran practically unavoidable.
Palestine would then be relegated to an obscure corner of the international agenda.
Complicating matters further, America’s wars in Iraq and Afghanistan have limited its regional clout.
The US now faces an unpredictable Middle East that is writing its own history as well – or as badly – as it can.
Syria’s internal conflict has now become a Sunni-Shia sectarian war that is spreading across the region.
The Sunni clerics who have just declared a jihad against “the Iranian regime, Hezbollah, and its sectarian allies” are the voice of millions across the Muslim world.
Furthermore, waves of Syrian refugees are threatening the sustainability of the Jordanian monarchy, already roiled by profound internal cleavages.
Hezbollah has drawn Lebanon into the Syrian conflict, setting up a showdown between Shia and Sunni at home.
A similar scenario is already unfolding in Iraq.
Turkey, a responsible regional power, has so far resisted being drawn into the Syrian quagmire, but its effects can be seen in the rising tensions between the country’s Sunni majority and the Shia Alevi sect.
Inertia is not an adequate response in an era of revolutionary change.
Unfortunately, Israel is missing a coherent regional strategy.
Netanyahu, always on the defensive, does not view Middle East turmoil as a trigger for a proactive strategy that would use a solution to the Palestinian problem as leverage for broader positive change in the region.
America, burdened by the cost of its Middle East troubles, eager to refocus on Asia, and no longer in need of Arab oil, can allow itself to leave the region to its destiny.
Israel is part of the region and has a strong interest in helping to shape its future.
Israel has traditionally strived to forge alliances with the region’s minorities – Kurds, Persians, Maronites, and others.
Now is the time for a major shift to an alliance with the region’s overwhelming Sunni majority.
Israel should follow Obama, whose recent decision to arm the Syrian rebels, though belated and still ill-defined, is a choice for the Sunni alliance.
Israel should play an active role in the fall of Assad as a way to undermine the region’s “Shia crescent” and isolate its leader, Iran.
Assad’s defeat would break the “axis of resistance,” choke off Hezbollah’s arms supplies, and drive a permanent wedge between Turkey and Iran.
A solution to the Palestinian problem would serve such a strategy.
It would strengthen Israel’s relations with Egypt, help to stabilize Jordan (a vital and friendly buffer state), and remove a major source of tension with Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdoğan’s Islamist government.
Most important, it would undermine Iran’s efforts to make inroads into the Arab world under the pretext of defending Palestine and Holy Jerusalem.
What Good Is an Arab Military Alliance?
LONDON – The framework nuclear agreement that Iran and the P-5 (China, Britain, France, Russia, and the United States) plus Germany recently reached represents progress on one major security challenge in the Middle East.
But, as some Arab countries move to establish a joint military force, another security question is emerging: Will such an alliance leave the region better or worse off, particularly given today’s growing Sunni-Shia divide?
A nine-country Saudi-led coalition, which includes Egypt, the United Arab Emirates, Kuwait, and Jordan, is already carrying out airstrikes against the Iran-backed Houthi rebels in Yemen – an effort that Iran’s Supreme Leader Ali Khamenei recently declared will end with the Saudis’ “noses [being] rubbed to the soil.”
Yet Egypt’s president, General Abdel Fattah el-Sisi, has indicated that the coalition’s mandate may be extended beyond Yemen.
But what is that mandate?
A few objectives can be excluded from the start.
For example, post-conflict democratization cannot be the goal, given that Arab regimes lack the credentials or knowhow to craft democracies, and their militaries are neither willing nor able to assist in the process.
Similarly, humanitarian intervention can be ruled out, owing not only to most Arab regimes’ lack of experience and inglorious human-rights records, but also because none of the official statements related to the founding of the joint force have remotely suggested that upholding human rights was ever a concern.
Stabilization might be an objective, but only if the relevant governments can agree on shared threats and how to address them.
They could, for example, take the classic “balance of power/terror” approach, by intervening to undermine the more powerful actor in a conflict, force it to the negotiating table, and dictate the terms of any compromise, thereby ensuring that they benefit from the newly created status quo.
But the rise of Arab military coalitions raises serious concerns, not least because the history of Arab-led military interventions – unlike those carried out by the West in places like Bosnia, Kosovo, and even Libya – does not contain any promising precedent.
Such interventions were usually aimed at empowering a proxy political force over its military and political rivals, instead of averting humanitarian disaster or institutionalizing a non-violent conflict-resolution mechanism following a war.
Egypt’s military intervention in Yemen in the 1960s is a case in point.
By late 1965, Egyptian President Gamel Abdel Nasser had sent 70,000 troops in Yemen to support a republican coup against royalist forces.
Despite using prohibited chemical weapons against Yemeni guerillas from 1963 to 1967 – a first in an intra-Arab conflict – Egypt failed to achieve its objectives.
On top of its military humiliation, Egypt’s international reputation suffered, with the United Nations General Assembly condemning the Egyptian forces’ use of banned chemical weapons against villages that supported the monarchy.
The adventure also took a heavy economic toll; by 1965, Egypt had run up a foreign debt of nearly $3 billion, forcing it to add a “defense tax” to finance the Yemen war.
The Syria-dominated “Arab Deterrent Force” did not fare much better when it intervened in Lebanon’s civil war in the 1980s, failing either to end the brutal fighting or to secure vulnerable Palestinian refugees.
After 1982, when the Lebanese government failed to extend the ADF’s mandate, it turned into a purely Syrian military force – one that ended up committing some of the worst atrocities against Palestinian factions and refugees in the so-called “War of the Camps” in 1985.
Brief and less complex interventions were also unsuccessful in ending violent crises – and in some cases even exacerbated them.
A clear example is the recent Egyptian airstrikes in Libya, which have not only undermined the UN-led peace process in a deeply divided country, but have also empowered the most extreme elements.
Of course, history is not a definitive guide to the future; an Arab-led intervention today could turn out very differently.
But there is little to indicate that it will; indeed, despite hundreds of Saudi airstrikes on Houthi-controlled military bases and seaports, the rebels continue to advance.
If emerging Arab military coalitions are to avoid the mistakes of past interventions, their members must reconsider their approach, including the structural deficiencies that contributed to past failures.
Many factors affect the outcome of a military intervention in a civil war, especially if it involves a ground offensive.
In particular, Arab leaders should focus on revising the processes by which national-security policy is formulated, improving civil-military relations, providing the relevant training in peacekeeping and peace-building, reforming the political culture, and addressing socio-psychological complexes.
If Arab leaders fail to overcome these deficiencies, the latest Arab force could become the Middle East’s newest source of anti-democratic, sectarian-based instability, potentially intensifying the Sunni-Shia conflict.
That is the last thing the region needs.
Joking about Science
ITHACA, NEW YORK – An apocryphal story sometimes heard among physicists concerns a toast, proposed by his Cambridge University colleagues, to J. J. Thomson’s discovery of the electron in 1897: “To the electron: may it never be of use to anyone!”
Pure mathematicians supposedly tell a similar joke about their profession.
Why should it be considered witty to celebrate the uselessness of knowledge?
I witnessed a similar attitude from a cosmologist when I participated in a radio show a few years ago: the host remarked to him that his research “has virtually no practical applicability,” to which he quickly replied, “I’m proud of that, yes.”
These jokes all seem to rely on the same assumption: everyone thinks that knowledge, especially scientific knowledge, should be useful.
So it’s funny to boast that one’s own brand of knowledge, whether experimental physics, mathematics, or cosmology, is useless.
But the joke wouldn’t work if there were not at the same time another widely shared assumption that scientific knowledge has a value independent of any practical use.
After all, it would not be funny if a charity dedicated to famine relief celebrated its own ineffectiveness; practical value in that case would be paramount, because it would be the only real reason for the charity to exist.
So, even though potential usefulness is the reason why governments devote so much money to scientific research, people really expect more from science than that.
On this view, science also has a quite different, higher aim: understanding the natural world.&#160;
Einstein may have drawn US President Franklin Roosevelt’s attention to the possibility of making nuclear weapons, but he is chiefly remembered for his profound ideas about the nature of the universe.
More recent scientific gurus, such as Carl Sagan and Stephen Hawking, have presented a similar image to the public.
Science from this perspective is about natural philosophy, an enterprise that seeks to acquire deep understanding of the world regardless of whether that knowledge can be put to use.
Jokes also betray a certain uneasiness about the apparent contradictions that they reveal.&#160; In this case, the uneasiness derives from a fundamental uncertainty about which of the two faces of science, natural philosophy or instrumentality, represents its true character.&#160; Is science really about understanding the world, with instrumentality being a matter of fortuitous spin-offs?
Or is it really about putting the natural world to human uses, with natural philosophy being little more than a language to account for why certain techniques work?
The nineteenth century invented the familiar terms “pure” and “applied” science as a way of reconciling these alternative understandings.
Pure science, as the name suggests, is presented as the “real thing,” untainted by practical considerations and rooted in properly conducted empirical and theoretical investigation of nature.
Applied science takes the knowledge provided by pure science and puts it to work.
But that straightforward picture bears little resemblance to the complexities of real scientific activity: if applied science involved nothing more than the application of the results of pure science, there would be no need for “research and development” departments in manufacturing corporations, or research laboratories at chemical or electronics companies.
The instrumental achievements of science would depend solely on the scraps falling from the pure scientist’s table.
In fact, the two faces of science are much more intimately interwoven – less like faces than like two ingredients of a thoroughly stirred mixture.
“Truth and utility,” wrote Francis Bacon, the early seventeenth-century English philosopher and statesman, “are the very same things.”
In other words, the truth of beliefs about the world is guaranteed only by the capacity of those beliefs to be turned into actions that produce the practical outcomes that human beings desire.
What we understand as the instrumentality of science was, for Bacon, nothing but the other side of the scientific coin.
Where the poet John Keats wrote “Beauty is truth, truth beauty,” Bacon might have said, “Utility is truth, truth utility”—as long as we take “utility” in a very broad sense.
But we don’t believe Bacon, either.
Like Bacon, we value utility because it seems to lend credibility to the claims that science makes about the nature of the world – science is true because it works.
But, at the same time, we won’t allow science to be reduced to practical utility, because that would destroy its intellectual status, as well as the intellectual status of scientists themselves, and would prevent science from giving explanations.
So science must retain its claim to being natural philosophy, too.
Sometimes we believe that science is natural philosophy, and sometimes we believe that science is instrumentality.
But in fact it’s both simultaneously, neither “pure” nor “applied.”
If we could acknowledge that, we wouldn’t be joking about it.
Deconstructing the Euro
PARIS – In January, Chris Williamson, Chief Economist at the economics research firm Markit, called France “the new sick man of Europe.”
With near-zero GDP growth, rising unemployment, and mounting public debt – not to mention counter-productive austerity policies – it is difficult to argue otherwise.
Given France’s profound importance to Europe’s economic and political stability, this poses a major threat to the entire European project.
Recent developments confirm Williamson’s diagnosis.
French business activity sank to a seven-month low in December.
While tax revenues increased by €32 billion ($44 billion) last year, the government deficit fell by a mere €8 billion and public debt increased from 89% of GDP to more than 93%.
Meanwhile, unemployment rose from 9.5% to 10.5%.
The obvious conclusion is that austerity is not the answer.
Indeed, France must abandon its current policies, for its own – and the rest of Europe’s – sake.
France’s problems, like those of the eurozone’s other troubled economies, stem from the fact that the euro’s exchange rate does not align with member countries’ economic positions.
As a result, these countries’ virtual exchange rates vis-à-vis Germany are critically overvalued, inasmuch as wages in these countries have risen more quickly, and labor productivity more slowly, than in Germany.
Given that the implicit nominal exchange rates are fixed “forever” within the euro, these countries have accumulated major deficits relative to Germany.
Likewise, the deficit countries’ exchange rates are overvalued relative to third countries like the United States and Japan, while Germany’s currency is undervalued, because the euro’s exchange rate is determined by the balance of payments of the eurozone as a whole, which Germany’s massive surplus distorts.
In short, the euro exchange rate is too weak for equilibrium in Germany and too strong for equilibrium in France and the other less competitive eurozone economies.
The eurozone’s weaker economies thus face a dilemma: either expand in line with productive potential, thereby incurring external deficits, or enforce austerity, eliminating external deficits by squeezing imports.
Under pressure from Germany, they have so far pursued the latter option.
The current “competitive austerity” trend is irrational, first and foremost, because, by undermining domestic demand, it directly controverts the currency union’s fundamental principle that a large domestic market should act as a buffer against external demand shocks.
This is causing everyone to suffer – even Germany.
Indeed, from 2007 to 2012, Germany’s exports to other eurozone countries declined by 9%, from €432 billion to €393 billion.
But this is not the only threat that austerity poses to Germany’s hard-won prosperity.
The euro has also caused Germany’s business cycle to diverge from those of the less competitive economies, while prohibiting customized monetary policies.
And the common monetary policy that all are being forced to pursue is intensifying deflationary pressures in the weaker countries, while increasing inflationary pressures in Germany.
Furthermore, populations in the eurozone’s stagnant economies are increasingly demanding that Germany change its policies, increasing wages and implementing measures aimed at boosting consumption and discouraging savings.
While responding to such demands would help to ease political tensions across the eurozone, they would face strong opposition within Germany.
Similarly, resolving the crises that will inevitably emerge from the current rigid exchange-rate system will ultimately require Germany to agree either to debt write-offs or to large-scale government-bond purchases by the European Central Bank, which would flood the eurozone with liquidity.
Either outcome would run contrary to Germany’s interests and preferences, making it as unfair an approach as austerity.
What the eurozone needs is a solution that does not force any one country or group of countries to bear the brunt of the adjustment – and that means a controlled segmentation of the currency union.
Contrary to popular belief, this could be done in a way that reinvigorates the European ideal, rather than reviving the parochial nationalism of the past.
The key is to ensure that it arises from the European Union’s economic and political core.
Specifically, Germany, Europe’s greatest economic power, and France, the intellectual progenitor of European unification, should announce their simultaneous exit from the euro and re-adoption of the Deutsche Mark and the franc.
This would trigger the immediate revaluation of the Deutsche Mark – and possibly of the franc – relative to the euro.
For their part, other EU member countries would have to decide whether to retain the euro in its truncated form or revert to their own national currencies, possibly pegging them to the revived Deutsche Mark or franc.
Regardless of their decision, the price competitiveness of the eurozone’s weaker economies would improve considerably.
Of course, France and Germany would need to implement interim arrangements to safeguard their banking systems’ stability.
Moreover, they would have to negotiate with the ECB and other European governments a plan for managing euro-denominated debts.
A period of monetary uncertainty, as European economies adjusted to the new environment, would be unavoidable.
But that would be far better than the economic and political impasse in which the eurozone is now trapped.
Latin America’s Ukraine
MEXICO CITY – By all indications, the international community has resigned itself to Russian President Vladimir Putin’s Crimean “land grab,” as US Vice-President Joe Biden has called it.
Once Putin decided he wanted to assume the consequences of his acts, there was very little the United States, the European Union, or the United Nations could do.
Latin America, meanwhile, is experiencing the opposite problem.
Though the region’s countries have the means to stop the growing political, economic, and human-rights catastrophe in Venezuela, they lack the will, while the rest of the world’s attention to Ukraine has removed any pressure on them to act.
In Ukraine, the US and the EU seem to have decided on a sensible course of action – or, rather, on a realistic two-track response – that is unlikely to produce spectacular results, but is certainly preferable to passivity.
First, the sanctions imposed so far – visa cancellations, asset seizures or freezes, and the like – will not give Sevastopol back to Ukraine, but they will eventually bite, at least in certain Russian business sectors.
Whether this unites the oligarchs, or divides them, and whether it forces them to take their money out of Russia, or bring it back home, cannot be predicted.
But uncertainty is far better than knowing acquiescence.
There are simply no alternatives right now, and applying the entire gamut of sanctions from the outset would leave the EU and the US without further options.
Second, and much more important, a tacit anti-appeasement ultimatum has been issued to the Kremlin: additional expansion in Ukraine will lead to much stronger and more painful sanctions.
This may or may not work, but the decisions and announcements at least have the merit of existing, thereby demonstrating the willingness of the G-7 and others to uphold principles and values to which Russia is, in theory, also committed.
Clearly, the world’s democracies lack perfect options, given everyone’s eminently reasonable reluctance to resort to force.
Given Ukraine’s location, history, and the potential for trouble, the international community’s greater attention to the crisis there than to the disaster unfolding in Venezuela is not surprising.
But it is not appropriate, either.
Recent events in Venezuela imply as many perils and unforeseen, perverse consequences as in Ukraine, and the international community, as well as most Latin American democracies, should be paying much more attention.
For starters, there is energy security.
Venezuela has some of the world’s largest oil and gas reserves, and is a major exporter (though smaller than ten years ago).
And, for better or for worse, it is a key supplier to certain countries.
Nearly all of the Caribbean, Central America, and some Gulf ports in the United States depend on Venezuelan low-sulfur crude oil for their power plants, refineries, and balance-of-payments positions.
Cuba is the most dramatic case of dependence: Without subsidized Venezuelan petroleum and the enormous sums paid for the Castros’ doctors – some excellent, some fraudulent – the island’s economy would sink, causing a wave of Cubans to leave, as has occurred repeatedly over the past half-century.
This time, though, the consequences for Florida and Mexico could be graver than before.
But what happens in Venezuela matters for other reasons as well.
Targeted repression, imprisonment of opposition leaders, press censorship, shortages, inflation, and wanton violence – Caracas is one the world’s most dangerous cities – have created a situation that appears untenable in the medium term.
The harsh economic and security measures that Venezuela needs to emerge from its current debacle cannot be implemented without some form of consensus, which requires an end to repression and polarization.
Unfortunately, none of this seems likely if left exclusively in the hands of Venezuelans, who have failed repeatedly over the past 15 years to find solutions to their dilemmas.
Some have suggested a papal mediation; others have advocated intervention by a group of Latin American former presidents.
In the case of Crimea, the deaths of hundreds of demonstrators in Kyiv and the possible Russian takeover of eastern Ukraine has called into question principles such as non-intervention.
Not in Latin America: the number of students in Venezuela that are killed by government-sponsored paramilitary groups is still viewed as nobody’s business but the Venezuelans’, even though the country is a party to every regional instrument of international human-rights law.
And no outside mediation is feasible without a minimum of censure or criticism of Maduro’s extremism, even if the opposition takes its lumps, too, for some of its factions’ radical, occasionally subversive stances.
Paradoxically, whereas the Western powers are probably powerless in Ukraine, Latin America’s major players could exert great influence in Venezuela.
Economic sanctions on Russia may eventually hurt, and the Kremlin may desist from further encroachment; but the Ukrainian crisis is largely impervious, in the short term, to outside involvement.
In Venezuela, the danger is just as great for everybody, and addressing it is much cheaper and easier.
But doing so requires what most Latin American governments sorely lack: vision and courage.
Brazil’s Cautious Voters
MEXICO CITY – Brazil has been in the global spotlight this year, and not always for the right reasons.
Following the 2013 riots over the amount of money being spent on the 2014 soccer World Cup, protests continued up to, and even during, the tournament in June.
There were dire – though ultimately misplaced – predictions about chaotic conditions for participants, and then, of course, the catastrophic performance of the home team.
Now, the costs of the soccer jamboree, coming on top of the country’s ongoing economic slowdown, are coming home to roost.
Several analysts have concluded that Brazil’s bubble has burst, and that the so-called “country of the future” will remain stuck in the present.
Economic uncertainty is also dramatically affecting Brazilian politics.
And a once placid, even predictable, presidential election campaign has been thrown into disarray by the death of the Brazilian Socialist Party candidate, Eduardo Campos, in an airplane crash in August.
Campos’s running mate, Marina Silva, was then nominated to take his place.
A presidential candidate four years ago who ran on a green, socially conservative, but strongly pro-democratic platform, Silva received nearly 20 million votes.
Her ties to Brazil’s huge evangelical churches, and her unwillingness to break with them on issues such as abortion, same-sex marriage, and drug policy, alienate many voters.
Nonetheless, she has rapidly overtaken Aécio Neves, the Social Democratic Party (PSDB) candidate, as the main challenger to Dilma Rousseff, the incumbent President and Workers’ Party (PT) candidate.
A run-off between the two women, following the October 5th first round, seems inevitable, as opinion polls give neither close to 50% of the vote.
Though competent and tough, Rousseff faces voter fatigue after 12 years of PT rule, which many will remember, perhaps unfairly, for corruption scandals and the national team’s 7-1 drubbing by Germany in this year’s World Cup.
But it is the government’s dismal economic record over the past four years that is causing the biggest problems for Rousseff’s campaign.
At the same time, Silva will not be able to win the run-off without an enthusiastic and persuasive endorsement from Neves and the PSDB.
Fortunately for Silva, the PSDB is highly critical of the PT administration, especially the foreign policy of Rousseff’s predecessor, Luis Inácio Lula da Silva.
PSDB-allied diplomats and former senior officials strongly have opposed the PT’s support for Latin America’s authoritarian regimes (particularly in Cuba and Venezuela), its futile insistence on a permanent seat on the United Nations Security Council, and its excessive embrace of non-aligned, anti-imperialist positions.
A Silva victory would herald change in domestic and foreign policy alike.
But perhaps its most remarkable impact would be cultural.
Though she would not be the first woman president (Rousseff broke the gender barrier) or the first from humble origins (Lula broke that taboo), she would be the first mulatto – darker-skinned than traditional Brazilian political leaders – to hold the office.
Just as Lula’s 2002 election signified a sea of change in a highly class-conscious, socially stratified society, Silva’s election would shake up the racial order in a country – and indeed continent – where racism has not been eradicated.
Indeed, in a country that has been proud of its supposedly non-racist nature, there has been no Afro-Brazilian politician of significant stature for a century.
Despite the excitement aroused by her candidacy, however, Silva is unlikely to win.
Since Latin America’s democratization in the 1980s, only two incumbents have lost – Daniel Ortega in Nicaragua (who was not really elected the first time) and Hipólito Mejía in the Dominican Republic.
More than a dozen incumbents have won re-election, more or less democratically.
The incumbent’s advantage in Latin America owes much to the feeble regulations restricting the government’s use of the state apparatus for campaign purposes.
The scope for abuse of power, public money, the media, and most state institutions available to sitting presidents makes it almost impossible to defeat them.
Ultimately, Brazilians may just be too unsure about handing power to Silva, who has become a media phenomenon but remains an unknown quantity.
Rousseff will probably be re-elected, not so much on the strength of her record as because voters fear the unfamiliar.
That would be a pity.
After all, most new political challengers appear unprepared for the top job until they are in power.
But Brazilians may feel that they have already broken enough political barriers and taboos in recent years, and that Silva would represent one too many.
Mexico’s Second Revolution
MEXICO CITY – Mexico, a stagnant and violence-plagued country in recent years, finally began to overcome its malaise in 2013, thanks to an activist president and a coalition of political parties determined to move the country forward.
But, alongside substantive changes, there is considerable uncertainty and hyperbole.
It could hardly be otherwise.
The situation resembles that of 20 years ago – almost to the day.
When the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) among Mexico, Canada, and the United States entered into force on January 1, 1994, it seemed that Mexico was poised for a true takeoff.
But a series of events – the Zapatista uprising in Chiapas, the assassinations of a presidential candidate and the incoming president’s chief aide, and the collapse of the currency – shook Mexico that year, underscoring the depth of the challenges it faced.
NAFTA brought with it a spectacular increase in Mexican exports, as well as a dramatic shift in their composition.
But it proved to be a great disappointment in terms of foreign investment inflows and economic growth, which has averaged 2.6% per year over the last two decades – slower than Peru, Chile, Colombia, Brazil, and Uruguay.
As a result, Mexico’s income gap with the US and Canada has barely narrowed.
Thus, President Enrique Peña Nieto’s task since taking office one year ago has been to ensure that the promise of major change in Mexico finally translates into sustained economic growth, improved living standards, and faster convergence with the US and Canada.
While both the foreign and local press refer generally to “reforms,” or lump together education, labor, financial, fiscal, energy, telecommunications, and political reforms, there are significant differences among them.
Some consider all of the changes that have taken place in Mexico this year to be equally important.
Others have mused that Peña Nieto’s administration sometimes seems intent on announcing reforms, regardless of their content, the time necessary to implement them, or their actual impact on Mexican society.
In fact, a clear distinction can be drawn between two subsets of legislative achievements: those that, while not meaningless, are incomplete, superficial, or essentially maintain the status quo, and those that will change Mexico (if all goes well).
The changes in how teachers are evaluated and their labor rights (wrongly described as an education reform), together with changes to tax and telecommunications legislation, belong to the first category; energy and political reforms belong to the second.
Energy reform opens up electricity generation and oil exploration, extraction, and refining to private foreign or domestic investment through licenses, concessions, production sharing, or profit sharing.
The oil workers’ union has been banished from the board of directors of Pemex, the national oil company, and new contracts for shale oil and gas, together with deep-water prospecting and drilling, will be signed with a government agency, not with Pemex.
Once the myriad legal and political obstacles are cleared, Mexico will be able to increase oil and gas production, drive down the price of electricity, and stimulate growth in an otherwise lethargic economy. One hopes that 12 years of obstruction by Peña Nieto’s Institutional Revolutionary Party (PRI) will not mean that these reforms are too little, too late.
The second crucial reform is political.
For the first time since the early 1920’s, Mexican legislators and mayors will be allowed to seek reelection to consecutive terms.
While no panacea, reelection is one of the most important instruments of accountability in a democracy, and Mexico has been deprived of it for nearly a century.
The same is true of ballot initiatives, referenda, and independent candidacies, all of which were non-existent until the recent reform.
For the first time since Mexico left behind 70 years of authoritarian rule, the country has a political and electoral framework that resembles those found in all modern democracies.
Both reforms are incomplete and may not be sufficient to jump-start the economy and mobilize a singularly passive civil society.
Because Pemex, unlike the Brazilian and Colombian state-owned oil companies, will not be listed on the New York or Mexico City stock exchanges, internal reform will be postponed or half-baked.
Moreover, it will be years before any oil actually begins to flow from the deep waters of the Gulf of Mexico, and how much shale oil and gas actually exists in northeastern Mexico is unknown.
Nor is it certain that foreign investment (or tourism) will increase, given the country’s current levels of violence, crime, and human-rights violations.
Likewise, restrictions and ambiguities continue to plague the institutional arrangements sought by the framers of the country’s political and electoral reforms.
Reelection is permitted only for candidates nominated by the same party for which they originally ran, and the enabling legislation for independent candidates, ballot initiatives, and referenda remains unclear.
Most important, the government appears to be backtracking on a commitment to allow a binding referendum on the opening of the oil sector and other “transcendent” issues.
Its reluctance is understandable, because voters are evenly divided on the issue, and no one will invest a cent in Mexican oil or gas if the recently approved constitutional amendment on Pemex can be overturned in 2015, as the opposition claims will happen.
But curtailing democracy in order to modernize the energy sector is not a good idea.
Finally, skepticism persists with regard to the Mexican economy’s capacity to achieve sustainable 4-5% annual economic growth – the bare minimum needed to ensure long-term prosperity.
Deficient education, infrastructure, security, and courts, together with endemic corruption and scant entrepreneurial dynamism, militate against excessive optimism.
NAFTA 20 years ago, and Peña Nieto’s reforms now, are necessary but insufficient conditions for progress.
More is needed, and what is needed is not necessarily attainable.
Putin’s Reality Check for Europe
BERLIN – For far too long, the West has harbored illusions about Vladimir Putin’s Russia – illusions that have now been shattered on the Crimean peninsula.
The West could (and should) have known better: Ever since his first term in office as Russian president, Putin’s strategic objective has been to rebuild Russia’s status as a global power.
To this end, Putin used Russia’s energy exports to recover gradually the territories lost when the Soviet Union collapsed a generation ago.
Ukraine has been at the heart of this strategy, because, without it, the aim of a revived Russia is unachievable.
So Crimea was just the first target; the next will be eastern Ukraine and persistent destabilization of the country as a whole.
Before our eyes, the post-Soviet international system in Eastern Europe, the Caucasus, and Central Asia is being overthrown.
Nineteenth-century concepts of international order, based on zero-sum balance-of-power considerations and spheres of interest, are threatening to supersede modern norms of national self-determination, the inviolability of borders, the rule of law, and the fundamental principles of democracy.
As a result, this upheaval will have a massive impact on Europe and its relations with Russia, for it will determine whether Europeans live by twenty-first-century rules.
Those who believe that the West can adapt to Russian behavior, as Putin’s Western apologists suggest, risk contributing to further strategic escalation, because a soft approach will merely embolden the Kremlin.
Indeed, whether or not its leaders acknowledge it, the European Union is now in direct conflict with Russia over its enlargement policy since the end of the Cold War.
That is because Russia’s re-emergence as a global power requires not just the reintegration of lost Soviet territories, but also direct access to Europe and a dominant role there, especially in Eastern Europe.
So a fundamental strategic struggle is now a given.
From a Western perspective, willful confrontation makes little sense, because the EU and Russia are and will continue to be neighbors.
Looking ahead, Russia will need the EU even more than vice versa, because in its Far East and in Central Asia, China is emerging as a rival of entirely different dimensions.
Moreover, Russia’s rapid demographic decline and enormous modernization deficit imply the need for a joint future with Europe.
But seizing this opportunity is possible only on the basis of the rule of law, not of force, and must be guided by the principles of democracy and national self-determination, not great-power politics.
Instead, Putin has now triggered a lasting crisis.
The West’s response will be a new containment policy, mainly taking the form of economic and diplomatic measures.
Europe will reduce its energy dependence on Russia, review its strategic alignment and priorities, and scale back investment and bilateral cooperation.
In the short term, Putin seems to have greater leverage, but the weakness of his position will soon become apparent.
Russia is completely dependent, economically and politically, on its commodity and energy exports, which go primarily to Europe.
Lower European demand and an oil price that no longer suffices to sustain Russia’s budget stand to hobble the Kremlin very quickly.
Indeed, there is reason to believe that Putin may have overplayed his hand.
The collapse of the Soviet Union at the beginning of the 1990’s was caused not by the West, but by a wave of secession, as nationalities and minorities, seeing the party-state weakened, seized the opportunity to break free.
Today’s Russia has neither the economic nor the political strength to regain and integrate the lost Soviet territories, and any attempt by Putin to press on with his plan would impoverish its people and lead to further disintegration – a bleak prospect.
Europeans have reason to be worried, and they now have to face the fact that the EU is not just a common market – a mere economic community – but a global player, a cohesive political unit with shared values and common security interests.
Europe’s strategic and normative interests have thus re-emerged with a vengeance; in fact, Putin has managed, almost singlehandedly, to invigorate NATO with a new sense of purpose.
The EU will have to understand that it is not acting in a vacuum in its eastern and southern neighborhood, and that, for the sake of its own security interests, the conflicting interests of other powers there cannot simply be ignored or, worse, accepted.
The EU’s enlargement policy is not merely some expensive, expendable annoyance; it is a vital component of the EU’s security and outward projection of power.
Safety comes with a price tag.
Perhaps now there will be a reassessment in the United Kingdom of the costs of an EU exit.
And maybe there will be a realization on the Continent that European unification must move forward more quickly, because the world – and Europe’s neighborhood in particular – has turned out to be not as peaceful as many, above all the Germans, perceived it to be.
The EU peace project – the original impetus for European integration – may have worked too well; after more than six decades of success, it had come to be considered hopelessly outdated.
Putin has provided a reality check.
The question of peace in Europe has returned, and it must be answered by a strong and united EU.
The Middle East in the Arab Winter
BERLIN – Travel broadens the mind, goes the old saying.
This is especially true for the Middle East.
But travel there nowadays can be extremely disorienting; indeed, developments that were impossible to contemplate just a few months ago are becoming reality.
The youth revolt that began in Tunis and Cairo in 2010-2011 has come to an end (at least for the time being), though the region has been changed fundamentally by it.
The victory of counter-revolution and power politics, as in Egypt, has only seemed to restore the old order; the current regime’s political foundations are simply too brittle.
Equally noticeable has been the permanent shift in the region’s political-strategic axis.
Iran, with its nuclear and hegemonic ambitions, is the current center, while the old center – the Israeli-Palestinian conflict – has been marginalized, giving rise to entirely new alliances of interests.
Saudi Arabia and Israel (which have no formal diplomatic relations) are united against Iran – and against the possibility of a US-Iranian détente.
Ideologically, the central conflict between Iran and its neighbors is based on the sectarian conflict between Sunni and Shia Islam.
The devastating Syrian civil war is already being fought along these lines; given signs of a military and political stalemate, those lines could become the basis of a permanent division of the country, as in Bosnia.
If this happens, Iraq, Lebanon, and Jordan would not be left unaffected.
The old Anglo-French Middle East mapped out by the Sykes-Picot Agreement in May 1916 would be gone for good.
Moreover, the Kurdish issue has reappeared – and could indirectly influence and re-radicalize the Palestinian question.
Unfortunately, there is not much evidence that an Israeli-Palestinian settlement based on a two-state solution will preempt this development.
Then there is the question of the long-term consequences of Al Qaeda’s rebirth in the form of Sunni jihadism in Syria, Yemen, and North and East Africa.
The Gulf monarchies are trying to ride this tiger militarily against Iran.
But what will happen when they one day find themselves in the role of the sorcerer’s apprentice?
Will this fanatical wind blow back to the Arab peninsula?
And could these societies’ domestic institutions withstand such an attack?
Throughout the Middle East, most of the political elite remain trapped within a worldview defined by power politics and nineteenth-century notions of sovereignty.
Their strategic watchwords are national rivalry, balance, and hegemony – concepts that offer no solution for the future of the region’s nations and states.
Intraregional economic cooperation, which is essential to achieving sustained growth and social development, much less a regional security framework to ensure peace and stability, remains an alien idea.
In essence, the Middle East is experiencing a crisis of modernization.
The rebellious youth who led popular demands for change are lying low (or have been rounded up); but, given the intellectual paralysis of the region’s rulers (and large parts of the opposition), an even more violent eruption can be expected.
As in the past, Egypt will play a guiding role for the entire region (whether it wants to or not).
The region’s modernization crisis is being compounded by the partial withdrawal of an exhausted force for order, the United States.
This is fueling tremendous anxiety in the region and has contributed to the overthrow of existing alliances and the search for new ones.
President Barack Obama has ended America’s ruinous wars in Iraq and Afghanistan.
Above all, it was the war in Iraq – and thus former President George W. Bush and his neoconservative advisers – that brought Iran to its current position of strategic strength.
Yet it is Obama who is now regarded as weak in the Middle East.
Obama is heavily criticized for not having intervened militarily in Syria, even though his threat to do so subsequently forced President Bashar al-Assad’s government to surrender its chemical weapons.
Likewise, far from strengthening Iran further, Obama has pushed the Islamic Republic into a corner by leading the global push for strict economic sanctions.
To be sure, many aspects of Obama’s policy in the region are worth criticizing – above all, the defensive attitude with which his administration presents it.
But, rather than weakness, what America’s traditional allies in the Middle East fear most is far-reaching change in the status quo.
And Obama’s policy does indeed appear to be aiming for precisely that: a nuclear détente with Iran, an end to Syria’s civil war by means of a regional security architecture, and a two-state solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
It is a policy that sounds almost utopian, given the enormous inertial force of the region’s problems.
But if, against all expectations, Obama succeeds, his accomplishment will be historic.
And if he fails?
The Middle East will continue its slide into mayhem – perversely befitting the upcoming centenary of World War I’s outbreak.
The Great War’s Long Shadow
BERLIN – This year marks the centennial of the outbreak of World War I, which is reason enough to reflect on what this seminal European catastrophe teaches us today.
Indeed, the Great War’s consequences for international relations and the global system of states continue to be felt.
So, have we learned anything from the policy failures of governments, institutions, and international diplomacy that occurred in the summer of 1914?
Large parts of the northern hemisphere continue to struggle with the legacies of the great European empires – Habsburg, Russian, and Ottoman – that collapsed in WWI’s wake, or whose decline, like that of the British Empire, was initiated by the war and sealed by its even bloodier sequel a generation later.
The resulting fracture zones – in the Balkans and the Middle East, for example – are the source of some of today’s gravest risks to regional and even world peace.
After the Cold War’s end and the collapse of the Russian Empire’s Soviet successor, war returned to the Balkans under very similar conditions to those that prevailed in the period before 1914, with aggressive nationalism ultimately reconfiguring the disintegrating Yugoslavia as six separate states.
Of course, Serbian President Slobodan Milošević, whose call for a “Greater Serbia” triggered the war, was not alone: For a moment, Europe was in danger of reverting to the confrontation of 1914, with France and the United Kingdom supporting Serbia, and Germany and Austria favoring Croatia.
Fortunately, there was no relapse, because the West had learned its lessons from historical mistakes.
Today, three factors loom large in the avoidance of disaster: the United States’ military presence in Europe, the progress of European integration, and Europe’s abandonment of great-power politics.
Yet there is no point in fooling oneself: Only as long as the Balkan countries believe in the European Union and the benefits of membership will today’s precarious peace in the region become permanent.
No such hope currently exists for the Middle East, whose contemporary political borders were largely established by Britain and France during WWI, when the diplomats Mark Sykes and François Georges-Picot negotiated the division of the Ottoman Empire.
Likewise, the creation of Israel harks back to the 1917 Balfour Declaration, whereby the subsequent British mandatory power in Palestine supported the establishment of a national home for the Jewish people.
The Middle East created back then is, more or less, the Middle East today.
Yet we are now witnessing its disintegration, because the Sykes-Picot design always implied a strong external hegemonic power (or two) able and willing to maintain stability by channeling (or suppressing) the region’s numerous conflicts.
Great Britain and France, the first hegemonic powers, were succeeded by the US and the Soviet Union – and, finally, by the US alone.
America’s misadventure in Iraq, its exhaustion as a world power, and its unwillingness to maintain its previous level of commitment to the region have rendered the Sykes-Picot structure untenable, because no other external force for order is available.
The resulting vacuum has been filled by various currents of political Islam, terrorism, protest movements, uprisings, secession attempts by national or religious minorities, and aspiring regional hegemons (Iran and Saudi Arabia).
Indeed, the partial withdrawal of the US implies that the end of the enforced stability of the old Middle East will not spare the Sykes-Picot borders.
Developments in Syria and Iraq already suggest as much, and the future of Lebanon and Jordan has become increasingly uncertain.
One of the few positive features of the region is that no global power rivalries are currently playing out there.
But the regional struggle for mastery between Iran and Saudi Arabia (with Israel as a third actor) could prove to be all the more dangerous, given the prevailing – and deeply entrenched – mindset of traditional power politics.
Institutions and traditions supporting cooperative conflict resolution hardly exist in the region.
The memory of 1914 may trigger the most concern in East Asia, where all the ingredients of a similar disaster have accumulated: nuclear weapons, the rise of China as a global power, unresolved territorial and border disputes, the division of the Korean Peninsula, historical resentments, an obsession with status and prestige, and hardly any cooperative conflict-resolution mechanisms.
Distrust and power politics are the order of the day.
And yet there are grounds for optimism in East Asia.
The world has changed dramatically since the summer of 1914.
At the time, the world’s population was two billion; now it is seven billion.
This, together with the communications revolution, has created even more interdependencies and has forced more cooperation upon governments – as has the continued presence of the US as a stabilizer in the region, which has proved to be indispensable.
Moreover, while nuclear weapons pose a continuing danger, they also inhibit the risk of war as a means of power politics by making mutual destruction a certainty.
Military technology, the mindset of politicians and citizens, the structure of international diplomacy, and much more have changed in the century since WWI erupted.
And, yes, we have even learned a few things from history, which has made the world safer.
But, lest we forget: in the summer 1914, most actors regarded the impending disaster as an impossibility.
Defusing Iran
BERLIN – On February 18, crucial negotiations over Iran’s nuclear program began in Vienna between Iran and the five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council plus Germany (the P5+1).
The alternative to the talks is a further nuclear buildup by Iran, followed by additional international sanctions and, eventually, another war in the Middle East, which no one believes can resolve the problem.
So, can a comprehensive agreement that respects Iran’s right to civilian nuclear energy, while allaying the international community’s fears of weaponization, be achieved?
The interim agreement reached last November in Geneva reflected the West’s de facto acceptance that Iran is entitled to carry out limited low-grade uranium enrichment within the framework of the Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT).
The West released about $7 billion of frozen Iranian funds and relaxed some sanctions (in particular, on crude oil and auto parts), while Iran agreed to a quasi-freeze of its nuclear program.
That created the basis for a lasting agreement. But realizing that potential will be difficult.
First and foremost, a mountain of mutual distrust will need to be overcome.
The West and Israel do not believe that Iran’s nuclear program is meant to serve merely civilian aims.
Otherwise, why would Iran invest billions of dollars in a program that is almost tailor-made for military purposes, including long-distance delivery systems?
The Iranian leadership, for its part, remains convinced that the United States still seeks to bring about regime change.
From Iran’s perspective, accepting an American hand extended in a spirit of conciliation could turn it into a fist.
Moreover, any compromise would be fiercely contested within both camps, possibly leading to serious domestic political conflict.
And even if both sides’ current leaderships are sincere, will this hold true for their successors?
The absence of trust between Iran and the West leads directly to the second obstacle to a comprehensive agreement: verification and monitoring.
The central issue in these negotiations, around which everything else revolves, concerns Iran’s “breakout capability” – the time it would need, within the framework of any agreement with the West, to renege and build a nuclear weapon.
How much supervision will be required not just to verify compliance but also to detect any possible attempt at a breakout?
The technical questions are complex, and the proverbial devil really is in the countless details.
But prospects for a deal will hinge on resolving three broad issues.
The first two issues reflect the two paths toward the bomb: uranium enrichment and plutonium production.
Any workable agreement will require Iran to renounce uranium enrichment above the 5% level needed for a civilian nuclear-power program; accept limits on enrichment volumes, the number of centrifuges, and technology; agree to forgo reprocessing; and address operations at the heavy-water reactor in Arak.
The third issue concerns supervision and monitoring, which for quite some time would probably have to go beyond that agreed in the Additional Protocol to the NPT and include certain military installations.
Indeed, the duration the agreement will be of vital importance.
The West wants it to be implemented for as long as possible, while Iran would prefer a very short timeframe within which to achieve its central objectives: a comprehensive and lasting repeal of international sanctions and recognition as an NPT non-military nuclear power.
That raises another important question: Does US President Barack Obama really have a domestic mandate for negotiating a comprehensive repeal of the sanctions?
Here, we are brought back to the central issue in this process: technical questions, though important, are still only an expression of the underlying political conflicts and animosities.
These are the real factors driving the confrontation that the Vienna negotiations are meant to defuse over the next six months.
And the current regional and sectarian confrontation in the Middle East affects the nuclear negotiations directly.
All of the relevant players – including those, like Saudi Arabia and Israel, that are not sitting at the table but whose presence is very much felt – are clinging to their initial positions.
The US does not want Iran to become a military nuclear power or gain regional predominance; above all, the Americans do not want another Middle East war.
Iran, however, wants to become a (non-military?) nuclear power and shape a region in which it is heavily involved militarily (in Syria, Lebanon, and Iraq).
Europe shares the US position, but is more flexible.
Saudi Arabia, a Sunni power, wants to stop Shia Iran from becoming an emerging or, worse still, a military nuclear power in the Gulf, and has taken the opposite side in Syria, Lebanon, and Iraq.
Israel opposes Iran’s becoming a military nuclear power – or even a nuclear-threshold state – and is willing to try to prevent this by military means.
To achieve a sustainable compromise that all sides accept (even if with gritted teeth), the negotiations must be accompanied by diplomatic steps aimed at building trust both in the region and beyond.
Europe is very well versed in such processes and should put its experience to good use.
Iran must decide whether it wants to follow the North Korean route to international isolation, or some variation on the Chinese route to integration into the global economy.
It must also understand that its relationship with both Israel and Saudi Arabia will affect the negotiations, either positive or negatively.
And the West – the US, Europe, and, more than any other country, Israel – will have to get used to the idea of living with an Iranian civilian nuclear-power program, while limiting Iran’s capacity to become an emerging military nuclear power.
As the very different examples of the Soviet Union and China show, the Iranian regime might someday collapse or change fundamentally – probably when hardly anyone expects it.
Until then, we must do our best to defuse the nuclear time bomb together.
Revoking America’s Exorbitant Privilege
NEW YORK – The ongoing political stalemate in the United States holds two major implications for the international monetary system.
The better-known consequence has been deepening uncertainty about the US dollar, the main global reserve currency, and US Treasury securities, supposedly the world’s “safest” financial asset.
Not surprisingly, the major investors in US Treasuries, China and Japan, have expressed alarm.
Simply put, the global economy has at its center a dysfunctional political regime that generates recurrent threats of default on the world’s major reserve asset.
The second implication is further postponement of the International Monetary Fund’s 2010 quota and governance reforms, which would double member countries’ contributions and modestly increase major emerging economies’ voting power.
Prior to its approval by the IMF Board in December 2010, the reform, agreed at the G-20 Seoul Summit, had been hailed as a “historic” breakthrough.
But history has stalled without approval by the US, which has an effective veto over major IMF decisions.
The threat of a US default may well end in a political agreement to raise the US government’s debt ceiling, as occurred in 2011.
But, whatever the outcome, the latest episode makes it abundantly clear that our globalized world deserves a better international monetary system than the current “non-system” that evolved in an ad hoc manner after the collapse in the early 1970’s of the initial Bretton Woods arrangements.
The need to overhaul the international monetary and financial system was one of the basic lessons of the global financial crisis.