In Latin America, however, rigid class divisions and deep income inequalities created fertile ground for populism.
And when populist experiments collapsed, as they often did, under the weight of unsustainable debt and high inflation, it was right-wing budget-cutters, allied with conservative businessmen, who took over.
The center could not hold.
In the last two decades, however, this has begun to change.
With some exceptions (a particularly troubling one is Venezuela), democracy was consolidated in the region.
Elections have given rise to some capable governments and some mediocre ones, but only the lunatic fringe would advocate political change by means other than the ballot box.
Economic stabilization, plus a decade-long commodity boom, gave Latin America a growth spurt.
And, although that growth could not be sustained when commodity prices weakened, as they have now, it, together with enhanced social policies, did lift family incomes, reduce poverty, and sharply enlarge the middle class.
Today, a middle-class family living on the outskirts of Bogotá, Montevideo, São Paulo, or Santiago has an average income that is much lower in dollar terms than that of its counterparts in North America or Europe.
But that family likely lives in its own home (which it bought with a bank mortgage).
If it has not yet purchased a car, it will sooner rather than later.
But critics from the orthodox left are wrong to claim that such protests necessarily aim to overthrow “the economic model.”
Many of the marchers simply want the system to open its doors and let them in.
In political terms, this calls for well-executed reforms that last and do not imperil economic stability.
And that message is music to the ears of moderates, who understand that middle-class, middle-of-the-road voters are often pivotal in national elections.
As populists in the mold of Venezuela’s late president, Hugo Chávez, lose ground, a reform-minded liberal center has gathered strength.
Looking back, prime examples are the two terms of President Fernando Henrique Cardoso in Brazil and the 20 years (1990-2010) of Concertación governments in Chile.
Recent Peruvian administrations have all governed from the center, even if they did so under widely differing rhetorical styles and party labels.
And in Colombia, President Juan Manuel Santos’s administration has a history on the center-right, but has raised taxes and implemented a reform agenda that some of its ministers like to call “social democratic.”
In the not-too-distant future, politicians of the reforming center could reach power in two of Latin America’s larger countries.
In Argentina, Buenos Aires Mayor Mauricio Macri’s party, once conservative and strong only in the capital, has moved both to the political center and the provinces through its alliance with the center-left Radical Party.
And in Brazil last year, Cardoso’s Social Democratic Party, led by Aécio Neves, nearly beat the incumbent president, Dilma Rousseff.
If the election were held today, Neves or other plausible candidates from his party would win handily.
If Rousseff, plagued by scandals and a stalled economy, manages to complete her term, the social democrats look well-placed to win three years from now.
To seize these opportunities, centrist leaders must overcome at least three challenges.
First, they must seize further ground from populists, by delivering reforms that yield tangible short-term benefits.
Employment subsidies for jobless women and young people, expanded access to childcare, improved public transport, and effective anti-crime measures are all policies that boost both fairness and efficiency, now.
Second, liberal reformers must continue to lead when it comes to increasingly salient issues – such as the environment, non-discrimination, marriage equality, and drug-policy reform – that politicians of the traditional left and right are unable to address.
But they must do so in a way that appeals to broad swaths of the electorate, not only to highly schooled elites.
Last but not least, reform-minded democrats must lead the reform of democracy itself.
Citizens are increasingly suspicious of politicians, parliaments and political parties.
That is bad news for citizens, not just for politicians.
By leading the charge to reinvigorate democracy, centrist reformers can draw on the best of the liberal traditions of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries to ensure Latin America’s success in the new millennium.
Faulty Political Narratives
LIMA – Across Latin America, voters who, until recently, were enthusiastic about their leftist governments seem to be having a change of heart.
In Brazil and Venezuela, voters want to oust their leaders.
In Argentina, they already have.
In Bolivia, voters rejected President Evo Morales’s effort to amend the constitution so that he could seek another presidential term.
And in Peru, no left-wing candidate made it into the second round of the presidential election, to be held on June 5.
But learning from experience is much trickier than it seems.
We cannot relive the past; we can only tell stories about it – and the stories we tell tend to have a rather loose relationship with what really happened.
Nowhere is that more true than in Latin America.
The narrative espoused by the region’s recent leftist leaders – particularly Brazil’s Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, Venezuela’s Hugo Chávez, and Argentina’s Cristina Kirchner – was based on a revamped class struggle between “the people” and what could be called the “anti-people.”
The policies that preceded theirs were said to be pro-rich, because the governments that pursued them were subservient to the rich.
Their own popular movements supposedly rebelled against a political structure – local elites often in bed with imperialism (meaning mainly the United States) – that protected the interests of the anti-people.
But if voters are now jettisoning the left and its supposedly “pro-people” policies, it is not because they now prefer the “class enemy.” It is because they have changed narratives.
Besides class, at least three other narrative structures are politically salient in Latin America.
One focuses on corruption: The previous guys were corrupt, so we kicked the rascals out.
Now the new guys started stealing, too, so – regardless of their policies – it is time for them to go.
A third narrative is based on competing economic theories.
The 1990s was the era of neoliberalism, an economic worldview that wrongly assumed that the benefits of economic growth would trickle down to those at the bottom; government should embrace austerity and do little more than let markets work.
The new left-wing governments had a better economic theory, one that could boost economic growth while creating opportunities at the bottom.
Now, in the midst of inflationary stagnation, voters may be questioning that alternative.
The final narrative highlights the role of external conditions – good luck, not good policies – in determining economic performance.
When commodity prices are high and international capital is abundant and cheap, as in the 1970s and in 2004-2012, policymakers look like geniuses.
When the high tide recedes, as it has recently, they look like fools.
Governments will become more effective in the future only if voters learn to become more demanding of the policies that future governments adopt.
And yet none of Latin America’s political narratives teaches voters anything new or useful.
Lula and Chávez, after all, did not unseat right-wing governments: They were preceded by left-wing governments, led by members of the Socialist International.
Lula did not invent conditional cash transfers: he just expanded and changed the name of a program that he inherited.
Likewise, Chávez did not nationalize the oil industry; that was done in 1976.
And Cristina and Néstor Kirchner (her husband and predecessor) were Peronists; but in their narrative, their party’s role in power when the bulk of the killing took place during the “Dirty War” of the 1970s has been erased from history.
The truth is that most countries in Latin America mismanaged the boom of the 1970s and, when the tide turned, ended up in the 1980s debt crisis.
They all initially mismanaged the crisis, too.
Governments suddenly found themselves with much lower revenues than they expected; when markets proved unwilling to lend them the difference, they ended up printing money, causing exchange rates to weaken and inflation to rise.
To prevent this, they opted for yet another economic dead end: currency and price controls.
Eventually, in the late 1980s, they adopted a different strategy: They restructured the debt, eliminated financial controls, and imposed austerity, raising taxes and cutting spending in order to stop printing money.
And voters ended up re-electing presidents like Carlos Menem of Argentina, Fernando Henrique Cardoso of Brazil, and Alberto Fujimori of Peru precisely because they were able to overcome the debt crisis, balance the budget, and bring down inflation.
But just when they were supposed to be reaping the benefits of their hard work, the East Asian crisis of July 1997 caused commodity prices to collapse, which forced Russia into default in August 1998 and shut down all emerging markets through financial contagion.
Crises in Venezuela (1998), Brazil (1999), and Argentina (2001) followed, leading to the election of Chávez, Lula, and Kirchner.
As luck would have it, the situation changed quite dramatically in 2004: Commodity prices started their longest boom ever – the super-cycle – and investors’ appetite for emerging-market debt soared.
The need for austerity went out the window, as more spending could occur without printing money or running out of foreign exchange.
But the windfall was mismanaged, fueling fiscal profligacy, and the end of the boom left economies in recession and voters with broken dreams.
Argentina, Brazil, and Venezuela got themselves into a situation surprisingly similar to that of the late 1980s.
So the solutions are bound to look similar as well.
Voters enthusiastically supported extravagant spending during a boom.
They applauded when Rafael Correa of Ecuador eliminated an oil stabilization fund he inherited and when Chávez, rather than putting money aside for a rainy day, quintupled the public external debt.
Now that the party is over, they want more conservative governments to stabilize the economy and restore the market confidence needed to encourage private investment.
Until voters learn what to ask for from their governments, they are bound to dislike what they end up getting.
Unfortunately, Latin America’s dominant political narratives are not helping that process along.
Exit Latin America’s Left
BOGOTA – The crushing defeat of the long-ruling Chavista government in Venezuela’s recent parliamentary election, together with the end of 12 years of Peronist rule in Argentina, mark the end of a cycle of left-wing hegemony in much of Latin America.
But this is not a political watershed marking the renewal of ideological confrontation.
Rather, it is a measured transition toward political pragmatism.
And it is very good news.
Perhaps the best evidence that this is not an ideologically-driven sea change is to be found in what triggered it: an economic downturn.
For over a decade, the region relied on “Socialism of the Twenty-First Century,” which Venezuela’s late president, Hugo Chávez, used to galvanize groupings like the Bolivarian Alliance for the Peoples of Our America (ALBA) and Petrocaribe, an oil alliance including Caribbean states and Venezuela.
But economic collapse, hyperinflation, and food shortages have destroyed faith in that system.
It should be noted that the very same factors, largely the result of unforgiving global conditions, enabled Latin America’s leftist parties to win and consolidate power by blaming the market-oriented policies that preceded them.
Brazilians elected Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva to the presidency in 2002, and Argentinians chose Néstor Kirchner in 2003.
Financial meltdown restored the Institutional Revolutionary Party to power in Mexico in 2012, and Michelle Bachelet’s leftist Nueva Mayoría party won in Chile in 2013.
Leftist governments then took advantage of a sustained commodities boom to increase spending on consumer subsidies and social welfare, without depending on international creditors.
From 2003, the year of Kirchner’s election, to 2011, when his wife and successor Cristina Fernández de Kirchner was elected to her second term in a landslide, soybean prices rose by more than 7% annually, on average, boosting overall GDP growth.
Likewise, Brazil’s economy, propelled by commodity exports of its own, grew by about 4.5% per year.
This enabled the country, like Argentina, to fight extreme poverty and boost the purchasing power of an emerging middle class, which thus became deeply loyal to leftist governments.
In Argentina, it took a 30% inflation rate, massive corruption scandals, and restrictions on foreign-currency purchases to bring about a slim majority for the center-right Mauricio Macri in the recent presidential election.
The root cause of this reversal of fortune was a global environment that could no longer support high commodity prices.
In particular, China’s slowing growth has weakened demand for Latin American commodities.
In Ecuador, President Rafael Correa has become increasingly authoritarian – recently amending the constitution to enable him to run for a fourth term – in response to the impact of the shrinking economy on popular support for his “dictatorship of the heart.”
In Venezuela, where oil represents 95% of export revenues, voters naturally turned on the ruling Socialist Party.
While Chávez’s successor, Nicolás Maduro, remains president, the opposition now holds two-thirds of the seats in the National Assembly.
Long before the Venezuelan election, Cuba’s government, which had become heavily dependent on Chavista largesse, was already taking pragmatic steps toward normalizing relations with the United States.
Raúl and Fidel Castro – who know firsthand how the demise of the Soviet Union, Cuba’s main benefactor during the Cold War, affected their country – sensed the impending loss of Venezuela’s lavish subsidies and acted accordingly.
Even in Chile – perhaps the best-run economy in the region, but still highly dependent on copper exports – Bachelet’s approval rating has plunged to unprecedented lows, threatening her ambitious agenda of constitutional and educational reforms.
Add to that corruption scandals involving Bachelet’s son and weaknesses in the ruling center-left coalition, and the center right’s return to power in the 2017 presidential election seems increasingly likely.
But elections are not the only means of impelling change.
With the most severe economic slowdown in 25 years expanding the budget deficit to record levels, Brazilian President Dilma Rousseff has been forced to turn to austerity, including cuts in unemployment and welfare benefits.
To be sure, massive corruption scandals have also severely eroded Rousseff’s standing, and are the key reason why she is now facing impeachment proceedings.
But when the economy was growing, corruption was less politically explosive.
Similarly, after Venezuela’s army made it clear that defending Chavismo was not worth opposing the people’s will, Maduro was forced to pledge that the revolution would now “pass into a new phase.”
And even if Macri had not managed to win Argentina’s presidency, his opponent Daniel Scioli – who served as Vice President under Néstor Kirchner, but represents a more moderate Peronism – probably would have had to implement pragmatic policies aimed at boosting market confidence.
Perhaps the final nail in the coffin of Latin American left-wing politics comes from Colombia, where President Juan Manuel Santos has made achieving peace with the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC), Latin America’s oldest guerrilla group, his top priority.
A right-leaning president, Santos won reelection in 2014 by emphasizing these peace efforts, which garnered him strong support from the left.
Now, the two sides are on the cusp of a peace agreement, expected to be signed in March.
Even more than current economic struggles, which are driven largely by global forces, peace in Colombia will reinforce for Latin American voters the benefits of pragmatism over ideology – something that even FARC has recognized.
A new era of moderate, sensible policymaking could be what enables Latin America to diversify its economies and build more sustainable and inclusive prosperity.
Latin America’s Rising Right
LAGUNA BEACH – From changes in government in Argentina and Brazil to mid-course policy corrections in Chile, Latin American politics appears to be undergoing a rightward shift.
But rather than being “pulled” by the attractiveness of the economic policies that the right is advocating, this complex phenomenon is predominantly a reflection of the “push” implied by anemic growth and the disappointing provision of public goods, especially social services.
Indeed, we can think of the shift as a Latin American variant of the West’s blossoming romance with anti-establishment movements.
And that means that the region’s governments must be seen to deliver to their citizens.
Otherwise, the shift will prove to be only a stop on an uncertain path – politically more complicated and economically harder to navigate – toward an even less stable destination.
The evidence of the ongoing political change comes in many forms.
After years of fiscally irresponsible populist rule by the Kirchner family, Argentina has opted for Mauricio Macri, a former businessman running on a right-wing platform.
In Brazil, and pending final consideration by the Senate, President Dilma Rousseff has been sidelined by a “temporary impeachment,” with her replacement signaling a shift away from the policies of the leftist Workers’ Party.
Even incumbent governments in the region are altering their course.
In Chile, President Michelle Bachelet was reelected, but her government is signaling a move to the right on economic policy.
Cuba, under President Raúl Castro, is enlarging the legal scope for private businesses.
And in Venezuela, a country tragically flirting with “failed state” status, President Nicolás Maduro’s government confronts mounting economic and financial challenges stemming from fiscally unanchored policies begun under his predecessor, Hugo Chávez.
Facing widespread shortages of goods and malfunctioning markets, including for foreign exchange, his government has already lost control of the National Assembly, and the opposition is now seeking to shorten his term by constitutional means.
Several key factors are driving the region’s political dynamics.
The sharp drop in international prices for commodities, such as oil and copper, together with a slowing Chinese economy, has reduced the region’s export earnings and accentuated domestic economic challenges.
This has been aggravated by a more volatile environment for financial flows to emerging countries, more tentative foreign direct investment, and concern about the potential fallout for international trade from rising anti-globalization rhetoric in the unusual presidential race in the United States.
The resulting deterioration in economic performance, including deep recessions in Brazil and Venezuela, has accentuated popular dissatisfaction with public services and amplified long-standing worries about inequality and misappropriation of public funds.
Popular dissatisfaction is evident even in traditionally well-managed countries, such as Chile, where lower-income groups have done relatively well in recent years and where the scale of official fraud – documented and alleged – pales in comparison to neighboring countries.
For now, rightist parties and policy agendas are the main beneficiaries of the region’s economic and social disillusion.
The hope for many in the region is that political change can catalyze faster growth, by revamping existing policies and pursuing more effective anti-corruption campaigns.
But, again, unless today’s political winners deliver notably higher and significantly more inclusive growth, their electorates are likely to move on.
Viewed from a global perspective, the shift in Latin America is part of a broader rise in discontent with the “establishment.”
And it is not limited to governments. It also extends to private-sector elites, particularly banks and multinational companies.
In the US, the result has been a significant shift away from establishment politics, including the unanticipated emergence of Donald Trump as the presumptive Republican candidate and Bernie Sanders’s unexpectedly powerful challenge to Hillary Clinton on the Democratic side.
In Europe, anti-establishment parties have been gaining ground in local, regional, and national elections, complicating government formation (for example, in Spain) and influencing major policy decisions (such as the UK Conservative Party’s decision to hold the upcoming “Brexit” referendum).
With the exception of countries like the Philippines, where voters opted in last month’s presidential election for a blatantly anti-establishment candidate in Rodrigo Duterte, the tendency in the emerging world has been for adaptations within the confines of existing political elites.
That may well be the best way to characterize what is happening in much of Latin America.
Now it is up to these elites to respond effectively to the causes of popular anger, or risk facing the eventual emergence of anti-establishment movements, like their American and European counterparts.
That outcome, by seriously complicating the region’s political landscape, would further reduce governments’ scope for timely economic-policy adaptation.
Latin America’s Commodity Windfall
BUENOS AIRES – Latin America is experiencing an exceptional boom, owing to soaring income from exports of natural resources.
But is the region making the most this opportunity?
Have these funds been used as effectively as possible?
With the exception of Central America, rising commodity prices have improved the external accounts and fiscal positions of Latin American countries.
Revenue from natural-resource exports represented 25% of total income in the public sector in 2008.
In Venezuela, Bolivia, Ecuador, and Mexico, it exceeded 40%.
This comes to around 7% of GDP in these countries (more than 11% in Venezuela and Bolivia, and 8% in Ecuador and Mexico).
To determine what should be done with this windfall, it is important to know whether the increase in commodity prices is likely to be permanent or transitory.
If the latter, the best course of action would be to save the additional income or use it, as a second-best option, to reduce the national debt.
If the increase were considered permanent, however, it would make sense to increase spending or reduce tax pressure.
The choice will depend on the characteristics of the country.
There would be more reason to reduce taxes in Norway, for example, than in Latin America, where the general course would be to increase spending.
It is reasonable to presume that the commodity boom’s positive effect on Latin America’s terms of trade will last for an extended period – perhaps 10-15 years – but that it will not be permanent.
Moreover, it could be argued that if more knowledge is not added to exports, it will be hard to achieve sustainable economic development based on natural resources.
Given this, it would be wise to spend at least part of the windfall on improving the capacity to innovate, which is essential for a long-term growth beyond the fluctuation of international commodity prices.
That means investing in education and building incentives to increase productivity through changes in products, processes, or organization.
So what happened to the additional revenues derived from the commodity boom of recent years?
While several countries established legal limits to control spending, deficits, and debt, in some cases –for example, Argentina, Ecuador, and Venezuela – such laws were not enforced.
In addition to reducing debt, Chile used its additional revenues to increase the resources of two fiscal funds: when the recession began, there were more than $22 billion in assets in both funds.
Despite imprudent fiscal management, Venezuela, too, maintained considerable resources in specific funds ($11 billion at the end of 2008).
Ecuador and Colombia, by contrast, eliminated their stabilization funds in 2005 and 2008, respectively.
Beyond improving public accounts, a large part of the revenues from high commodity prices were used to increase public spending, although this proportion varied from country to country.
At one extreme stands Argentina, with the largest increase in public spending relative to GDP in Latin America (almost ten points).
At the other extreme are Chile, Costa Rica, and Uruguay.
Since there is no attribution in countries’ fiscal accounts of income from products linked to natural resources, we can only hazard a reasonably informed guess about how that spending was allocated.
Between 2001-2002 and 2007-2008, social-welfare spending in countries with abundant natural resources increased by around 55% in real terms, with spending relative to GDP rising by nearly 3.5 percentage points.
Therefore, on a regional level, a large part of the additional resources were used to increase public spending, especially for social security, health, and education, in that order.
In some countries there were also increased subsidies.
Argentina, for example, increased subsidies for energy and transport to the equivalent of 3% of GDP.
Something very similar occurred in Ecuador and Venezuela throughout the decade.
In contrast, spending for other objectives – for example, research and development on new products and processes – increased very little.
In short, Latin American countries have used their additional export revenues to pay down debt and increase social spending.
Both were necessary, but, with few exceptions, the region is not using the commodity windfall to do what it must: improve technological capacities sufficiently to ensure that future economic growth does not depend entirely on the fickle furtunes of finite natural resources.
Latin America’s Integration Muddle
SANTIAGO – Regional integration is usually regarded as a way for countries to strengthen themselves.
But today’s efforts at regional integration in Latin America seem to have a different purpose altogether.
They are put forward to help the proponents of various plans jockey for power and influence on both the regional and global stage.
Indeed, none of the current initiatives to boost Latin American regional integration resemble at all the European integration process.
Nor can they be considered the first tentative steps towards such a shared destiny, in the manner of the 1952 European Coal and Steel Community Treaty, which began the project for European unity.
At first glance, the almost constant bombardment of integration proposals in Latin America makes it appear as if the region’s presidents are trying to outdo each other in seeing who can come up with the greatest number of proposals.
All the while, scant attention is paid to the region’s already established bodies, which are in sad shape.
Consider MERCOSUR, the main post-Cold War regional initiative.
According to the Argentine scholar Roberto Bouzas, MERCOSUR is in a critical state of affairs, owing to the inability of its institutions to maintain “the common objectives which drove its member states to engage in the process of regional integration and the consequent loss of focus and capacity to prioritize underlying political problems.
Similar diagnoses are made with respect to the Latin American Economic System (SELA), the Andean Community of Nations (CAN), and other regional organizations.
Contributing to this loss of dynamism is the flood of proposals rushing out of Venezuela, including the Bolivarian Alternative for the Americas (ALBA, with its own standing army), the Trade Treaty of the Peoples (TCP), the Bank of the South, and the South Atlantic Treaty Organization (OTAS).
Some of the Venezuelan initiatives are going nowhere, but others, such Petrocaribe, Petrosur, and TeleSUR, are taking off.
Meanwhile, Brazil is intent on assuming a regional and global political role that corresponds to its growing economic weight.
The challenge is to find a regional role that is compatible with the country’s size, but that does not create mistrust and, at the same time, benefits the rest of the region.
The proposed Union of South American Nations (Unasur), like the South American Defense Council, is part of a Brazilian regional strategy to encourage cooperation within Latin America in order to counterbalance the power of the United States and act as a mediator in regional disagreements.
While the Unasur proposal may have been formulated in a more rigorous way than other initiatives, its failure to contemplate trade integration means that there is nothing to tie member states together beyond political will.
Discussions about international free trade, however, have generally been held outside the region, in Doha or in the G-20, with Argentina, Brazil, and Mexico representing Latin America.
Although Unasur aims to progress beyond free-trade agreements, this requires a more streamlined integration within the organization – one that expands its current role as a forum for discussing problems and seeking solutions for Latin America as a whole.
Unasur, however, has highlighted the cooling of relations between Brazil and Mexico, which is not a member of the new organization.
This may well have an impact on future regional political coordination, although Mexico’s future membership has not been ruled out.
(Furthermore, Mexican President Felipe Calderón’s participation in the Latin American and Caribbean Summit on Integration and Development in Bahia in December 2008 suggests that Mexico has not turned its back on the possibility of coordinating regional positions.)
The South American Defense Council, however, has stalled.
To increase its effectiveness, the mistrust that permeates Unasur must be quelled, and the goals of member states must be more clearly defined.
This is especially true of Brazil, the source of much of this mistrust.
Finally, Ecuador’s president, Rafael Correa, some time ago proposed an Organization of Latin American States to replace the Organization of American States (OAS).
Although the inclusion of all Latin American states goes some way towards repairing the weakened Brazilian-Mexican axis, and creates a new and more positive environment for future political coordination, this new organization is unlikely to contribute much to actual regional integration.
The lack of regional common policies is particularly noticeable in the areas of regional defense and internal security, where it has been impossible to identify a common position on inter-state tensions, the fight against organized crime, and drug trafficking.
These difficulties are exacerbated by the OAS’s inability to address complex situations such as the coup d’état in Honduras, the conflict between Ecuador and Colombia, or broader regional problems.
This regional stasis may worsen as a result of growing nationalism; an increase in social divisions within states; weapons proliferation and an increase in military spending; and environmental degradation.
It seems that Latin America has abandoned the principles, commitments, and foundations of full regional integration.
Indeed, national interests and nationalistic egos have now moved to center stage.
Latin America’s Military Factor
BUENOS AIRES – In 2009, Latin America scored an unrecognized achievement: the global economic crisis did not affect the continent as dramatically as it did other regions.   Politically and institutionally, however, Latin America’s weaknesses and perils worsened.
Indeed, while the various legislative and presidential elections held throughout Latin America reinforced – beyond the outcomes in each case – popular commitment to pluralism and democracy, they also reflected growing levels of political polarization and persistent institutional shortcomings.
In a way, this reveals a paradox of Latin American democracy: exclusive, minority governments that devalue and weaken the state are no longer acceptable, while the rise of personalismo – a concentration of power and coupled with refractory political tactics – are bringing about fragmentation and unruly governance.
In the region’s international relations, there were both promising and discouraging signs.
On the one hand, Brazil continued its successful rise as an emerging power with global aspirations.
On the other hand, intra-regional ruptures were an indication of the deterioration of Latin America’s current collective negotiating power, despite the inclusion of Argentina, Brazil and Mexico in the G-20.
The region as a whole continues to lose weight in world politics, largely because it lacks a coherent, common project.
The greatest cause of concern, however, is that the military question has reappeared.
The coup d’état that brought down President Manuel Zelaya in Honduras, for example, made that country the first case of successful neo-putschism in Central America in the twenty-first century.
Its repercussions could be enormous, because the contradictory and erratic response of the United States to the coup could be interpreted as tacit encouragement for other would-be coup leaders elsewhere in the region, at least in Central America.
Moreover, there has been an alarming increase in regional tensions.
In some cases, they involve border disputes (Peru and Chile, Bolivia and Chile, and Colombia and Nicaragua).
In others, they concern armed factions (Colombia and Venezuela, Colombia and Ecuador), the environment (Argentina and Uruguay, Colombia and Ecuador), migration (Mexico and Guatemala), human rights (Haiti and the Dominican Republic), and energy (Brazil and Bolivia, Brazil and Paraguay, Argentina and Chile).
With few exceptions, such as Argentina, Chile, and Uruguay, the militarization of the “war on drugs” is also starkly evident.
The armed forces’ role in fighting narcotics – which has been ineffective in every country where it has been tried – is encouraged by a coercive, misguided, bipartisan US strategy.
Ominous examples of the rising importance of the military in Latin American political affairs include the reinforcement of Plan Colombia and implementation of the Merida Initiative in Mexico and Central America, the reestablishment of the American Navy’s IV Fleet (deactivated in 1950), and the growing importance of the Southern Military Command in US foreign policy in the region.
There have been significant increases in defense budgets and weapons purchases, particularly in Brazil, Colombia, Chile, and Venezuela.
This could rekindle security dilemmas and degenerate into uncontrolled conflicts.
On top of this, José Alencar, Brazil’s vice-president, and Venezuelan President Hugo Chávez have reintroduced the nuclear question with statements that seem to point beyond legitimate peaceful use of nuclear energy.
Alencar has suggested that Brazil should “advance” in the development of nuclear weapons, while Chávez has strengthened his alliance with Iran on this front.
Finally, Colombia’s unresolved and cruel conflict persists.
Moreover, under a bilateral agreement, the US will have access to seven Colombian military bases, deploying up to 1,400 men (800 soldiers and 600 private contractors) with legal immunity under Colombian law.
Beyond the arguments about the wisdom of this treaty, this agreement seems certain to raise the probability of a negative internationalization of Colombia‘s problems.
In sum, 2009 ended with a mixed panorama in Latin America, with economic, political, and international progress accompanied by regressive and worrying trends.
The military question – believed to have been resolved after the region’s transition to democracy which came with the Cold War’s end, the effort to achieve regional integration, and the push toward globalization – has reappeared.   Indeed, it is now clear that one of the main regional challenges is to preserve civilian control of the military, which will require that Latin American elites avoid the temptation to strengthen disproportionately the armed forces’ place in their countries’ domestic and international politics.
If that challenge is not met, 2010 will be a year in which Latin America will live dangerously.
The socio-economic context is critical.
The region’s performance during the global financial crisis has not hidden fundamental problems: the heavy burden of an unrealized agenda of social inclusion and a combination of inequality and injustice that could turn lethal in the near future.
Disgruntled Democracies
MEXICO CITY – In 2011 and 2012, tens of thousands of students demonstrated in Santiago, Chile, demanding greater access to higher education.
Earlier this year, hundreds of thousands of Brazilians marched in São Paulo, Rio de Janeiro, and Belo Horizonte, calling for improved public-health services, better schools, and cheaper, more efficient public transport.
And Colombians and Peruvians from all walks of life (especially peasants, farm owners, and mineworkers), as well as Mexican school teachers, now occupy the centers of Bogotá, Lima, and Mexico City, disrupting inhabitants’ daily lives and creating serious problems for the authorities.
These countries, once models of economic hope and democratic promise in Latin America, have become examples of democracies without legitimacy or credibility.
Although they have made significant social progress in recent years, they have become centers of popular unrest.
And their presidents, despite their undeniable competence, are watching their approval ratings plummet.
These paradoxes are both perplexing and revealing. For starters, they reflect an economic-growth problem.
Chile’s economy has performed well over the past two years, despite low world copper prices; but its annual growth rate is nowhere near that of the previous 25 years.
The economic balm applied to old social and cultural wounds is losing its effectiveness.
Similarly, while Brazil’s economy remained relatively resilient after the 2009 recession, growth slowed almost to zero last year.
Growth rates last year in Colombia and even Peru, which has performed better than any other Latin American country since 2000, also dropped significantly.
And Mexico, the worst-performing of the five economies over the last 15 years, has outdone itself; this year, growth is expected to reach barely 1%, if that.
At the same time, while all of these countries built the political and judicial institutions needed to consolidate their transitions to democracy – from Brazil’s in the mid-1980’s to Mexico’s in 2000 – these institutions have become (and in some cases always have been) remarkably insulated from popular demands.
As a result, the protests took these countries’ seemingly responsive presidents by surprise.
Indeed, Colombia’s Juan Manuel Santos Calderón and Brazil’s Dilma Rousseff – both skilled and experienced politicians – were utterly unprepared for their countries’ protests.
Brazil faces a similar trial, as next year’s soccer World Cup and the 2016 Summer Olympics test the resilience and adaptability of the social and macroeconomic frameworks that have shaped the country’s development for almost two decades.
To be sure, pro-active anti-poverty programs, loose credit, a commodity-export boom, and heavy government spending (financed by an equally heavy tax burden) lifted millions out of poverty.
But the expectations of the emerging middle class – including efficient infrastructure, high-quality education and health services, and well-paid jobs – have not been met.
If they cannot even enter the luxurious new stadiums to see their national team play, they will not be happy.
Similarly, although Mexico has experienced rapid population growth and significant standard-of-living improvements over the last 15 years, many believe that they are not getting what they deserve – or what they were promised.
Teachers are furious at being blamed for the wretched state of the country’s education system and view Peña Nieto’s “educational reform” law as an excuse to limit the power of their unions while avoiding genuine institutional reform.
Mexico City’s middle-class residents – who wield disproportionate influence countrywide – are also incensed, both at the teachers for disrupting their lives and at the federal and local authorities for failing to restore order.
Against this background, the credibility of Mexico’s political institutions is rapidly eroding.
But there is a more fundamental issue at play that stems from the accumulated imperfections of representative democracy in countries where social and economic conditions are less than ideal.
When post-authoritarian excitement abounded and rapid economic growth prevailed, these imperfections were manageable; now, with the former fading and the latter a memory, they have become immense challenges.
This problem transcends Latin America.
As observers like Joshua Kurlantzick have pointed out, a global shift away from representative government, driven by increasingly disillusioned middle classes, is underway.
For elected leaders, the dilemma is that there are no simple solutions – and little public patience for more complex ones.
Latin America’s Two Lefts
A perception has been growing over the last few years – and picking up strength in recent months – that Latin America is swinging back to the left.
The unimpressive – and sometimes dismal – results of economic reform seem to have generated a backlash that has elected leftist presidents across the continent, starting with Hugo Chávez’s victory in Venezuela at the end of the 1990’s, and continuing with those of Ricardo Lagos in Chile and Nestor Kirchner in Argentina, and more recently that of Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva in Brazil and Tabaré Vázquez in Uruguay.
More left-wing victories seem to be in store in Mexico, Peru, and Bolivia.
But while the premises underlying this broad trend are clear, Latin America’s voters are electing not one left, but two.
To be sure, although 2004 was one of the region’s better years in terms of economic growth, the outcome of two decades of so-called structural reform remains disappointing.
Inequality has increased, poverty has been reduced only slightly at best, employment remains stubbornly low, corruption, violence, crime, and political gridlock continue unabated, and foreign investment and free-trade agreements with the US have yet to deliver the goods.
In these circumstances, a strong ideological and policy reaction against the pro-market “Washington Consensus,” with its emphasis on liberalization, deregulation, and privatization, is anything but a surprise.
At the same time, however, that reaction is much less uniform and clear-cut than many observers believe.
To begin with, those parties, leaders, and movements that have truly socialist and progressive roots – such as Lagos and his Socialist Party in Chile, Lula and the Workers’ Party in Brazil, and Vázquez in Uruguay – are following pragmatic, sensible and realistic paths.
Their policies are remarkably similar to those of their predecessors; their respect for democracy is full-fledged and sincere.
Their old school anti-Americanism has been tempered by years of exile, realism, and resignation.
Conversely, leftist leaders who arise from a populist, purely nationalist past, with few ideological underpinnings – Chávez with his military background, Kirchner with his Peronist roots, and Mexico City mayor and presidential frontrunner Lopez Obrador, with his origins in the Institutional Revolutionary Party – has proven much less responsive to modernizing influences.
For them, rhetoric is more important than substance and power is more important than how it is exercised.
The despair of poor, provincial, and clientelistic constituencies is a tool rather than a problem, and belittling the US by aligning with Fidel Castro trumps promoting their countries’ real interests in the world.
Secondly, the left in general – whether of socialist or populist origins – has “spoken loudly” and carried a “small stick,” so to speak.
Actual policies, with the passing exception of Argentina’s negotiation with its international creditors – and the IMF, in particular – are remarkably similar to those of their predecessors.
Chávez continues to invite foreign oil companies to drill in the Orinoco basin, Lula maintains hefty budget surpluses, Kirchner ultimately accepts IMF conditionality, and Lagos maintains unmatched relations with Chile’s highly conservative private sector.
Overall, macroeconomic orthodoxy seems to be taking root.
Indeed, it is only on the margins where Latin America’s left is striving to differ – and partly succeeding.
The areas where this new and old left can make a difference include improving anti-poverty programs, expanding housing and property rights, effective land reform, developing education, science, and technology, and, perhaps most importantly, strengthening democracy, human rights, and the rule of law in a region where they have been woefully absent for decades.
To succeed with this bold and necessary agenda, Latin America’s left must purge its dangerous and destructive nationalist and authoritarian strains.
The new left, if it stays the course on modernization and reform, can be a boon to the region.
Latin America’s Trump Problem
SANTIAGO – Donald Trump reached the White House by bringing out the worst in the United States’ electorate.
Will his administration now bring on the worst – both economically and politically – for Latin Americans?
The initial signs are nothing if not ominous.
Not since the days of gunboat diplomacy a century ago has a yanqui leader treated the countries south of the US border and their citizens so badly.
Trump infamously branded Mexican migrants rapists and murderers.
Guatemalans, Ecuadoreans, and Colombians, though not explicitly mentioned, did not feel particularly reassured.
With US participation in the 12-country Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) dead in the water, the next question is whether Trump will make good on his vow to renegotiate the rules governing the North American Free Trade Area, or even to pull out of NAFTA altogether.
Trade agreements with Central America, Colombia, Chile, and Peru could also be at risk.
No one (perhaps not even Trump) knows what the new administration will do in this regard.
A US president can renounce these pacts unilaterally.
But the volumes and volumes of implementing legislation were enacted by Congress, and can be modified only by a congressional vote.
The US economy (and businesses) would not benefit from an overnight and wholesale abandonment of the rules governing not only trade in goods and services, but also investment, intellectual property, and government procurement across much of the Western Hemisphere.
The Republicans may no longer be the party of free trade, but it is hard to imagine a Republican-controlled Congress willingly jumping off that cliff.
For Mexico and the Caribbean basin, trade with the US is crucial.
For the countries of South America, which trade as much or more with Asia – especially China – and the European Union, macroeconomics and finance are far more important.
The expectation of a surge in infrastructure spending in the US under Trump has caused a number of commodity prices to soar (overall uncertainty has also sent investors packing into metals such as gold and copper, which function as safe-haven assets).
So, in the short run, mineral exporters like Peru and Chile are benefiting.
But the run-up in prices may turn out to be short-lived, especially if Chinese growth continues to slow.
If Trump does half of what he has promised, cutting taxes on the rich and increasing defense and infrastructure spending, the US will run a much more expansionary fiscal policy.
The resulting boost to aggregate demand would then buttress the case for the Federal Reserve to raise short-term interest rates faster than it had been planning to do.
But, while such a change in the fiscal-monetary mix might be beneficial for the US in the short term, it would create new challenges for Latin America’s emerging economies.
Tighter money and a looser fiscal stance in the US almost surely would mean a stronger dollar.
That is bad news for governments and companies south of the border.
Yes, more prudent policies and better regulatory frameworks have allowed local-currency bond markets to flourish in recent years.
But in Latin America, much of public and especially private debt remains dollar-denominated, which limits how much central banks can allow currencies to depreciate in response to higher US interest rates.
A decade ago, economists were optimistic that flexible exchange rates would allow emerging markets to insulate their economies from monetary-policy shocks coming from the developed countries.
Floating is still the best alternative, but today the overall assessment is much less sanguine.
Not only is such flexibility de facto limited by dollar debts; US monetary conditions, it seems, are transmitted to other countries quite independently of their exchange-rate regimes.
London Business School’s Hélène Rey has argued that US monetary-policy shocks affect risk premia, and that this channel operates internationally as well as domestically.
This “risk-taking” channel of monetary policy is so powerful internationally that when the Fed loosens policy, credit grows all over the world, and vice versa.
So if higher interest rates in the US went hand in hand with higher premia and a reduced appetite for risk among investors, Latin America could find itself under financial stress.
This brings us to the broader question: how will Trump affect perceptions of risk worldwide?
Larry Summers and other thoughtful observers have long argued that the US could use more investment in roads, bridges, and ports, and that at today’s record-low long-term interest rates, such investments would pay for themselves.
Trump is adding to that recipe massive tax cuts for the wealthy.
The much larger deficits and debts (add several portions of nationalist rhetoric and a generous helping of foreign-policy inexperience to the mix) could easily prompt a surge in risk aversion and a sizeable increase in long-term interest rates – which would undermine much of the rationale behind self-financing infrastructure investments.
No one wants to live in a more uncertain world – least of all people in the still-vulnerable countries of Central and South America.
Those vulnerabilities are political as well as economic.
Just when recent electoral results in Argentina, Peru, and Venezuela, coupled with term limits for incumbents in Bolivia and Ecuador, suggested that South America was reaching the end of a cycle of left-wing populism, the US – and much of Europe – seems to be entering a cycle of right-wing populism.
There is no shortage of Latin American demagogues who will likely try to emulate Trump’s campaign.
The lesson will not be lost on them that no statement is so outrageous that the news media will not cover it, and that the benefits of increased attention outweigh the political costs of the outrage.
Just as in the US and Europe, immigration – not from Muslim countries, but from neighboring states – could provide a convenient lightning rod.
So could nationalism: there is a certain poetic symmetry at work when local left-wing activists complain about threats to national self-determination – just as Trump did – in arguing against the TPP and other trade agreements.
For Latin America, a return to the facile rhetoric and self-defeating policies of populism would be the most dangerous side effect of Trump’s victory.
One can only hope that, during his presidency, Trump plays as fast and loose with his campaign promises as he did with the truth during the campaign.
Global Flows and Global Growth
BERKELEY – A growing share of the world’s economic activity involves cross-border flows.
But just how interconnected is the global economy?
How are cross-border flows among activities, sectors, and countries changing?
How do national economies rank in terms of their cross-border flows or “interconnectedness”?
And what are the implications for business and policymakers?
A new report from McKinsey Global Institute addresses these questions by analyzing the inflows and outflows of goods, services, finance, people, and data and communications for 195 countries over the past 20 years.
Both aggregate data and micro examples confirm that the world has become more tightly linked, with cross-border flows increasing in scope and complexity – and embracing a larger number of countries and participants within them.
Despite a significant contraction from 2007 to 2009, resulting from the deep global recession, the combined value of financial flows and trade in goods and services was 36% of global GDP in 2012 – 1.5 times higher than in 1980.
The report also confirms that greater openness to global flows has been a significant source of economic growth for individual countries and worldwide.
Overall, the research estimates that global flows have contributed 15-25% of global growth each year, with more interconnected countries receiving 40% more of the growth benefits than less interconnected ones.
This is consistent with economic theory: interconnectedness fosters growth via productivity gains from specialization, scale, competition, and innovation.
Cross-border flows of goods, including commodities, remain the largest category, growing at 11% per year during the last decade and surpassing their pre-recession peak in 2012.
Today, more than 35% of goods cross national borders.
Cross-border flows of services have also recovered to pre-recession levels and have been growing rapidly at 10% per year since 2002.
Nonetheless, although services account for roughly two-thirds of world GDP, cross-border flows of services are less than one-quarter those of goods.
Cross-border flows of finance are still 70% off their pre-recession peak, yet even at today’s depressed levels they account for more than one-third of all global financing.
Knowledge-intensive flows requiring relatively high levels of human capital and research and development are now larger than labor-intensive, capital-intensive, and resource-intensive flows and are growing faster than all three.
Flows of low-value, labor-intensive goods like apparel are declining as a share of global flows, while flows of R&D-intensive products, such as pharmaceuticals and business services, are gaining share.
By 2012, knowledge-intensive flows accounted for nearly half of the combined total value of flows of goods, services, and finance.
This trend is an advantage for developed countries, which account for two-thirds of knowledge-intensive flows.
China is the exception, claiming the second-largest share of flows (after the United States).
Traditional measures of an individual country’s global interconnectedness compare the size of its global flows to its GDP.
According to these measures, smaller countries with smaller domestic markets appear to be more interconnected than larger ones.
But this approach is misleading, because it does not consider a country’s share of global flows.
The McKinsey report’s index of global connectedness remedies this shortcoming by considering both the size of a country’s global flows relative to GDP and its overall share of global flows.
The MGI Connectedness Index shows Germany, Hong Kong, and the US ranking first, second, and third, respectively.
But some major economies fall well behind.
Despite strong exports, South Korea and Japan rank 20th and 21st out of 85 countries, because they lag on immigration and cross-border Internet traffic.
China, which ranks 25th, has a strong export engine and large capital inflows but ranks low on people and data flows.
On average, emerging market economies rank lower than advanced economies, but several emerging market economies – including Morocco, India, Brazil, Saudi Arabia, and China – have improved their ranking significantly since the mid-1990’s.
Today, emerging markets account for about 38% of global flows, triple their share in 1990.
Yet a “digital divide” between developed and emerging economies persists in both data and communication flows and knowledge-intensive flows – and that gap does not appear to be closing.
Emerging economies produce 40% of global output, and are home to 80% of the world’s population, yet they account for only 24% of cross-border Internet traffic.
The economic gains of interconnectedness are significant, but so are the challenges.
To capitalize on the opportunities of digitization and the shift to knowledge-intensive trade, countries must invest in talent and infrastructure; reduce barriers to cross-border flows of people and information, without jeopardizing their citizens’ privacy and security; and expose their producers to robust foreign competition while ameliorating the resulting costs of disruption for their communities and workers.
If the gains from globalization are not widely shared, political support for greater openness to global flows will decline – as will the economic benefits that such flows create.
Intelligent Machines and Displaced Workers
BERKELEY – In their compelling new book The Second Machine Age, Erik Brynjolfsson and Andrew McAfee document the progress in artificial intelligence that is enabling computers to exceed what they were capable of only a few years ago.
The leaps in machine intelligence, along with the connection of human beings around the world in a common digital network, will enable the development of new technologies, goods and services.
The authors are optimistic about the “bounty” or economy-wide benefits of brilliant machines. But they warn that the distribution or “spread” of these benefits will be uneven.
Their fears are justified.
During the last three decades, even before breakthroughs in artificial intelligence, computers have been replacing and multiplying the physical labor of human beings.
Improvements in computer and communications technologies have also enabled employers to offshore many routine tasks that machines cannot directly replace.
As a result of both technological displacement and technology-enabled globalization, the share of employment in occupations in the middle of the skill distribution has declined rapidly in both the United States and Europe.
Demand for workers who perform routine tasks has been falling at an accelerating pace in recent decades, destroying well -paid middle-skill jobs in both manufacturing and clerical occupations.
Technological progress has also been skill-biased: it has increased the relative demand for workers with the human capital to fill occupations that involve cognitive and abstract tasks, while eliminating middle-skill routine occupations.
It has also been a major factor behind the emergence of large and growing differences in the wages of workers with a college education or higher and those of workers with lower levels of educational attainment.
These differences have persisted in the most recent decade, even though tepid economic growth and labor displacement by smarter machines have weakened demand for high-skill, high-cognition occupations.
Many college-educated workers simply have been forced down the occupational ladder into jobs traditionally performed by lower-skilled workers, who in turn have been pushed further down the occupational ladder or out of the labor force altogether.
As a result, the real wages of workers without a college education have fallen even further behind.
Skill-biased technological change has propelled growing inequality in labor incomes both within and across occupations, in turn fueling the marked increase in overall income inequality.
Smart machines and global connections have also boosted income inequality in two other ways: by increasing the size and scope of global markets for top-rated talent in a variety of fields (the so-called winner-take-all effect), and by generating huge excess returns or monopoly rents from the creation and ownership of intellectual property and intangible capital.
Ever-smarter machines and ever-tighter global connections are likely to aggravate adverse labor-market trends and growing income inequality, as technology displaces more and more workers.
No one is certain about how many workers are at risk; but, based on the pace of recent technological advances, there is reason for concern.
Using a variety of measures to assess the susceptibility of jobs to computerization, a recent study of 702 occupations finds that nearly half of total US employment is at risk.
And, if Brynjolfsson and McAfee are correct, the labor-displacement process will be much faster than anticipated.
How should policymakers respond?
First, it is important to acknowledge that weak aggregate demand and anemic economic growth, not an acceleration in the labor-displacement rate, explains the slow jobs growth of the last decade.
Under these conditions, monetary policy should remain accommodative and further fiscal austerity should be eschewed.
Second, the educational attainment levels of the workforce must be increased.
The effects of technology on workers’ occupational and wage prospects will continue to depend on their education for the foreseeable future.
The higher the educational attainment level associated with an occupation’s requirements, the lower the probability of its displacement by a smart machine.
In the US, educational attainment levels are not keeping pace with technology’s demands.
The US ranks 11th among developed countries in high-school graduation rates and is the only developed country in which the secondary-school graduation rates of 25-34 year olds are no higher than those of 55-64 year olds.
In the latest (2012) scores on international achievement tests, US teenagers scored below the OECD average, dropping to 31st place in math; 24th place in science and 11th place in reading.
After ranking first for decades, the US has fallen to 16th place in college graduation rates.
And both the educational achievement gap and the college completion gap by income level have been increasing in the US over the past few decades.
As smart machines become more powerful and pervasive, they will pose a challenge to a fundamental feature of the US economy: most people gain their income by selling their labor.
So what happens when the labor of a large number of working-age Americans, regardless of their education, is rendered technologically redundant or no longer commands an income adequate to provide a minimally decent standard of living?
Millions of American workers have already reached that point.
The near-term policy remedies are clear: raise the minimum wage to a level that will keep a fully employed worker and his or her family out of poverty, and extend the earned-income tax credit to childless workers.
President Barack Obama has proposed doing both.
In the longer term, more radical policies – such as the introduction of a negative income tax or a basic income – must be considered, with the goal of providing a guaranteed minimum standard of living regardless of employment status and market wage.
Decades ago, when intelligent machines and androids were found in science fiction rather than the real world, Milton Friedman, a champion of free-market capitalism, recommended a negative income tax to help the poor without undermining their incentive to work. He proposed a progressive consumption tax as a way to pay for it.
Ultimately, whether the benefits of artificial intelligence and digitization are distributed broadly or continue to accrue to a small minority of the population will depend not on the design of smart machines, but on the design of smart policies appropriate for the new machine age.
Which Corporate Taxation for America?
BERKELEY – Corporate tax reform is one of the few issues that garner bipartisan support in a deeply divided US Congress.
The current system, all agree, is deeply flawed: the corporate tax rate is too high by global standards, and the corporate tax base is too narrow, owing to numerous credits, deductions, and special provisions that distort economic decisions.
But there is significant debate about how to fix the system.
One major area of disagreement is how to tax the foreign earnings of US multinational companies (MNCs), a disagreement highlighted by the recent proposals issued by Senator Max Baucus, the chair of the Senate Finance Committee.
The current US system is based on a worldwide principle: the foreign earnings of US companies are subject to US corporate tax, with the amount owed offset by a tax credit for taxes paid in foreign jurisdictions.
Most other developed countries, by contrast, have adopted “territorial” systems that largely exempt their MNCs’ foreign earnings from home-country taxation.
MNCs headquartered in countries that employ a worldwide tax system are at a disadvantage when they compete in third-country markets with MNCs headquartered in territorial systems.
Whereas US MNCs must pay the high US corporate tax rate on profits earned by their affiliates in low-tax foreign locations, MNCs headquartered in territorial systems pay only the local tax rate on such profits.
For example, when a US firm and a firm headquartered in a territorial system compete in a country where the local tax rate is 17%, the foreign firm owes 17% of its profits in taxes to the local country, while the US firm owes 35% of its profits in taxes – 17% to the local country plus 18% to the US.
That difference translates into a sizeable cost advantage that allows the foreign firm to charge lower prices and capture market share from its US counterpart.
Current US law attempts to offset this competitive disadvantage through deferral: US MNCs are allowed to defer – potentially indefinitely – payment of US corporate tax on their foreign earnings until the earnings are repatriated to their US parent firms.
Not surprisingly, most US MNCs take advantage of the deferral option for at least some of their foreign earnings.
As a means of bringing back this estimated $1.7 trillion in foreign earnings, the Senate Finance Committee’s draft proposals suggest the elimination of deferral.
However, faced with the threat to their competitiveness that this would pose, many US MNCs would shift their headquarters to countries with lower corporate tax rates and territorial systems.
The global competitiveness of US MNCs and where they are based matter to the health of the US economy.
Despite the rapid growth of foreign markets, US MNCs still locate significant shares of their real economic activities – about 65% of their sales, 68% of their employment, 70% of their capital investment, and 84% of their R&D – at home.
Much of their domestic activity – particularly R&D, which has significant local spillover benefits – is related to their headquarter functions.
And foreign direct investment by US MNCs is not zero-sum: it encourages rather than reduces employment, investment, and R&D in the US.
Deferral is essential to maintaining US MNCs’ competitiveness as long as the US relies on a worldwide corporate-taxation system.
But deferral is not without significant costs for US MNCs and the US economy alike.
Deferred earnings held abroad are “locked out” of the US economy, in the sense that they are not directly available for domestic use by US MNCs and their shareholders.
Moreover, deferral distorts corporate balance sheets and capital-allocation decisions.
For example, firms may use earnings held abroad as collateral to take on more debt and incur higher borrowing costs at home.
Or they may use these earnings to make investments abroad that yield a lower return than investments at home.
Overall, such efficiency costs are estimated to be 1-5% of deferred earnings, rising as deferrals accumulate.
As the Senate Finance Committee’s draft proposals suggest, the US should jettison its worldwide approach to corporate taxation and adopt a territorial system for taxing US MNCs’ foreign earnings.
Such a system would provide a level playing field that supports US MNCs’ global competitiveness. It would also eliminate the efficiency costs of deferral and boost US MNCs’ repatriation of foreign earnings, with significant benefits for output and employment.
Based on recent research that incorporates conservative assumptions, we estimate that under a territorial system US MNCs would repatriate an additional $100 billion a year from future foreign earnings, adding about 150,000 US jobs a year on a sustained basis.
We also estimate that under a transition plan for taxing the existing stock of foreign earnings held abroad, similar to one proposed by US Representative Dave Camp, US MNCs would repatriate about $1 trillion of these earnings, adding more than $200 billion to US GDP and about 1.5 million US jobs over the next few years.
These are significant gains for an economy that is still operating far below potential, remaining about 1.5 million jobs short of its pre-recession employment level.
A territorial tax system does have one potential disadvantage: it could strengthen US MNCs’ existing incentives to shift their profits to lower-tax jurisdictions.
Competitive cuts in corporate tax rates, the spread of tax havens, and the rising importance of easily movable intangible capital have already made these incentives more powerful.
Recent studies find growing segregation between where MNCs locate their real economic activities and where their profits are reported for tax purposes.
Income shifting and the resulting erosion of domestic tax bases pose serious challenges, and countries with territorial systems have adopted tough countermeasures to combat them.
If the US moves to a territorial system, it should follow suit.
A modern territorial system with adequate safeguards against income-shifting and base erosion is the right approach to taxing the foreign earnings of US MNCs.
Putting America’s Recovery to Work
BERKELEY – America’s economy grew much more rapidly than expected in 2013 and appears poised to strengthen further this year.
But there is still considerable slack in the labor market, and, as long as it persists, the gains from faster growth will continue to be concentrated at the top of the income distribution, as they have been throughout the recovery.
According to recent BEA estimates, real (inflation-adjusted) GDP grew at a 2.7% average annual rate in 2013, compared to only 2% in 2012.
Most forecasters – including the nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office, the so-called Blue Chip consensus, and the Federal Reserve – predict that annual real growth will reach at least 2.8% in 2014.
Despite two recent lackluster employment reports, there are many reasons to expect that growth will accelerate in 2014.
The headwinds buffeting the US recovery – impaired household balance sheets, a depressed housing market, and government spending and employment cuts – are dissipating.
Household debt has fallen to levels last seen in the early 1990’s, real household net worth has returned to its pre-recession peak, and residential investment as a share of GDP is rising.
Meanwhile, state and local-government budgets are improving, and the federal budget is on track to subtract only about 0.5% from GDP in 2014, compared to 1.75% in 2013.
In a Congressional election year, another destabilizing showdown over the federal debt limit is unlikely.
Moreover, monetary policy is likely to remain accommodative, and inflation remains lower than expected.
US Federal Reserve Chair Janet Yellen was a vocal co-architect of the Fed’s accommodative policy stance under the leadership of her predecessor, Ben Bernanke, so policy continuity is expected.
Indeed, the Fed has reiterated its intention to hold the federal funds rate near zero well past the time that the unemployment rate falls below 6.5%, while gradually trimming its purchases of long-term assets – so-called quantitative easing – by $10 billion a month.
Meanwhile, private spending grew 3.9% year on year in 2013, the strongest rate in a decade, and the outlook for 2014 is promising.
Improving household balance sheets imply stronger consumer sentiment.
Real personal-consumption spending rose at a 2.3% annual rate in 2013, up from 2% in 2011 and 2012.
Stronger consumer spending, along with record-high corporate profits, should boost investment spending further this year, as will re-shoring of economic activity and an improving trade balance, owing to a decline in energy and labor costs in the US.
Indeed, shale energy and big-data analytics, two areas in which the US has a strong competitive edge, could be significant supply-side “game changers” for growth.
Nonetheless, the outlook for US workers is less sanguine and more uncertain.
Despite stronger growth in 2013, net monthly job creation, at about 193,000, was only slightly above its 2012 level (186,000) and still below its pre-recession average of 200,000.
Employment at the end of 2013 was still 1.1 million short of its pre-recession peak; regaining this peak requires 7.7 million more jobs, in addition to absorbing subsequent monthly entrants to the labor force.
In November 2013, monthly job openings topped four million for the first time since 2008.
But the number of job seekers exceeded the number of openings in every industry.
While the short-term unemployment rate (those unemployed for 26 weeks or less) has fallen back to its 2001-2007 pre-crisis average, the long-term unemployment rate remains higher than at any time since the measure was introduced in 1948.
The long-term unemployed account for about 36% of total unemployment, down from nearly 46% in March 2011 but still far above the previous peak of 26% reached 30 years ago.
The long-term unemployed tend to be older – the number of unemployed workers aged 50-65 has doubled – and those who have been laid off from previous jobs.
Faster economic growth and more job openings are less likely to benefit these workers: the longer they are unemployed, the more their skills become obsolete and the more their actual or perceived employability deteriorates.
Moreover, both the short-term and long-term unemployment rates underestimate the slack in the labor market caused by the significant and sustained decline in the labor-force participation rate (LFPR) since the recession began.
In 2007, 66% of Americans were working or actively seeking work; today, that number stands at 63%, the lowest level since 1977.
If the LFPR had remained at its pre-recession high, the unemployment rate today would be nearly 12%.
If it had stabilized when the unemployment rate peaked in October 2009, unemployment today would be over 9%.
A critical policy question is why the LFPR has continued to decline.
Demography clearly plays a role: a larger share of the workforce is reaching retirement age, while the share of those aged 16-24 who are pursuing education is rising.
But the recession triggered sudden and sustained declines in the LFPR across all age groups in response to weak demand and poor job prospects.
A recent CBO analysis attributes about one-half of the decline in the LFPR from the end of 2007 to the end of 2013 to these cyclical factors, with the remainder explained by secular demographic trends.
As has been painfully obvious during the last several years, prolonged labor-market slack means falling real wages for most workers, with the negative effect intensifying as one moves down the wage distribution.
By the same logic, stronger growth in 2014 and tightening labor markets should lead to healthier wage gains for the 70% of the workforce whose real wages have not yet returned to their pre-recession level.
But, as President Barack Obama argued in his recent State of the Union address, it will take more than faster economic growth for American workers to recover from the Great Recession.
Extending unemployment benefits for the long-term jobless, combating the stigma against hiring them, creating more on-the-job training opportunities and apprenticeships, and raising the minimum wage are all essential steps toward a more equitable distribution of the recovery’s benefits.
Bridges to Somewhere
BERKELEY – After another round of brinkmanship, a rancorous US Congress passed a last-minute bill to avert the bankruptcy of the Highway Trust Fund (HTF), the primary source of federal funding for America’s highway and transit infrastructure.
The HTF finances about $50 billion of infrastructure spending a year, and its bankruptcy would have forced state and local governments to shelve thousands of projects, threatening tens of thousands of construction jobs.
The new legislation provides a temporary $11 billion fix that will postpone the HTF’s bankruptcy for about ten months.
Through fiscal gimmickry, the bill’s funding costs are pushed beyond the arbitrary ten-year budget window behind which Congress hides to signal its fiscal responsibility.
But there is nothing fiscally responsible about this legislation.
Investment in public infrastructure in the US has plunged to less than 2% of GDP, its lowest level since the federal government started tracking these data in 1992.
The American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE) gives a grade of D+ to infrastructure in the United States, reflecting both delayed maintenance and underinvestment.
An estimated one out of every nine US bridges is structurally deficient, and 42% of urban roads are congested, costing the economy an estimated $101 billion a year in wasted time and fuel consumption.
Deficient and deteriorating transit systems impose another $90 billion in annual economic costs.