Telemedicine applications will allow physicians to treat patients who are hundreds of miles away.
This massive transition will transform how citizens interact with their governments, revolutionize entire industries, and change the way we engage with one another.
In Europe, the Internet of Everything is emerging as the single most promising way to revive a moribund economy and tackle the continent's stubborn unemployment problem, with companies, cities, and even countries positioning themselves as leaders in innovation, growth, and the creation of jobs.
The most recent example is France.
Cities too are embracing digitization.
Barcelona has installed in-ground parking sensors and launched connected public transportation as part of its Smart City strategy.
Nice has constructed a “connected boulevard," including smart lighting and environmental monitoring.
And the Port of Hamburg has a digital system to reduce water, rail, and ground traffic congestion.
Projects like these are being replicated across the continent, generating billions of dollars in value in terms of reduced costs, productivity gains, and increased revenues.
As a result, Europe's leaders see not only opportunities for growth, but also the need to avoid being left behind.
To create a truly digital Europe will require a foundation of high-speed, high-quality broadband, both wired and wireless.
As part of Europe's Digital Agenda, policymakers have set out to connect 50% of European households to superfast broadband (100 mbps or greater) by 2020.
They also aim to connect all residences to broadband (at least 30 mbps) by this time.
These targets should be fully embraced, and policymakers should continue to encourage major investments in broadband, as well as in the infrastructure needed to support the wireless devices in which we have all come to depend.
Of course, Europe will also have to encourage entrepreneurship, which requires fostering a culture of risk-taking, facilitating access to venture capital, and investing in strong educational institutions.
Many countries are doing just that, implying that the next game-changing technology may not come from Silicon Valley; it could just as easily be developed in a lab in Paris, London, or Berlin.
Over the longer term, Europe will need a workforce trained for careers in the new digitized economy.
It is estimated that Europe will have an e-skills gap that, if filled, could lead to 850,000 potential jobs in 2015, rising to twice that by 2020.
On a continent where youth unemployment exceeds 50% in some countries, there should be no problem finding young and eager people able to do these jobs, provided they receive the proper training.
This gap cannot be closed overnight, but countries that do nothing to overcome it could very well fall behind.
Widening the talent pipeline sufficiently will require a generational commitment to teaching math and science, providing technical training, and mentoring young people of all backgrounds so they understand the full range of possibilities that a career in technology affords.
As Europe continues down the road of digital transformation, the possibilities for growth are immediate and significant.
The continent is already the world's largest economic bloc, with a GDP of more than €14 trillion ($15.2 trillion) in 2014.
But its growth has been waning.
The European Commission estimates – conservatively, in my opinion – that the digital revolution could spur an “additional 2.1% of GDP growth over the baseline."
On the jobs front, the Internet of Everything will be a key driver of employment.
Advances in cloud computing alone are expected to create 2.5 million additional jobs in Europe by 2020.
The digital transformation will bring opportunities and create new types of jobs: systems developers, transportation network engineers, medical device consultants, data analysts, electrical engineers for smart grids, and many more.
As Europe charts its economic course for the next decade, its leaders must ensure that digital transformation forms the foundation of their strategy.
This will allow them to create a Europe that is stronger, faster, more dynamic – and more digital.
Internet or Splinternet?
CAMBRIDGE – Who owns the Internet?
The answer is no one and everyone.
The Internet is a network of networks.
Each of the separate networks belongs to different companies and organizations, and they rely on physical servers in different countries with varying laws and regulations.
But without some common rules and norms, these networks cannot be linked effectively.
Fragmentation – meaning the end of the Internet – is a real threat.
Some estimates put the Internet’s economic contribution to global GDP as high as $4.2 trillion in 2016.
A fragmented “splinternet” would be very costly to the world, but that is one of the possible futures outlined last month in the report of the Global Commission on Internet Governance, chaired by former Swedish Prime Minister Carl Bildt.
The Internet now connects nearly half the world’s population, and another billion people – as well as some 20 billion devices – are forecast to be connected in the next five years.
But further expansion is not guaranteed.
In the Commission’s worst-case scenario, the costs imposed by the malicious actions of criminals and the political controls imposed by governments would cause people to lose trust in the Internet and reduce their use of it.
The cost of cybercrime in 2016 has been estimated to be as high as $445 billion, and it could grow rapidly.
As more devices, ranging from automobiles to pacemakers, are placed online, malicious hackers could turn the “Internet of Things” (IOT) into “the weaponization of everything.”
Massive privacy violations by companies and governments, and cyber attacks on civilian infrastructure such as power grids (as recently happened in Ukraine), could create insecurity that undercuts the Internet’s potential.
A second scenario is what the Commission calls “stunted growth.”
Some users capture disproportionate gains, while others fail to benefit.
Three or four billion people are still offline, and the Internet’s economic value for many who are connected is compromised by trade barriers, censorship, laws requiring local storage of data, and other rules that limit the free flow of goods, services, and ideas.
The movement toward sovereign control of the Internet is growing, and a degree of fragmentation already exists.
China has the largest number of Internet users, but its “Great Fire Wall” has created barriers with parts of the outside world.
Many governments censor services that they think threaten their political control.
If this trend continues, it could cost more than 1% of GDP per year, and also impinge on peoples’ privacy, free speech, and access to knowledge.
While the world could muddle along this path, a great deal will be lost and many will be left behind.
In the Commission’s third scenario, a healthy Internet provides unprecedented opportunities for innovation and economic growth.
The Commission concluded that sustaining unhindered innovation will require that the Internet’s standards are openly developed and available; that all users develop better digital “hygiene” to discourage hackers; that security and resilience be at the core of system design (rather than an afterthought, as they currently are); that governments not require third parties to compromise encryption; that countries agree not to attack the Internet’s core infrastructure; and that governments mandate liability and compel transparent reporting of technological problems to provide a market-based insurance industry to enhance the IOT’s security.
Until recently, the debate about the most appropriate approach to Internet governance revolved around three main camps.
The first, multi-stakeholder approach, originated organically from the community that developed the Internet, which ensured technical proficiency but not international legitimacy, because it was heavily dominated by American technocrats.
A second camp favored greater control by the International Telecommunications Union, a United Nations specialized agency, which ensured legitimacy but at the cost of efficiency.
And authoritarian countries like Russia and China championed international treaties guaranteeing no interference with states’ strong sovereign control over their portion of the Internet.
More recently, the Commission argues, a fourth model is developing in which a broadened multi-stakeholder community involves more conscious planning for the participation of each stakeholder (the technical community, private organizations, companies, governments) in international conferences.
An important step in this direction was the US Commerce Department’s decision last month to hand oversight of the so-called IANA functions – the “address book” of the Internet – to the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers.
ICANN, with a Government Advisory Committee of 162 members and 35 observers, is not a typical inter-governmental organization: the governments do not control the organization.
At the same time, ICANN is consistent with the multi-stakeholder approach formulated and legitimated by the Internet Governance Forum, established by the UN General Assembly.
Some American senators complained that when President Barack Obama’s Commerce Department handed its oversight of the IANA functions to ICANN, it was “giving away the Internet.”
But the US could not “give away” the Internet, because the United States does not own it.
While the original Internet linked computers entirely in the US, today’s Internet connects billions of people worldwide.
Moreover, the IANA address book (of which there are many copies) is not the Internet.
The US action last month was a step toward a more stable and open multi-stakeholder Internet of the type that the Global Commission applauded.
Let’s hope that further steps in this direction follow.
Golden Slumbers
CAMBRIDGE – In principle, holding gold is a form of insurance against war, financial Armageddon, and wholesale currency debasement.
And, from the onset of the global financial crisis, the price of gold has often been portrayed as a barometer of global economic insecurity.
So, does the collapse in gold prices – from a peak of $1,900 per ounce in August 2011 to under $1,250 at the beginning of July 2013 – represent a vote of confidence in the global economy?
To say that the gold market displays all of the classic features of a bubble gone bust is to oversimplify.
There is no doubt that gold’s heady rise to the peak, from around $350 per ounce in July 2003, had investors drooling.
The price would rise today because everyone had become convinced that it would rise even further tomorrow.
Doctors and dentists started selling stocks and buying gold coins.
Demand for gold jewelry in India and China soared.
Emerging-market central banks diversified out of dollars and into gold.
The case for buying gold had several strong components.
Ten years ago, gold was selling at well below its long-term inflation-adjusted average, and the integration of three billion emerging-market citizens into the global economy could only mean a giant long-term boost to demand.
That element of the story, incidentally, remains valid.
The global financial crisis added to gold’s allure, owing initially to fear of a second Great Depression.
Later, some investors feared that governments would unleash inflation to ease the burden of soaring public debt and address persistent unemployment.
As central banks brought policy interest rates down to zero, no one cared that gold yields no interest.
So it is nonsense to say that the rise in the price of gold was all a bubble.
But it is also true that as the price rose, a growing number of naïve investors sought to buy in.
Lately, of course, the fundamentals have reversed somewhat, and the speculative frenzy has reversed even more.
China’s economy continues to soften; India’s growth rate is down sharply from a few years ago.
By contrast, despite the ill-advised fiscal sequester, the US economy appears to be healing gradually.
Global interest rates have risen 100 basis points since the US Federal Reserve started suggesting – quite prematurely, in my view – that it would wind down its policy of quantitative easing.
With the Fed underscoring its strong anti-inflation bias, it is harder to argue that investors need gold as a hedge against high inflation.
And, as the doctors and dentists who were buying gold coins two years ago now unload them, it is not yet clear where the downward price spiral will stop.
Some are targeting the psychologically compelling $1,000 barrier.
In fact, the case for or against gold has not changed all that much since 2010, when I last wrote about it.
In October of that year, the price of gold – the consummate faith-based speculative asset – was on the way up, having just hit $1,300.
But the real case for holding it, then as now, was never a speculative one.
Rather, gold is a hedge.
If you are a high-net-worth investor, or a sovereign wealth fund, it makes perfect sense to hold a small percentage of your assets in gold as a hedge against extreme events.
Holding gold can also make sense for middle-class and poor households in countries – for example, China and India – that significantly limit access to other financial investments.
For most others, gold is just another gamble that one can make.
And, as with all gambles, it is not necessarily a winning one.
Unless governments firmly set the price of gold, as they did before World War I, the market for it will inevitably be risky and volatile.
In a study published in January, the economists Claude Erb and Campbell Harvey consider several possible models of gold’s fundamental price, and find that gold is at best only loosely tethered to any of them.
Instead, the price of gold often seems to drift far above or far below its fundamental long-term value for extended periods.
(This behavior is, of course, not unlike that of many other financial assets, such as exchange rates or stock prices, though gold’s price swings may be more extreme.)
Gold bugs sometimes cite isolated historical data that suggest that gold’s long-term value has remained stable over the millennia.
For example, Stephen Harmston’s oft-cited 1998 study points to anecdotal evidence that an ounce of gold bought 350 loaves of bread in the time of Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, who died in 562 BC.
Ignoring the fact that bread in Babylon was probably healthier than today’s highly refined product, the price of gold today is not so different, equal to perhaps 600 loaves of bread.
Of course, we do not have annual data for Babylonian gold prices.
We can only assume, given wars and other uncertainties, that true market prices back then, like today, were quite volatile.
So the recent collapse of gold prices has not really changed the case for investing in it one way or the other.
Yes, prices could easily fall below $1,000; but, then again, they might rise.
Meanwhile, policymakers should be cautious in interpreting the plunge in gold prices as a vote of confidence in their performance.
The New Interventionists
MUNICH – The consequences of Russia’s intervention in Syria stretch far beyond the Middle East.
The Kremlin’s military campaign has tilted the stalemate in favor of the government and derailed efforts to craft a political compromise to end the war.
It also heralds the beginning of a new era in geopolitics, in which large-scale military interventions are not carried out by Western coalitions, but by countries acting in their own narrow self-interest, often in contravention of international law.
Since the end of the Cold War, the debate over international military action has pitted powerful, interventionist Western powers against weaker countries, like Russia and China, whose leaders argued that national sovereignty is sacrosanct and inviolable.
The unfolding developments in Syria are further evidence that the tables are turning.
While the West is losing its appetite for intervention – particularly involving ground troops – countries like Russia, China, Iran, and Saudi Arabia are increasingly intervening in their neighbors’ affairs.
In the 1990s, after genocides in Rwanda and the Balkans, Western countries developed a doctrine of so-called humanitarian intervention.
“The Responsibility to Protect” (colloquially known as “R2P”) held countries accountable for their people’s welfare and compelled the international community to intervene when governments failed to protect civilians from mass atrocities – or were themselves threatening civilians.
The doctrine upended the traditional concept of national sovereignty, and in countries like Russia and China, it quickly came to be viewed as little more than a fig leaf for Western-sponsored regime change.
So it is ironic, to say the least, that Russia is using a concept similar to R2P to justify its intervention, only in this case it is defending the government from its citizens, rather than the other way around.
Russia’s efforts are, in effect, an argument for a return to the era of absolute sovereignty, in which governments are uniquely responsible for what happens within their country’s borders.
Russia’s stance also reflects its preference for stability over justice and its acceptance of the legitimacy of authoritarian rule.
With the proliferation of “color revolutions” in places like Georgia, Ukraine, and Kyrgyzstan, Russia and China have become increasingly wary of popular uprisings.
The threat of Western intervention, in their view, only compounds the potential for instability.
Indeed, the Chinese have coined their own stiff foreign-policy jargon for this sentiment: fanxifang xin ganshe zhuyi (loosely translated, “countering Western neo-interventionism”).
But Russia’s respect for sovereignty has notable limits.
In Crimea in 2014, the Kremlin embraced a very different doctrine of intervention, justifying its actions in Ukraine on the grounds that it was defending the rights of ethnic Russians.
This marks a return to a pre-Westphalian world of linguistic, religious, and sectarian solidarity, of the sort Czarist Russia practiced when it regarded itself as the protector of all Slavs.
Not surprisingly, this justification for intervention is rapidly finding adherents in other parts of the world.
In the Middle East, Saudi Arabia has adopted a parallel argument for its support of Sunni forces in Yemen and Syria, as has Iran in backing its Shia allies in both countries.
Even China is increasingly being pushed to take responsibility for its citizens and companies overseas.
At the beginning of the Libyan civil war, China airlifted tens of thousands of its citizens out of the country.
All of this has come at a time when the West is losing its military preeminence.
Improvements in the Russian and Chinese militaries and the increasingly common use of asymmetric strategies by state and non-state actors are leveling the battlefield.
Indeed, the proliferation of state-sponsored non-state actors in places like Libya, Syria, Crimea, and Donbas is blurring the distinction between state and non-state violence.
After the Cold War, the West imposed an international order that defined geopolitics worldwide.
When that order was threatened, Western leaders felt authorized to intervene in the affairs of whatever “rogue state” was causing the problem.
But now that order is being challenged on several fronts simultaneously – globally by Russia and China, and at the regional level by increasingly assertive players in the Middle East, Latin America, and even Europe.
As a new order takes shape, the roles countries have played for the last 25 years are likely to be reversed.
In the West, the concept of sovereignty and the limited use of power is likely to make a comeback, while national leaders who have traditionally called for restraint will become increasingly bold in unleashing their troops.
The Wrong Lessons of the Iraq War
WASHINGTON, DC – The Chilcot report was finally released this month, seven years after it was commissioned by the British government to “identify lessons” from the United Kingdom’s participation in the Iraq War.
But in the frenzied focus on former Prime Minister Tony Blair’s errors of judgment and process in bringing the UK into the war alongside the United States, the real lessons risk being lost.
For many critics, the failure of the Iraq War proves that interventionist Western foreign policies are both futile and immoral.
But interventions should never be assessed on the basis of the success or failure of the last one.
That logic is what led Bill Clinton’s administration, following the failure of US intervention in Somalia in 1993, to fail to act the following year to prevent the genocide in Rwanda, which in retrospect could have been halted with quite limited action.
In the case of the Iraq War, the intervention killed hundreds of thousands of Iraqis and shattered the country, as well as costing the lives of thousands of US and British soldiers.
The tragic legacy of the Iraqi intervention continues today, however, because it now stands as a cautionary tale against all intervention.
President Barack Obama has repeatedly justified his refusal to use force in Syria, other than against the Islamic State (ISIS), in terms of avoiding another Iraq.
Moreover, his decisions have been affected by British reactions to Iraq.
After the defeat, British Defense Secretary Philip Hammond recognized that it was the Iraq War that had “poisoned the well” of public opinion, while former Labour leader Ed Miliband said the British public, “want us to learn the lessons of Iraq.”
The Chilcot report found that the case for invading Iraq was made on the “basis of flawed intelligence,” that the resources committed did not meet the stated goals, and that interveners failed to plan for unintended consequences.
As a result, Britain ended its six-year commitment in Iraq “a very long way from success.”
This catalogue of failure should not be read as a brief against all intervention, but as a set of criteria for future success.
First, the intelligence must be cross-examined from every conceivable angle.
This maxim was not applied in Libya, either, such that the initial reports of a potential massacre of hundreds of thousands of people in Benghazi has since come under sustained and credible attack.
Second, the means and the ends must be at least roughly aligned.
Transforming a dictatorship into a democracy in a country that has never known democracy and lacked the economic and civic resources to sustain it was at least a generation-long endeavor (though neither the US nor the UK government initially justified the intervention on these grounds).
The original stated end of removing weapons of mass destruction could have been achieved at much lower cost, had such weapons in fact existed.
Third, intervention planners should assume worst-case rather than best-case scenarios.
The cost of non-intervention must be as high as or higher than the projected cost of intervention (where many things that can go wrong frequently do).
These lessons set a high bar for any future intervention.
But it is a bar cleared by at least some proposed measures in Syria.
The intelligence concerning Assad’s atrocities against his own is irrefutable.
The stated goal of intervention in Syria should be to stop Assad from committing mass murder against his own population, which has forced millions to flee the country, and to convince him and his supporters that if they cannot win by any means, they are better off negotiating a genuine peace settlement, however fragile.
To achieve this specific end, the means are available and calibrated: the targets should be Assad’s air force and airports.
The US and its allies are already bombing perpetrators of crimes against humanity in Syria, but only when those perpetrators belong to ISIS rather than to the Syrian government.
Finally, if such an intervention failed either to stop Assad’s massacre of civilians or to create the conditions for a negotiated peace, Syria would be no worse off than it is today.
The fear is that weakening Assad will strengthen ISIS, and that a Syria overrun by ISIS would be worse for the West, for other countries in the Middle East, and arguably for Syrians.
But Assad actively benefits from the presence of ISIS in Syria; it reinforces precisely the counterterrorist narrative that he has promoted since the first peaceful protests against his government began in March 2011.
And Syrians across the country will fight ISIS just as fiercely with or without Assad’s air force.
Russia and Iran will continue to fight ISIS as well.
One of Chilcot’s main conclusions is surely correct: “aspects of any intervention need to be calculated, debated, and challenged with the utmost rigour.”
That said, intervention can still be the right course.
Three Ways to Improve Child Health
SEATTLE – Over the last 15 years, the international community has made great strides in improving child health.
But, with millions of children under the age of five dying each year from preventable and treatable diseases like diarrhea and pneumonia, the job is far from finished.
Most people would say that malaria or even HIV/AIDS are the leading child killers.
In fact, diarrhea and pneumonia top the charts as the biggest threats to child survival – as they have for the more than 30 years that we have been tracking them.
According to the recently published 2016 Pneumonia and Diarrhea Progress Report, the two diseases caused 1.4 million child deaths last year, and one-quarter of all deaths of children under the age of five.
They exact their highest toll in South Asia and Sub-Saharan Africa.
Tackling the two biggest killers of children worldwide may seem daunting, but we have all the knowledge we need to mount an effective response.
Indeed, we know which viruses, bacteria, and parasites we need to target; which interventions are likely to work; and which countries need them the most.
Just 15 countries account for 72% of childhood deaths from pneumonia and diarrhea.
These are the countries on which the Pneumonia and Diarrhea Progress Report focuses.
Its analysis of national efforts shows that, while most countries have made improvements over the last year, improvement in some of the largest countries has been minimal, and a few countries have not made any progress at all.
Most deaths happen in the first two years of a child’s life.
To change this, governments need to step up their efforts to prevent pneumonia and diarrhea, including by ensuring that parents have access to the information they need to protect their children.
Here, it is critical that ordinary citizens stand up and hold their governments accountable.
The good news is that there are three relatively simple interventions that could make a big difference.
The first is breastfeeding.
An age-old, no-cost intervention, breastfeeding exclusively for the first six months of a baby’s life is one of the easiest ways to prevent both diarrhea and pneumonia.
Breast milk has all the nutrients babies need to grow, as well as antibodies that boost their immune systems, thereby protecting against illness and helping to accelerate recovery.
The Progress Report estimates that about half of all diarrhea episodes, and about a third of respiratory infections, could be averted by breastfeeding.
Yet rates of exclusive breastfeeding during a child’s first six months remain low.
In ten of the 15 countries evaluated in the Progress Report, fewer than half of mothers exclusively breastfeed their children.
Many kids still lack clean drinking water, access to basic toilets, and good hygiene practices.
Poor water quality and lack of reliable sanitation systems to treat human waste play a big role in spreading diseases.
UNICEF reports that something as simple as hand washing with soap can cut rates of diarrhea and respiratory infections by more than 40% and 25%, respectively.
By investing not only in systems to provide clean drinking water and sanitation, but also in educational programs that encourage better hygiene practices and toilet use, governments can break a vicious cycle of diarrhea and malnutrition that causes irreversible physical and cognitive damage.
The children they help are more likely to be able to attend school, and grow into healthy, educated adults.
The third key intervention is vaccination.
Vaccines represent the most cost-effective intervention for preventing childhood illness, and they already exist for most common bacterial causes of pneumonia (pneumococcus and Hib) and for the leading causes of diarrhea (rotavirus).
Yet half of the world’s children live in areas where the pneumococcal vaccine is not available through a national immunization program, and only 15% of the children in the world’s poorest countries have access to the rotavirus vaccine.
By making vaccines available through national immunization programs, governments can protect all children from the diseases that are most likely to harm or kill them.
Efforts to ensure that families take advantage of vaccination services, including by educating parents about their value, will also be needed.
Pneumonia and diarrhea should not still be taking children’s lives.
No single intervention will be enough.
But the accelerated and coordinated implementation of the three interventions described here could go a long way toward preventing pneumonia and diarrhea, especially for the most vulnerable children, enabling them to lead healthy, productive lives.
In the Footsteps of Gandhi, Mandela, and Havel
LONDON – Liu Xiaobo, the imprisoned Chinese writer and human-rights campaigner, will receive the Nobel Peace Prize on December 10.
For the first time in history, however, neither the laureate nor any member of his immediate family will be present in Oslo to accept the award.
China’s government has blocked Liu’s wife, the acclaimed photographer Liu Xia, from participating by keeping her under virtual house arrest in Beijing.
It has browbeaten other countries into boycotting the award ceremony.
Not surprisingly, Vladimir Putin’s Russia was among the first to kowtow to China’s Diktat. More ominously, it looked for a while like the Norwegian Nobel committee itself might bow to Beijing, too.
But in the end it decided to go ahead with the award. That is only fitting: an award for moral courage ought not to be compromised by those offering it.
When Liu learned that he had been awarded this year‘s Nobel Peace Prize, his first reaction was telling: “This prize is given to the victims of the Tiananmen Square massacre.”
That simple phrase neatly encapsulates Liu’s peaceful 20-year-resistance to China’s government, which began with a hunger strike in Tiananmen Square.
Over the next two decades, he was imprisoned several times, and held under house arrest when not in prison.
Despite this ongoing persecution, Liu continued to write and petition the government on behalf of the people of China.
Like the greatest non-violent freedom fighters of modern times – Mahatma Gandhi, Martin Luther King, Nelson Mandela, and Václav Havel – he sacrificed his own freedom to highlight his people’s lack of it.
Today, many individuals and countries are demonstrating their support for the Nobel Peace Prize Committee’s decision to award the prize to Liu.
Indeed, Havel and a previous laureate, Desmond Tutu, were consistent advocates of awarding the prize to him.
But, in addition to supporting Liu’s achievements by making certain that they are represented at the ceremony in Oslo, world leaders need to come to grips with the Chinese government’s reaction.
Although much of the world recognizes that it is in economic competition with China, it often fails to see that it is also in moral competition with China.
The Communist Party of China used to rule a destitute power. But, having become much richer over the past three decades, China is now proposing to the world its own model of development – and, indeed, of civilization.
This model, which some have dubbed “The Beijing Consensus” is explicit: there are no moral standards, only material ones.
Human rights and freedom can be made to disappear not only from Web sites, but also from reality.
Though now better off than they have ever been in material terms, the Chinese people under the current regime are denied any real opportunity to retain and refine their own dignity beyond the quest for wealth and luxury goods.
Liu’s prize is a rebuke to the regime, because it rejects the dogma that nothing but the pursuit of economic interest matters.
China’s rulers know that in a system in which justice is absent, Liu’s efforts to speak to a higher moral calling requires only moral courage to be followed.
The regime has tried to separate politics and economics, but Liu has shown that this is impossible.
Any Chinese can become another Liu Xiaobo if they choose to see through the lies of the regime’s “Materialism/Leninism.”
But even here there is a paradox for the regime.
For inevitably, the ordinary men and women who have built modern China will demand to live in a freedom commensurate to their material achievements.
So a civilized China is emerging, just as a civilized Eastern Europe once emerged, from the hearts and minds of prisoners of conscience, of people like Liu Xiaobo.
Havel, who has inspired Liu as he has so many others who aspire to freedom, wrote a public letter to Chinese President Hu Jintao after Liu’s latest imprisonment.
In it, he said: “Mr. Liu's trial was the result of a political order for which you carry ultimate political responsibility.”
Just as Czechoslovakia’s communist government once imprisoned Havel for daring to dream of a civil society and a true constitution of liberty for his country, China’s government has imprisoned Liu for attempting something similar, with his Charter 08 appeal, modeled on Czechoslovakia’s Charter 77.
Havel eventually saw his ideas triumph in the Velvet Revolution of 1989.
Liu Xiaobo is demonstrating anew the unstoppable power of the powerless.
Awarding him the Nobel Peace Prize lifts the hopes of all of us who dream of a truly free and civilized China.
And we might also dream that next December, the Nobel committee will at long last recognize Havel for an award whose meaning he truly personifies.
A Very Tolerant Christmas
LONDON – Christmas is coming – and has been, it seems, since mid-autumn.
And just in case there was any sign of flagging, we now have Black Friday, an export from the United States, when we are all encouraged to drink deep of the modern Christmas spirit and shop until we drop.
In my old-fashioned way, I rather disapprove of celebrating “God rest you merry merchants” day.
Since when were we happy for Christmas to dawn in early November?
Festivals should happen only when they turn up on the calendar.
When I was a boy, Christmas arrived on its eve, December 24.
We went to mass at midnight.
Afterward, my dad carried me home.
We woke up the following morning to open presents and prepare for our turkey lunch.
The day after Christmas was a public holiday with cold turkey and ham to sustain us.
Then it was back to work on December 27.
That was that. Christmas was over, until December 24 the following year.
These days, whether you are Christian or not, the feast to mark the birth of Jesus Christ has turned into a winter bacchanal and a huge retailing orgy.
Of course, there was always a commercial side to Christmas, if only for breeders of poultry and makers of greeting cards.
But in most countries today, even those with few Christian citizens, the festival offers the chance for a holiday and a binge.
Sometimes, the symbols of the event become very confused.
It is reported that one Tokyo department store marked the time of year for shoppers by hanging a huge crucified Father Christmas in its entrance hall.
Apocryphal or not, the story gives us some idea of the cultural confusion that this midwinter religious feast can cause.
It is all a long way from the stable in Bethlehem that we read about in the New Testament – a location now ringed by Israel Defense Forces barbed wire.
Of course, there are places where any sign of celebrating Christmas would trigger immediate persecution.
In any part of Mesopotamia presently controlled by the Islamic State (ISIS), practicing Christians would lose their heads.
At its worst, intolerance is literally murderous.
But there are other forms of intolerance, infinitely less horrifying than that of jihadist bigots, that kill no one but demean us all.
Think of all those who don’t like to write or say “Happy Christmas,” lest they offend those who are not Christians.
This self-censorship is rather insulting to Jews, Hindus, and Muslims.
What cause for offense should they have when Christians celebrate their December feast?
Does the celebration of Diwali, Eid, or Passover offend Christians?
It certainly should not, although we can recall terrible periods of Christian intolerance and bigotry.
In Britain, we recently experienced an example of alleged political correctness that went well beyond such questions.
The Church of England filmed various Christian groups saying the Lord’s Prayer, one of the foundations of Christian worship.
The film was to be shown among the advertisements in cinemas.
But the cinema proprietors banned the film on the grounds that it might give offense.
Even well-known atheists criticized this mindless act of censorship.
Intolerance grows, and not just in societies run by jihadists and religious fanatics.
Across university campuses, particularly in the US but also in Britain, students claim the right to deny others free speech or to rewrite history that offends them – a complete denial of what universities should be all about.
Censorship and assertions of sensitivity eviscerate scholarship and, with it, the very idea of a university where pluralism defines the meeting of minds.
Disagreement is the heart of educated debate.
Destroy that and you destroy the hallmarks of liberal order.
As the great political philosopher Karl Popper argued, the only thing that we should not tolerate in an open society is intolerance.
The most extreme example of such intolerance today – which much of the world is now fighting – is the religious totalitarianism of ISIS.
The extent to which this extremism is a product of Saudi Arabia’s energetic promotion of its Wahhabi ideology is for Muslims to debate themselves.
But it is increasingly difficult for the outside world to overlook the impact of the Kingdom’s main export, alongside oil.
The best present we could give to the world this Christmas (regardless of whether we celebrate it religiously or not), would be to dedicate ourselves to championing tolerance everywhere.
This will require us to address the inverted narratives of victimhood, which are often recruited to justify intolerance.
The suffering from past wrongs does not justify current and future cruelty.
This Christmas, the open society is endangered not only from without, by the likes of ISIS, but also by (admittedly far smaller) threats at home – a gloomy reflection, I admit, as we prepare in churches and in high streets to enjoy another year’s winter party.
So, in the spirit of tolerance: Happy Christmas, whether you are Jewish, Muslim, Hindu, Sikh, atheist, agnostic, consumerist, or Christian.
As the Irish comedian Dave Allen used to say, “May your God go with you.”
Into Syria without Arms
NEW YORK – Much of the debate over what to do in the Middle East tends to pit realists against idealists.
Bahrain is a classic case, as is Saudi Arabia and, for that matter, Egypt: calls for the United States and other countries with interests and influence in the region to stand up for democracy and human rights run up against concerns that national-security interests will suffer if pro-Western authoritarian regimes are ousted.
European and US policymakers often attempt to square the circle with a compromise policy that is inconsistent and satisfies no one.
Syria offers a stark contrast to this pattern in the sense that strategic and humanitarian interests are aligned.
Many governments have a strategic desire to oust a regime that is closely allied with Iran and Hezbollah.
And there is a humanitarian desire to get rid of a regime that has killed as many as 15,000 – if not more – of its own people.
But an armed intervention would be a large undertaking, one requiring not just considerable air power (given Syria’s extensive air-defense network) but also ground forces, given the existence of at least two capable divisions that remain loyal to President Bashar al-Assad.
The sectarian nature of Syrian society all but guarantees that the presence of troops from other countries would be both prolonged and difficult.
One alternative to direct military intervention is to provide arms and other forms of support to the opposition.
This is being done.
The case for helping people defend themselves is obvious.
But arming the opposition is not without its drawbacks. It risks fueling a civil war and encouraging regime loyalists to dig in.
In addition, arms provided to fight the regime will be used by factions to fight one another if and when the regime is removed, thereby making the aftermath in Syria that much more violent.
But intervention need not be defined as either armed intervention or intervention with arms.
There is much more that the world can and should be doing to bring about the removal of the Assad regime.
For starters, economic sanctions can be increased.
The rule of thumb should be that Syria will be the target of sanctions no less stringent than those being applied to Iran.
Syria’s energy and banking sectors should be fully covered.
The elites in Syria who still support the regime ought to pay an additional price.
Cutting off air travel to and from Syria would increase dissatisfaction among those who regularly visit London, Paris, and other Western capitals.
Likewise, those Arab governments unhappy with the state of affairs in Syria can do more to bring about change.
They could suspend all ties with Syria, and they should scale back commercial and diplomatic relations with Russia, the regime’s most important external backer, until the Kremlin alters its policy.
Moreover, the diplomatic mission led by former United Nations Secretary-General Kofi Annan under UN auspices needs to be fundamentally recast.
The time to try to broker a compromise, with Assad’s regime agreeing to reforms that would satisfy the opposition, is long gone (if it ever existed).
The purpose of diplomacy now should be to bring about an exit for Assad and his inner circle, and to establish a process for moving to a new, more representative political order based on the rule of law.
We are already beginning to see some of those closest to Assad desert what they rightly view as a sinking ship.
One way to accelerate this trend is to threaten war-crimes indictments by a certain date, say, August 15, for any senior official who remains a part of the government and is associated with its campaign against the Syrian people.
Naming these individuals would concentrate minds in Damascus.
Defections will also increase if the Syrian opposition demonstrates that the alternative to the Assad regime is one that is truly open and inclusive.
The minority Alawites fear that they will suffer the fate of the minority Sunnis in post-Saddam Iraq. The only way to reassure them (and to encourage them to defect) is with an opposition that becomes truly national and articulates principles that appeal to all Syrians.
Western governments need to work much more closely with the divided and relatively inexperienced opposition if this imperative is to be met.
In short, the crisis in Syria warrants outside intervention, but mostly with tools other than arms.
What is needed is an approach that hastens the demise of the Assad regime and increases the odds that what comes after will not be an orgy of vengeance, violence, and chaos.
The human and strategic stakes call for no less.
But investors should not become distracted.
In 2017, they will need to reappraise how the global economy works, and recalibrate accordingly their assessment of every stock or bond on sale, because even if some market fundamentals remain the same, many others have clearly changed.
For at least two decades, most investors accepted the consensus among economists and political scientists that the world was getting smaller and more integrated.
With the rise of China and India, one-third of the world’s population suddenly became workers and consumers in the global economy.
And new technologies offered cheap communications, advanced robotics, and increasingly powerful data analysis, which enabled companies to slim down their inventories and integrate supply chains.
Meanwhile, political leaders gradually developed regulatory and trade regimes that eliminated tariffs, simplified border crossings, and opened exciting new markets.
Good companies tried to take advantage of new opportunities, and investors looked for the firms that showed the most promise.
According to the World Trade Organization, merchandise and commercial-services exports have quadrupled since 1995.
Given this track record, when trade performance declined after the 2008 financial crisis, most policymakers assumed that new trade agreements would, again, boost growth.
US President Barack Obama’s administration, for its part, envisioned a vast free-trade area encompassing both Asia and Europe.
The two grand agreements that it pursued – the 12-country Trans-Pacific Partnership and the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership – would have put the US at the center of an integrated market comprising two-thirds of the global economy.
But that hope has faded now that populist movements across the West, tapping into public discontent about the dawning world order, have succeeded at the polls.
Since the radical anti-establishment Syriza’s election in Greece almost two years ago, voters seem to have taken to the idea of national governments standing up to supranational and multilateral organizations such the European Commission and the International Monetary Fund.
Likewise, many observers have interpreted the Brexit referendum as a bid to reassert control over national borders.
And while historians will still be debating what led to Trump’s victory long after he has left office, it is already apparent that many of his supporters similarly want America to bolt its door, restock its pantry, and rely more on itself than on foreign friends.
Taken together, these political outcomes – and the anti-establishment forces on the march ahead of next year’s French and German elections – will halt further global economic and political integration, at least in the near term.
For now, countries will avoid grand trade deals and make only half-hearted efforts to align their regulations.
Companies operating internationally will soon face higher costs, as it becomes harder to move goods across state borders and employ foreign workers; their investors, meanwhile, can expect lower returns.
Even a mild trade tussle between the US and Mexico, for example, could be extremely costly for car manufacturers, given that some components currently cross the US border as many as eight times during the production process.
And if Boeing were not already reining in its Dreamliner model’s vast global supply chain, it would now be scrambling to do so even faster.
If voters want to limit the cross-border movement of goods, services, and people, companies will have to adopt a new model that builds in more redundancy within borders; and investors will need to look for firms that can profit with minimal border crossings, or that can still generate a profit despite increased protectionist friction.
At the margin, the market will put a premium on companies that can quibble with governments and navigate contradictory regulations, rather than those that can boost productivity and open new markets.
At the same time, the new model that emerges will still have to account for major forces that sustained the old model, especially the forces of globalization and technological innovation that voter resistance will not stop.
In today’s global economy, the next substantial productivity boost will come from companies analyzing customer and production-line data on a large scale.
Companies that do this well will be able to design better products, at lower costs; but they will achieve significant gains only if they can compare data across borders and jurisdictions.
Meanwhile, the immutable logic of the Internet, productivity-enhancing robotics, and the division of labor that Adam Smith first described will force governments to cooperate.
Savvy investors will look for companies that can withstand the current populist revolt against globalization and take advantage of incipient economic and technological trends.
Theirs will be a more complicated analysis for more complicated times.
Like a good astronomer or anthropologist, however, successful investors will find reliable patterns in a sea of crosscutting evidence.
Inviting the Avoidable
Maybe it is excessive skittishness, or perhaps it is the result of global financial volatility in recent years – crises in Mexico in 1994-5, East Asia in 1997-98, Russia in 1998, and then in Brazil, Turkey, and Argentina – but we economists are more concerned about monetary affairs and possible future disasters than we have been in many decades.
This month, the Switzerland-based Bank for International Settlements (BIS) was the latest to worry aloud about the financial risks that the world seems to be building into its future.
“[A]ll the countries hit by financial crisis... experience[d] a very sharp slowdown,” the BIS says of the recent past.
It then cites “global current account imbalances,” particularly “the US external deficit,” describing it as “unprecedented for a reserve currency country to have a current account deficit of such magnitude.”
In short, the world has become “increasingly prone to financial turbulence.”
The BIS hints at the possibility of a financial crisis that, with the US at its center, would dwarf by at least an order of magnitude all crises that have occurred since 1933.
Yet, in response to this risk, the BIS issues the standard textbook recommendations.
Countries whose policies and economies are out of balance should change their policies, thereby restoring balance: “deficit countries should reduce the rate of growth of domestic spending below that of domestic production.
Allowing their currencies to depreciate in real terms would make their products more competitive, and also provide an incentive for production to shift out of non-tradables into tradables.”
This is economists’ polite code for the message that the US must gradually cut its budget deficit, while other countries – like China and Japan – must gradually let the value of the dollar fall and that of their own currencies rise.
So the BIS proposes nothing new or particularly attention-grabbing.
But if we turn to America’s government, we see an enormous pretense that the current budget deficit is not a problem.
As Stan Collender, a noted observer of the US federal budget, has commented, “No one with federal budget responsibilities actually seems to be interested in the budget.”
This is not “because the budget committees are too busy....[T]he House and Senate...are not doing much of anything...[because] they don't want to.”
Within the Bush administration, Director of the Office of Management and Budget Josh Bolten “has been virtually invisible,” while “the president and vice president...avoid talking publicly about the budget.”
Let us be clear on this point: it is not that politicians who wish to take the lead on fiscal consolidation are failing to gain traction; it is that there are no politicians – at least none with any agenda-setting influence – who are even trying to steer the US towards adopting a more responsible fiscal policy.
This is a grotesque failure of leadership.
Governments that pursue policies – whether US fiscal laxity or China’s exchange-rate peg – that create unsustainable imbalances do so for what they regard as important political reasons.
Appeals to them to change their policies, and thus contribute to the common global good of financial stability, are fruitless unless others are seen to change their policies, act responsibly, and so contribute to the common good as well.
International policy coordination requires a leader, a first mover.
But, while the US, as the world’s largest economy, is best suited for this role, it has so far failed to play its part.
Treasury Secretary John Snow has spent almost no public time on the budget, but a lot of public time on China.
Republican political operatives care far less about national savings than they do about manufacturing-sector job losses.
“So what else is new?” you may ask – and with good reason.
The list of issues on which the Bush administration has failed to lead is a long one, and failure to take steps to diminish the risks of future financial catastrophe cannot rank very high.
The entire Bush administration has been a succession of leadership failures, so why harp on its poor financial management?
Form a purely practical point of view, one reason is that ensuring global financial stability is an issue on which real progress can be made relatively easily.
The Bush administration may not care that deficit reduction is the right policy for America, but it might care far more if the issue were framed as a prerequisite for policy changes abroad that diminish pressure from imports on domestic manufacturing employment.
Iran: Another Problem from Hell
WASHINGTON, DC – Throughout 2010, the pattern for negotiations over Iran’s nuclear program held to form.
With just about every diplomatic effort failing to yield results, international efforts have increasingly given way to discussions about sanctions – and what mix of them would be needed to bring Iran to heel.
In 2011, a renewed focus on comprehensive economic sanctions could turn out to be the bad idea whose time has arrived.
Sanctions, of course, have a dismal historical record in achieving their aims.
Indeed, they have often been more useful in proving the law of unintended consequences.
So it might be useful to step back and take one more look at our disagreeable negotiating partner – Iran – to see what should, and should not, be emphasized diplomatically.
There is nothing easy about negotiating with Iran.
It is one of the oldest states in the broader Middle East, with a deep culture.
Despite its leaders’ grim public image, Iran has a sense of humanism, as any Kurd who fled from Saddam Hussein’s chemical-warfare attacks along the Iranian border can attest.
Bending, much less breaking, will not come naturally to such a prideful country.
Iran also doesn’t “play well with others.”
Most Americans remember it as the country that abducted US diplomats soon after its Islamic revolution in 1979, holding them for no apparent purpose for 444 days.
No American diplomat has been stationed in Tehran since.
American attitudes toward Iran are probably far more conditioned by that episode than people realize.
Iran is also internally divided.
Its mullahs bicker constantly, seeming to reflect the country’s broader cleavages.
Iran’s civilian authorities apparently have limited control over the military and the dreaded security services, which seem to answer to no one but themselves.
Iran’s Islamic Revolution, moreover, has run into a familiar contradiction: it cannot further its aims without accepting Westernization and modernization.
Iran’s youthful population – a product of the massive post-revolution baby boom – is increasingly frustrated and depressed; not surprisingly, young Iranians are having fewer children than ever.
As the June 2009 election protests showed, Iran’s urban youth desperately want to end the country’s isolation, but they have increasingly found that the only way out of isolation is to study or work abroad – and never return.
Iran does not live in a great neighborhood, either.
Turkey can be a good neighbor, but otherwise Iran is bordered by inhospitable states to the east and the north.
And, while its western neighbor Iraq is a fellow Shia-majority state, Iraq’s Arab Shia make no secret of their distaste for the Persians and their claim to Shia prominence.
While most of the world may have missed it, there is an ongoing competition between Iraq’s Najaf and Iran’s Qom over which city is holier.
Iran has virtually no friends among the Sunni Arab states.
As the world recently learned from the WikiLeaks release of US diplomatic cables, Sunni Arab leaders are no more tolerant of an Iranian nuclear bomb than is the US or its allies.
The Sunni reaction to Iran may reflect deep-seated suspicions about the Shia (witness the cold shoulder given by most Sunnis to Shia rule in Iraq).
Iran’s only friends, it seems, are those – like the Chinese – who are more interested in its natural resources than its people.
While sanctions may deepen Iran’s predicament, they are unlikely to break the diplomatic impasse on nuclear weapons.
But, given the Iranian government’s increasingly unhelpful reactions to diplomatic overtures, there is unlikely to be any interest in toning down sanctions.
Indeed, just the opposite response is likely – efforts to tighten sanctions still further. 
Yet, just as the US adopted a “bomb and talk” approach with the Serbs during the dénouement of the Bosnian war, America must be willing to “sanction and talk” when it comes to Iran, thereby creating greater space for an eventual diplomatic strategy.
First, the US should consider establishing diplomatic relations with Iran and putting diplomats on the ground.
This would not be an easy process, and could well meet considerable Iranian resistance.
But the Iranians have diplomatic relations with other members of its main interlocutor in talks on its nuclear program, the sanctions-minded P-5+1 Group (China, France, Germany, Russia, the United Kingdom, and the US), and restoring Iran-US diplomatic ties would shorten lines of communications and close the 444-day chapter of 1979-1981.
Second, even if a stronger bilateral mechanism is forged, it should not be allowed to displace the P-5 approach.
The ability of this group to work together is critical to resolving this and future crises. 
Third, the US should continue its efforts to encourage action by Iran’s neighbors.
While Turkey’s lurch into the fray in 2010 may have been unwelcome, its interest in calming a situation involving an immediate neighbor is understandable.
More problematically, the Sunni Arab states should also give more serious thought to addressing the situation, and should seek to reconcile their private and public postures.
Iran, after all, is not building an Islamic bomb.
It is building an Iranian bomb, or, worse yet, a Shia bomb that Arab leaders must be more resolute in trying to stop.
Private expressions of deep concern do not compensate for public nonchalance (or changing the topic to Israel), and are hardly a basis for a successful policy toward a country whose nuclear ambitions could have a catastrophic impact on the region.
Finally, the Chinese and the Russians have been brought along principally by the US to a more robust policy, yet they remain reluctant.
They need to convey through their own bilateral approaches to Iran a sense of urgency – and perhaps even express a little anger – at Iran’s unwillingness to negotiate seriously.
Sanctions should be a tool of diplomacy, not the other way around.
Even as we look to tighten sanctions on Iran in 2011, we must strengthen our efforts to establish a strong political and diplomatic track.
Iran at History’s Fork in the Road
NEW YORK – History rarely unfolds smoothly or evenly. Instead, it tends to be punctuated by major developments – battles, assassinations, breakthroughs – that have consequences that are felt for years.
Thirty-one years after the revolution that ousted the Shah and brought Islamic rule to Iran, we are at one of those turning points.
To be sure, we do not know the degree, direction, or pace of change.
What we do know, however, is that what happens in Iran will materially affect not just that country but the entire Middle East and beyond.
One future for Iran would be mostly an extension of what already exists, i.e., an Iran run by conservative clerics and an aggressive Revolutionary Guard, with the latter increasingly enjoying the upper hand.
The Iranian regime would continue to brutally repress its domestic opponents, meddle in Iraq and Afghanistan, arm and fund Hezbollah and Hamas, and, most important, develop the ability to construct one or more nuclear weapons and the means to deliver them.
The emergence of such a future would present the world with a stark choice: either acquiesce to an Iran that possesses or could quickly assemble a nuclear device, or launch a preventive military attack designed to destroy much of the Iranian nuclear program.
Iran’s emergence as a nuclear-weapons state would almost certainly tempt several of the main Sunni Muslim countries (Turkey, Egypt, and Saudi Arabia all come to mind) to embark on a crash program to acquire or develop nuclear arms of their own.
A Middle East comprising several nuclear weapons states is a recipe for catastrophe.
An armed attack by the United States, Israel, or both on Iran’s nuclear facilities is another possibility.
One downside of such a prospect that Iran would likely retaliate against US interests and personnel in Iraq and Afghanistan, and, using Hamas and Hezbollah, against Israel and others.
Iran could also interfere with oil traffic, leading to a spike in prices and delivering a further blow to American and global economic recovery.
Moreover, while a preventive strike would delay Iran’s nuclear efforts, it would not stop the regime from rebuilding, and it might also create conditions that cause problems for the regime’s domestic opponents.
But, despite these potential drawbacks, an armed attack on Iran’s nuclear facilities will and should remain a distinct possibility given the enormous strategic costs of a nuclear-armed Iran.
It is in part to avoid the difficult choice of either living with a nuclear-armed Iran or attacking it that the five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council and Germany have pursued negotiations to limit Iran’s nuclear program and place it under international supervision.
Russia and China, which claim to oppose the emergence of a nuclear-armed Iran, are now being pressed to support new, tough sanctions to increase the odds it does not happen.
But if history is a guide, even strong sanctions may not be enough to persuade Iran’s rulers to negotiate constructively and accept meaningful constraints on their nuclear activities.
These considerations raise the prospect of trying to bring about an alternative future: an Iran with a political leadership that is more moderate at home and abroad, and that forgoes developing a nuclear weapon or anything close to it.
In addition to providing a better life for Iran’s 70 million people, political change there would weaken both Hamas and Hezbollah, thereby strengthening the relative position of moderates in the West Bank and Gaza and much improving the prospects for peace between Israel and the Palestinians.
A more moderate Iran would also cause Turkey to reconsider its recent shift away from the West and lead Syria to rethink its foreign-policy orientation, which would create a real opportunity for an Israeli peace deal with Damascus.
Iraq’s prospects for emerging as a successful country at peace with itself and its neighbors also would be much improved.
It is rare in history that such widely different but plausible paths stem from a common point.
It is not difficult, however, to determine which one is preferable.
This is why additional measures are called for to improve the prospects for political change that brings about an Iranian government prepared to live in peace with its own people and its neighbors.
Such measures include assisting the Green Movement so that it can maintain access to the Internet, introducing additional sanctions aimed at the Revolutionary Guard, and publicly supporting the political and legal rights of the Iranian people.
Some governments and individuals are likely to resist these suggestions, believing that such intervention constitutes an unwarranted intrusion into Iran’s sovereignty.
But in today’s global world, what happens in Iran is more than Iran’s affair.
Iran’s government has a right to nuclear power to generate electricity, but not to a nuclear weapon.
It also has obligations to its neighbors, to the world community (not to support terrorism, for example), and to its citizens.
The world should not sit idly by as Iran’s regime fails to meet these obligations.
Iran Confronts Reality
MADRID – Who has not seen what looks like water on a highway on a hot summer’s day?
Or a three-dimensional image that was actually a picture on a flat surface?
The nature of illusion is that we mistake what we perceive for reality.
That is true whether an illusion is cognitive or political.
Depending on how a particular event develops, it can lead us to formulate erroneous interpretations of what is actually happening.
Such perceptions are often mediated by ideas and previous experiences.
And, as Robert Jervis argued in Perception and Misperception in International Politics, published during the Cold War, the illusions that we create have an enormous influence on decision-making – even becoming a fundamental cause of conflict.
To a certain extent, this is what has happened with analysis of the recent 16th Summit of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM), held at the end of August in Tehran – the first time Iran has hosted the meeting.
The summit took place against a background of scant progress in negotiations with Iran on its nuclear program and growing pressure from Israel for the international community to establish a “trigger” – a line that the Islamic Republic must not cross.
Moreover, regional tensions heightened the perception of the NAM summit’s importance and that of its host.
In the Middle East, only Iran and Hezbollah support Syrian President Bashar al-Assad’s regime in a civil war that is nearing the point of no return and destabilizing Lebanon and Jordan.
The NAM played an important role during the Cold War.
Its vision was shaped by the recent independence struggles of many of its member countries, and its agenda promoted national sovereignty, non-interference, a rebalancing of North-South relations, and support for national liberation movements.
But the reality that united NAM in the past has changed.
The Cold War’s bipolar governance structures and a subsequent period of American unilateralism – to which the non-aligned states attempted to act as a counterbalance – have given way to a much more complex and interdependent multi-polar world.
While the United States and Europe are still struggling to overcome a serious economic crisis, many NAM members, such as India, Chile, and Singapore, have maintained relative strong growth and form a part of new global governance structures, such as the G-20.
Likewise, many of the problems that we now face – whether climate change, financial crisis, development challenges, terrorism, or nuclear proliferation – reflect growing global interdependence.
Managing them effectively obliges us to rethink the concept of sovereignty.
These changes have transformed not only the traditional structures of power, but also the leitmotif of NAM and the fate of its members.
Globalization has fueled ever-widening disparities among its members – just compare Colombia with Afghanistan, or Chile with Sudan – that make it difficult to transform sheer numbers into coherent influence.
The impact of the Tehran summit, and whom it may have benefited, is not entirely clear.
Iran certainly regarded the meeting as a propaganda opportunity, promising wide media coverage at a time when it was in the eye of a diplomatic hurricane.
But the participants’ inability to reach a common position on their hosts’ nuclear program or the violence in Syria – two of the fundamental questions that confronted the summit – obviously undermined Iran’s effort to demonstrate that, despite facing severe economic and diplomatic sanctions, it remains an effective international player.
Indeed, United Nations Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon criticized Iran for not assuring the world that it is not seeking nuclear arms at a time when the International Atomic Energy Agency has published a new report suggesting that it is.
And, in a speech of great depth, Mohamed Morsi, the first Egyptian president to visit Iran since the Islamic Republic’s birth in 1979, firmly rejected the Syrian regime, as he did in a subsequent appearance before the Arab League as well.
Moreover, Morsi urged Iran to join Egypt, Turkey, and Saudi Arabia – all Sunni-majority countries – in pressing for political transition in Syria (a role that the Syrian opposition rejected before Iran could even say no).
In other words, reality betrayed the perception that Iran sought to create in hosting the NAM summit.
Instead, Morsi’s speech provided the occasion’s most memorable moment.
And Iran’s nuclear quest remains a reality that must not be ignored during the next key three years, when the Islamic Republic will lead NAM while itself remaining one of the most serious problems on the international agenda.
An Iran Deal Ten Years Late