The Republican Party and the American Petroleum Institute sank that proposal.
A decade later, we have high oil prices, but they are not due to a well-designed tax, either in America or elsewhere.
As a result, the price boom is boosting windfall profits for the owners of oil deposits rather than improving countries' public finances.
Time to Test Iran
NEW YORK – Most of the debate about how to address Iran’s efforts to develop nuclear-weapons capacity focuses on two options.
The first is to rely on deterrence and live with an Iran that has a small nuclear arsenal or the ability to assemble one with little advance notice.
The second is to launch a preventive military strike aimed at destroying critical parts of the Iranian program and setting back its progress by an estimated two or more years.
But now a third option has emerged: negotiating a ceiling on the nuclear program that would not be too low for Iran’s government and not too high for the United States, Israel, and the rest of the world.
In fact, such an option has been around for years – and in several rounds of negotiations.
What has changed, however, is the context.
And changes in context can be critical; indeed, what happens away from the negotiating table almost always determines the outcome of face-to-face talks.
The single most important change in context is the rapidly deteriorating state of Iran’s economy.
The many financial and oil-related sanctions that have been implemented in recent months and years are starting to bite.
They were designed not to impede Iran’s nuclear program directly, but rather to increase the price that Iran’s leaders must pay for pursuing their nuclear ambitions.
The thinking (or, more accurately, the hope) was that Iran’s leadership, if forced to choose between regime survival and nuclear weapons, would choose the former.
This hypothesis may soon get a real-world test.
Iran’s currency, the rial, has fallen roughly 40% in recent weeks, sharply increasing Iran’s inflation rate and what Iranians must pay for imports and many staples.
The result is the first signs of serious public discontent with the regime since the violent repression of the Green Movement in 2009.
Iran’s merchant class, one of the pillars of the clerical establishment that has ruled the country since the 1979 revolution, is grumbling as well.
Other factors also could give negotiations a real chance.
Upheavals in the Arab world suggest that no regime in the Middle East is entrenched; Iran’s leaders would have to be blind not to have taken note.
In his speech at the United Nations in late September, Israeli Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu signaled a willingness to give sanctions more time, until at least the summer of 2013.
And there are signs that, regardless of who wins November’s presidential election, the US might well undertake an armed strike, with potential destruction much greater than if Israel were to act alone.
Again, the Iranians might see compromise as the lesser of the threats that it faces.
Until now, negotiations have been desultory at best.
The compromise that Iranian officials are suggesting is nowhere near what they would have to accept to avert military action and gain an easing of sanctions.
But now is the time to present to Iran a comprehensive package – what it must do and what the reward would be if it agreed.
It would also be essential to set a deadline for Iran to accept such an accord, lest it use further negotiations to buy time to improve its nuclear capabilities.
The precise terms would have to be determined, but Iran would have to give up all of the uranium that it has enriched to 20% and stop enriching to that level.
It would also have to accept a ceiling on how much uranium it could possess or enrich at lower levels.
Limits on the number of centrifuges and where they could be housed might also be necessary.
Inspections would need to be frequent and intrusive to reassure the outside world of what Iran is doing – or, perhaps more to the point, what it is not doing.
In return, Iran would receive substantial relief from the removal of those sanctions imposed in response to its nuclear program.
Moreover, the offer’s essential elements should be made public.
That way, if the regime balked, it would have to explain to its own people why it was not prepared to abandon its nuclear-weapons program, despite a reasonable US proposal that was not designed to humiliate Iran, and that, if accepted, promised a major improvement in Iranian living standards.
It is possible that the new economic and political context will lead Iran’s rulers to accept what they have rebuffed until now.
If, on the other hand, the regime remains determined to pursue its nuclear goals, regardless of cost, then we will know that there is no alternative to the first two options: attacking Iranian facilities or living with a nuclear-armed Iran.
Both outcomes are potentially risky and costly, but the US public, in particular, should be made aware that it was Iran that rejected a reasonable alternative to war before one began.
And, if push came to shove, it would be good for other governments to know that the US and/or Israel decided to attack only after offering Iran a face-saving way out.
That would make it less difficult to keep economic pressure on Iran in the aftermath of any strike.
Going public makes sense for another reason: Iran’s people ought to know that any attack on the country was one that it had largely brought on itself.
This realization might mute any “rally around the flag” reaction and thus not rule out regime change down the road.
We tend to think of diplomacy as something carried out in secret; sometimes, however, it is better to hide in plain sight.
This is such a moment.
But time is of the essence; diplomacy needs to move faster if it is not to be overtaken by Iran’s march to a nuclear weapon – and, with it, the march to conflict.
Can Italy Be Saved?
MILAN – As the economist Mario Monti’s new government takes office in Italy, much is at stake – for the country, for Europe, and for the global economy.
If reforms falter, public finances collapse, and anemic growth persists, Italy’s commitment to the euro will diminish as the perceived costs of membership come to outweigh the benefits.
And Italy’s defection from the common currency – unlike that of smaller countries, like Greece – would threaten the eurozone to the core.
Italy is a large economy, with annual GDP of more than $2 trillion.
Its public debt is 120% of GDP, or roughly $2.4 trillion, which does not include the liabilities of a pension system in need of significant adjustments to reflect an aging population and increased longevity.
As a result, Italy has become the world’s third-largest sovereign-debt market.
But rising interest rates are causing the debt-service burden to become onerous and politically unsustainable.
Furthermore, Italy must refinance €275 billion ($372 billion) of its debt in the next six months, while investors, seeking to reduce their financial exposure to the country, are driving the yield on Italian ten-year bonds to prohibitively high levels – currently above 7%.
The need to refinance outstanding debt is not the only challenge.
Domestic and foreign bondholders, especially banks, have experienced capital losses, which have damaged balance sheets, capital adequacy, and confidence.
The trade and current-account deficits are large and rising, probably reflecting a loss of competitiveness and productivity relative to Germany and France, two of Italy’s largest trading partners.
Moreover, economic growth has been slow for the past decade, and is not accelerating, which will make it difficult to lower the public-debt burden even with fiscal consolidation.
Italy’s low growth rates reflect several factors, including labor-market rigidities, public-sector under-investment in the science and technology base of the economy, limitations on competition in certain sectors, and an extended period of structural adjustment to the eurozone environment.
But Italy has significant strengths as well.
Aggregate debt (government, household, non-financial corporations, and financial institutions) is slightly more than 315% of GDP, similar to Switzerland (313%), France (323%), the United States (296%), and even Germany (285%), all 2009 numbers.
But household debt is very low, at less than 50% of GDP.
Moreover, a long-standing pattern of high household savings, in the range of 17%-30% of income, means that individual and household net worth is higher than in most advanced countries.
That is not all. The businesses and industries of central and northern Italy are efficient, innovative, and globally integrated.
And budget deficits were held in check during and after the crisis, unlike in many other advanced countries.
Of course, while this was necessary, given the high initial public-debt burden, it limited counter-cyclical stimulus and impeded growth.
Italy’s crisis comes at a time of heightened risk for key countries (for example, a hard landing in China, or persistently high unemployment in the US).
In assessing such risks, it is useful to focus on three variables: resources, competence, and will.
Does a country have the resources to address the problems that it faces?
Do policymakers have the experience and expertise to implement effective reforms?
Do the authorities recognize the need to act decisively and aggressively?
Resources come first.
If the resources are inadequate, the outcome will be bad, regardless of competence or will, unless there is some sort of external help.
Likewise, political will is irrelevant without the competence to translate it into effective policies.
It seems to me that in several important cases, including Italy, the US, and China, there is a relatively favorable scenario and a much less attractive one, distinguished largely by the effectiveness of the policy responses.
Unlike Greece, where resources are deficient (giving rise only to unattractive scenarios), these countries’ resources are adequate, but either competence or political will (or some combination of the two) is in doubt, though analysts’ assessments vary widely.
For Italy, that means that the health of its consolidated balance sheet can be used in conjunction with reforms and parameter shifts in the pension system to restore fiscal balance and boost growth over time.
Three things are required: a comprehensive reform program that meets the adjustment challenges head-on, political backing for that program, and time to implement enough of it to establish the credibility needed to lower the high risk premium on Italian debt.
With the first two requirements dependent on Italy’s turbulent domestic politics, investors are increasingly unwilling to bet on the relatively favorable scenario, which means that Italy does not have time.
Rising yields could undercut the fiscal-stabilization and economic-growth program before it can be fully implemented.
And, as yields rise, the adequacy of the country’s resources becomes questionable or worse.
What is needed is a financial circuit breaker, in the form of a transitional lender of last resort.
This would allow the reform programs to shift the balance of risk back toward the favorable scenario.
There is, however, a final risk factor.
The type of determined intervention designed to prevent the run-up in bond yields may not be forthcoming, owing to a concern within the eurozone core, led by Germany, that unconditional, aggressive action by a lender of last resort would undercut the incentive – and hence the political will – to undertake the required reforms.
The sequencing problem is obvious: a commitment conditional on reform progress will not bring back private investors immediately, because it does not reduce the perceived risk of substantial political obstacles to implementing the necessary measures.
Only bold and largely unconditional commitments by both the European Union and Italy can break this dangerous impasse.
Absent either one, the risk of a sequential unraveling of eurozone public finances and a global economic downturn will remain high.
Can Science Save Europe?
VIENNA– Europe’s current financial squeeze defies easy solutions.
Self-inflicted austerity has met popular restlessness for more tangible measures to revive economic growth and create jobs.
Protesters vividly express widespread frustration with deepening inequality, and condemnation of privileges of a global financial elite comes uncomfortably close to implicating government.
In previous times, such a situation would have been described as pre-revolutionary.
In today’s world, the consequences may seem more benign, but they are no less worrisome: a loss of solidarity, a return to nationalist insularity, and greater scope for political extremism.
Europe’s image has suffered accordingly, notably from the perspective of Asia’s booming economies.
Whereas China, India, and others have enjoyed continuing economic growth and investment in research and innovative capacity, Europe is perceived as being on the brink of decline, economically as well as politically.
Worse still, Europe also seems intent on ignoring its persistent strengths.
Those strengths lie in Europe’s science base, part of the cultural heritage that shapes European identity.
In terms of numbers – whether of scientific publications, researchers, or overall access to high-quality tertiary education – Europe compares favorably with its international partners (which are also competitors).
So why, critics ask, does Europe produce many novel scientific ideas and discoveries, but fail to transform them into marketable products?
In fact, that question is wedded to an obsolete linear model of innovation.
What is lacking in Europe is public and official awareness of where the real potential of European science lies.
Scientific curiosity, given sufficient space and autonomy, remains the most powerful driving force behind the completely unforeseeable transformations in how our societies develop.
In order to understand what science can do for Europe, it is important to clarify what science – that is, curiosity-driven frontier research – cannot do for Europe: deliver results that can immediately be commercialized.
Frontier research, like innovation, is an inherently uncertain process.
One does not know what one will find when working at the cutting edge and attempting to push into unknown territory.
Any short-term economic benefits are welcome byproducts, not the main “deliverables” that can be planned.
Nor will science create much-needed jobs, except for those who work in research organizations and universities.
Instead, cutting-edge research pioneers new ways of working (and models of future workplaces), which require novel skills and knowledge that will diffuse widely into society and transform production and services.
For example, it could lead to more environmentally friendly and resource-efficient uses of natural resources, or to investment in services that are more responsive to human needs and better attuned to human interaction.
Science is the only civic institution with a built-in long-term time horizon –&nbsp;a feature that builds confidence in a fragile future.
Modern science began in Europe 300 years ago with relatively few people – perhaps no more than a thousand when the putative scientific revolution was in full swing.
They began to engage in the systematic inquiry of how the natural world (and to a lesser extent, the social world) functioned.
They obtained new knowledge of how to manipulate and intervene in natural processes.
The experimental practices that they invented spread beyond the laboratories.
Later, they began to underpin and merge with progress in the crafts to drive forward the Industrial Revolution.
The idea that we can only know what we can make gained wide acceptance.
New tools provide new means of investigation, enabling researchers to speed up computation, for example, and hence increase the production of new knowledge.
Science and technology mutually reinforce each other, and both percolate through the social fabric.
This was the case in 1700, and it remains true today.
Let us now look forward towards the future.
According to health statistician Hans Rosling, our planet will probably be home to at least nine billion people by 2050.
Six billion will live in Asia, one billion in Africa, 1.5 billion in the Americas, and 500 million in Europe.
By ensuring that the pursuit of new knowledge remains a high priority, Europe can safeguard the scientific revolution and retain a leading edge globally, despite having fewer people than other regions.
Europe’s scientific institutions are already evolving and adapting to new global challenges.
People working within science and people working with science – ordinary citizens – will assure that the unending quest for human betterment continues to be an important part of European identity.
Science alone will not save Europe.
Rather, a Europe that knows how to put its science to work will not need to be saved.
Can Science Save the World?
CAMBRIDGE – For most people, there has never been a better time to be alive than now.
The innovations that drive economic advances – information technology, biotech, and nanotech – can boost living standards in both the developing and the developed world.
We are becoming embedded in a cyberspace that can link anyone, anywhere, to all the world’s information and culture – and to every other person on the planet. 
Twenty-first century technologies will offer environmentally benign lifestyles and the resources to ease the plight and enhance the life chances of the world’s two billion poorest people.
Moreover, the greatest threat of the 1960’s and 1970’s – nuclear annihilation – has diminished.
This threat could recur, however, if there is a renewed standoff between new superpowers.
And there are other risks stemming from humanity’s greater collective impact on the planet, and from the growing empowerment of individuals.
Soon after World War II, physicists at the University of Chicago started a journal called the Bulletin of Atomic Scientists to promote arms control.
The logo on the Bulletin’s cover is a clock, the proximity of whose hands to midnight indicates the editors’ judgment of the precariousness of the world situation.
Every few years, the minute hand shifted, either forwards or backwards.
It came closest to midnight in 1962 during the Cuban Missile Crisis.
When the Cold War ended, the Bulletin’s clock was put back to 17 minutes to midnight.
But the clock has been creeping forward again.
We are confronted by proliferation of nuclear weapons (by, say, North Korea and Iran).
Al-Qaeda-style terrorists might willingly detonate a nuclear weapon in a city center, killing tens of thousands.
Even if the nuclear threat is contained, the twenty-first century could confront us with grave new global perils.
The world spends nearly $7 trillion a year on energy and its infrastructure; yet our current research and development efforts are not up to meeting the challenge of climate change.
There is no single solution, but some measures, like better insulation of buildings, would save rather than cost money.
Efforts to economize on energy, storing it, and generating it by “clean” or low-carbon methods deserve priority and the sort of commitment from governments that were accorded to the Manhattan Project (which created the atomic bomb) or the Apollo moon landing. 
The top priority should be a coordinated effort by Europe, the United States, and the other G-8+5 countries to build demonstration plants to develop carbon capture and storage (CCS) technology.
This is crucial, because whatever technical advances there may be in solar and other renewable energy sources, we will depend on coal and oil for the next 40 years.
Yet unless the rising curve of annual emissions can be reversed, the CO2 concentration will irrevocably reach a truly threatening level.
Mankind must also confront other global “threats without enemies” that are separate from (though linked with) climate change.
Loss of biological diversity is one of the most severe such threats.
The extinction rate is 1,000 times higher than normal, and is increasing. 
Biodiversity is a crucial component of human well-being and economic growth.
We are clearly harmed if fish stocks dwindle to extinction.
Less evidently, there are plants in the rain forest whose gene pool might be useful to us.
The pressures on our planet depend, of course, on our lifestyle.
The world could not sustain its 6.5 billion people if they all lived like present-day Americans.
But it could if even prosperous people adopted a vegetarian diet, traveled little, and interacted virtually.
New technology will determine our lifestyle, and the demands that we make on energy and environmental resources.
Nevertheless, our problems are aggravated by rapid growth in the human population, which is projected to reach eight or even nine billion by 2050.
If the increase continues beyond 2050, one cannot help but be gloomy about most people’s prospects.
There are now, however, more than 60 countries where the fertility rate is below replacement level.
If this were true of all countries, the global population would start to decline after 2050 – a development that would surely be benign.
All of today’s developments – cyber, bio, or nano – will create new risks of abuse.
The American National Academy of Sciences has warned that, “Just a few individuals with specialized skills…could inexpensively and easily produce a panoply of lethal biological weapons.…The deciphering of the human genome sequence and the complete elucidation of numerous pathogen genomes…allow science to be misused to create new agents of mass destruction.”
Not even an organized network would be required; just a fanatic with the mindset of those who now design computer viruses.
The global village will have its village idiots.
In our increasingly interconnected world, there are new risks whose consequences could be widespread – and perhaps global.
Even a tiny probability of global catastrophe is unacceptable.
If we apply to catastrophic risks the same prudent analysis that leads us to buy insurance – multiplying probability by consequences – we would surely prioritize measures to reduce this kind of extreme risk.
The decisions that we will make both individually and collectively in the foreseeable future will determine whether twenty-first century science yields benign or devastating outcomes.
Can the Elephant Dance with the Dragon?
TRIVANDRUM, INDIA – It is fashionable these days, particularly in the West, to speak of India and China in the same breath.
These are the two big countries said to be taking over the world, the new contenders for global eminence after centuries of Western domination, the Oriental answer to generations of Occidental economic success.
Indeed, two new books explicitly twin the two countries: Robyn Meredith’s The Elephant and the Dragon: The Rise of India and China and What It Means for All of Us and Harvard business professor Tarun Khanna’s Billions of Entrepreneurs: How China and India are Reshaping their Futures – and Yours .
Both books view the recent rise of India and China as shifting the world’s economic and political tectonic plates.
Some even speak of “Chindia,” as if the two were joined at the hip in the international imagination.
Count me among the skeptics.
It is not just that China and India have little in common, save for the fact that they occupy a rather vast landmass called “Asia.” It is also that they are already at very different stages of development.
China started its liberalization a decade and a half before India, hit double-digit growth when India was still hovering around 5%, and, with compound growth, has put itself in a totally different economic league from India, continuing to grow faster from a larger base. 
Moreover, the two countries’ systems are totally dissimilar.
If China wants to build a new six-lane expressway, it can bulldoze its way through any village in its path.
In India, if you want to widen a two-lane road, you could be tied up in court for a dozen years over compensation entitlements.
When China built the Three Gorges dam, it created a 660-kilometer long reservoir that necessitated displacing two million people – all accomplished in 15 years without a fuss in the interest of generating electricity.
When India began the Narmada Dam project, aiming to bring irrigation, drinking water, and power to millions, it spent 34 years (so far) fighting environmental groups, human rights activists, and advocates for the displaced all the way to the Supreme Court, while still being thwarted in the streets by protesters.
That is how it should be: India is a fractious democracy, China is not.
But, as an Indian, I do not wish to pretend that we can compete in the global growth stakes with China.
But if we can’t compete, can we co-operate?
The two civilizations had centuries of contact in ancient times.
Thanks mainly to the export of Buddhism from India to China, Chinese came to Indian universities, visited Indian courts, and wrote memorable accounts of their voyages.
Nalanda received hundreds of Chinese students in its time, and a few Indians went the other way; a Buddhist monk from India built the famous Lingyin Si temple in Huangzhou in the fifth century.
Southwest India’s Kerala coastline is dotted with Chinese-style fishing nets, and the favorite cooking pot of the Malayali housewife is the wok, locally called the cheen-chetti (Chinese vessel).
But it has been a while since Indians and Chinese had much to do with each other.
The heady days of Hindi-Chini bhai-bhai (“Indians and Chinese are brothers”), the slogan coined by Nehru’s India to welcome Chou En-Lai in 1955, gave way to the humiliation of the 1962 border war, after which it was “Hindi-Chini bye-bye” for decades.
The border dispute remains unresolved, with periodic incursions by Chinese troops onto Indian soil and new irritants such as the anti-Chinese protests by Tibetan exiles who have been given asylum in India.
To speak of a bilateral “trust deficit” might be an understatement.
And yet, there is some good news.
Trade has doubled in each of the last three years, to an estimated $40 billion this year; China has now overtaken the United States as India’s largest single trading partner.
Tourism, particularly by Indian pilgrims to the major Hindu holy sites in Tibet, Mount Kailash and Lake Mansarovar, is thriving.
Indian information technology firms have opened offices in Shanghai and Hangzhou, and Infosys recruited nine Chinese this year for its headquarters in Bangalore.
There are dozens of Chinese engineers working in (and learning from) Indian computer firms and engineering companies, while Indian software engineers support the Chinese telecoms equipment manufacturer Huawei.
By and large, India is strong in areas in which China needs to improve, notably software, while China excels at hardware and manufacturing, which India sorely lacks.
So India’s Mahindra and Mahindra company manufactures tractors in Nanchang for export to the US.
The key operating components of Apple’s iPod were invented by the Hyderabad company PortalPlayer, while the iPod itself are manufactured in China.
Philips employs nearly 3,000 Indians at its “Innovation Campus” in Bangalore to write more than 20% of the company’s global software, which Philips’ 50,000-strong workforce in China then turns into brand-name goods.
In other words, the elephant is already dancing with the dragon.
The only question is whether political tensions could bring the music screeching to a halt.
There is no doubt that, whatever India’s legitimate differences with China’s Communist regime, cooperation is in the best interests of both peoples.
After all, one plus one doesn’t only equal two; put together properly, it can add up to 11.
Can the G-8 Survive St. Petersburg?
Russia’s gradual inclusion in the G-8 was supposed to nurture the growth of democracy, foster creation of a free-market economy, and encourage constructive behavior in international relations.
Instead, Russia’s leaders have become more interested in consolidating state power at home and abroad than in promoting democracy, protecting human rights, and cooperating with the West.
The collapse of the USSR, President Vladimir Putin has proclaimed, was the greatest geopolitical catastrophe of the twentieth century.
Obviously, the USSR is not about to be resurrected.
But Putin has moved to reassert state control over strategic sectors of the economy, including oil and gas, communications, pipelines, electricity and banking, as well as limiting political rights, harassing independent groups, and strengthening control over the media.
Moreover, Russia is coming to the fore, firmly and confidently, to regain its Great Power status.
Putin continues to pursue a brutal military campaign in Chechnya while intervening politically in Soviet successor states like Ukraine, Georgia, Moldova, and Belarus and rejecting Western tactics aimed at curbing Iran’s and North Korea’s nuclear ambitions.
Putin’s position is reinforced by strong public support, as well as by the dramatically weakened position of major Western leaders.
George W. Bush and Tony Blair have lost the popularity they enjoyed before the Iraq war, and Blair, together with French President Jacques Chirac, will soon leave the political scene.
Angela Merkel in Germany and Romano Prodi in Italy are ruling with weak coalition governments.
In these circumstances, given Russia’s continuing failure to meet the G-8’s political and economic standards, the upcoming summit in St. Petersburg could produce a backlash, eroding the legitimacy, credibility, and relevance of the world’s most developed countries.
Indeed, Russia and the world may well see in the summit the G-8’s silent approval of Putin’s domestic and foreign policies.
Clearly, there are many who would endorse former Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev’s recent call on Western countries to stop pressuring Putin over human rights.
According to Gorbachev, Western pressure merely strengthens Putin, “because in essence his position is very close to the aspirations of the people.”
Bush has echoed that sentiment, telling CNN ahead of his trip to the summit that admonishing the Russian president in public on matters such as democracy and human rights would be counterproductive.
“No leader likes to be scolded publicly,” he said.
But can the West afford to remain aloof?
Russia started off its year as G-8 president with a crisis over gas supplies to Ukraine, and even threatened Europe with rerouting its gas exports to Asia.
Putin has placed energy security at the top of the summit’s agenda, but that does not mask Russia’s ambition to dominate European markets by controlling the pipelines that carry its oil and gas, the refineries that process it, and the retail outlets that sell it.
The dilemma facing the West is that it needs Russia’s backing not only on policy toward Iran and North Korea, but also in Afghanistan, Iraq, and the Middle East as a whole.
Unfortunately, Bush’s strategy of democracy promotion has mainly contributed to unease around the world and alienation from Western goals.
Especially in view of the Iraq experience, Putin has won substantial public sympathy by arguing that opposition to Western democracy promotion is resistance not to democracy itself, but to Western intervention against Russian “sovereign democracy.”
Clearly, an ostracized Russia is a dangerous Russia.
But to hold a G-8 meeting in St. Petersburg in an atmosphere of “business as usual” may be even more dangerous.
Bush and European leaders issued a statement after their recent meeting in Austria saying that Russia must honor “democratic freedoms, respect for human rights, civil society and transparency, and a responsible approach to energy security.”
But words alone are not enough.
Nor should it be the end of the story.
The G-8’s seven democratic countries should use the St. Petersburg summit as an opportunity to reaffirm their will to develop close and friendly relations with Russia.
But if their inclusion of Russia is to serve a useful purpose, they must also reaffirm the values that unite them.
Can the Islamic State Unify Europe?
MUNICH – During the financial crisis, the eurozone’s northern members rescued their southern counterparts by offering huge bailouts and backing the European Central Bank’s promise to save the euro at all costs.
When Germany recently requested a quota system to cope with the massive influx of refugees, however, its partners showed no such solidarity.
And now that France, reeling from the Paris attacks, has declared war on the Islamic State, other European countries are shrugging their shoulders, mumbling condolences, and silently hoping that the conflict will spare them.
The implication is clear: although Europe has made significant progress toward fiscal union, it remains far removed from political union.
A half-century after the foundation of a common market and 15 years after the launch of the common currency, Europe still lacks a united police force and a single foreign policy.
Perhaps most problematic, the EU is still home to 28 armies, with 28 commanders-in-chief, bound together only loosely by NATO.
Some European leaders – including French President François Hollande and European Commission President Jean-Claude Juncker – seem unbothered by this reality.
They argue that Europe should be accelerating progress toward fiscal union even further, by introducing a common insurance scheme for deposits, a single budget, Eurobonds, more financial risk-sharing, and a unified unemployment-benefits system as quickly as possible.
They are wrong.
In fact, such measures would only exacerbate the flaws in the eurozone’s structure.
They would sustain false relative prices – the result of the inflationary credit bubble in the south that formed after the euro’s adoption – that are preventing the euro’s southern European countries from regaining competitiveness.
As a result, structural unemployment in France and Southern Europe would persist.
Moreover, the proposed measures would compound Europe’s public-debt problems by reducing interest-rate spreads among countries even further, sustaining asset-price bubbles, and destroying the capital market’s allocative role.
This was the mistake the United States made after its founding, when various rounds of debt mutualization fueled an unsustainable credit bubble that drove nine of the 29 US states and territories into bankruptcy from 1835 to 1842 and paved the way for the American Civil War.
The disadvantages of strengthening Europe’s fiscal union further do not end there.
Continued progress toward fiscal union would, paradoxically, make political union increasingly unlikely for one simple, but important reason: France.
Europe’s strongest military power by far, France has thwarted all attempts to pool Europe’s armed forces.
In 1954, France’s National Assembly rejected the treaty for the Western Union Defense Organization.
In 2005, France rejected the proposed European Union Constitution, which could have marked the beginning of the political unification process.
Successive French presidents have declared that France will not accept a United States of Europe as even a remote goal of European politics.
But France – whose banking system and industries are heavily exposed to southern Europe – is a major beneficiary of fiscal union.
When the global financial crisis began, French banks’ exposure to Greece, at €58 billion ($61.7 billion), was twice as high as that of German banks.
Given this, it is understandable that France prefers fiscal to political unification.
But if other European countries accept this preference, and Europe continues along its unbalanced integration path, there will be no leverage to convince France to support political union.
Perhaps the tragic terrorist massacre in Paris will change the French aversion to political integration.
By highlighting that even a mighty military power sometimes needs support, the attack could prove to be a game changer in the effort to create a European political union.
Of course, for this to happen, the countries of Europe must unite to help France in its fight against the Islamic State.
Meanwhile, France and other EU countries should help Germany, Austria, Sweden, Hungary, and Slovenia to alleviate the refugee crisis by accepting a quota system.
As Europe attempts to build a sustainable, stable, and prosperous union, it should look to successful unions like the US and Switzerland for guidance.
Both of those unions began as military-defense organizations, and only later developed fiscal unions.
It took decades, if not centuries, for them to obtain sizeable public budgets and begin engaging in income redistribution.
And both prohibit the kind of fiscal or monetary bailout operations for single states or cantons that the EU pursued during the financial crisis.
It is time for the EU to change its approach to integration.
Instead of continuing to push for unbalanced fiscal integration, it must work to implement key elements of political union, including an integrated police force, common asylum laws, a single foreign policy, and, above all, a united army.
If recent events have taught us anything, it is that threats to the EU stem not from inadequate fiscal risk-sharing, but from insufficient coordination on foreign-policy and security challenges.
Can the Stability Pact Be Reformed?
The European Commission recently proposed important changes to how the Stability and Growth Pact (SGP) is to be implemented.
Now the Commission and ECOFIN (the committee of euro area finance ministers) are reviewing the proposals, as well as others put forward by member states.
A decision is expected in the first half of 2005, but how the Pact will be revised remains uncertain.
The need for reform is self-evident: with structural factors accounting for 75-80% of aggregate budget deficits for the euro area in recent years, the Pact’s 3%-of-GDP ceiling for national budget deficits has been breached repeatedly since 2002.
Smaller member states, notably Finland and Ireland (as well as Spain) and the two non-euro area countries Denmark and Sweden, have stuck to the principle of fiscal balance or small – though diminishing – surpluses. But the largest European Union members, including the United Kingdom, France, and Germany, have been unable or unwilling to play by the rules.
Indeed, France and Germany barely escaped financial sanctions in November 2003 for their violations of the Pact.
Although the European Court of Justice later declared that decision invalid, the impasse remains.
So either fiscal behavior or the Pact’s rules must change.
The European Commission’s recent proposals amount to a relaxation of its earlier hard-line stance, providing a catalogue of ways in which the fiscal rules can be made more flexible.
But it is difficult to see how this hodge-podge will “strengthen economic governance” or clarify the Pact’s implementation.
None of the proposals are mutually exclusive, but there are trade-offs.
If, for example, one extends the time period over which member states are required to conform to the rules, there is less need to modify the rules themselves.
If deficits are redefined to exclude certain expenditures, the 3% ceiling can be observed.
But removing some public expenditures from the deficit runs counter to sound execution of fiscal policy.
For example, Germany recently proposed that expenditures undertaken to meet European commitments – such as Rampamp;D spending to support the Lisbon agenda of enhanced productivity – be exempted.
The problem is that allowing public investment to be financed by borrowing would lead to continuing disputes between the Commission and individual member states, because it relies excessively on that blurred distinction.
Others seek to broaden the definition of “exceptional circumstances” to permit the deficit ceiling to be breached in any year with prolonged unsatisfactory GDP growth, not just -2%.
In particular, countries that break the Pact’s deficit ceiling because they overestimated their growth – and hence government revenue – want to be treated more leniently than those who deliberately violate the rules.
This may sound principled, but basing deficit monitoring on targets rather than outcomes merely strengthens an already powerful incentive for governments to rig their forecasts.
Yet an exception might be warranted where a violation of the deficit ceiling has led to fiscal tightening in line with advice from the Commission and endorsed by Ecofin.
Having violated the ceiling in 2002, Germany looked set to do so again in 2003 despite tightening its budget along Commission lines.
When it turned out that Germany’s starting position had been more unfavorable than initially thought and that revenues were again failing, Germany’s government objected to additional consolidation.
Where a country’s fiscal adjustments have been approved by its peers, there should be limits on how much more can be asked of it.
All of this may be beside the point, for it is the threat of financial sanctions under the Pact that inspired governments to seek to reform its rules.
But the Commission now proposes to put the emphasis entirely on peer pressure – naming and shaming offenders.
This may encourage national policy-makers who defend the SGP’s deficit ceiling to continue to do so, but peer pressure will lose some of its effectiveness when the ultimate threat of sanctions disappears.
In short, the Commission’s proposals and the follow-up suggestions put forward by some governments have forced open a Pandora’s Box.
Both the Commission and the euro area countries seem to be hoping that more rapid growth will ease – and ideally resolve – the dilemma that reform of the Pact has put before them.
TABLE 1
GENERAL GOVERNMENT FINANCIAL BALANCES
(% OF NOMINAL GDP)
2000-06
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004p
2005p
2006p
Austria
Belgium
Finland
France
Germany
Greece
Ireland
Italy
Luxembourg
Netherlands
Portugal
Spain
-1.7
0.2
7.1
-1.4
1.3
-4.2
4.4
-0.7
6.0
2.2
-2.9
-0.9
0.1
0.6
5.2
-1.5
-2.8
-3.7
1.0
-2.7
6.4
-0.1
-4.4
-0.4
-0.4
0.1
4.3
-3.3
-3.7
-3.8
-0.2
-2.4
2.8
-1.9
-2.7
-0.1
-1.3
0.3
2.1
-4.1
-3.8
-4.6
0.2
-2.5
0.8
-3.2
-2.8
0.4
-1.5
-0.1
1.1
-3.7
-3.9
-5.3
0.0
-2.9
0.8
-3.2
-2.8
0.4
-2.3
-0.9
1.5
-3.2
-3.4
-3.7
-0.2
-3.1
-0.2
-2.4
-3.0
-0.2
-2.2
-1.1
1.8
-3.0
-2.6
-3.3
-0.5
-3.6
-0.5
-1.7
-3.8
-0.2
Euro area
0.1
-1.7
-2.4
-2.8
-2.8
-2.6
-2.4
Denmark
Sweden
United Kingdom
2.5
5.1
3.8
2.8
2.9
0.7
1.6
-0.3
-1.7
1.2
0.1
-3.5
1.2
0.1
-3.5
1.4
0.8
-3.3
1.5
1.2
-3.2
p Projected
Source:
 OECD 
 Economic Outlook 
 76 database.
TABLE 2
GENERAL GOVERNMENT CYCLICALLY-ADJUSTED
FINANCIAL BALANCES
(% OF NOMINAL GDP)
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004p
2005p
2006p
Austria
Belgium
Finland
France
Germany
Greece
Ireland
Italy
Netherlands
Portugal
Spain
-2.7
-1.1
6.1
-1.9
2.0
-4.2
3.1
-2.5
4.4
-2.9
1.3
-0.1
0.1
5.4
-2.0
-3.4
-4.5
-0.1
-3.3
-1.9
-5.0
-0.3
-0.3
0.6
4.7
-3.2
-3.4
-4.2