Notwithstanding Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Olmert’s commendable gestures at Sharm el-Sheikh in 2007, the summit’s achievements are bound to be short-lived.
It is unrealistic to believe that transferring to the Palestinians tax revenues that are owed to them, removing a limited number of checkpoints in the occupied West Bank, and even releasing 250 Fatah prisoners “with no blood on their hands” will calm the Palestinian volcano, and thus enhance Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas’s leadership and Fatah’s edge over Hamas.
Indeed, all indications are that Hamas might soon boost its popularity by exchanging Israeli corporal Gilad Shalit for even more prisoners, including some “with blood on their hands.”
This alliance of Middle East moderates comes with a price that neither Israel nor the Bush administration seems ready to pay.
The Israeli-American strategy of driving a wedge between Gaza and the West Bank while shunning negotiations on a peace settlement that could give Abbas the ultimate tool to undermine Hamas is a policy at war with itself.
Moreover, no matter how critical the moderate Arabs may be of the Hamas coup in Gaza, the Arab leaders cannot afford the domestic fallout of shunning Hamas.
Indeed, Mubarak has already called for a resumption of inter-Palestinian dialogue, which might lead to yet another attempt at a national unity government, the same kind of government with which both Israel and the US refused to do business.
Abbas is being asked to play for high stakes – defeating Hamas and with it the cause of Islamic fundamentalism in the region – with inadequate resources.
And, by mortgaging his entire Middle East policy to the concept of an “ideological confrontation” against the forces of evil, Bush is putting his entire strategy on the weary shoulders of a defeated Palestinian president without really providing him with the necessary tools.
Worse still, by ladling money and arms to Abbas without offering him a political horizon that would deepen his support among ordinary Palestinians, while at the same time imprisoning all Hamas leaders in the West Bank, Israel and the United States are condemning Abbas to seeming a collaborator in the eyes of his people.
Of course the Arabs are not free of blame either.
No Israeli government will risk making a far-reaching peace offer to a Palestinian Authority whose rule is characterized by abdication and anarchy.
Hamas’s emergence as a formidable military force also reflects the Egyptians’ inept performance in preventing the smuggling of weapons into Gaza.
Taming Hamas is in Egypt’s interest, but it refuses to pay the price of a direct confrontation because that might lead Egyptian forces to be perceived as Israel’s protectors.
Indeed, Mubarak’s strategic vision is desperately narrow.
His role as a broker of sorts is mostly aimed at endearing himself to the US, where Congress is highly critical of his human rights record.
On his home front, he needs to cultivate, at the lowest possible price, an image as a champion of the Palestinian cause.
The latest Sharm el-Sheikh summit is also a message to the Saudis: Cairo, not Mecca, is the center of Middle East politics.
Calling for Israeli concessions is perfectly legitimate, even necessary.
But the credibility of such demands is undermined by the Arabs’ inability to alleviate Palestinian misery and, no less importantly, by their failure to help the Palestinians face the hard choices they will need to make if an orderly Palestinian state is ever to emerge.
Sharon’s Triumph
Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon’s disabling stroke has thrown Israeli politics into turmoil yet again.
Or so it seems.
Sharon was considered a certain victor in the planned March elections, for which he had organized his own Kadima (Forward) party, attracting leading figures from the Labor party on the left and the Likud party on the right.
But will his departure from public life really be as destabilizing as many observers suggest?
To be sure, it was Sharon’s personal appeal that made Kadima so popular.
His conservative and nationalist credentials sustained his popularity on the right, while his new security strategy – including full withdrawal from the Gaza Strip – attracted supporters from the left.
In short, Sharon was the ideal center candidate: a leader who reconciled a dovish approach with a hawkish outlook.
Yet Sharon’s untimely departure has by no means reversed the fundamental political and strategic shifts that he initiated.
In the short term, while Kadima will get fewer votes without Sharon at the helm, some voters will be swayed by sympathy for the stricken leader.
Indeed, polls show that the party could still finish first.
Moreover, Kadima still has an impressive triumvirate at the top of its list.
Acting Prime Minister Ehud Olmert, a veteran political maverick and former mayor of Jerusalem, inspired several of Sharon’s initiatives.
Shimon Peres, a former prime minister and Labor party leader, appeals to many voters from the left.
Former chief of staff and defense minister Shaul Mufaz provides the security expertise.
Their differences will be harder to patch up without Sharon, but they have closed ranks and could well lead Kadima to victory.
At the same time, the main alternative candidates on the left and right have positioned themselves too far toward the extremes to recapture the center easily.
On the left is Amir Peretz of the Labor party, a populist and trade-union federation leader with little national leadership experience and even less familiarity with security matters.
Many Israelis distrust his ability to lead the country.
It had generally been expected that Labor would come in second in the election and form a coalition government with Kadima.
Without Sharon, Peretz might have more leverage in the partnership, particularly since Olmert has been more willing than Sharon to embrace policy changes perceived as dovish.
A Kadima-Labor coalition would have its problems, but it would still form the basis of a solid government.
On the right is Bibi Netanyahu, a former prime minister and leader of Sharon’s old Likud party.
A year ago, Netanyahu seemed certain to succeed Sharon.
But his opposition to the Gaza Strip withdrawal, coupled with his strong criticism of Sharon, cost him his position as heir apparent.
To gain control of the rump Likud, Netanyahu had to move sharply to the right.
In the longer term, Netanyahu may again rise to the top in a post-Sharon era, if he is able to regain the center.
But in the upcoming elections, he is likely to be left out in the cold.
More importantly, continuity on the political front is likely to extend to strategy and policy.
Sharon embodied a new national consensus, accepted by at least two-thirds of the population, that reflects deep-seated changes in the country and its situation.
From the left comes the idea that, in return for full peace, Israel is ready to withdraw from most of the territory captured in 1967 and accept a Palestinian state.
From the right, the consensus acknowledges that currently there is no Palestinian partner for real peace.
The left’s advocacy of territorial withdrawal gained currency as a result of a general recognition that holding onto land, especially Palestinian-populated areas, is not in the national interest.
Israel does not intend to claim this land in the future, never derived any economic benefit from it, and now regards staying there as a security problem rather than an asset.
With the Cold War over, the USSR gone, and the Arab world weakened, a conventional war with the armies of Arab states is no longer likely, rendering obsolete the strategic considerations underlying Israel’s occupation of this territory.
At the same time, though, there is no hesitation about waging a tough defensive war against Palestinian terrorism.
Israel will complete its defensive security fence and strike back against terrorists and those who fire missiles at Israeli civilian targets.
No one believes that Palestinian leader Abu Mazin can or will do anything to stop such attacks.
Indeed, it is understood on both the left and the right that he and his colleagues will not live up to any commitment they make.
The Palestinian movement is falling apart, the radicals are gaining control, and nobody is going to make peace.
The bad news, then, is that the conflict will go on for decades, owing to intransigence and growing chaos on the Palestinian side.
The good news is that Israel can defend itself with relatively low casualties, its economy is improving, and tourism is recovering.
As Palestinian extremism and anarchy become clearer, Israel’s stance may gain greater international sympathy, strengthening prospects for better relations with the Arab world and the West.
It was Sharon who sensed a sea change in Israeli sentiment and acted upon it.
But Sharon was the messenger, not the message.
The era of Israeli pragmatism that he opened will not end with his departure.
Modi’s Hypocrisy
NEW DELHI – According to Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s supporters, his overwhelming victory in India’s general elections was a sweeping repudiation of everything for which the previous United Progressive Alliance (UPA) government, led by the Indian National Congress, stood.
Will Modi live up to voters’ expectations?
There has certainly been a lot of hype.
Modi, it was claimed during the election campaign, would reverse the UPA’s “poor governance” and “policy paralysis,” introducing a radically new approach, based on his corporatist “Gujarat development model.”
In doing so, he would transform India, liberating it from the UPA’s exhausted and ineffective policies and thus improving the lives of millions.
“Achhe din aane wale hain” – “the good days are coming” – his supporters declared upon his victory.
In particular, the Modi public-relations machine proclaimed an end to the sops and compromises that supposedly characterized the UPA coalition.
Modi pledged to make the tough decisions that the UPA could not, weaning Indians from the statist culture of “doles” and subsidies, while pursuing bold policies aimed at spurring economic growth and job creation.
Indians today, he averred, want jobs, not handouts.
It took just a few weeks for the hollowness of these claims to become apparent.
A commonly cited example of the outgoing government’s alleged economic mismanagement was its sugar-price policy.
Powerful sugarcane cooperatives, led by major UPA supporters, supposedly drove the government to fix extravagant prices and write off sugar farmers’ bad debts, leading to over-production.
Instead of eliminating this system, as expected, Modi’s government has augmented subsidies for sugar exports to support higher output, raised import duties on sugar to discourage foreign competition, and increased the percentage of sugar-based ethanol that must be blended with petrol.
His motivation is not difficult to discern: his Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) hopes that such concessions will help it to wrest control of Maharashtra, India’s main sugar-producing state, from the UPA in the upcoming state assembly election.
This goal explains another policy reversal as well.
The UPA’s critics long claimed that unsustainably low, state-dictated passenger fares and freight charges for rail services – which could not cover the cost of maintenance to ensure the safety of trains and tracks, much less enable expansion and improvement of service – reflected the government’s inability to make tough decisions.
It is true that coalition politics prevented decisive action, with a railway minister being summarily dismissed by his own party leader – whom the UPA was politically unable to confront – after attempting to raise fares.
But, in the pre-election interim budget, the UPA government finally bit the bullet, proposing a 14.2% increase in rail fares and a 6.5% hike in freight rates.
Per India’s code of political conduct, the budget changes were deferred until after the election.
Soon after taking office, the Modi government announced its intention to implement the price increases, though officials made sure to emphasize that they were merely following through on an existing mandate.
Then, faced with public resistance, they moderated the planned hikes, particularly of the significantly discounted monthly pass currently available to suburban commuters – an important segment of the electorate in Mumbai, Maharashtra’s capital.
Modi had previously derided the UPA’s populist railway ministers for distorted policies that punished businesses, declaring during his election campaign that India’s railways should be run more like China’s, with increased government investment, including for bullet trains.
Yet, no sooner had he been sworn in than he acquiesced in precisely the kind of political compromise to which he and the BJP – which won a parliamentary majority, and thus does not depend on coalition partners for its government’s survival – was supposed to be immune.
Modi’s government has adopted an even weaker stance on another unpopular but necessary decision: fuel-price increases.
In order to align Indian fuel prices more closely with world market prices, thereby enabling domestic oil and gas producers to finance exploration and extraction, the UPA government had announced that natural-gas prices would be doubled from April 1.
But, as with railway fares, the final decision was left up to Modi.
And, instead of doing what was needed – even while blaming his predecessors – Modi postponed the decision until September.
This hypocrisy has characterized virtually every policy decision that the BJP government has taken so far.
Despite the BJP’s strident criticism of the United States-India Civil Nuclear Cooperation deal – the UPA administration’s signature foreign-policy triumph – Modi’s government has just ratified an India-specific “additional protocol,” granting the International Atomic Energy Agency access to India’s civilian nuclear sites.
Moreover, the BJP had opposed interaction with Pakistani Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif, pending satisfactory progress on the prosecution and punishment of the perpetrators of the 2008 Mumbai attacks, which killed 164 people and injured more than 300.
Yet Sharif was an honored guest at Modi’s inauguration, exchanging gifts with India’s newly affable leader.
The Modi government has also adopted the UPA-proposed Goods and Services Tax, which had been stalled by opposition from BJP-ruled states (including Modi’s Gujarat).
And it will strengthen the national anti-terrorism effort, which Modi previously denounced as an assault on Indian federalism.
Many Modi supporters in the media have already begun to decry the series of policy abdications Modi has conducted since his campaign.
Indian citizens who thought that they voted for change are beginning to wonder if the BJP has simply reprised the UPA government’s policies.
As a member of the previous government, I must say that that may not be such a bad thing.
Gurus and Governors
NEW DELHI – The ongoing general election in India has brought to prominence not only the usual cast of political aspirants, campaign managers, publicists, and vote-brokers, but also an array of astrologers, numerologists, and pandits.
Candidates have been flocking to such soothsayers in large numbers, seeking advice on everything from the precise minute to file their nomination forms to the appropriate alignment of the doors of their campaign offices.
Indians, after all, manage to live in that rare combination of modernity and superstition that defines them as a breed apart.
Where else in the world is so much made of an individual’s astrological chart, that mysterious celestial database that determines one’s life opportunities, marital prospects, and willingness to take on certain risks?
I once wrote that an Indian without a horoscope is like an American without a credit card.
That observation shows no sign of losing its validity in the twenty-first century.
It is a truth that seems particularly entrenched in Indian politics.
As a believing Hindu, I make no claims to pure rationalism myself.
But I am bemused when a minister’s swearing-in ceremony is delayed because an astrologer told him that the time was not auspicious to take the oath, or when a candidate’s election papers are filed at the last possible minute to avoid the malign influences of the stars at other times of the day.
Both are frequent occurrences in Indian political life.
It is not just a question of taking the oath of office at a time determined by an astrologer; the stars also decide when a minister moves into his office and begins his work.
Many ministers do not report to work for days after being sworn in; files pend while the planets realign themselves more favorably.
Superstition can also influence the selection of the minister’s office, housing, and furniture, guided (if not actually directed) by gurus and pandits on the basis of time-honored, if scientifically unproven, principles.
My favorite story of this type involves a chief minister who refused to move into his official residence because a pandit claimed that it was not built according to the correct spiritual principles of vaastu (India’s version of feng shui), and that he would not fare well in it.
The bungalow was reconstructed accordingly, at great public expense, with new doorways and windows realigned to satisfy the pundit.
At last, the chief minister moved in, only to lose his job – and his new home – the next day in an unexpected political crisis.
Why do otherwise intelligent, educated people put themselves in thrall to superstition?
I am all in favor of the innate human desire to propitiate the heavens.
I am even prepared to entertain the notion that the cosmos might be sending us signals in every planetary alignment.
But what makes us so credulous as to believe that soothsayers understand the code?
Not long ago, the chief minister of Tamil Nadu state, the former actress Jayalalitha, decided to add an extra “a” to the end of her name because a numerologist told her that the new spelling would be beneficial to her turbulent political career.
She promptly went on to win an election in her state, lost the next one, and now is back in power again.
I suppose it is entirely possible that “Jayalalithaa” has attained political successes that might have eluded a mere “Jayalalitha.”
But on what possible basis can it be argued that the addition of a superfluous vowel made all the difference?
One can scarcely believe that the heavens dispense their favors according to the number of vowels in mortals’ names.
But many Indians are firm believers, as the increasingly eccentric spellings of film titles and movie stars’ names confirm.
One of India’s finest actors, Irfan Khan, suddenly re-baptized himself Irrfan, a change that many swear prefigured the transformation of his career.
New Delhi’s political circles are rife with gossip about a former prime minister who was guided daily by a godman, and a former finance minister whose decisions were influenced by astrology (though tempered, it seems, by a former cabinet secretary who passed himself off as an amateur astrologer).
The leader of Bihar state’s Rashtriya Janata Dal party, Laloo Prasad Yadav, reportedly filled his swimming pool with mud and garbage because a pandit told him it would stop the “leak” of defecting members.
Most Indian politicians wear rings with stones tailored to specific planetary conjunctions that are providential for them, or designed to ward off malefic influences from planets unfavorably situated on their birth charts.
Many swear it works for them; others take the agnostic view that one has nothing to lose by indulging such beliefs, except the price of the ring – a sort of Hindu version of Pascal’s famous wager.
It turns out, however, that Indian politicians are not the only ones vulnerable to seduction by the Indian “miracle mafia.”
Former Indian Foreign Minister Natwar Singh reveals in a recent memoir that no less a personage than Margaret Thatcher was fascinated by an Indian godman, Chandraswami, whom she received in her office shortly after becoming Conservative Party leader.
The godman impressed Thatcher enough with his mind-reading skills that she visited him again – wearing, on his instructions, a red dress and sporting a religious talisman he had given her.
At this second encounter, Chandraswami accurately prophesied that she would become prime minister within four years and serve for nine, 11, or 13 years (she served for 11).
There was one crucial difference from her Indian counterparts, though.
When Singh, meeting Thatcher soon after she had become Prime Minister, whispered, “Our man was proved right,” her reaction surprised him.
“For a moment, she seemed flustered,” he recalled.
“Then, she took me aside and said: ‘High Commissioner, we don’t talk about these matters.’”
Indians do: We may be superstitious, but we are not hypocritical.
India’s Disrupted Democracy
NEW DELHI – India’s 15th Lok Sabha (the lower house of Parliament) passed into history ignominiously this month, following the least productive five years of any Indian parliament in six decades of functioning democracy.
With entire sessions lost to opposition disruptions, and with frequent adjournments depriving legislators of time for deliberation, the MPs elected in May 2009 passed fewer bills and spent fewer hours in debate than any of their predecessors.
As if that were not bad enough, the final session witnessed new lows in unruly behavior, with microphones broken, scuffles in the well of the house, and a legislator releasing pepper spray to prevent discussion of a bill he opposed.
In the latter incident, the Speaker was rushed, choking, from her seat, and three asthmatic MPs were taken to the hospital, prompting the offender to explain that he was acting in self-defense against those who sought to prevent him from engaging in less exotic forms of disruption.
To those of us who sought election to Parliament in order to participate in thoughtful debate on how to move India forward, and to deliberate on the laws by which we would be governed, the experience has been deeply disillusioning.
To be sure, democracy has proved to be an extraordinary instrument for transforming an ancient country – one featuring astonishing ethnic, religious, linguistic, and cultural diversity, myriad social divisions, and deeply entrenched poverty – into a twenty-first-century success story.
Only democracy could have engineered such remarkable change with the consent of the governed, and enabled all to feel that they have the same stake in the country’s progress, equal rights under its laws, and equal opportunities for advancement.
And only democracy could defuse conflict by giving dissent a legitimate means of expression.
Some observers express astonishment that India has flourished as a democracy; in fact, it could hardly have survived as anything else.
But the “temple of democracy,” as Indians have long hailed their parliament, has been soiled by its own priests, and is now in desperate need of reform.
Parliament’s functioning has become, to most Indians, an embarrassment and, to many, an abomination.
People turn on their televisions and watch in disbelief as their elected representatives shout slogans, wave placards, scream abuse, and provoke adjournments – indeed, do almost anything but what they were elected to do.
The result is that most Indians consider Parliament a colossal waste of time and money.
After all, its dysfunction not only cheapens political discourse; it also delays essential legislative business.
Bills languish, policies fail to acquire the legal framework needed for implementation, and governance slows.
The errant MPs are not just betraying their voters’ confidence; they are also betraying their duty to the country and discrediting democracy.
But the complacency with which the political establishment accepts the disruption of Parliament suggests that even experienced politicians do not understand this.
Because a parliamentary system usually results in predictable outcomes, with the ruling majority typically getting its way, India’s opposition MPs (and any government MPs who disagree with the cabinet’s position on a specific issue) prefer disruption to debate.
And this is greeted on both sides of the aisle with a shrug, as if intentionally drowning out one’s colleagues with shouted slogans were just another parliamentary maneuver, as valid as a filibuster or an adjournment motion.
In fact, an unwritten but sacrosanct convention ensures that the Speaker almost never uses the position’s authority to suspend or expel errant members, except when there is a consensus between the government and the opposition to do so – which of course rarely occurs.
(The pepper-spraying MP was, however, suspended for the rest of the session.
Even complacency has its limits.)
What the political establishment overlooks is the broader damage that such behavior does to Parliament’s public standing, and therefore to democracy itself.
The shambolic performance of elected parliaments in Europe, especially in interwar Germany and Italy, had a great deal to do with the rise of authoritarianism and fascism in the first half of the twentieth century.
When democracy is discredited by its own practitioners, there is much greater public willingness to embrace a seemingly efficient alternative.
India’s neighbors have proved this often enough, welcoming the overthrow of elected governments in popular coups.
India has never seemed likely to succumb to a similar tendency, but the irresponsible custodians of Indian democracy should not tempt fate.
If India’s founding fathers, like the passionate democrat Jawaharlal Nehru, had not been cremated, they would be turning over in their graves.
With a general election to be held by the end of May, voters should insist that those who seek to represent them in Parliament go there to debate and deliberate, not to disrupt and destroy.
As of now, that seems to be a forlorn hope.
India’s Martian Chronicles
NEW DELHI – The news that the Mars orbiter spacecraft Mangalyaan, launched by India on November 5, has left the Earth’s orbit, traversed the moon, and is on course for its ultimate destination, 400 million kilometers (249 million miles) away, brought early holiday cheer to Indians.
Space missions have become a matter of pride for India, which is already one of the top countries in terms of rocket and satellite technology.
Mangalyaan, India’s first inter-planetary satellite, was purpose-built for the Mars mission – and it was made entirely indigenously.
Indian-educated scientists designed and fabricated it in barely 15 months – astonishingly fast for a country of chronic delays, where “Indian Standard Time” is a common joke.
They also did so at a remarkably low cost, with the total bill coming in at under $73 million, or about a fifth of what the few other countries that have sought to explore Mars have spent.
Indeed, while Indians often lament their country’s dysfunction, inadequate infrastructure, antiquated industrial processes, and uneven manufacturing record, it rose to the challenge and delivered.
But it is too early to celebrate.
Five years ago, India’s lunar mission, called Chandrayaan, was the occasion for another national celebration.
Though it was intended to explore the moon for two years, the spacecraft was declared lost after 312 days.
While scientists at the Indian Space Research Organization (ISRO) believe that they gained valuable lessons from the experience, the partial failure of the Chandrayaan mission still haunts them.
Moreover, the challenge is even greater when it comes to Mars.
It is a sobering fact that of a total of 51 Mars missions sent out by five countries, 30 ended badly.
Among India’s Asian rivals, neither Japan, which launched a Mars orbiter in 2003, nor China, which followed suit in 2011, was able to complete its mission successfully.
India hopes to join the three space programs that have succeeded – those of the Soviet Union, the United States, and the European Union.
Mangalyaan’s objective is to reach Mars’s orbit by September 2014 and to look for the presence of methane gas, a sign of possible life. Success would mark a scientific advance for humanity; failure, Indian scientists aver, would still provide a learning experience.
The ISRO’s chief scientist, K. Radhakrishnan, is not interested in comparisons with other countries: “We are in competition with ourselves,” he declared, “in the areas we have charted for ourselves.”
India is increasingly regarded around the world as the leading developing country in the field, with the human-resource capacity and technological skills needed to work on the cutting edge of outer-space challenges.
India’s adventures in space exploration are not merely about its scientists’ ambitions.
At United Nations forums, India has consistently been a voice for international cooperation in outer space.
It speaks of being able to offer other countries, particularly from the developing world, an opportunity to participate in space exploration.
Its moon mission in 2008, which carried a payload for some 20 countries, won the International Lunar Exploration Working Group’s International Cooperation Award.
Yet, unavoidably, some triumphalism has crept into the narrative.
One of India’s more astute young commentators, Sreeram Chaulia, captures this heady exuberance well: “Every milestone in advanced rocket science,” he writes, “is a shot in the arm for national self-confidence, showing that India is headed for global leadership.
When the chips are down, or if there is a national calamity, memories of the Mars orbiter blazing a trail in the sky will sustain the faith that the future belongs to India.”
This is precisely the attitude that raises the hackles of domestic critics, especially on the left, who argue that a country facing India’s crippling social and economic problems cannot afford the luxury of indulging in space exploration.
Critics have portrayed the Mars mission as an irresponsible ego trip by pampered scientists disconnected from the harsh realities of Indian poverty and suffering.
This may not be entirely fair, however.
India embarked on its quest for rocket and satellite technology and space exploration when it was far poorer, impelled by its own ancient scientific tradition and the conviction of its first prime minister, Jawaharlal Nehru, that such aspirations could co-exist with a determined effort to end poverty.
Indeed, India’s space scientists have produced tangible benefits for ordinary citizens, launching meteorological satellites that have predicted cyclones and helped save thousands of lives, as well as telecommunications satellites that have knit a vast country together through shared networks.
Mitigating natural disasters and enabling nationwide broadcasting can hardly be considered to be disconnected from India’s real priorities.
With a general election looming in the months ahead, the air is already thick with political recrimination.
The Mars mission – if it succeeds – is one thing that can literally rise above it all.
The Great War’s Forgotten Soldiers
NEW DELHI – One hundred years after the start of World War I, the world has been commemorating that seminal event.
Described as “a war to end all wars,” the Great War, as it was called at the time, failed to live up to its billing.
Those who fought and died in it would not have expected its sequel just 25 years later.
But while the war took the flower of Europe’s youth to premature graves, snuffing out the lives of a generation of talented poets, artists, cricketers, and others whose genius bled into the trenches, it also involved soldiers from faraway lands that had little to do with Europe’s bitter traditional hatreds.
The role and sacrifice of Australians, New Zealanders, Canadians, and South Africans have long been celebrated in history books, novels, and award-winning films like “Gallipoli.”
But the world hears very little about the 1.3 million Indian troops who served in the conflict, which claimed the lives of 74,187, with another 67,000 wounded.
Their stories, and their heroism, have long been omitted from popular histories of the war, or relegated to the footnotes.
India contributed divisions and brigades to the European, Mediterranean, West Asian, North African, and East African theatres.
In Europe, Indian soldiers were among the first to suffer the horrors of the trenches.
They were killed in droves before the war entered its second year, and they bore the brunt of many German offensives.
It was Indian jawans who stopped the German advance at Ypres in the autumn of 1914, soon after the war broke out, while the British were still recruiting and training their own forces.
More than a thousand of them died at Gallipoli, thanks to Churchill’s folly.
Nearly 700,000 Indian sepoys fought in Mesopotamia against the Ottoman Empire, Germany’s ally.
Letters from Indian soldiers in Europe to their families back home bespeak cultural dislocation and tragedy.
“The shells are pouring like rain in the monsoon,” declared one.
“The corpses cover the country like sheaves of harvested corn,” wrote another.
These men were undoubtedly heroes.
They were pitchforked into battle in unfamiliar lands, in climatic conditions to which they were neither accustomed nor prepared, fighting an enemy of whom they had no knowledge, risking their lives every day for little more than pride.
Yet they were destined to remain largely unknown once the war was over – neglected by the British, for whom they fought, and ignored by their compatriots.
Part of the reason is that they were not fighting for India.
The soldiers were all volunteers; soldiering was their profession, and they served the very British Empire that was oppressing their own people back home.
While raising men and money from the subcontinent, the British promised to deliver self-rule to India at the end of the war.
Had they kept that pledge, the sacrifices of India’s WWI soldiers might have been seen in their homeland as a contribution to India’s freedom.
But the British broke their word, and nationalists had nothing for which to thank India’s soldiers.
They had merely gone abroad to serve their foreign masters.
Losing one’s life in a foreign war fought at the behest of colonial rulers was an occupational hazard; it did not qualify as a form of praiseworthy national service.
Thus, Indian nationalists allowed the soldiers’ heroism to be forgotten.
When the world commemorated the 50th anniversary of WWI in 1964, there was scarcely a mention of India’s contribution anywhere, least of all in India.
The India Gate in New Delhi, built in 1931, is visited by hundreds daily who have no idea that it commemorates the Indian soldiers who lost their lives fighting in WWI.
But, though historical amnesia about the Great War is pervasive across India, the centenary is finally forcing a rethink.
The British have been flocking to an exhibition showcasing Indian troops’ role; the French are making a film about the brown-skinned and turbaned men who fought to save their land from the Germans; and, in India, curiosity has overcome the fading colonial-era resentment of British exploitation.
Indians are beginning to see the soldiers of WWI as human beings who took the spirit of their country to battlefields abroad.
The Center for Armed Forces Historical Research in Delhi is painstakingly working to retrieve memorabilia of that era and reconstruct their forgotten story.
The Commonwealth War Graves Commission maintains war cemeteries in India, mostly commemorating WWII rather than WWI soldiers.
The most famous epitaph is inscribed at the Kohima War Cemetery: “When you go home, tell them of us and say/For your tomorrow, we gave our today.”
The Indian soldiers who died in WWI could make no such claim.
They gave their “todays” for someone else’s “yesterdays.”
They left behind orphans, and history orphaned them as well.
It is a matter of quiet satisfaction that their long-overdue rehabilitation has now begun.
The Terrorist Next Door
NEW DELHI – Recent incidents on the Line of Control (LoC) – the frontier between India and Pakistan in the state of Jammu and Kashmir – have again raised fundamental questions about the nuclear-armed neighbors’ fraught relationship.
Early this month, India’s army foiled an attempted incursion by a group of 30 to 40 militants from Pakistani territory, leading Indian critics to decry official peace overtures.
Indeed, barely two weeks before the latest incident, Indian Prime Minister Manmohan Singh met with his Pakistani counterpart, Nawaz Sharif, during the United Nations General Assembly session in New York.
Pakistan was hacked off the stooped shoulders of India by the departing British in 1947 as a homeland for India’s Muslims; but, until recently (as Pakistan’s population continues to grow at a higher rate than India’s), more Muslims remained in India than lived in Pakistan.
Bilateral relations have been bedeviled ever since by a festering dispute over the divided territory of Kashmir, India’s only Muslim-majority state (but home to only 3% of India’s Muslims, who are scattered in larger numbers throughout the country).
For decades, open conflict and simmering hostility have been punctuated by periods of short-lived bonhomie.
The principal obstacle to peace has been Pakistan’s sponsorship of militancy and terrorism within India, culminating in the horrific attacks in Mumbai in November 2008, in which terrorist commandos killed almost 200 people.
In the late 1980’s, Pakistan backed an insurrection by some Kashmiri Muslims and supplied arms, training, and funds to militants who infiltrated across the LoC.
The insurrection, which continues to this day, and Indian security forces’ response to it have caused great loss of life and property, and have all but wrecked the state’s economy, which is largely dependent on tourism.
In the process, both countries have suffered grievously.
Indian citizens have been killed in large numbers, while the government has had to deploy more than a half-million soldiers to keep the peace.
And Pakistan’s strategy of “bleeding India to death by a thousand cuts” through insurgency and terrorism has accomplished little, while making its military an enormously powerful domestic player and spawning terror outfits (some of which have turned against their sponsors).
In June, when Sharif became the first prime minister in Pakistan’s checkered political history to succeed a democratically elected prime minister through another democratic election, there was hope in India that the balance of power might shift from the military to the civilian government.
During his election campaign, and after his victory, Sharif expressed a determination to make peace with India.
Despite the historical pattern of Pakistani civilian leaders talking peace while armed men slip across the border, many in India believe that this time might be different.
But many also remain skeptical.
Singh sat down with Sharif after a series of incidents on the LoC led his critics to urge him not to proceed with the meeting.
India, the government’s critics argue, has taken upon itself the enormous burden of talking peace with a government that, when it comes to addressing the real threats emanating from its territory and institutions, has proved to be ineffective at best and duplicitous at worst.
The latest attempted infiltration – which Indian military leaders say could not have occurred without the Pakistani army’s complicity – has added to the outcry against the government for its alleged naiveté.
In pursuing peace with Pakistan, India’s government is indeed rolling the dice.
As the Mumbai attack five years ago and the recent LoC incidents have shown, the gap between Pakistan’s official statements and its military’s actions suggests that the civilian government, even if sincere, is too weak to control its own security apparatus.
So long as Pakistan’s government remains either unable or unwilling to push back against the so-called “non-state actors” that are said to be out of its control, why should India pursue the dialogue that it called off in 2008?
Yet India’s peaceniks are not wrong.
A country that seeks to focus on its own enormous development challenges should do everything it can to defuse hostility on its borders.
Not talking to Pakistan is not much of a policy; it has been tried for years, yielding no significant benefit.
If India’s pursuit of peace strengthens like-minded Pakistani politicians who are struggling against their own hawks, it is worth attempting.
The benefits of peace, for both sides, would be enormous.
But it has always been India, a status quo power, that wishes to live in peace, while Pakistan, craving Kashmir, uses every means at its disposal to alter the status quo.
For this reason, India’s army must be well prepared and vigilant in defense of the country’s borders.
But, unlike in Pakistan, the army in India does not make foreign policy.
That is the prerogative of an elected civilian government that is determined to engage in dialogue with its eyes open (and its weapons at the ready).
It would help if Pakistan’s government – facing home-grown terrorists even as it exports terror to its neighbors – showed a little more willingness to join the quest for peace.
The moment the Pakistani establishment genuinely disavows terrorism as an instrument of state policy, the prospect of peace will dawn on the subcontinent.
Alas, that prospect is not yet even a glimmer on the horizon.
Nehru’s Last Stand?
NEW DELHI – The victory of the Bharatiya Janata Party and its leader, Narendra Modi, in India’s general election last month has raised a crucial question about the country’s future.
With the BJP sweeping to power on a platform of aggressive nationalism and business-friendly corporatism, has the socioeconomic consensus dating to India’s first prime minister, the democratic socialist Jawaharlal Nehru, come to an end?
The “Nehruvian consensus” facilitated India’s democratic maturation and accommodated the country’s many diverse interests, without permitting any one group or section to dominate the nascent nation-state.
It is fashionable today to decry Nehruvian socialism as a corrupt and inefficient system that condemned India to many years of slow economic growth.
But at its core was the conviction that in a land of extreme poverty and inequality, the objective of government policy must be to improve the welfare of the poorest, most deprived, and most marginalized.
In Nehru’s day, the best way to accomplish that was by building up structures of public ownership and state control of resources, as well as by boosting economic capacity through government intervention.
Of course, Nehru’s economic vision had its flaws, giving rise, for example, to the so-called “license-permit-quota Raj,” under which government control stifled entrepreneurial activity, which in turn held growth rates below those of India’s Southeast Asian neighbors.
India slowly repealed many of these burdensome regulations in the 1980s, when Nehru’s grandson, Rajiv Gandhi, was in power.
Then, following reforms initiated by his successors atop the Indian National Congress, Narasimha Rao and Manmohan Singh, India entered a confident new era of flourishing growth and socioeconomic dynamism.
So what went wrong?
Many attribute the astonishing scale of the BJP’s victory to Modi’s success in tapping into the restless (and rightful) aspirations of India’s youth after two years of a slowing economy.
This is where critics deem the Congress party to have failed, focusing as it did on the needs of India’s poorest.
But, leaving aside the last two years, India witnessed record-high growth rates while Congress was in power.
Our objective – supported by eminent economists, lawyers, and social activists with tremendous first-hand experience – was to distribute the fruits of this growth more equitably.
And, though the election results might suggest otherwise, most Indians’ lives and living standards have improved in the last ten years.
This was not because of “doles,” as critics call them, but because of more generous and effective government.
In fact, it is precisely the social investment carried out by Congress governments that put more children in school and more people to work, while ensuring that their basic needs were met.
The alleged handouts empowered those with the least to stand on their own feet and seek to improve their lives.
More people could demand more from their government, which is their right, generating a wave of aspiration that the BJP caught and rode into office.
Some predict that Congress will move further to the left economically in order to distinguish itself from the BJP, and argue that this would be counterproductive, given that voters have seemingly rejected socialist policies.
But, in a country where most people in every electoral constituency live on less than $2 a day, writing off “pro-poor” policies would be unwise.
Congress leaders should continue to point out that it is their policies that have enabled most Indians to reach a point at which they are better informed and more empowered to make new and different demands of their government.
The Nehruvian emphasis on socially inclusive growth is not simple “leftism”; the Congress party supports growth and led the liberalization that made growth possible.
But we wish to see the benefits of that growth reach the weakest and poorest sections of Indian society.
In the long run, I am certain that the Nehruvians will be rewarded for not pursuing an economic-growth model that favors a select few at the expense of everyone else.
India must shine, but it must shine for all of its citizens.
Unless Modi can deliver inclusive growth, his triumph will prove short-lived and the Nehruvians will return.
India’s Democratic Pageant
NEW DELHI – Last week, India’s independent Election Commission announced the dates for the next general election.
The world’s largest single exercise of the democratic franchise will take place over a staggering 37 days in nine “phases,” some a week apart, from April 7 to May 12.
Some 814 million eligible voters will elect, for the 16th time, a new parliament and government, casting their ballots at more than 930,000 polling stations – after choosing from an estimated 15,000 candidates belonging to more than 500 political parties.
Democracy, of course, is a process, not an event.
But India’s elections – with their outsize logistical and security challenges, myriad languages, and candidates identified not just by name but also by electoral symbols to aid illiterate voters – are events that evoke admiration each time they occur.
It takes a sizeable forest to furnish enough paper for posters, electoral rolls, and ballots.
And the thousands of electronic voting machines that are manufactured in India can survive heat, dust, and power failures – and retain their results safely until the votes are ready to be counted, sometimes weeks later.
(Because no votes are counted until the last ones are cast, counting day is May 16.)
Moreover, every election has at least one story of officials battling through snow or jungle to ensure that the preferences of remote constituents are duly recorded.
Yet there are larger issues behind the electoral spectacle that must not be overlooked.
India’s elections have, over the years, deepened and broadened the composition of the political establishment.
Sociologists have analyzed the class composition of India’s legislatures and traced the change from a post-independence Parliament dominated by highly educated professionals to one populated by today’s motley crew of MPs, who are more truly representative of India’s rural heartland.
But the fact that, particularly in India’s northern states, voters elect people referred to openly in the press as “mafia dons,” “dacoit leaders,” and “anti-social elements” is a troubling reflection on the way the electoral process has served Indian democracy.
In the last four parliaments, at least a hundred members have had criminal cases pending against them.
The resulting alienation of the educated middle class means that fewer and fewer of them go to the polls on Election Day.
The poor, however, do.
Whereas psephological studies in the United States have demonstrated that the poor do not vote in significant numbers (presidential-election turnout in Harlem averaged 23% before Barack Obama’s two candidacies), the opposite is true in India.
In India, it is the poor who take the time to line up in the hot sun, believing that their votes will make a difference, whereas more privileged voters, knowing that their views and numbers will do little to influence the outcome, have been staying at home.
Studies of Indian elections have consistently shown that the poorest vote in numbers well above the national average, while the educated middle-class turn out in numbers well below it.
The significant changes in the social composition of India’s politicians and bureaucrats since Independence are indeed proof of democracy at work.
But many lament that the poor performance of the country’s political class in general offers less cause for celebration.
India’s parliamentarians increasingly embody the qualities required to acquire power rather than the skills needed to wield it for the common good.
Many cynics regard democracy in India as a process that has given free rein to criminals and corrupt cops, opportunists and fixers, murderous musclemen and grasping middlemen, kickback-making politicos and bribe-taking bureaucrats, mafia dons and private armies, caste activists and religious extremists.
And yet it is democracy that has given Indians of every imaginable caste, creed, culture, and cause the chance to break free of their lot.
Where there is social oppression and caste tyranny, particularly in rural India, democracy offers the victims a means of salvation.
Among the victors in recent elections have been people from traditionally underprivileged backgrounds who have risen through the power of the ballot to positions their forefathers could never have dreamed of.
There could be no more startling tribute to the Indian system.
Yes, elections also allow many to vent extreme views.
There are those who wish for India to become a Hindu Rashtra, a land of and for the Hindu majority; those who wish to raise even higher the protectionist barriers against foreign investment that have started to come down; and those who believe that a firm hand at the national helm would be preferable to the failures of democracy.
As the victors in May cobble together a government, their challenge will be to sustain a pluralist India of competing ideas and interests, unafraid of the power or products of the outside world, and determined to liberate and fulfill its people’s creative energies.
I have little doubt that the democratic process will ensure inclusiveness rather than fragmentation.
The only possible idea of India is that of a nation greater than the sum of its parts.
In India, as elsewhere, there will always be a choice between a world of edicts and crusades, where orthodoxies rule and foreign heresies are ruthlessly suppressed, and a world in which the virtues of tolerance, dissent, and cooperation are recognized and practiced.
As it goes to the polls, India, with a sixth of the world's population, should offer an instructive example of the latter.
The Return of the Ugly American
NEW DELHI – Nearly a month after American authorities arrested India’s deputy consul general in New York, Devyani Khobragade, outside her children’s school and charged her with paying her Indian domestic worker a salary below the minimum wage, bilateral relations remain tense.
India’s government has reacted with fury to the mistreatment of an official enjoying diplomatic immunity, and public indignation has been widespread and nearly unanimous.
So, has an era of steadily improving ties between the two countries come to an end?
Judging from Indian leaders’ statements, it would certainly seem so.
India’s mild-mannered Prime Minister Manmohan Singh declared that Khobragade’s treatment was “deplorable.”
National Security Adviser Shivshankar Menon called her arrest “despicable” and “barbaric,” and Foreign Minister Salman Khurshid refused to take a conciliatory phone call from US Secretary of State John Kerry.
Emotions have run high in India’s Parliament and on television talk shows as well.
Writing to her diplomatic colleagues after her arrest, Khobragade, who has denied the charges against her, noted that she “broke down many times,” owing to “the indignities of repeated handcuffing, stripping, and cavity searches, swabbing,” and to being held “with common criminals and drug addicts.”
A former Indian foreign minister, Yashwant Sinha, has publicly called for retaliation against gay American diplomats in India, whose sexual orientation and domestic arrangements are now illegal after a recent Supreme Court ruling.
The government has not taken him seriously, but his suggestion indicates how inflamed passions have become.
Some retaliation has occurred.
The initial American rationale (that foreign consuls in the US enjoy a lower level of immunity than other diplomats) led India’s government to re-examine privileges enjoyed by US consular officials that are unavailable to their Indian counterparts in the US.
These privileges – including full-fledged diplomatic ID cards, access to the restricted customs areas of airports, tax-free shipments of items for personal consumption, and no questions asked about the terms of their employment of local domestic staff – were swiftly withdrawn.
The cardinal principle of diplomatic relations is reciprocity, and India realized that it had been naïve in extending courtesies to the US that it was not receiving in return.
Likewise, the police have removed bollards and barriers that the US Embassy had unilaterally placed on the street in front of its complex in New Delhi, creating an obstacle to free circulation on a public road that India had tolerated in a spirit of friendship.
(The government has, however, reiterated its commitment to the US Embassy’s security, even reinforcing the police presence outside.)
Tempers remain inflamed, with US Ambassador Nancy Powell, in a New Year’s message to Indians, ruefully acknowledging that ties have been “jolted by very different reactions to issues involving one of your consular officers and her domestic worker.”
Kerry has also expressed “regret” over the incident.
But the US has shown no signs of moving to drop the charges to defuse the crisis.
Indians remain bewildered that the US State Department would so willfully jeopardize a relationship that American officials had been describing as “strategic” over a practice routinely followed by foreign diplomats for decades.
Most developing-country diplomats take domestic staff with them on overseas assignments, paying them a good salary by their national standards, plus a cost differential for working aboard.
In Khobragade’s case, perquisites included a fully furnished room in a pricey Manhattan apartment, a television set, a mobile phone, medical insurance, and tickets home.
The cash part of the salary may be low by US standards – Khobragade herself, as a mid-ranking Indian diplomat, earns less than what the US considers a fair wage – but, with the other benefits, the compensation is attractive for a domestic helper.
More to the point, Khobragade did not find her maid in the US labor market and “exploit” her; she brought her from India to help her in her representational duties, on an official passport, with a US visa given for that purpose.
In almost no other country are local labor laws applied in such a manner to a foreign diplomat’s personal staff.
Privately, US diplomats express frustration at their helplessness in the face of theatrical grandstanding by the ambitious federal prosecutor, Preet Bharara, an Indian-American who has launched a series of high-profile cases against Indians in America.
For once, however, the zealous Bharara seems to have slipped up, because Khobragade was arrested at a time when she enjoyed full diplomatic (not just consular) immunity as an adviser to India’s United Nations mission during the General Assembly.
The State Department’s handling of the matter – which included approval of Khobragade’s arrest – has been, to say the least, inept.
Worse, just before the arrest, the maid’s family was spirited out of India on US visas for victims of human trafficking.
The implication that an Indian diplomat in a wage dispute with her maid is guilty of human trafficking understandably riles Indian diplomats as much as the treatment of Khobragade after she was detained.
The American habit of imposing its worldview self-righteously on others is deeply unwelcome.
To most Indians, common discourtesy cannot be repackaged as moral virtue.
Indian-American relations had been strengthening, owing to both sides’ shared commitment to democracy, common concerns about China, and increasing trade and investment.
The Khobragade affair suggests, however, that all of this is not enough: sustaining a strategic partnership requires, above all, mutual respect.
India had handled American diplomats with a generosity of spirit that it felt the bilateral relationship deserved.
Now, with the same spirit shown to be lacking from the other side, the friendship has suffered.
Until the US displays appropriate deference to the sensitivities, pride, and honor of other peoples and cultures, it will continue to be resented around the world.
The Return of Fiscal Policy
NEW YORK – Since the global financial crisis of 2008, monetary policy has borne much of the burden of sustaining aggregate demand, boosting growth, and preventing deflation in developed economies.
Fiscal policy, for its part, was constrained by large budget deficits and rising stocks of public debt, with many countries even implementing austerity to ensure debt sustainability.
Eight years later, it is time to pass the baton.
As the only game in town when it came to economic stimulus, central banks were driven to adopt increasingly unconventional monetary policies.
They began by cutting interest rates to zero, and later introduced forward guidance, committing to keep policy rates at zero for a protracted period.
In rapid succession, advanced-country central banks also launched quantitative easing (QE), purchasing massive volumes of long-term government securities to reduce their yields.
They also initiated credit easing, or purchases of private assets to reduce the costs of private-sector borrowing.
Most recently, some monetary authorities – including the European Central Bank, the Bank of Japan, and several other European central banks – have taken interest rates negative.
These policies boosted asset prices and economic growth, while preventing deflation. But they are reaching their limits.
In fact, negative policy rates may hurt bank profitability and thus banks’ willingness to extend credit.
As for QE, central banks may simply run out of government bonds to buy.
Yet most economies are far from where they need to be.
If below-trend growth continues, monetary policy may well lack the tools to address it, particularly if tail risks – economic, financial, political, or geopolitical – also undermine recovery.
If banks are driven, for any reason, to reduce lending to the private sector, monetary policy may become less effective, ineffective, or even counter-productive.
In such a context, fiscal policy would be the only effective macroeconomic-policy tool left, and thus would have to assume much more responsibility for countering recessionary pressures.
But there is no need to wait until central banks have run out of ammunition. We should begin activating fiscal policy now, for several reasons.
For starters, thanks to painful austerity, deficits and debts have fallen, meaning that most advanced economies now have some fiscal space to boost demand.
Moreover, central banks’ near-zero policy rates and effective monetization of debt by way of QE would enhance the impact of fiscal policy on aggregate demand.
And long-term government bond yields are at an historic low, enabling governments to spend more and/or reduce taxes while financing the deficit cheaply.
Finally, most advanced economies need to repair or replace crumbling infrastructure, a form of investment with higher returns than government bonds, especially today, when bond yields are extremely low.
Public infrastructure not only increases aggregate demand; it also increases aggregate supply, as it supports private-sector productivity and efficiency.
The good news is that the advanced economies of the G7 seem poised to begin – or perhaps have already begun – to rely more on fiscal policy to bolster sagging economic growth, even as they maintain the rhetoric of austerity.
In Canada, Prime Minister Justin Trudeau’s administration has announced a plan to boost public investment.
And Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe has decided to postpone a risky consumption-tax hike planned for next year, while also announcing supplementary budgets to increase spending and boost the household sector’s purchasing power.
In the United Kingdom, the new government, led by Prime Minister Theresa May, has dropped the target of eliminating the deficit by the end of the decade.
In the wake of the Brexit vote, May’s government has designed expansionary fiscal policies aimed at spurring growth and improving economic conditions for cities, regions, and groups left behind in the last decade.
Even in the eurozone, there is some movement.
Germany will spend more on refugees, defense, security, and infrastructure, while reducing taxes moderately.
And, with the European Commission showing more flexibility on targets and ceilings, the rest of the eurozone may also be able to use fiscal policy more effectively.
If fully implemented, the so-called Juncker Plan, named for European Commission President Jean-Claude Juncker, will boost public investment throughout the European Union.
As for the United States, there will be some stimulus, regardless of whether Hillary Clinton or Donald Trump wins the presidential election.
Both candidates favor more infrastructure spending, more military spending, loosening limits on civilian spending, and corporate-tax reform.
Trump also has a tax-reduction plan that would not be revenue-neutral, and thus would expand the budget deficit (though the effect on demand would likely be small, given the concentration of benefits at the very top of the income distribution).
The fiscal stimulus that will result from these uncoordinated G7 policies will likely be very modest – at best, 0.5% of GDP of additional stimulus per year for a few years.
This means that more stimulus, particularly spending on public infrastructure, will probably be warranted.
Nonetheless, the measures undertaken or contemplated so far already represent a step in the right direction.
Bapak Bangsa Israel yang Terakhir
TEL AVIV – Tahun 2006, setahun sebelum Shimon Peres terpilih menjadi Presiden Israel, Michael Bar-Zohar menerbitkan biografi Shimon Peres dalam Bahasa Ibrani.
Biografi itu diberikan judul yang tepat, yaitu Seperti Phoenix (Like a Phoenix): saat itu, Peres telah aktif dalam politik Israel dan menjadi tokoh publik selama lebih dari 60 tahun.  
Karir Peres mempunyai masa pasang dan surut.
Beliau mencapai puncak ketenaran dan mengalami kegagalan yang memalukan – serta beberapa kali inkarnasi.
Sebagai pilar kepemimpinan keamanan nasional Israel, Beliau kemudian menjadi sangat pro-perdamaian, yang mempunyai hubungan cinta dan benci dengan publik Israel yang terus menerus menolak memilih Beliau sebagai Perdana Menteri namun mengagumi Beliau ketika tidak mempunyai atau mencoba mempunyai kekuasaan.
Tidak putus asa dalam menghadapi kesulitan, Peres terus berusaha maju, terdorong oleh ambisi dan misi yang Beliau miliki dan terbantu oleh bakat dan kreatifitas.
Beliau adalah orang yang otodidak, pembaca yang rajin, dan penulis yang produktif, seseorang yang tergerak dan terinspirasi setiap beberapa tahun oleh ide baru: nanosains, otak manusia, pengembangan ekonomi Timur Tengah.
Beliau juga politisi visioner dan licik, sesorang yang tidak pernah sepenuhnya menepis asal-usul Eropa Timur.
Ketika upaya Beliau untuk mencapai kekuasaan dan partisipasi dalam pembuatan keputusan berakhir di tahun 2007, Beliau mencapai puncak dari karir publiknya, menjabat sebagai Presiden hingga tahun 2014.
Beliau merehabilitasi institusi tersebut dengan menjadi lebih sukses dari pendahulunya dan menjadi populer di Israel dan dikagumi di luar negeri sebagai “tetua” dalam kancah internasional, pembicara yang populer di forum-forum internasional, dan simbol perdamaian Israel, kontras dengan Perdana Menteri Israel yang garang, Binyamin Netanyahu.  
Karir politik Peres yang beragam dan kompleks melalui lima tahap utama.
Beliau memulai karir sebagai aktivis di Partai Buruh dan pergerakan pemuda pada awal tahun 1940-an, beliau dianggap cukup senior untuk dikirim ke Eropa sebagai anggota delegasi pre-negara ke Kongres Zionis pertama setelah perang.
Beliau kemudian bekerja sama dengan Bapak Pendiri Israel, David Ben-Gurion, di Kementrian Pertahanan, umumnya menangani pengadaan, selama Perang Kemerdekaan Israel, dan pada akhirnya naik jabatan menjadi Direktur Jenderal Kementrian tersebut.
Dalam kapasitasnya sebagai Direktur Jenderal, Peres menjadi arsitek doktrin pertahanan negara baru tersebut.
Menjalankan semacam kementrian luar negeri secara parallel, pencapaian utama Beliau adalah pembentukan aliansi yang baik dan kerjasama kemanan yang kuat – termasuk dalam hal teknologi nuklir – dengan Perancis.
Pada tahun 1959, Peres menjadi politisi penuh waktu, mendukung Ben-Gurion dalam konfliknya dengan anggota lama Partai Buruh, Peres kemudian terpilih sebagai anggota Knesset, Parlemen Israel, dan menjadi Wakil Menteri Pertahanan dan kemudian menjadi anggota penuh kabinet.
Karir beliau memasuki fase baru pada tahun 1974, ketika Perdana Menteri Golda Meir dipaksa mundur setelah kegagalan Oktober 1973, yaitu saat pasukan Mesir Anwar Sadar sukses menyebrangi Terusan Suez.
Peres mencalonkan diri, namun kalah tipis dari Yitzhak Rabin.
Sebagai kompensasi, Rabin memberikan Peres posisi sebagai Menteri Pertahanan di pemerintahannya.
Meskipun demikian, persaingan mereka pada tahun 1974 menandai mulainya 21 tahun persaingan sengit, yang diperingan dengan kerjasama.
Dua kali, pada tahun 1977, setelah Rabin dipaksan untuk mundur, dan pada tahun 1995-1996, setelah Rabin dibunuh, Peres menggantikan rivalnya tersebut.
Beliau juga menjabat sebagai Perdana Menteri (salah satu yang terbaik) di Pemerintahan Persatuan Nasional pada tahun 1984-1986; tapi, walaupun telah berusaha selama hamper 30 tahun, beliau tidak pernah memenangkan mandat dari pemilih Israel untuk posisi yang paling beliau inginkan.
Pada tahun 1979, Peres mentransformasi diri menjadi pemimpin perdamaian Israel, memfokuskan usahanya pada Yordania di tahun 1980-an.
Tapi, walaupun beliau hampir mencapai perjanjian damai pada tahun 1987, ketika Beliau menanda-tangani perjanjian damai dengan Raja Hussein, perjanjian tersebut tidak mempunyai dampak.
Pada tahun 1992, anggota Partai Buruh menyimpulkan bahwa Peres tidak dapat memenangkan pemilu, dan hanya sentris seperti Rabin yang mempunyai peluang. 
Rabin menang dan kemudian kembali, setelah 15 tahun, menjadi Perdana Menteri.
Kali ini, Rabin menyimpan portofolio pertahanan untuk diri sendiri dan memberikan Peres jabatan di Kementrian Luar Negeri.
Rabin bertekad untuk mengatur proses perdamaian sendiri dan memberikan Peres peran kecil.
Tapi Peres mendapat tawaran dari Wakil Rabin kesempatan untuk melakukan perundingan kedua dengan PLO di Oslo, dan, dengan persetujuan Rabin, Beliau mengambil alih perundingan, yang membawa mereka pada kesuksesan di bulan Agustus 1993.
Ini adalah contoh utama dari kompetisi dan kolaborasi yang menandai hubungan Rabin-Peres.
Butuh keberanian dan kreatifitas Peres untuk bisa menyelesaikan Perjanjian Oslo; namun tanpa kredibilitas dan reputasi Rabin sebagai orang militer dan ahli keamanan, publik Israel dan institusi politik tidak akan menerima perjanjian tersebut.  
Kerjasama terpaksa antara Rabin dan Peres berlanjut hingga 4 November 1995 ketika Rabin dibunuh oleh ekstremis sayap kanan.
Ekstremis tersebut dapat membunuh Peres, namun memutuskan bahwa membunuh Rabin lebih efektif untuk menunda proses perdamaian.
Peres kemudian menjadi penerus Rabin dan mencoba untuk melakukan perjanjian damai dengan Suriah setelah Oslo.
Beliau gagal, lalu meminta pemilu lebih awal, melakukan kampanye yang buruk, dan kalah tipis dari Netanyahu pada bulan Mei 1996.
Sepuluh tahun kemudian merupakan periode yang tidak menyenangkan untuk Peres.
Beliau kehilangan kepemimpinan Partai Buruh ke Ehud Barak, bergabung dengan Partai Kadima Ariel Sharon, dan menjadi sasaran kritik dan serangan dari sayap kanan Israel, yang menyalahkan Beliau atas Perjanjian Oslo.
Peres kemudian mengecilkan arti Anugrah Nobel Perdamaian yang Beliau dapatkan bersama dengan Yasser Arafat dan Rabin setelah perjanjian Oslo.
Perbedaan antara reputasi Beliau di kancah internasional dan posisi Beliau di politik Israel menjadi sangat terlihat pada periode ini – perbedaan ini menghilang pada saat Beliau menjadi Presiden pada tahun 2007.         
Peres adalah pemimpin yang berpengalaman dan berbakat, pembicara yang fasih, dan mempunyai banyak ide.
Tapi mungkin hal yang terpenting adalah Beliau merupakan pemimpin Israel yang mempunyai visi dan pesan.
Ini adalah rahasia reputasi Beliau di kancah Internasional: orang-orang mengharapkan pemimpin Israel, seseorang dari Yerusalem, yang merupakan tokoh visioner seperti Beliau.
Ketika pemimpin politik negara tersebut tidak memenuhi harapan tersebut, pemimpin seperti Peres memenuhi peran tersebut – dan mendapatkan kejayaan.
The Promise of Abenomics
TOKYO – Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe’s program for his country’s economic recovery has led to a surge in domestic confidence.
But to what extent can “Abenomics” claim credit?
Interestingly, a closer look at Japan’s performance over the past decade suggests little reason for persistent bearish sentiment.
Indeed, in terms of growth of output per employed worker, Japan has done quite well since the turn of the century.
With a shrinking labor force, the standard estimate for Japan in 2012 –&#160;that is, before Abenomics – had output per employed worker growing by 3.08% year on year.
That is considerably more robust than in the United States, where output per worker grew by just 0.37% last year, and much stronger than in Germany, where it shrank by 0.25%.
Nonetheless, as many Japanese rightly sense, Abenomics can only help the country’s recovery.
Abe is doing what many economists (including me) have been calling for in the US and Europe: a comprehensive program entailing monetary, fiscal, and structural policies.
Abe likens this approach to holding three arrows –&#160;taken alone, each can be bent; taken together, none can.
The new governor of the Bank of Japan, Haruhiko Kuroda, comes with a wealth of experience gained in the finance ministry, and then as President of the Asian Development Bank.
During the East Asia crisis of the late 1990’s, he saw firsthand the failure of the conventional wisdom pushed by the US Treasury and the International Monetary Fund.
Not wedded to central bankers’ obsolete doctrines, he has made a commitment to reverse Japan’s chronic deflation, setting an inflation target of 2%.
Deflation increases the real (inflation-adjusted) debt burden, as well as the real interest rate.
Though there is little evidence of the importance of small changes in real interest rates, the effect of even mild deflation on real debt, year after year, can be significant.
Kuroda’s stance has already weakened the yen’s exchange rate, making Japanese goods more competitive.
This simply reflects the reality of monetary-policy interdependence: if the US Federal Reserve’s policy of so-called quantitative easing weakens the dollar, others have to respond to prevent undue appreciation of their currencies.
Someday, we might achieve closer global monetary-policy coordination; for now, however, it made sense for Japan to respond, albeit belatedly, to developments elsewhere.
Monetary policy would have been more effective in the US had more attention been devoted to credit blockages –&#160;for example, many homeowners’ refinancing problems, even at lower interest rates, or small and medium-size enterprises’ lack of access to financing.
Japan’s monetary policy, one hopes, will focus on such critical issues.
But Abe has two more arrows in his policy quiver.
Critics who argue that fiscal stimulus in Japan failed in the past – leading only to squandered investment in useless infrastructure – make two mistakes.
First, there is the counterfactual case: How would Japan’s economy have performed in the absence of fiscal stimulus?
Given the magnitude of the contraction in credit supply following the financial crisis of the late 1990’s, it is no surprise that government spending failed to restore growth.
Matters would have been much worse without the spending; as it was, unemployment never surpassed 5.8%, and, in throes of the global financial crisis, it peaked at 5.5%.
Second, anyone visiting Japan recognizes the benefits of its infrastructure investments (America could learn a valuable lesson here).
The real challenge will be in designing the third arrow, what Abe refers to as “growth.”
This includes policies aimed at restructuring the economy, improving productivity, and increasing labor-force participation, especially by women.
Some talk about “deregulation” – a word that has rightly fallen into disrepute following the global financial crisis.
In fact, it would be a mistake for Japan to roll back its environmental regulations, or its health and safety regulations.
What is needed is the right regulation.
In some areas, more active government involvement will be needed to ensure more effective competition.
But many areas in which reform is needed, such as hiring practices, require change in private-sector conventions, not government regulations.
Abe can only set the tone, not dictate outcomes.
For example, he has asked firms to increase their workers’ wages, and many firms are planning to provide a larger bonus than usual at the end of the fiscal year in March.