But technology alone will not be enough.
Regulators, hospitals, and drug-safety authorities must take the lead, rather than placing the burden on often poor and uneducated citizens who are struggling to care for loved ones.
The search for new, sustainable solutions, requires at least three initiatives.
First, we must encourage innovation by offering research grants to support small initiatives or large-scale projects (like campaigns to fight HIV, malaria, and maternal mortality).
Ideally, an international group would coordinate and develop all of the ideas and products, and take them from the laboratory to the field.
Second, we need to harness the creativity and commitment of young students, so that they understand the devastating impact of bad pharmaceuticals and become motivated to make a difference in people’s lives.
Third, we must make use of the media.
Just as the world cries foul when an illegal shipment of ivory is uncovered, we must launch campaigns in the press, on television, and online to bring to account any trader, state official, or company caught selling or promoting low-quality drugs.
In this way, we will remind those in the industry of a fundamental premise: their most precious commodity is not a blockbuster drug, but the public’s trust.
If drug makers and pharmacists cannot protect their customers’ health, they cannot protect their business.
November’s Diplomatic Harvest
MADRID – Jihadism is flourishing.
Tensions with Russia are flaring.
Agreement between Iran and the “E3+3” (Britain, France, and Germany from the European Union, plus China, Russia, and the United States) remains elusive, with domestic politics in all of the negotiating partners introducing additional complexities into an already complicated process.
US President Barack Obama, having suffered a severe midterm election defeat, must now deal with a Congress under full Republican control.
In the eurozone, economic growth remains anemic, causing leaders to look inward.
One could easily conclude that the world is being sucked into a vortex of instability.
But the past month featured some hopeful moments, and pausing to study them is imperative to avoid succumbing to pessimism.
Concluding a deal with Iran on its nuclear program remains an unfinished item of global business.
The negotiations in Vienna failed to produce a deal that is critically important to both regional and global stability.
But the atmosphere is positive: Iran fulfilled its obligations under last year’s interim agreement, and the E3+3 showed a willingness to end sanctions.
The deadline to finalize negotiations has now been extended to June 2015.
The West has a unique window of opportunity.
Achieving a deal is essential to avoid a new – and potentially catastrophic – conflict in the Middle East.
Negotiation and diplomacy are the only way to resolve the Iranian nuclear question in the long term and to normalize Iran’s critical role in regional security.
There were several other promising developments in November.
The new European Commission took office on November 1, launching its mandate with a plan to boost public and private investment by €315 billion ($392 billion) over the next three years.
Similarly, in Brisbane, the G-20 approved a package of economic measures to boost global economic growth by 2.1 percentage points by 2018.
Moreover, the 20 leaders endorsed the Global Infrastructure Initiative, which will create a Global Infrastructure Hub to serve as a knowledge-sharing platform for governments, the private sector, development banks, and international organizations.
The Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) summit in Beijing featured several important agreements as well.
At the top of the list is the announcement of a US-China bilateral climate deal, which helps to smooth the path toward the crucial United Nations Climate Change Summit (COP21) in Paris next year.
If India were to adopt a similar stance, hope would grow stronger still.
The UN’s Green Climate Fund, meanwhile, has been boosted with additional financing pledges – another critical stepping stone on the path to Paris.
The Fund, financed by developed countries, is designed to help developing countries meet the costs of mitigating and adapting to climate change.
The US has now pledged $3 billion, with Japan promising $1.5 billion, augmenting previous pledges by France and Germany – funding that is essential to ensure developing countries’ fruitful participation at COP21.
The EU is also looking forward to Paris, following the European Council’s approval of the European Commission’s 2030 framework for climate and energy policies.
Targets have been set for reducing greenhouse-gas emissions, increasing the percentage of renewables in Europe’s energy mix, enhancing energy efficiency, and promoting electricity interconnection among member states.
China and the US reached another bilateral deal at the APEC summit, which will serve to unblock the World Trade Organization’s Information Technology Agreement and thus eliminate tariffs on information and communication technology.
The Obama administration has estimated that, once applied, this agreement – which was frozen for a year as China sought to protect its domestic industry – will increase annual global GDP by $190 billion.
At the same summit, Chinese President Xi Jinping announced steps toward a 17-member Free Trade Area of the Asia-Pacific (FTAAP).
Such trade cooperation could provide a much-needed boon to diplomacy in a region that is under perpetual geopolitical strain.
Meanwhile, the US-backed Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) also moved forward in Beijing.
Though the two projects are commonly viewed as rivals, owing to China’s absence from the TPP, the initiatives could be complementary.
If strategic vision prevails and points of convergence are found, stability in Asia could be strengthened significantly.
The same is true of the Middle East, where an unscheduled meeting of the Gulf Cooperation Council in November brought some unexpected good news: Saudi Arabia, Bahrain, and the United Arab Emirates committed to return their ambassadors to Qatar after an eight-month absence.
In Tunisia, meanwhile, the technocratic government that had taken charge for several months was replaced democratically.
In a parliamentary election at the end of October, the secular Nidaa Tounes (Call of Tunisia) party scored a victory over the Islamist Ennahda (Renaissance).
One month later, Tunisians went to the polls to elect a president for the first time since President Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali was removed in 2011.
Tunisia remains a beacon of hope in the region.
The emergence of a coalition government shows that the damaging winner-take-all paradigm of Middle East politics can be broken, and that power can be shared.
The Arab world should take note.
In Jerusalem, mounting tension over holy sites has highlighted the difficulty of moving the Israeli-Palestinian peace process forward.
With an escalation in violent attacks in the city – a sacred place for both sides – the conflict has taken on a more religious face.
And, given this context, the Israeli government’s legislative proposal to define Israel as the nation-state of the Jewish people – thereby giving preference to the state’s Jewish identity over its democratic character and endangering minority rights – is especially pernicious.
Today, more than ever, I believe the peace process could take a new turn if the EU officially recognized Palestine – whose interim institutions it continues to support.
The effectiveness of such concerted action was on welcome display in November.
We should strive to maintain the momentum.
Multilateral Engagement for Energy Security
Our global need for energy reliability binds us together as surely as the global network that delivers it; a failure in one part of our network will inevitably affect everyone.
Local interests and persistent conflicts that sit astride our networks, including the as yet unresolved issue of Russian gas supply to Ukraine and Europe, have again raised the specter of energy being used as a weapon to gain political leverage.
Energy security is at the top of the agenda of the G-8 meeting hosted by President Vladimir Putin in Saint Petersburg.
The G-8 has correctly identified the key economic issue, energy interdependence, and now is the time for focused multilateral engagement on this issue.
For some countries that are blessed with vast supplies of oil and gas, the use of energy exports to reward friends and punish foes seems a tempting option.
Today, however, it is more likely to prove disruptive to friend and foe alike, as well as damaging to those countries that indulge this temptation.
Energy embargoes have generally proven counterproductive.
The price rises that followed OPEC’s oil embargoes of the 1970’s were unsustainable and led to conservation efforts and expansion of non-OPEC production.
As a result, OPEC’s share of world oil exports dropped sharply in the twelve years following the embargo of 1973-1974. 
Experience has taught us that transparency and price stability is in everyone's interest.
Pursuit of these principals while encouraging the development of global markets is essential to greater overall growth prospects for the world economy.
So when Russia sought earlier this year to quadruple the price of its gas exports to Ukraine, it argued that it was simply demanding market rates.
The message sounded fair and it did, for a short time, appeal to some policymakers and investors not fully apprised of the situation. 
To be clear, measured price changes implemented over time was never in dispute; indeed, some internal price adjustments for Ukraine were in order.
Unfortunately for Russia’s neighbors, it is not the market that determines what price is paid for Russia’s gas or transport; it is Gazprom and its chairman, Dmitry Medvedev, who is also the Russian government’s First Deputy Prime Minister.
The price charged by Gazprom for each country bordering Russia is different and is largely determined by political relationships with the Kremlin.
Economically speaking, gas supply and transport prices are more correlated to political relationships than to fundamental supply-demand or gas transport basis calculations. 
Ukraine was threatened with an immediate quadrupling of its prices – or interruption of its gas supply - as a result of it new-found independence from Russia during the Orange Revolution.
Georgia, also feeling the wrath of Moscow following the Rose Revolution, faced potentially harmful price increases as well.
Belarus, however, still in strong alignment with the Kremlin, continues to enjoy highly subsidized gas. 
Of course, Ukraine was not the only country put at risk by this brinksmanship; suppliers such as Turkmenistan, geographically locked into transit requirements through Russia, also suffer.
And for the consuming nations of Western and Central Europe, the price effects and supply disruption anxieties were of significant consequence.
Immediate multilateral intervention by the European Union and the United States probably are what probably caused Gazprom to turn the gas back on. 
Natural gas may be the commodity most vulnerable to event-driven supply disruptions.
The fixed interconnected pipelines lock producers and consumers in a near-exclusive embrace.
Diversification in natural gas transportations is a long-term cross-border asset development proposition requiring enormous investment and political commitment on a multilateral level.
Many solutions are already under consideration: new gas storage capacity, increased efficiency, expansion of domestic production of both oil and gas, and alternative energy supplies such as coal-bed methane.
Additionally, a market in tradable liquefied natural gas (LNG) is rapidly emerging.
It is more feasible to diversify the supply chain, albeit incrementally, by importing gas from distant producers rather than from monopolistic suppliers next door.
All of these efforts together will soften shocks somewhat and create more energy self-sufficiency.
Yet more is required. 
First, G-8 leaders should consider implementing standards in energy transactions requiring open and transparent contracts in line with best practices in business.
It is important to dilute the global impact of local politicians pursuing non‑energy agendas, or simply their own limited interests.
We see these problems today in state-owned firms in Latin America, political unrest in Africa, tensions in the Middle East or through opaque business intermediaries, as in the questionable gas deal between Ukraine and Russia, known now as RUE (RosUkrEnergo).
In the end, energy security for all of us in Europe requires recognizing that the linked nature of our supply and transmission systems makes us interdependent.
This is where an “Energy Alliance” of consumers and suppliers could be useful, starting with the nations of Europe helping to guarantee the energy supplies of others in a major disruption.
The Energy Charter, which emphasizes market access and transparency, is a laudable effort but it is not sufficient for those moments of crisis; our markets are not yet well enough equipped to deal with event-driven disruptions.
The Energy Charter might be a vehicle for this collective energy security, if deepened and broadened. 
It is our duty as leaders to chart a course for a secure energy future.
Tolerance of questionable dealing today for the sake of political expediency will cost more in the future for us all.
When the inevitable conflict occurs, public confidence, political credibility and market reliability are needlessly sacrificed – this has clearly occurred for Russia and for Ukraine.
Threats to energy security must be challenged and resolved on a multilateral basis, with all stakeholders present.
The interdependent nature of our energy infrastructure requires a multilateral approach.
We are all depending on it. 
Six years after the eruption of the financial crisis, the recovery remains weak and uneven.
Global growth is projected at just 3.3% in 2014 and 3.8% in 2015.
Some important economies are still fighting deflation.
More than 200 million people are unemployed.
The global economy risks getting stuck in a “new mediocre” – a prolonged period of slow growth and feeble job creation.
To break free from stagnation, we need renewed policy momentum.
If the measures agreed by the leaders assembled at the G-20 in November are implemented, they will lift world GDP by more than 2% by 2018 – the equivalent of adding $2 trillion in global income.
Furthermore, by 2025, if the laudable – yet not overly ambitious – goal of closing the gender gap by 25% is achieved, 100 million women could have jobs that they didn’t have before.
Global leaders have asked the International Monetary Fund to monitor the implementation of these growth strategies.
We will do so, country by country, reform by reform.
Besides structural reforms, building new momentum will require pulling all possible levers that can support global demand.
Accommodative monetary policy will remain essential for as long as growth remains anemic – though we must pay careful attention to potential spillovers.
Fiscal policy should be focused on promoting growth and creating jobs, while maintaining medium-term credibility.
And labor-market policies should continue to emphasize training, affordable childcare, and workplace flexibility.
As we ponder the second choice, between stability and fragility, we must consider how we can make our increasingly interconnected world a safer place.
Financial integration has risen tenfold since World War II.
National economies are so interconnected that shifts in market sentiment tend to cascade globally.
It is therefore critical that we complete the agenda on financial-sector reform.
To be sure, there has been progress, especially on banking regulation and on addressing too-big-to-fail financial institutions.
But countries must now implement the reforms and improve the quality of supervision.
We also need better rules for nonbanks, stricter monitoring of shadow banks, and improved safeguards and more transparency in the derivatives markets.
Progress on closing data gaps in the financial sector is urgently needed as well, so that regulators can properly assess risks to financial stability.
Most important, the culture of the financial sector needs to change.
The principal purpose of finance is to provide services to the other parts of the economy, which it cannot do unless it enjoys the confidence of those who depend on those services – that is, all of us.
Restoring trust should therefore start with an all-out effort to promote and enforce ethical behavior throughout the industry.
The third choice, whether to cooperate or go it alone, is the most critical.
No economy is an island; indeed, the global economy is more integrated than ever before.
Consider this: Fifty years ago, emerging markets and developing economies accounted for about a quarter of world GDP.
Today, they generate half of global income, a share that will continue to rise.
But sovereign states are no longer the only actors on the scene.
A global network of new stakeholders has emerged, including NGOs and citizen activists – often empowered by social media.
This new reality demands a new response.
We will need to update, adapt, and deepen our methods of working together.
This can be done by building on effective institutions of cooperation that already exist.
Institutions like the IMF should be made even more representative in light of the dynamic shifts taking place in the global economy.
The new networks of influence should be embraced and given space in the twenty-first century architecture of global governance.
This is what I have called the “new multilateralism.”
I believe it is the only way to address the challenges that the global community faces.
The year 2014 was a tough one.
The recovery was slow, a series of dangerous geopolitical risks emerged, and the world was confronted with a devastating Ebola outbreak.
This year may be another tough one, but it could also be a good one – a truly multilateral year.
New momentum on global trade could help unlock investment worldwide, and I am hopeful about the new Sustainable Development Goals (which will succeed the Millennium Development Goals in 2015), and about the prospects for a comprehensive climate-change agreement at the end of this year.
Against this backdrop, the adoption of the IMF reforms by the United States Congress would send a long-overdue signal to rapidly growing emerging economies that the world counts on their voices, and their resources, to find global solutions to global problems.
Growth, trade, development, and climate change: 2015 will be a rendezvous of important multilateral initiatives.
We cannot afford to see them fail.
Let us make the right choices.
Why Multilateralism Still Matters
MADRID – Across the West, faith in international governance and economic globalization is declining.
As Donald Trump’s victory in the United States’ presidential election showed, voters, driven by a sense of injustice and inequality, are increasingly rejecting openness, as well as the political establishment that has advanced it.
But, while the grievances fueling these choices are real – many have been left behind by globalization – the treatment is likely to cause more harm than the disease.
Trump won by promising to pursue unilateral and inward-looking solutions, much like those advocated by proponents of the United Kingdom’s exit from the European Union.
Voters were galvanized by the prospect of rejecting new free-trade agreements like the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP), and renegotiating old ones like the North American Free-Trade Agreement (NAFTA).
They rally against multilateral bodies like the World Trade Organization (WTO) – the main forum for negotiating and implementing global trade norms and one of the only international organizations with a quasi-judicial dispute-settlement entity.
All of this ignores a crucial fact: in today’s world, turning inward is not a viable option, especially for Western liberal democracies.
We are simply too interconnected; the problems, challenges, and opportunities we face have no regard for national borders.
Efforts to move backward to the time of independent nation-states will therefore carry massive costs.
Indeed, the decline of the WTO, together with the demise of deals like the TPP and NAFTA, would fuel the emergence of separate trade blocs, inaugurating a new era of great power competition.
Perhaps most important, a retreat from global trade would bring about a generalized loss of welfare.
The good news is that not everyone is suffering from such a lack of vision.
The European Union and Canada have signed the Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement (CETA), providing a glimmer of hope that progress can still be made on prosperity-enhancing trade and investment pacts.
It was not an easy negotiation, and the CETA has faced resistance from groups that worry that more trade will hurt their livelihoods.
But the protracted talks, which included a complex final approval process, finally succeeded in October.
The CETA is a positive development not only because it links two developed economies that project democratic values and boast strong welfare systems, but also because it introduces high environmental, labor, and phytosanitary standards for trade.
It will also provide a substantial economic boost, possibly adding around €12 billion ($12.7 billion) to the EU’s GDP, while underpinning a nearly 25% increase in the trade of goods and services for both sides.
This is particularly important at a time when trade growth is outpaced by GDP growth, a dramatic reversal from recent trends.
Yet another advantage of the CETA is improved dispute settlement, brought about by the establishment of a permanent court whose members will be chosen by Canada and the EU together, in order to avoid conflicts of interest.
To ensure transparency, arbitral awards will be made public, and parties will have the right to appeal.
Recent election outcomes threaten not only trade, but also the environment and the world’s climate.
The US, which is responsible for 16% of global greenhouse-gas emissions, is critical to any effort to fight climate change – not least because of the example it sets for other high-emitting countries.
Yet Trump vowed repeatedly during his campaign to “cancel” the historic global climate agreement reached in Paris last December.
If Trump delivers on this promise, the consequences could be dire.
The promising news here is that, at this year’s climate conference in Marrakesh, Morocco, the rest of the signatories to the Paris agreement clearly expressed their determination to implement the commitments they submitted.
There is even more promising news: last month, governments, industry, and civil-society representatives reached a deal to limit CO2 emissions by the civil aviation industry – the first-ever agreement to reduce CO2 emissions in a global sector.
Given that, in a high-demand scenario, the industry would be emitting by 2050 almost as much CO2 as Russia and India combined emit today, this is a hugely important development.
Again, the EU stands out for its forward-thinking stance, playing a central role – along with its member states – in brokering the deal, which requires airlines to offset the growth of their CO2 emissions from 2020 by purchasing “emission units” generated by emissions-reducing projects in other sectors, like renewables.
In the mid-2000s, the EU – which already had its own carbon-trading scheme (the EU ETS) in place – recognized that despite the commitments included in the Kyoto Protocol, the world had not succeeded in reducing the industry’s emissions.
It commenced work on a solution in 2008.
By 2012, it had convinced the International Civil Aviation Organization to commit to reaching a global agreement by the end of 2016.
The fulfillment of that commitment amounts to a major step forward for climate cooperation.
The world is past the point of closed borders and unilateral solutions.
We have already globalized; now we need global rules to underpin economic and financial stability, as well as peace and security.
The EU, despite its many challenges, has not only proved its value as a cornerstone of the international order; it has also vindicated the broader value of global vision and leadership, carried out through diplomacy and smart multilateralism.
Now more than ever, it is a lesson that we cannot afford to ignore.
Learning to Love a Multipolar World
NEW YORK – American foreign policy is at a crossroads.
The United States has been an expanding power since its start in 1789.
It battled its way across North America in the nineteenth century and gained global dominance in the second half of the twentieth.
But now, facing China’s rise, India’s dynamism, Africa’s soaring populations and economic stirrings, Russia’s refusal to bend to its will, its own inability to control events in the Middle East, and Latin America’s determination to be free of its de facto hegemony, US power has reached its limits.
One path for the US is global cooperation.
The other is a burst of militarism in response to frustrated ambitions.
The future of the US, and of the world, hangs on this choice.
Global cooperation is doubly vital.
Only cooperation can deliver peace and the escape from a useless, dangerous, and ultimately bankrupting new arms race, this time including cyber-weapons, space weapons, and next-generation nuclear weapons.
And only cooperation can enable humanity to face up to urgent planetary challenges, including the destruction of biodiversity, the poisoning of the oceans, and the threat posed by global warming to the world’s food supply, vast drylands, and heavily populated coastal regions.
Yet global cooperation means the willingness to reach agreements with other countries, not simply to make unilateral demands of them.
And the US is in the habit of making demands, not making compromises.
When a state feels destined to rule – as with ancient Rome, the Chinese “Middle Kingdom” centuries ago, the British Empire from 1750 to 1950, and the US since World War II – compromise is hardly a part of its political vocabulary.
As former US President George W. Bush succinctly put it, “You’re either with us or against us.”
Not surprisingly, then, the US is finding it hard to accept the clear global limits that it is confronting.
In the wake of the Cold War, Russia was supposed to fall in line; but President Vladimir Putin did not oblige.
Likewise, rather than bringing stability on US terms, America’s covert and overt wars in Afghanistan, Iraq, Syria, Libya, South Sudan, and elsewhere created a firestorm stretching across the greater Middle East.
China was supposed to show gratitude and deference to the US for the right to catch up from 150 years of abuse by Western imperial powers and Japan.
Instead, China has the audacity to think that it is an Asian power with responsibilities of its own.
There is a fundamental reason, of course, for these limits.
At WWII’s end, the US was the only major power not destroyed by the war.
It led the world in science, technology, and infrastructure.
It constituted perhaps 30% of the world economy and formed the cutting edge of every high-tech sector.
It organized the postwar international order: the United Nations, the Bretton Woods institutions, the Marshall Plan, the reconstruction of Japan, and more.
Under that order, the rest of the world has closed much of the vast technological, educational, and infrastructural gap with the US.
As economists say, global growth has been “convergent,” meaning that poorer countries have been catching up.
The share of the world economy represented by the US has declined by roughly half (to around 16% currently).
China now has a larger economy in absolute terms than the US, though still only around one-fourth the size in per capita terms.
None of this catching up was a perfidious trick against the US or at its expense.
It was a matter of basic economics: given peace, trade, and a global flow of ideas, poorer countries can get ahead.
This tendency is to be welcomed, not shunned.
But if the global leader’s mindset is one of domination, the results of catch-up growth will look threatening, which is how many US “security strategists” view them.
Suddenly, open trade, long championed by the US, looks like a dire threat to its continued dominance.
Fear-mongers are calling for the US to close itself off to Chinese goods and Chinese companies, claiming that global trade itself undermines American supremacy.
My former Harvard colleague and leading US diplomat Robert Blackwill and former State Department adviser Ashley Tellis expressed their unease in a report published last year.
With just 4.4% of the world’s population and a falling share of world output, the US might try to hang on to its delusion of global dominance through a new arms race and protectionist trade policies.
Doing so would unite the world against US arrogance and the new US military threat.
The US would sooner rather than later bankrupt itself in a classic case of “imperial overreach.”
The only sane way forward for the US is vigorous and open global cooperation to realize the potential of twenty-first-century science and technology to slash poverty, disease, and environmental threats.
A multipolar world can be stable, prosperous, and secure.
The rise of many regional powers is not a threat to the US, but an opportunity for a new era of prosperity and constructive problem solving.
Cities for Migrants
CORK – In many countries, particularly in Europe, immigration is increasingly framed as a security issue.
Mainstream politicians, bowing to pressure from fear-mongering populists, are calling for tighter restrictions, and some countries are openly flouting their legal obligation and moral responsibility to provide protection to refugees fleeing conflict.
But the news is not all bad.
Even as corrosive political discourse impedes effective action at the national and international levels, at the municipal level, progressive and effective immigrant-integration initiatives are flourishing.
Mayors and local administrators are building social and physical infrastructure that supports the reception of migrants and refugees into local communities.
For them, the newcomers are not just statistics; they are real people – and potentially productive members of the local community.
The key to tapping their potential, city officials recognize, is a well-managed integration process.
Of course, such a process is complex, and can raise concerns among residents.
New arrivals often place significant pressure on urban centers, particularly cities that are already struggling with scarce resources.
The challenges – from providing access to decent housing and health care to ensuring that transport networks and schools can cope with growing demand – are numerous and daunting.
That is why a proactive approach – not to mention plenty of ingenuity – is so important.
And that is precisely what many city administrators are demonstrating.
With New York City’s municipal identity card, iDNYC, all residents, regardless of their status, gain access to a variety of services.
In São Paulo, immigrants can contribute to public-policy discussions through a participatory council.
The Barcelona municipal council, as part of a broader social-cohesion plan, launched the “anti-rumor campaign,” which uses a comic book series to combat negative stereotypes about migrants.
Collaborating with local businesses, municipal leaders have also channeled resources toward promoting entrepreneurship and work training for migrants.
In Auckland, New Zealand, where one-third of the population is foreign-born, the Omega project, inspired by a Canadian initiative, matches new migrants with skilled mentors and offers paid internships.
In London, the Bike Project refurbishes discarded bicycles, and gives them to migrants to serve as affordable transportation.
There are thousands more projects like these, helping migrants and refugees to build new lives in their new communities.
Better still, initiatives are no longer confined to individual cities.
Municipal leaders and local authorities are increasingly forming alliances with counterparts around the world to find solutions to common problems, share best practices, and turn the challenges of integration into new opportunities.
For example, police officers from Toronto, a highly multicultural city, have trained their counterparts from Amsterdam in community outreach.
The Mayoral Forum on Mobility, Migration, and Development, a United Nations-supported platform, aims to advance precisely this kind of dialogue and cooperation among the world’s mayors, municipal leaders, and regional authorities.
Launched in 2014 in Barcelona, the forum, which meets annually, operates on the principle that healthy and sustainable urban centers – a key component of any country’s dynamism and success – depend on the equal rights, duties, and opportunities of its residents.
The forum also encourages the international community to engage with cities as “key actors in discussions and decision-making processes on the design of migration policies.”
After all, cities – which already house more than half of the world’s population, a share that will rise to 66% by 2050 – have plenty of experience integrating new residents, both from abroad and from rural areas.
The problem is that, despite devolution of power to local governments – a developed-country trend that is spreading to the developing world – many cities still operate with limited resources and authority to act.
This must change – an imperative that the Vatican recently highlighted.
When the Pontifical Academy of Sciences announced that it would organize a summit on refugees and migrants later this year, it stressed that mayors “must be provided with the ability to meet the needs, accommodate, and regularize all types of migrants or refugees.”
National and international debates about migration are deeply flawed, owing to their focus on security – and so are the policies that result from them.
If municipal authorities – which have proved their willingness and ability to tackle the nuts and bolts of integration in innovative ways – were empowered to play a more active role in crafting immigration policies, everyone would benefit.
Muppets and Middle East Peace
NEW YORK – Can furry puppets in Day-Glo colors provide the lessons we need to calm the fires of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict?
The Muppet empire is now worldwide.
Those who grew up with the children’s educational TV show Sesame Street know that it gives five-year-olds easy-to-take lessons in literacy, numeracy, and social skills.
But Sesame Street has a loftier agenda, finding partners in the developing world – including Saudi Arabia, South Africa, and Pakistan – to bring the fuzzy little creatures, with their message of peace and tolerance, to local audiences.
A new documentary, “When Muppets Dream of Peace,” tracks the harrowing joint production of Sesame Street in Israel and Palestine, with a Jordanian production team brought in to help facilitate.
This program, like so many educational or cultural Israeli-Palestinian partnerships, began in starry-eyed idealism.
But, based on the film – and on a recent panel discussion with the filmmakers and a Muppets spokesman in New York City – it was undermined by a common flaw in such partnerships.
The original plan – like with so many of these programs – was based on a notion of parity: Israeli and Palestinian production teams would work together.
But the Palestinian partners vetoed that idea – “We aren’t there yet,” they explained.
Could they have a stand-alone Palestinian Sesame Street? No funding for that, came the reply.
The Palestinian team finally agreed to parallel productions with a major “cultural exchange” element – rather than creating segments together, they would produce a series with Palestinian Muppets and adults that also incorporated cartoons and mini-documentaries produced by the Israelis and Jordanians. The other two teams would do likewise.
Some unifying characters – such as an Arab- Israeli girl who explains each “side” to the other – would create a measure of continuity.
The New York-based management wanted the Palestinians and Israelis to portray each other in a humanizing way.
Again, the Palestinians resisted.
Rather than focus on creating scenarios that showed Israelis – even Israeli kids – in a positive light, they wanted to focus on showing Palestinian culture in a positive light, portraying Palestinian youths as role models, and providing images to kids that offered alternatives to violence.
But then reality intervened again.
A suicide bomber attacked in Israel, and, in retaliation, the Israel Defense Forces took over Ramallah, where the tiny Palestinian Sesame Street studio was located.
Day after day, the talented Palestinian team of animators, puppeteers, designers, cameramen, and producers could not get to work – even as the Israeli team was churning out their own material in a brightly lit, well-funded studio in Tel Aviv.
Then the IDF occupied the TV station itself and destroyed it, along with the team’s computers and cameras.
The documentary’s footage of shot-out computer screens and piles of smashed printers and cameras – under graffiti reading “Palestine Never” – makes one despair.
Meanwhile, New York was growing impatient, letting the Palestinian team know that their segments were late – and, under what was essentially a military occupation, the Palestinians began to rethink whether this was the right kind of project to which to devote their energies.
The New York producer overseeing the project, a single mother, was reluctant initially to visit Ramallah – so the Palestinian team’s inability to produce their segments on time was, like so many aspects of the Palestinian experience, hidden behind a barrier of fear, not fully witnessed, and thus not fully comprehended.
The co-production has ended. But there is a Palestinian Sesame Street and an Israeli Sesame Street, and there are positive Arab-Israeli characters in the Israeli version.
And the creators of these programs, together with the filmmakers behind “When Muppets Dream of Peace,” offer important lessons for all of us.
One quote from a Palestinian TV production team member stayed with me: “This is a shotgun wedding,” he explained when he was advocating for a Palestine-only Sesame Street.
“And we want a divorce.”
The Palestinian team is utterly indistinguishable, superficially, from their European or Israeli counterparts: they are hip, young, talented, sophisticated, and more than anything they want to work to create a positive environment for their kids – or at least a psychological respite from the reality of occupation, violence, and war.
But how often does the outside world – even the best-intentioned donors and program creators – reach out to Palestinian civil society on its own terms, without insisting on that “shotgun wedding?”
How often are resources invested in Palestinian films, books, newspapers, high schools, dance troupes, teachers, etc. without requiring the recipients to make friendly gestures to Israel?
Many civil-society elements in the Muslim world have turned their backs on possible partnerships with Israeli counterparts.
One Egyptian actor was boycotted at home for merely appearing in Cannes with an Israeli actress.
But I am certain that the more intently outsiders invest in Palestinian civil society on its own terms, the less exasperated the Palestinian intelligentsia – and the Muslim world – will become with the often-coerced terms of Palestine's creativity.
A vibrant Palestinian civil society could become more flexible and open toward possible partnerships – including more natural, holistic Israeli-Palestinian joint ventures – thus benefiting the region as a whole.
The Muppets have taught generations of kids worldwide how to count to ten and share cookies.
In the 1970’s in the United States, they taught us about an interracial couple on Sesame Street.
In South Africa, the creators asked for – and got – a puppet that was an HIV-positive child, since acceptance of such kids was a lesson that local educators told the New York team they needed to teach.
In the Sesame Street of Palestine and Israel, the failure of the joint venture was really a success: the Muppets and their creators have given us another valuable lesson, this time in how – and how not – to help others.
Murder Unincorporated
NEW YORK – What possessed the young French Muslim Mohammed Merah to murder three Jewish schoolchildren, a rabbi, and three soldiers, two of them fellow Muslims?
What possessed another man, Anders Breivik, to gun down more than 60 teenagers in a Norwegian summer camp last year?
These murder sprees are so unusual that people demand explanations.
To call these killers “monsters,” as some were quick to do, sheds little light on the problem.
They were not monsters; they were young men.
And to dismiss them as madmen is equally evasive.
If they were clinically insane, nothing more would need to be explained.
Two accounts, both broadly socio-political, stand out. One was put forward by the controversial Muslim activist Tariq Ramadan.
He blames French society. More specifically, he blames the fact that young Frenchmen of Muslim origin are marginalized on the grounds of their faith and the color of their skin.
Even though these people have French passports, they are treated as unwanted foreigners.
When French President Nicolas Sarkozy, himself the son of immigrants, says that there are too many foreigners in France, he drives young men like Merah farther into a corner.
A tiny minority of such men might lash out in desperation.
The other explanation, favored by Sarkozy, takes Merah at his word.
He said that he was protesting French military operations in Muslim countries and avenging the killing of Palestinian children.
He wanted to bring down the French state as an Islamic holy warrior.
He was inspired by al-Qaeda.
So why not believe him?
Hence Sarkozy’s decision to arrest other Muslim men suspected of Islamic extremism and bar certain imams from attending a religious conference in France.
Those who view Islamic extremism as the problem also tend to hold up young killers like Merah as examples of failed integration.
They never became sufficiently French. Immigrants must be forced to share “Western values.”
Although no one would argue that Anders Breivik is insufficiently Norwegian, he, too, could be taken at his word.
The rhetoric of xenophobic demagogues appears to have convinced him that he had to kill the children of the social-democratic elites in order to protect Western civilization against the dangers of multiculturalism and Islam.
His murders were the extreme result of dangerous ideas.
Neither explanation is entirely wrong.
Many young Muslims feel unwanted in their countries of birth, and extreme language, whether used by Islamists or their opponents, helps to create an atmosphere conducive to violence.
But both Ramadan and Sarkozy are too simplistic, for they reduce extraordinary murders to single explanations.
Even when they are faced with rejection, most young Muslim men do not become mass murderers.
Merah is too anomalous to serve as a typical example of anything, including racial or religious discrimination.
Far from being a religious fanatic, Merah grew up as a petty criminal with no interest in religion.
The appeal of Islamist extremism may have been its glorification of violence more than any religious content.
He enjoyed watching jihadist videos of beheadings.
He also tried to join the French army and the Foreign Legion.
The army turned him down because of his criminal record. If the French wouldn’t have him, he would join the holy warriors: anything to give him a sense of power and an excuse to indulge his violent impulses.
Many young men are drawn to the fantasy of violence; far fewer feel the need to act it out.
Ideology can serve as an excuse or justification, but it is rarely the main source of individual acts of brutality.
Murder sprees are more often than not a form of personal revenge – losers wishing to blow up the world around them, because they feel humiliated or rejected, whether socially, professionally, or sexually.
Sometimes, the killers appear to lack any excuse at all, as in the case of Eric Harris and Dylan Klebold, who in 1999 shot 12 fellow-students and a teacher at their high school in Columbine, Colorado.
In that case, people blamed the sadistic video games and movies that the killers had been watching.
Still, most enthusiasts of this type of entertainment do not actually go out and kill people.
Breivik had fantasies of being a knight fighting the enemies of the West. Merah imagined that he was a jihadi.
Who knows what the Columbine killers thought they were doing. But the reasons why they killed lie within them, and cannot be principally attributed to the entertainment or other materials that they consumed.
Banning such materials has an aesthetic appeal, to be sure, and public figures who preach violence should always be condemned.
Hate speech and violent ideology are not irrelevant.
But to make too much of them in cases such as those of Merah or Breivik can be misleading.
Censorship is unlikely to solve the problem.
Banning Hitler’s Mein Kampf or forbidding the display of Nazi symbols has not stopped neo-Nazis in Germany from murdering immigrants.
Suppressing violent pornography will not get rid of rapists or high-school killers.
Preventing demagogues from ranting about Muslims or multi-culturalists will not deter a future Anders Breivik.
And barring radical imams from entering France won’t stop another Merah from going on a murderous rampage.
In fact, to compare Merah’s savage deeds to the killings of September 11, 2001, as Sarkozy has done, is to give the killer too much credit.
There is no evidence that he is part of any organized group, or in the vanguard of a revolutionary movement.
Using his case to stoke fear of an Islamic threat to society might make electoral sense for Sarkozy.
But provoking fear is seldom the best recipe for avoiding further violence. On the contrary, it is more likely to fuel it.
Musharraf’s Ambiguous Legacy
Pakistani President Pervez Musharraf’s resignation brings to an end one of the more interesting curiosities of subcontinental politics: for more than four years, Pakistan had a president who was born in India, while India had a Prime Minister (Manmohan Singh) who was born in Pakistan.
Since the two countries’ separation is now more than six decades old, that anomaly is unlikely to be repeated.
But it is not the only reason Indians are greeting Musharraf’s exit with mixed feelings.
Musharraf was someone who was easy to hate across the border.
He had, after all, risen to the top of the military on the back of the Pakistani army’s Islamist elements, who came into their own (in what had previously been a rather Anglophile, British- and American-trained officer corps) during the decade-long reign of a fundamentalist military ruler, General Muhammad Zia-ul-Haq.
Indeed, though Musharraf displayed an urbane image, enjoyed his Scotch, and admired Turkey, he was not one of the Pakistani secularists so admired by Indian liberals.
Instead, he cultivated a reputation as an anti-Indian hardliner.
The fact that his family had fled India upon Partition gave him an additional chip on his shoulder: it was widely said that he saw relations with India as a series of opportunities to wreak vengeance for what his family had suffered in the refugee upheavals of 1947.
As Chief of the Army Staff, Musharraf directed the disastrous Kargil invasion of 1999, when Pakistan sent its soldiers surreptitiously across the cease-fire lines to capture strategically vital heights overlooking a key Indian road.
Musharraf was recorded by Indian intelligence boasting about the action on an open telephone line during a visit to Beijing.
Because the invasion was manifestly illegal and provocative, Pakistan denied that official soldiers were involved, with the result that when they were repulsed, at great cost to both sides, Musharraf refused to accept his own soldiers’ bodies.
It was a low point in Indo-Pakistan relations, and no one in Delhi was prepared to trust Musharraf ever again.
Within months, however, Musharraf had conducted a coup against the hapless Nawaz Sharif, and a year later declared himself president, a title meant to enhance his stature when he visited India for peace talks in July 2001.
But Musharraf had come to power as the patron of the jihadi s his army was financing, equipping, and training for their forays into Indian territory, and few in New Delhi thought genuine peace could be made with such a duplicitous man.
Then came 9/11, when – under intense pressure from the United States to support American retaliation in Afghanistan or face the consequences – he was forced to disown his protégés.
The Taliban, under whose rule Osama bin Laden had found a safe haven, had been created (and, in crucial battles, led) by Pakistan’s Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI).
Now, Musharraf, in order to preserve his country’s alliance with the world’s sole superpower (and his country’s largest donor), had to betray his own.
For at least two years, though, Musharraf tried to have it both ways, cracking down at America’s behest on the Islamists on Pakistan’s western border with Afghanistan while sponsoring them on the eastern border with India.
A Pakistani-sponsored jihadi attack on India’s Parliament in December 2001 nearly provoked all-out war.
But the double game proved unsustainable: the Islamists were less inclined than their now-ambivalent patron to draw sophistical distinctions between one kind of enemy and another.
The result was two assassination attempts against Musharraf in December 2003.
If Musharraf had previously been unwilling to choose sides, the attempts to kill him finally showed him which side he had to be on.
From then on, Musharraf seems genuinely to have tried to clamp down on the Frankenstein’s monster that he had sustained as an instrument of Pakistani policy.
For roughly four years, he represented the best that the West and India could hope for in a Pakistani leader – someone with military authority, who seemed convinced that his own survival, and the interests of his state, demanded a clampdown on terrorism.
“I never thought I’d say this,” one senior national security figure in New Delhi said to me, “but Pervez Musharraf…may be India’s best hope for peace with Pakistan.”
It could not last indefinitely.
The first problems arose in the lawless “federally administered tribal areas” (FATA) in western Pakistan.
Musharraf, concerned at all costs to avoid any military action that might provoke a tribal rebellion against his forces, tried to buy himself more political space by cutting deals with insurgent leaders in the FATA, signing peace agreements with the very chiefs his army should have been pursuing.
Meanwhile, internal difficulties worsened.
As anti-Musharraf sentiment grew within Pakistan, and repressive measures aimed at the judiciary and the press cost him ever more support among the intelligentsia, his hold on power began to slip.
His effort to cut a deal with Benazir Bhutto was a final attempt to remain in office through the election of a civilian leader acceptable to the public (and the West).
Her assassination by Islamist elements foreclosed that option.
Musharraf’s fraying authority made him less effective and, indeed, less useful: the Taliban re-emerged in strength on Pakistan’s Afghan border, and his own ISI was proved to have been involved in the bombing of India’s embassy in Kabul.
By the summer of 2008, both the West and India were facing a Pakistan again in the grip of chaos, its border areas in Islamist hands and its ISI out of the control of the elected civilian government.
The prospects of an implosion of effective governmental authority in Pakistan are strong, and the consequences would be dire.
But, by the time Musharraf resigned, he had already lost the ability to do anything about it.
Musharraf’s Return?
LAHORE – Pakistan’s former president, Pervez Musharraf, has decided to return to Pakistani politics, if not quite to Pakistan. He announced his decision at London’s National Liberal Club, an institution founded in the nineteenth century by William Gladstone and other stalwarts of Britain’s parliamentary tradition.
The choice of venue was, of course, steeped in irony. Musharraf did not uphold the Gladstonian tradition while he was in office for almost nine years, from October 1999 to August 2008.
The second “mistake” came the following November, after Musharraf’s government failed to contain the legal community’s impressive civil-disobedience movement to pressure the government into reinstating Chaudhry. Musharraf, again acting impulsively, placed the country under emergency rule when Chaudhry was brought back by a decision of his own court.
Chaudhry was fired again, a move accompanied this time by a wider shakeup of the already shaken-up judiciary. The government emptied the Supreme Court of relatively independent judges and installed a more “trustworthy” group.
The strategy didn’t work, and the lawyers returned to agitating.
Musharraf withdrew the emergency and restored the constitution, but a few days later Benazir Bhutto was assassinated in Rawalpindi after she addressed a large election rally.
Musharraf postponed the elections scheduled for December 2007 until February 2008.
Many assumed that Musharraf would follow the lead of his military predecessors, who on several occasions announced elections and a return to democracy, only to postpone the vote when it drew near.
But Musharraf surprised the Pakistani political establishment and held the election, in which the Pakistan Muslim League (the Quaid Group), his political base, was trounced by Bhutto’s Pakistan People’s Party and the Pakistan Muslim Group (the Nawaz Group).
The second Muslim League was headed by Nawaz Sharif, twice Pakistan’s prime minister.
His second tenure ended when Musharraf removed him from office in October 1999 to establish the country’s fourth military regime.
Following the coup, Bhutto and Nawaz fled into exile, and were allowed back into the country only after Musharraf, hoping that their return would help deflect public attention from the lawyers’ protest movement, announced that he would hold elections.
Given the way Musharraf governed the country, it is hard to imagine that he will be able to stage a political comeback.
Pakistan these days is a troubled country, politically as well as economically.
Thus, in a long interview with the BBC before launching his new party, Musharraf suggested that Pakistan’s army was the only institution that could save the country from its current woes.
“There is a sense of despondency in Pakistan, and the place that the people go to is the military,” he said.
“There’s nobody else to whom they can go.
In Pakistan, they come to the army headquarters, they come to the army chief, they run there, and they ask them to act.
They don’t trust the politicians.”
While there may be some element of truth in this, Musharraf appears not to have learned the lesson of his final year in office.
Then, an energized legal community, supported by a hyperactive media, was able to defy a military government.
It is unlikely that most Pakistanis, despite their distrust of Pakistan’s politicians, will be inclined to turn to someone with Musharraf’s history.
The army, in fact, recognizes this.
It also realizes that Pakistan can be effectively governed only if its leaders have the support of other important constituencies.
These include the large and growing middle class, which has a strong presence in Punjab’s many large cities – where Nawaz’s Muslim League governs.
The muhajir community – the refugees who migrated from India in 1947 – has its own political party, the Muhajir Qaumi Movement, which governs Sindh and its large cities with the help of the People’s Party.
The PPP remains popular in rural Sindh and among the country’s poor and lower middle class.
The Pashtuns have their own party, the National Awami Party, which governs the newly named province of Khyber-Pakhtunkhwa, on the border with Afghanistan.
Despite today’s turbulence, it is unlikely that the military will intervene directly and taken over the reins of government, as it has on four occasions in Pakistan’s history.
If, however, it is to orchestrate a regime change – which it might attempt to do – it will not likely disregard these groups and their powerbases by imposing their former commander on the political system.
The military, if it is to play a role, will try to find new leaders from among the political establishment.
The political stage is too crowded for Musharraf to find a place to stand.
Menuju Zaman Keemasan Islam yang Baru
SHARJAH – Kontribusi dunia Islam di masa lalu terhadap ilmu pengetahuan dan pendidikan sangat luar biasa.
“Zaman keemasan” Islam – ketika keilmuan dan pengetahuan berkembang luas di seluruh dunia Islam – berlangsung berabad-abad, termasuk pendirian perguruan tinggi pertama di dunia.
Akan tetapi sekarang, negara-negara dengan mayoritas penduduknya beragama Islam tertinggal jauh dibandingkan negara lain dalam hal pendidikan dan penelitian.
Hal ini harus berubah jika kawasan tersebut ingin menyediakan lapangan kerja modern dan kehidupan yang lebih baik kepada penduduk yang jumlahnya terus bertambah dan mampu mengikuti perkembangan global.
Saat ini, hanya satu universitas dari dunia Islam – Middle East Technical University di Turki – yang masuk dalam daftar 100 universitas terbaik di dunia dan hanya sekitar selusin yang masuk dalam 400 besar di daftar lain.
Meskipun tidak ada tes yang terstandarisasi secara internasional dalam bidang sains dan matematika di tingkat universitas, siswa kelas empat, delapan, dan sepuluh di dunia Islam memperoleh nilai di bawah rata-rata pada mata pelajaran tersebut, berdasarkan Trends in International Mathematics and Science Study dan Program for International Student Assessment.
Ketimpangan dengan siswa-siswa di negara lain pun semakin besar.
Selain itu, hasil penelitian – diukur dengan jumlah publikasi dan kutipan dalam jumlah internasional, serta paten – sangat rendah dibandingkan dengan jumlah penduduk dan kemampuan finansial.
Negara-negara Muslim mengeluarkan rata-rata 0.5% PDB-nya untuk penelitian dan pengembangan, dibandingkan dengan rata-rata global yang adalah 1,78% PDB dan rata-rata OECD yakni di atas 2%.
Jumlah penduduk yang bekerja di bidang sains juga jauh di bawah rata-rata global.
Delapan belas bulan yang lalu, satuan tugas non-pemerintahan dan non-partisan yang beranggotakan pakar-pakar internasional – dibentuk oleh Muslim World Science Initiative dan Malaysian Industry-Government Group for High Technology, dan dikoordinasikan oleh saya – dirancang untuk mengkaji kondisi ilmu pengetahuan yang memprihantikan di dunia Islam dan menentukan bagaimana universitas bisa memperbaiki kondisi tersebut.
Pemahaman yang lebih baik atas berbagai isu dan potensi solusi dapat memungkinkan ilmu pengetahuan bangkit kembali di dunia Islam dan memberikan manfaat besar bagi perekonomian negara dan masyarakatnya.
Kajian kami atas kondisi ilmu pengetahuan di universitas-universitas di dunia Muslim mempertimbangkan tidak hanya anggaran dan penelitian, tapi juga isu-isu lain seperti status perempuan dalam studi dan karir di bidang sains.
Selain itu, kami melakukan kajian menyeluruh – kajian yang tidak pernah dilakukan sebelumnya – mengenai cara pengajaran ilmu pengetahuan di universitas di dunia Islam, termasuk metode pedagogi, buku teks, bahasa pengantar, penyensoran terhadap topik-topik “kontroversial” (seperti teori evolusi), dan peran agama di kelas sains.
Dalam laporan yang baru saja diterbitkan, satuan tugas ini menyimpulkan bahwa meskipun kondisi ilmu pengetahuan secara keseluruhan di dunia Islam masih lemah, banyak upaya yang bisa dilakukan untuk memperbaikinya secara efektif dan efisien.
Satuan tugas menawarkan beberapa rekomendasi spesifik bagi lembaga akademik, badan pembuat kebijakan nasional, dan pemangku kepentingan lainnya seperti akademi ilmu pengetahuan, asosiasi industri, dan organisasi masyarakat sipil.
Bagi lembaga akademik, salah satu tujuan utamanya haruslah meningkatkan kapasitas siswa untuk berpikir kreatif dan kritis (creative thinking and critical inquiry).
Guna mencapai tujuan ini, satuan tugas menyarankan untuk memperluas pendidikan bagi siswa-siswa yang berfokus pada sains agar meliputi bidang humaniora, ilmu sosial, bahasa, dan komunikasi.
Di saat yang sama, satuan tugas juga menyerukan penerapan metode-metode pembelajaran yang sudah teruji dan benar, khususnya pendekatan-pendekatan “inquiry-based” dan “active-learning”.
Tentu saja pergeseran tersebut mengharuskan para pengajar untuk mendapat pelatihan dan menguasai metode-metode tersebut.
Para pengajar/dosen juga harus didorong untuk mendedikasikan diri untuk menulis buku dan menjalankan promosi ilmu pengetahuan, tidak hanya sekedar mempublikasikan makalah.
Rekomendasi ini mungkin dianggap mengejutkan meningat rendahnya produktivitas penelitian di dunia Islam, akan tetapi kenyatannya adalah upaya tersebut akan menghasilkan manfaat lebih besar dibandingkan penekanan tunggal pada publikasi, yang secara tidak sengaja dapat memicu plagiarisme dan “ilmu sampah” (junk science).
Satuan tugas telah merekomendasikan agar badan-badan pembuat kebijakan nasional memberikan ruang lebih besar bagi universitas untuk berinovasi (terutama dalam kurikulum) dan berkembang (dalam program penelitian dan kolaborasi), dengan caranya masing-masing berdasarkan kekuatan dan kelemahan mereka.
Satuan tugas juga telah meminta seluruh lembaga untuk menjunjung tinggi meritocracy dan menghindari gimmicks seperti membayar “kolaborasi” demi meningkatkan popularitas.
Lonjakan ranking yang sifatnya instan tidak akan sebanding dengan risiko kerusakan reputasi dalam jangka panjang.
Langkah-langkah ini membutuhkan program perubahan yang bersifat bottom-up.
Itulah sebabnya satuan tugas ini telah mengumumkan panggilan terbuka untuk semua universitas di dunia Islam untuk bergabung dalam jaringan sukarela yang disebut Network of Excellence of Universities for Science (NEXUS).
Berada di bawah pengawasan satuan tugas ini, kelompok sejawat yang dipilih secara otonom – terdiri dari administrator di fakultas dan universitas yang mengakui bahwa perubahan harus dimulai dari dalam – akan menerapkan langkah-langkah yang dirancang oleh satuan tugas.
Harapannya adalah segera setelah upaya-upaya dari kelompok universitas pertama mulai membuahkan hasil, jumlah lembaga yang bergabung akan bertambah.
Momentum yang dihasilkan akan menciptakan tekanan bagi kementerian, regulator, dan badan-badan pembuatan kebijakan lainnya – yang mungkin paling menentang perubahan – agar bersedia mengambil langkah-langkah yang saling melengkapi.
Universitas adalah pusat penelitian, pemikiran kritis, dan perdebatan yang hidup, tempat generasi mendatang tidak hanya mempelajari fakta dan teori yang sudah diakui tapi juga belajar membedah ide, menemukan kelemahan, dan membantu memperkaya dan memperluas basis pengetahuan kita.
Ketika dunia Islam menghadapi tantangan-tantangan yang belum pernah terjadi sebelumnya, pentingnya menciptakan lingkungan akademis yang sehat harus selalu ditekankan.
Membangun Kembali Baitul Hikmah Islam
GUILDFORD – Pemerintah Islam tahu bahwa pertumbuhan ekonomi, kekuatan milliter, dan keamanan nasional mendapat manfaat besar dari kemajuan teknologi.
Banyak diantaranya secara signifikan meningkatkan pendanaan untuk ilmu pengetahuan dan pendidikan.
Akan tetapi banyak pihak merasa – khususnya negara-negara Barat – bahwa dunia Muslim nampaknya masih ingin terlepas dari ilmu pengetahuan modern.
Pandangan para skeptis ini tidak sepenuhnya salah.
Negara-negara yang mayoritas penduduknya beragama Islam rata-rata mengeluarkan 0,5% PDB mereka untuk penelitian dan pengembangan, dibandingkan dengan negara-negara maju yang menghabiskan dana lima kali lebih besar.
Jumlah ilmuwan, insinyur, dan teknis saja kurang dari sepuluh per seribu penduduk, dibandingkan rata-rata global yaitu 40-140 di negara-negara maju.
Bahkan angka-angka ini cenderung mengecilkan masalah yang sebetulnya bukan tentang dana yang dikeluarkan atau peneliti yang dipekerjakan tetapi lebih kepada kualitas ilmu pengetahuan yang dihasilkan.
Yang pasti, kita jangan terlalu terburu-buru mengkritik negara-negara Muslim ini karena di negara-negara Barat yang seharusnya “sudah mendapat pencerahan”, masih ditemukan cukup banyak penduduk yang memandang ilmu pengetahuan dengan kecurigaan atau rasa takut.
Namun di sebagian besar negara Muslim, ilmu pengetahuan masih menghadapi tantangan sebab dianggap sebagai konstruksi Barat yang sifatnya sekuler – atau bahkan atheis.
Banyak penganut agama Islam yang lupa – atau tidak pernah mengetahui – kontribusi ilmiah yang brilian oleh para ulama Islam ribuan tahun lalu.
Mereka tidak menganggap ilmu pengetahuan modern itu netral sehubungan dengan ajaran Islam.
Memang benar, beberapa penulis Islam terkemuka bahkan pernah berpendapat bahwa disiplin ilmu seperti kosmologi sebetulnya merusak sistem kepercayaan Islam.
Menurut filsuf Muslim Osman Bakar, ilmu pengetahuan diserang dengan alasan bahwa “kosmologi berupaya menjelaskan fenomena alam yang tidak diakibatkan oleh penyebab spiritual atau metafisika, melainkan penyebab alami atau kebendaan saja.
Bakar tentu saja sepenuhnya benar.
Berusaha menjelaskan fenomena alam tanpa bantuan dari metafisika justru adalah inti dari sains.
Tetapi sulit untuk menawarkan pembelaan yang lebih baik dibandingkan dengan yang diusulkan hampir 1.000 tahun lalu oleh polymath Muslim keturunan Persia, Abu Rayhan al-Birūni.
“Umumnya pengetahuan lah yang dikejar semata-mata oleh manusia dan dicari demi pengetahuan itu sendiri, sebab menguasai pengetahuan sungguh sangat menggembirakan dan berbeda dari nikmat-nikmat lainnya,” menurut al-Birūni.
“Kebaikan tidak akan dihasilkan dan kejahatan tidak dapat dihindari, kecuali dengan pengetahuan.��
Untungnya semakin banyak umat Islam yang sepakat dengan pendapat tersebut.
Mengingat ketegangan dan polarisasi antara dunia Islam dan Barat, tidak mengherankan bahwa banyak orang merasa geram ketika dituduh tidak siap secara budaya atau intelektual untuk bersaing di bidang sains dan teknologi.
Itu sebabnya pemerintah di negara-negara Muslim meningkatkan anggaran penelitian dan pengembangannya secara signifikan.
Tetapi sekedar menghabiskan uang tidak menjadi obat mujarab.
Para ilmuwan tentu membutuhkan pendanaan yang memadai tapi persaingan global memerlukan lebih dari sekedar memiliki alat-alat terbaru.
Keseluruhan infrastruktur di lingkungan penelitian harus ditangani.
Ini berarti tidak hanya kita perlu memastikan teknisi laboratorium memahami cara penggunaan dan pemeliharaan peralatan, tapi juga – bahkan jauh lebih penting – memupuk kebebasan intelektual, sikap skeptis, dan keberanian untuk mengajukan pertanyaan-pertanyaan yang tidak ortodoks yang merupakan landasan atau pendorong kemajuan ilmiah.
Jika negara-negara Islam ingin kembali menjadi pusat inovasi, penting untuk diingat kembali “masa keemasan” Islam yang berlangsung dari abad kedelapan hingga abad kelima belas.
Misalnya, tahun 2021 akan menandai satu milenium sejak dipublikasikannya Kitab Optik oleh Ibnu Al-Haytham, salah satu buku terpenting dalam sejarah ilmu pengetahuan.
Ditulis lebih dari 600 tahun sebelum lahirnya Isaac Newton, karya Al-Haytham diakui secara luas sebagai salah satu contoh metode ilmiah modern.
Salah satu episentrum intelektual yang paling terkenal di era ini adalah Baitul Hikmah di Baghdad, yang pada saat itu merupakan tempat penyimpanan buku yang terbesar di dunia.
Sejarawan mungkin berselisih tentang apakah perpustakaan tersebut betul-betul ada serta apa fungsinya; namun pendapat semacam itu tidak terlalu penting dibandingkan dengan kekuatan simbolik yang masih dipertahankannya di dunia Islam.
Ketika pemimpin negara-negara Teluk bicara tentang visi miliaran dolar mereka untuk mendirikan Baitul Hikmah baru, mereka tidak khawatir meskipun Baitul Hikmah yang asli adalah sebuah perpustakaan sederhana yang diwariskan kepada seorang khalifah dari ayahnya.
Para pemimpin tersebut ingin menghidupkan kembali semangat berpikir kritis dan analitis yang sudah lama hilang dari budaya Islam dan harus segera dipulihkan.
Tantangan-tantangan yang sulit tetap harus diatasi untuk mewujudkan keinginan tersebut.
Banyak negara mencurahkan sumbangan yang luar biasa besar untuk dana penelitian dalam bentuk teknologi militer, suatu fenomena yang lebih banyak dipicu oleh geopolitik dan tragedi-tragedi di Timur Tengah, bukan karena rasa haus akan pengetahuan.
Para ilmuwan dan insinyur muda yang cemerlang di Suriah menghadapi hal-hal yang lebih mendesak dibandingkan penelitian dasar dan inovasi.
Dan beberapa negara di dunia Arab cenderung melihat perkembangan teknologi nuklir teknologi dengan ketenangan yang sama seperti perkembangan industri piranti lunak di Malaysia.
Tetapi penting untuk menyadari betapa besar negara-negara Muslim dapat berkontribusi untuk umat manusia jika mereka kembali bangkit dan mampu memupuk rasa ingin tahu yang mendorong penemuan ilmiah – baik itu untuk mengagumi ciptaan Ilahi atau sekedar ingin memahami mengapa dibuat seperti itu.
Burma to Myanmar and Back?
NEW DELHI – In ways big and small, Asia is still living with the tainted legacy of imperialism.
Consider the debate now underway in Myanmar – or Burma to some.
Because the imperial tongue found it difficult to pronounce “Myanmar,” the country’s no-nonsense British masters renamed it Burma (redrawing its borders as well for good measure).
The new name stuck until the military regime that ruled the country for decades restored the original one in 1989.
Ironically, however, the newly empowered democratic opposition would like to bring back the name Burma, viewing “Myanmar” as emblematic of the dictatorship that they wish to leave behind.
But the past can never be truly erased.
Not even Mao Zedong, with the fury unleashed during China’s Cultural Revolution, could make the “Four Olds” (old customs, old culture, old habits, and old ideas) vanish.