As John Limbert, the erudite Iran scholar and retired US diplomat (taken hostage in Iran for 444 days) once reflected on the 1979 Iranian revolution, “Our liberal-minded Iranian friends proved to be helpless in political turmoil....[T]hey could write biting editorials,” but lacked the stomach to “throw acid, beat up opponents, organize street gangs...and engage in the brutality that wins” in political uprisings.
Pakistani liberals may be right that their country is invulnerable to an Islamist power grab.
But the costs are too high to be impulsive, and the storms of political Islam are difficult to forecast.
In 1978, Iran’s liberals were bent on removing the Shah by any means.
Instead of creating an atmosphere conducive to an Iranian Gandhi, they unwittingly helped usher into power Ayatollah Khomeini and a theocratic regime less tolerant than the one they helped unseat.
Three decades later, millions of chastened Iranians wish they could relive those heady days differently; their Pakistani counterparts would be wise to heed their hindsight.       
Pakistan’s Next Fight
NEW YORK – The terrorist sanctuary in the South Waziristan region of Pakistan’s tribal frontier with Afghanistan is coming apart.
The October 11 attack on Army Headquarters in Rawalpindi was the most daring of all – and sent shudders across the military command, because the terrorists knew the layout of the military and security buildings.
But this inside knowledge also worked against the militants, because it demonstrated what was at stake for the country at large. No large street protests against the military operation in South Waziristan have been reported from anywhere in Pakistan.
But success in South Waziristan is only the starting point for dealing with the problem.
Militant hubs are scattered throughout the sparsely-populated tribal areas, including the North Waziristan, Orakzai, and Mohmand regions.
Moreover, violent militancy has now spread into Pakistan proper.
Southern Punjab is seeing a rapid growth in the number of religious fanatics, and rooting out the problem there is much more challenging than acting in the Pashtun tribal areas.
Many militants in Punjab worked closely with the Pakistani intelligence services for years, and their infrastructure is dispersed and hidden in various towns and villages.
The Army, which recruits heavily in the Punjab, will not use force there in the way it is doing in the tribal areas.
Only a concerted law-enforcement effort, with the full support of the intelligence services, can succeed in the Pakistani heartland.
The deep security crisis in Pakistan is mirrored across the border in Afghanistan, which offers a model of what not to do.
The Afghan Taliban, removed from power and routed from the country by the end of 2001, needed only a few years to revive itself, owing to the failure of the Afghan government and its international backers to rebuild and stabilize the country.
A critical factor in the Taliban’s revival was the haven that it found in the distant reaches of the Pakistan-Afghanistan border, and the support that it continued to receive from elements within Pakistan.
This time, as the Afghan Taliban are expelled from Pakistan, NATO and Afghan forces must be ready to take them on.
Observing the fighting in Pakistan, the United States, Afghanistan, and India expect the Pakistani army to take on both the Afghan Taliban and the Pakistani militants.
But thousands of fighters are thought to be dispersed in the Pashtun tribal areas of Pakistan, with many of them focused on operations in Afghanistan.
The cross-border movement of radicals suggests the importance of international cooperation.
Moreover, alliances among radical groups are constantly shifting, a reflection of tribal traditions and opportunism.
Outsiders watching these shifts, and the Pakistani government’s handling of them, have been unable to discern a consistent pattern that would explain Pakistani policy.
But here, regional politics must be taken into account, especially the continuing rivalry between India and Pakistan.
At every stage of the lengthy conflict that has brought the US into the region, Pakistan has sought to limit Indian influence in Afghanistan.
Indeed, India’s growing influence and investment in Afghanistan is disturbing to Pakistan’s national security apparatus.
Ultimately, the dynamics of Afghan politics will determine Afghanistan’s fate.
But a collaborative India-Pakistan effort to stabilize the country could work wonders.
For both Pakistan and India, Afghanistan risks turning into a new disputed territory, like Kashmir, where conflict has damaged both countries for more than 60 years.
In Afghanistan today, they have an opportunity to reject that precedent and act on their mutual interest in stability.
Pakistan must be able to focus internally on its future.
Financially insolvent and politically paralyzed, Pakistan needs international help to bring development to its liberated tribal areas and hope to the young people – 65% of the population – who live there.
For India, stability in Pakistan and Afghanistan would ease its rise to global economic power.
Both countries should take advantage of the opportunity for cooperation provided by the Pakistani Army’s campaign against Waziristan’s militants.
The Pakistani Mecca of Terror
BERLIN – Almost seven decades after it was created as the first Islamic republic of the postcolonial era, Pakistan is teetering on the edge of an abyss.
The economy is stagnant, unemployment is high, and resources are scarce.
The government is unstable, ineffective, and plagued by debt.
The military – along with its rogue Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI) agency, comprising the country’s spies and secret policemen – is exempt from civilian oversight, enabling it to maintain and deepen its terrorist ties.
Nuclear-armed Pakistan is now at risk of becoming a failed state.
But even if it does not fail, the nexus between terrorist groups and Pakistan’s powerful military raises the specter of nuclear terrorism – a menace so large that the United States has prepared a contingency plan to take out the country’s fast-growing nuclear arsenal should the need arise.
Make no mistake: Pakistan is “ground zero” for the terrorist threat the world faces.
The footprints of many terrorist attacks in the West have been traced to Pakistan, including the 2005 London bombings and the 2015 San Bernardino killings.
Two key actors behind the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks in the United States – Osama bin Laden and Khalid Sheik Mohammed – were found ensconced in Pakistan.
In the recent Manhattan and New Jersey bombings, the arrested suspect, Ahmad Khan Rahami, was radicalized in a Pakistan seminary located near the Pakistani military’s hideout for the Afghan Taliban leadership.
But it is Pakistan’s neighbors that are bearing the brunt of its state-sponsored terrorism.
Major terrorist attacks in South Asia, like the 2008 Mumbai strikes and the 2008 and 2011 assaults on the Indian and US embassies in Afghanistan, respectively, were apparently orchestrated by the ISI, which has reared terrorist organizations like Lashkar-e-Taiba, Jaish-e-Mohammad, and the Haqqani network to do its bidding.
This is no hearsay; former Pakistani military dictator Pervez Musharraf has largely acknowledged it.
In India, in particular, the Pakistani military – which, despite being the world’s sixth largest, would have little chance of winning a conventional war against its giant neighbor – uses its terrorist proxies to wage a clandestine war.
This year alone, Pakistani military-backed terrorists have crossed the border twice to carry out attacks on Indian military bases.
In January, Jaish-e-Mohammad struck India’s Pathankot air base, initiating days of fighting that left seven Indian soldiers dead.
Last month, members of the same group crossed the border again to strike the Indian army base at Uri, killing 19 soldiers and prompting India to carry out a retaliatory surgical strike against militant staging areas across the line of control in disputed and divided Kashmir.
Afghanistan and Bangladesh also accuse ISI of undermining their security through terrorist surrogates.
They blame Pakistan for the recent grisly attacks in their respective capitals, Kabul and Dhaka, in which a university and a café were among the targets.
Such activities have left Pakistan isolated.
Just recently, its regional neighbors – Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, Nepal, and Sri Lanka – pulled the plug on a South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation summit that was scheduled for early next month in Pakistan’s capital, Islamabad.
Sri Lanka’s prime minister, Ranil Wickremesinghe, has warned that “cross-border terrorism” imperils the very future of SAARC.
But diminished international standing and growing regional isolation have been insufficient to induce Pakistan’s dominant military to rethink its stance on terrorism.
One reason is that Pakistan retains some powerful patrons.
Beyond receiving financial support from Saudi Arabia, Pakistan has, in some ways, become a client of China, which provides political protection – even for Pakistan-based terrorists – at the United Nations Security Council.
This month, China torpedoed, for the fifth time in two years, proposed UN sanctions on Masood Azhar, the Pakistan-based head of Jaish-e-Mohammed, which the UN designated as a terrorist outfit years ago.
The sanctions were backed by all other members of the Security Council’s anti-terror committee, not least because India had presented evidence linking Azhar to the terrorist killings at its two military bases.
In terms of financial aid, however, it is the US that serves as Pakistan’s biggest benefactor.
Yes, even after finding the likes of Bin Laden on Pakistani soil, the US – the country that has spearheaded the so-called War on Terror – not only continues to deliver billions of dollars in aid to Pakistan, but also supplies it with large amounts of lethal weapons.
US President Barack Obama’s administration also opposes a move in Congress that would officially brand Pakistan a state sponsor of terrorism.
This approach reflects Obama’s commitment to using inducements to coax the Pakistani military to persuade the Taliban to agree to a peace deal in Afghanistan.
But that policy has failed.
The US remains stuck in the longest war in its history, as a resurgent Taliban carries out increasingly daring attacks in Afghanistan with the aid of their command-and-control structure in – you guessed it – Pakistan.
No counterterrorism campaign has ever succeeded when militants have enjoyed such cross-border havens.
Achieving peace in Afghanistan, like stemming the spread of international terrorism, will be impossible without making the Pakistani military accountable to the country’s civilian government.
The US has a lot of leverage: Pakistan has one of the world’s lowest tax-to-GDP ratios, and is highly dependent on American and other foreign aid.
It should use that leverage to ensure that the Pakistani military is brought to heel – and held to account.
Pakistan\u0027s War of All Against All
The alliance in the fight against terrorism between Pakistani President General Pervez Musharraf and the United States is imperative not only for America, but for Pakistan-a Muslim-majority nation whose social fabric is being torn apart by militancy and lawlessness.
But will an exclusive focus on military power ultimately prove to be counter-productive?
The Human Rights Commission of Pakistan, perhaps the country's most credible human rights body, argues that while "the violence now deeply embedded in society is to be rooted out over the coming years," that task "presents bigger challenges than merely picking up, detaining, and torturing those who authorities claim are militants."
In opposing how the war against Al-Qaeda and the Taliban is fought, many in Pakistan's minuscule middle class find themselves aligned with people they abhor: extremists whose distorted religiosity violates the tolerant version of Islam prevalent in this region.
Many upwardly mobile urbanites thus find themselves caught on the horns of a dilemma: how to reconcile aspirations for a better lifestyle, as symbolized by America, with increasing abhorrence of US policies.
Those on the religious right have no dilemma: they just hate America and its policies outright, and oppose all things "un-Islamic," including television, films, radio, and even indigenous forms of dance and music.
Interestingly, computer technology is exempted, as it can be used to further the extremist cause.
However, while Pakistan's progressives oppose militarism and violence in principle, religious fundamentalists have no compunction in resorting to violence to reinforce their point of view - thus posing a threat not just to General Musharraf, who has survived at least two assassination attempts, but also to human rights workers.
Indeed, the prominent feminist lawyer Asma Jahangir has 24-hour armed guards.
Militants have also attacked non-governmental organizations, particularly those located in the undeveloped tribal Northern Areas that lie beyond the writ of Pakistani law.
Sharing a mountainous - and porous - border with Afghanistan, this region includes many Taliban sympathizers among their fellow Pashtuns.
Human rights groups have long urged the necessity of extending the writ of Pakistan's Constitution to the tribal belt, where religion-based parties have wide support.
These religious parties, a coalition of which now heads the provincial government in the North West Frontier Province, were politically marginalized until given a central role by Pakistan's military dictator of the 1980's, General Zia ul Haq, who led Pakistan's covert intervention in the war against the Soviet occupation of Afghanistan.
Throughout his rule, religion-based politics grew along with the number of madrassahs and fighters trained and equipped by Pakistani and US intelligence agencies.
The terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, and subsequent pressure from Washington, led to a U-turn by Pakistan away from pro-jihadi policies.
Today, many former officials associated with those policies, such as Mushahid Hussain, a former information minister, concede that Pakistan should have contained militancy long ago.
Cautious steps are being taken, like the review of religion-based laws and curricula that have contributed to a creeping talibanization of Pakistani society.
For human rights activists, it is ironic that an elected (but basically military-led) government that they oppose in principle should be undertaking reforms they have long advocated, but that elected civilian governments ignored.
Despite fierce opposition from religious parties, there have been minor victories, like a couple of madrassahs agreeing to include secular subjects like math, English, and computer studies in their curricula.
There has also been administrative action against a few religious institutions for encroaching on public space - practically unheard of since official patronage of religious parties began in the 1970's, when their cadres were needed in the war against the Soviets.
But the "war on terror" has also provided this government with an excuse to arrest and detain suspects without charge.
More heinous human rights violations have also come to light.
Qari Noor Mohammad, a religious activist in Faisalabad in Punjab province, was arrested recently and held without charge for several days before his corpse was dumped in front of his house.
The lack of transparency that surrounds Pakistan's fight against "terrorism" is contributing to a growing public sentiment against the anti-militancy drive, which is largely perceived to be taking place under US pressure.
Particularly contentious is the ongoing military operation in Wana district in the Northern Areas, which the Pakistani army has entered for the first time ever.
The army action in Wana, aimed against Al Qaeda and Taliban operatives who are believed to be hiding there, has led to several civilian casualties, including women and children, and rendered over 30,000 people homeless.
But human rights groups question how the five to six hundred Al-Qaeda operatives that the government claims were holed up in the area came to be based there in the first place.
Locals interviewed independently say that some of those captured are in fact innocent local people from Wana, not foreign militants.
Compared to his military predecessor, Musharraf, who touts the catch-phrase of "enlightened moderation," is conveniently progressive.
Whereas the devoutly religious Zia was useful for boosting religious Islamic sentiments against the Soviets, Musharraf is needed nowadays to contain those very forces, which threaten not just global security but Pakistan itself.
It remains to be seen, however, whether he will be progressive enough.
Pakistan’s War with Itself
LAHORE – Pakistan is now a nation caught between its army and the Taliban, fighting a war not of its own making.
Its population lives in fear of bombings and suicide attacks – the next one could be at the local mosque, an internet café, or a roadside restaurant.
Most Pakistanis are now resigned to full-scale army action being extended across the country.
Despite all the stakeholders – Pakistan’s army and government, as well as Western countries – knowing the scale of recent army action in Swat and Buner, millions of innocent people were left to fend for themselves as bombs rained down on them from the sky.
They were not evacuated. They were left to walk for miles and days to safety.
The United States and the Pakistani army, meanwhile, evidently believe that their sole responsibility is to keep the Taliban at bay.
Indeed, only when the mass of internally displaced people swelled to 1.5 million – the worst humanitarian disaster since the Rwanda genocide – did foreign countries, including the US, decided to provide emergency aid.
If the government of Pakistan and its friends do not accept that this human suffering was preventable, a chain of similar disasters will take place as army action heats up in Waziristan and other parts of the country.
The US administration is extremely concerned about the Taliban’s advances in Pakistan. So are Pakistan’s people.
But the two have different sets of concerns – and herein lie their inherently different perceptions of the situation.
The US media and government focus their rhetoric on the possibility of Pakistan’s nuclear arsenal falling into Taliban hands.
The other obvious Western concern – recently expressed by British Prime Minister Gordon Brown – is the threat of a “crucible of terrorism” in the border areas of Afghanistan and Pakistan endangering world security.
Pakistanis, on the other hand, are the people actually living with that threat.
The Taliban have brought violence and terror.
The innumerable blasts and attacks all across the country, the killing of Benazir Bhutto, and the routine television images of splatters of blood covered with flies have wrecked their nerves.
Now the Taliban are blasting girls’ schools and flogging women.
This is not Pakistan. Had it been Pakistan’s ethos, the Taliban in Swat wouldn’t have needed to blast schools – people would have happily pulled their daughters from the schools themselves.
Ordinary men and women in Swat believe in education, but the Taliban were terrorizing them out of exercising their legal and constitutional rights.
This illiterate, armed, Wahhabi brand of ideology was imported – as US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton admitted recently before House Appropriations Committee – by the US from Saudi Arabia and other Middle Eastern countries in order to undermine the Soviet occupation of Afghanistan in the 1980’s.
Once the mission was accomplished and the Soviets vanquished, the Wahhabi virus was left to fester in Pakistan’s border areas.
In the eight years of General Pervez Musharraf's dictatorship, the US and Pakistan’s army fought against the Taliban in Pakistan’s tribal regions.
Only occasionally was the fighting “officially” reported.
Access to the area was denied to independent media. Many locally-based correspondents were killed in suspicious circumstances.
There was a simple reason why Musharraf was the Western media’s blue-eyed boy: he delivered.
Post-Musharraf Pakistan is a rather fragile democracy.
Even today, the government’s focus remains killing and bombing.
There is no genuine attempt at politically mainstreaming the troubled areas, no understanding of what democracy entails.
There is not even any money being spent on equipping hospitals in Peshawar and the rest of Pakistan with adequate blood banks and trauma units, despite the regular inflow of bombing victims.
The Pakistani army would rather be seen as the country’s savior than own up to its own shortsightedness and make clear whether it has decided to change course by obeying the constitution.
Meanwhile, many worries and concerns remain: Will the internally displaced be able to return home and – despite the countless hastily dug graves that scar their beautiful landscape – reconnect with their old lives?
Will the political parties finally realize that they must stop looking to the US and start being more responsive to their own people?
But the most important questions are these: Will the face of the enemy become clear?
Who is providing the Taliban with guns and money?
And will army shelling really end the war?
Palestine after Abbas?
RAMALLAH – A political leader’s decision not to seek re-election usually triggers fervent discussion about potential heirs.
Yet, President Mahmoud Abbas’s withdrawal from the presidential election scheduled for January 24, 2010, has produced nothing of the kind in Palestine – not because of a dearth of leadership or a reluctance to mention possible successors, but because the presidency of the Palestinian Authority has become irrelevant.
Abbas’s withdrawal comes at a time when Palestinian frustration with the political process has rendered suspect the entire rationale behind the PA, established in the mid-1990’s, following the Oslo Accords.
The main component of the PLO’s agreement with Israel was a five-year interim period during which negotiations were expected to lead to an independent Palestinian state alongside Israel.
Sixteen years later, it has become clear that the Israelis have made no effort to come to terms with Palestinian national aspirations – and that no effective effort has been made to convince them.
The number of illegal Jewish settlers in Palestinian areas has doubled, leaving Palestinians increasingly convinced that negotiations are a waste of time.
Many recall the preferred strategy of former Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir: “I would have conducted negotiations on autonomy for ten years, and in the meantime we would have reached a half-million people in the West Bank.”
Initially, the five-year interim agreement called for the election of a Palestinian Legislative Council and an executive leader whom the Israelis wanted to call a “chairman,” spurning the word “president.”
Because Arabic makes no distinction between chairman and president, the Israelis accepted use of the Arabic word rayyes in the official English text.
Palestinian refugees in exile and other Palestinians living in the diaspora were not allowed to vote.
East Jerusalem Palestinians were allowed to vote only at the post office or at booths outside the city limits.
Abbas’s withdrawal merely confirms the obvious.
Another such election in the near future, including the one set for January, is unlikely to occur, mainly owing to the continuing rift between the PLO and Hamas, which controls Gaza.
Hamas participated in the 2006 legislative elections, which followed Israel’s military withdrawal from Gaza.
But for years Hamas and other radical Palestinian groups have rejected the Oslo process, on the grounds that free elections under Israeli occupation would be absurd.
Hamas has the power to stymie the vote and has indicated that it would do so.
Moreover, Abbas has not given up his positions as head of the PLO and leader of its biggest faction, Fatah, which remains in control in the West Bank.
Abbas cannot resign from his post for the foreseeable future, lest the Hamas-backed speaker of the Palestinian Legislative Council take over.
At the same time, no PLO official is likely to seek the presidency without Abbas’s approval, which he will withhold until a new mechanism for ending the occupation is found.
The PLO will likely gain much from Abbas’s decision, because it de-emphasizes the status of the PA president and raises the profile of his post as chairman of the PLO’s executive committee.
That shift, in turn, clears the way for a generational change in leadership – and, more importantly, a transition to post-Oslo politics.
The PLO’s old guard – men like Yasser Arafat and Abbas, who led the liberation organization from exile and returned home with the Oslo Accords – dominated the Palestinian political landscape up to now.
After they depart the scene, Palestinian leaders who were born under occupation and spent time in Israeli prisons will most likely fill the vacuum.
The most prominent such figure is Marwan Barghouti, the leader of the student movement at Birzeit University in the 1980’s and one of the main organizers of the First Intifada, resulting in his deportation by Israel in the late 1980’s.
In 2002, he was arrested and sentenced to a long prison term on charges that he led the Second Intifada, which had begun two years earlier, and ordered some of its military attacks.
Despite being imprisoned, Barghouti was recently elected to Fatah’s central council, and a number of others who spent time in Israeli prisons will join him.
One is Jibril Rajoub, imprisoned for 19 years and deported in the First Intifada, only to return to lead one of the security services after the PA was established.
Another is Mahmoud Dahlan, also an ex-prisoner and former security official, although the loss of Gaza to Hamas, for which many Palestinians hold him partly responsible, has dimmed his leadership prospects.
Finally, there is Nasser al-Qudwa, the former PLO representative at the United Nations.
Qudwa is a dark-horse candidate to succeed Abbas – a possible compromise figure who has never been directly involved in security or military activities.
For many Palestinians, Qudwa, a soft-spoken, multi-lingual nationalist (and Arafat’s nephew), presents an acceptable face for Palestine locally and internationally.
The coming months will reveal whether we are, indeed, witnessing the dawn of the post-Oslo era in Palestinian politics, and whether a new leader, with new supporters, will be required to revive the Palestinian cause.
Whoever emerges on top will have to present an effective strategy to end four decades of military occupation and bring about a truly independent state that a majority of Palestinians can embrace.
Palestine as a Failed State
Every week, it seems, brings another backward step for Palestine.
President Mahmoud Abbas’s failure to convene the Palestinian Legislative Assembly, due to a Hamas boycott, may lead inexorably to the final breakdown of the political structures created under the Oslo Accords.
Sadly, this is only the latest chapter in the Palestinians’ tragic history of failed attempts to create a nation-state.
Palestinians see their history as one of struggle against Zionism and Israel.
But the reality is more complicated, and marked by repeated failures to create a coherent body politic, even when historical opportunities beckoned.
Perhaps the first failure occurred in the 1920’s, when the British Mandatory government in Palestine encouraged the two national communities – Jewish and Arab – to establish communal institutions of self-government to look after education, welfare, housing, and local administration.
The Jews – then less than 20% of British Palestine’s population – set up what became known as the National Committee (Va’ad Leumi), based on an elected body, the Representative Assembly of Palestinian Jews.
Regular elections to this Assembly took place, sometimes with more than a dozen parties competing.
This autonomous institution became the forerunner of the political structure of the nascent Jewish state, and its leaders – David Ben-Gurion among them – emerged as Israel’s future political elite.
Israel succeeded as a nation, with a vibrant and sometimes obstreperous parliamentary life, precisely because its leaders used this opportunity.
The Palestinians, however, never created similar embryonic state structures: an Arab Higher Committee was established, made up of regional and tribal notables, but no elections ever took place.
The Mufti of Jerusalem, Haj Amin al-Husseini (later an ally of Nazi Germany), became its chairman, but it never succeeded in creating a generally accepted national leadership or in providing the Arab community the panoply of educational and welfare services offered to the Jewish community by its elected institutions.
The second failure occurred during the Arab Revolt against British rule in Palestine in 1936-1939, which was accompanied by massive terror attacks against Jewish civilians.
The revolt itself was brutally suppressed by the British army, but not before a split within the Palestinian community resulted in two armed militias – one based on the Husseini clan, the other on the more moderate Nashashibis – that turned viciously on each other.
More Palestinians were killed by contending militias than by the British army or the Jewish self-defense forces.
The third failure – even more tragic – occurred in 1947-48, when Palestinian Arabs rejected the United Nations partition plan, which envisaged separate Arab and Jewish states after the departure of the British.
While Jews accepted this compromise, the Palestinian Arabs, supported by the Arab League countries, rejected it and went to war against the emerging State of Israel.
The Palestinian Arab defeat in this endeavor, and the resulting refugee problem, is a defining moment for Palestinians.
But what sometimes gets lost in this narrative is that, while practically all sectors of Palestinian Arab society rejected the UN plan, Palestinians were unable to devise coherent political institutions and a unified military command with which to confront the much smaller Jewish community.
By contrast, the besieged Jewish community, under David Ben-Gurion and the Jewish self-defense force (the Hagannah) was able to mobilize, through its democratic institutions and with only marginal dissent, the resources needed for a successful military campaign.
Indeed, many Palestinian political leaders absconded to Beirut or Cairo once violence broke out.
The Husseini clan set up its militia in the Jerusalem area.
Near Tel Aviv, in adjoining Jaffa, a competing militia under Hassan Salameh, took control.
In the north of the country, a Syrian-based militia, under Fawzi al-Kaukji, attacked Jewish villages.
The more moderate Haifa Arabs tried, not very successfully, to stay out of the fray.
Disunity made the Arab defeat almost inevitable.
Moreover, the scars of the 1930’s virtual civil war have still not healed: mutual suspicion and memories of internecine massacres vitiated cooperation and trust.
The last failure occurred when the 1993 Oslo Accords between Israel and the PLO set up the autonomous Palestinian Authority under Yasser Arafat.
Instead of creating the infrastructure of the future Palestinian state, with various functions slowly transferred from the Israeli army to the Palestinian Authority, Arafat created a mukhabarat (security services) state, as in Egypt, Syria, and (until Saddam Hussein’s fall) in Iraq.
Arafat and his Fatah-based supporters established almost a dozen competing security services – sometimes indistinguishable from clan-based militias – which consumed more than 60% the Palestinian Authority’s budget, at the expense of education, housing, welfare, and refugee rehabilitation.
Into this vacuum burst Hamas, with its network of schools, welfare services, community centers, and support organizations.
The Hamas takeover of Gaza was but the latest step in this development.
It is easy to blame the current Palestinian crisis on individuals – be it Arafat or Abbas.
It is even easier to blame the Israeli occupation or American policies.
To be sure, there is a lot of blame to go around.
But all national movements – the Greek as well as the Polish, the Jewish as well as the Kurdish – begin in adversity.
The Palestinians have a difficult history – one of internal disunity and murderous internecine conflict – to overcome.
They now stand again at a crossroads, and whether they will be able to transcend their tragic heritage depends on them.
No one can help them if they cannot come up with a coherent, consensual, and reasonably united leadership – what Abbas himself calls “one law, one authority, one gun.”
Internet or Intifada?
TEL AVIV – According to Israeli Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu, the ongoing wave of knife attacks on Jews by young Palestinian “lone wolves” can be blamed entirely on incitement by Palestinian Authority and Islamist websites.
Netanyahu evidently expects Israelis, and the world, to believe that if these sites were posting cat videos, the Palestinians would cease their agitation and submit quietly to occupation.
Palestinians are indeed being provoked, but by Israeli actions – beginning with the perpetual encroachment on their rights that occupation entails.
Beyond facing daily humiliation at checkpoints, Palestinians have seen Israeli settlers destroy their crops and olive groves, and even torch a West Bank home, burning three family members and killing a toddler.
Add the Israeli military’s frequent late-night house raids in search of “terror suspects” and the relentless expansion of Israeli settlements, and it becomes pretty clear that Palestinians don’t need to scour the Internet for reasons to be angry.
It is ironic that Netanyahu, of all people, is accusing anyone of incitement.
Was it not incitement when, just days before Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin was assassinated in 1995 for his efforts to achieve peace with the Palestinians, Netanyahu addressed a rally where posters depicted Rabin in a Nazi SS uniform?
Was it not incitement when he attempted to mobilize Jewish voters earlier this year by warning of “Arabs voting in droves, bussed in by the left.”
Just this month, one of Netanyahu’s shamelessly incendiary statements – the claim that Haj Amin al-Husseini, the Grand Mufti of Jerusalem, gave Adolf Hitler the idea of annihilating Europe’s Jews during World War II – sparked a media firestorm.
When it comes to anti-Jewish zeal, Husseini’s record hardly needs false footnotes – unless, apparently, one has an interest in presenting the Palestinians as co-perpetrators of the Holocaust.
In this case, it seems that Netanyahu may have gone too far; after more than a week of condemnation, including from Israeli historians, he was forced to retract the statement.
But he is unlikely to be chastened.
For Netanyahu, incitement is a powerful political tool.
He fuels Israeli fears and disillusionment, in order to preserve a status quo that, at least in the case of Palestine, benefits Israel.
As Netanyahu put it last month in a closed meeting of the Knesset’s Foreign Affairs and Defense Committee, Israel must continue “controlling all the territory,” adding that the country “will forever live by the sword.”
Of course, this approach is not always successful; for example, Netanyahu was unable to block the international nuclear deal with Iran, despite his best efforts.
But, rather than rethink his approach, he has simply redirected it, in order to restore the Palestinians to their position as the principal existential threat to Israel.
Today’s emerging intifada demonstrates the profound danger implied by this approach.
Fueling Israelis’ fear and resentment of Palestinians does not only undermine the chances of a political solution; it also exacerbates Palestinians’ frustration and anger with Israelis.
And that anger is already intense, especially among young Palestinians living under Israeli occupation.
Consider what life is like in East Jerusalem, the epicenter of the decentralized rebellion, where some 77% of Palestinians live below the poverty line.
Not only are municipal services poor or non-existent; Palestinians also face persistent pressure from Jewish religious groups bent on asserting Israeli control.
Young Palestinians – the third generation to live under occupation – have run out of patience.
Despite being a largely secular generation, they are using the narrative of jihad (the knife is a conspicuous Islamic State symbol) to defy their parents’ docility, challenge an incompetent Palestinian leadership, and, most of all, to resist the Israeli occupiers.
That is why they have made Islam’s holy shrines on Jerusalem’s Temple Mount (Haram al-Sharif to Muslims) into icons of their rebellion.
If iron-fisted authoritarian governments in countries like Egypt and Tunisia could not stop their populations from overthrowing them in the Arab Spring, how can one expect the crippled Palestinian Authority to stop this rebellion?
Indeed, at this point, Palestinian Authority President Mahmoud Abbas is more worried about avoiding the fate of Egypt’s Hosni Mubarak or Tunisia’s Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali than he is about stopping the violence.
To preempt young Palestinians’ wrath, he has refused to condemn their terror campaign and indirectly fueled anger over Israel’s supposed violation of the status quo on the Temple Mount.
This approach will have far-reaching consequences, for a similarly dangerous vehemence regarding the Temple Mount, the holiest site in Judaism, has lately been gaining traction among Israelis.
Though Jewish law explicitly forbids Jews from ascending the Temple Mount, lest they profane this most sanctified of Jewish shrines before the coming of the Messiah, a growing number of Israelis – from religious fanatics to members of Israel’s ruling coalition – now support defying that prohibition.
They claim that Jews must frequent the holy site, and even build a temple, to strengthen Israel’s sovereignty there.
The focus on the Temple Mount has given the current confrontation an apocalyptic quality.
It is time for both sides – and especially the Israelis – to recognize just how dangerous the situation is.
By blurring the borders between Israel and the Palestinian territories, Israel has created the conditions for permanent civil war.
The two-state solution might not be particularly attractive to either party anymore; but a binational solution, at least as it is unfolding these days, would be a living nightmare.
Palestine’s Moment of Decision
NOT TO BE PUBLISHED BEFORE JANUARY 10
The victory of Mahmoud Abbas in the Palestinian presidential election poses a huge challenge to the Palestinian leadership.
By being voted chairman of the PLO’s executive committee hours after the death of Yasser Arafat, Abbas clinched the support of the organization that represents all Palestinians, including those in the diaspora.
Popular election as President of the Palestinian National Authority gives Abbas the grassroots legitimacy to carry out his political program.
That program, while similar to Arafat’s, differs in key ways.
Abbas (also known as Abu Mazen) has been publicly and consistently critical of what he calls the “militarization of the intifada.”
Even before Arafat’s death, Abbas argued that the use of force by militants weakens the Palestinian negotiating position.
He stuck to this position throughout his electoral campaign, refusing the demands of hard-line Palestinian factions that he apologize for his previous statements.
Abbas conducts himself in a business-like manner, and he strongly believes in the rule of law and in the need for real civilian governance to assume preeminence in Palestinian politics.
In this he also differs from Arafat, who believed that the revolutionary mindset must continue so as long as Palestinians lived under an illegal foreign occupation.
Until liberation, there could be no business as usual.
By winning election on a clear anti-violence and pro-rule of law platform, Abbas has the mandate and the responsibility to carry out this policy.
He needs to make it clear to every armed Palestinian that there will be no tolerance for any unofficial group carrying arms or conducting military attacks from Palestinian territory.
In order to preserve national unity, Abbas will obviously need to use all his persuasive skills to convince radical groups (some in his own Fatah movement) to respect that approach.
As chairman of the PLO, he will be under extreme pressure not to delegitimize the internationally sanctioned acts of resistance against Israeli military targets.
In order to counter that pressure, he will have to show that a cessation of violence is in the higher interest of Palestinians.
Abbas will find it equally challenging to apply rule-of-law principles to a traumatized community that is reeling after nearly five years of violence, oppression, and draconian travel restrictions imposed by the Israelis.
As in the issue of the militarization of the intifada, this is not a simple matter, as it concerns forces outside the control of Abbas and his government.
Nevertheless, internal policies will be of grave importance.
The day-to-day lives – and livelihoods – of Palestinians need immediate improvement.
The Israeli-built wall to the west of the West Bank means that Palestinian unemployment will continue to rise and living standards will continue to drop.
To counter this, Abbas will have to seek external Arab and international support.
The real need is to encourage investment, primarily from Palestinians and Arabs.
But this is unlikely without major legal and administrative reforms, and, more generally, good governance and ironclad application of the rule of law.
The key to establishing civil order is peace.
No matter how persuasive Abbas is in convincing radical groups to put down their arms, a unilateral ceasefire will not last long if it is not mutual.
The role of the Israeli occupation forces will thus be crucial in determining the success of Abbas’s daunting mission.
Indeed, the task that Abbas faces will become impossible if the Israeli policy of “targeted killings” is allowed to continue while Palestinian leaders are working seriously to put an end to acts of violence against Israelis.
Ultimately, the main agenda for the new Palestinian president in negotiations with Israel will be to push the Israelis to make good on their repeated international assurances that a viable contiguous Palestinian state is a realistic goal in the near future.
But if left to Israelis and Palestinians alone, the goal of Palestinian independence within the 1967 borders of Palestine will most likely remain out of reach.
The international community, lead by the United States, must invest effort and political capital to realize this goal.
The new Palestinian president faces a challenging agenda and high popular expectations.
Much will depend on how Abbas handles himself and how he governs.
But the ultimate question is what Israel and the international community will do if Abbas fulfills his pledge to end anti-Israeli violence and apply the rule of law in a functioning democracy.
Palestinians have chosen; now the world must do so as well.
Palestine Stands Up
JERUSALEM – Although the crisis over Israel’s naval interventions to defend its blockade of Gaza is gaining all the headlines around the world, something of far more historic importance is taking place in the Middle East.
The Palestine National Authority is preparing to issue a unilateral declaration of independence, and it is taking concrete steps on the ground to make any such declaration viable.
When US President Barack Obama appointed former Senator George Mitchell as his special envoy for Middle East peace negotiations, Mitchell’s mandate was to achieve within two years not only an agreement between Israel and the Palestinians, but also overall peace between the Jewish state and the whole Arab world.
But, after 15 months on the job, and innumerable visits to the region, all Mitchell has to show for his efforts is an agreement between Israel and the Palestinian Authority to start indirect “proximity talks” – which it is hoped will lead to direct talks in due course.
When one bears in mind that both sides have been negotiating directly for 15 years, Mitchell’s achievement appears even more minuscule.
Under such circumstances, calling Mitchell’s work up to now a failure is the only polite – and realistic – thing to do.
It is as easy to blame Israeli Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu’s intransigence – his enforcement of the Gaza blockade, for example – as it is to point out that the Palestinian Authority does not control Hamas-ruled Gaza, with its 1.2 million inhabitants, leaving it in no position to speak authoritatively for Palestinians.
As a result, one thing that both Israelis and Palestinians agree on is that the proximity talks will most likely lead nowhere, so both sides are currently busy ensuring that the other side will be blamed for the failure.
On too many issues – borders, settlements, refugees, Jerusalem – the gaps between the two sides are too deep to be easily bridged.
In these circumstances, an idea recently raised – tentatively but courageously – by Palestinian Prime Minister Salam Fayyad should be eagerly welcomed.
It may or may not fly, but it is arrestingly novel: if negotiations fail – so Fayyad says – sometime in 2011 the Palestinians should declare independence unilaterally.
This may be a real game changer.
Obviously, it would not resolve the conflict; it might not even immediately change the situation on the ground.
Indeed, it could even precipitate some unforeseen Israeli countermeasures.
But it would certainly mean a paradigm shift for a conflict in which everyone has been treading water for almost two decades.
If the Palestinians declared independence unilaterally, and if, as is expected, some sort of recognition by at least some states followed, the contours of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict would change dramatically.
Indeed, the conflict would become, if one can use the expression, more “normal” – no longer between an occupying power and an occupied people, but between two countries, two states, that disagree about a lot of issues, including borders, mutual relations, and control over populations.
In a way, a unilateral declaration of independence would make the Israeli-Palestinian conflict a bit more like the Israeli-Syrian conflict – an inter-state conflict. It might even force Israel to make decisions that until now it found easier to avoid.
Such a declaration would also be an enormous act of self-empowerment for the Palestinians.
Until now, they have failed abysmally in institutional nation-building, a necessary requirement for any successful national movement.
Palestinian nationalism is deeply ingrained in the consciousness of most Palestinians – yet, since 1948, when the United Nations proposed partitioning British Palestine into two states, a Jewish and an Arab one, it has failed to move from ideology towards reality.
Neither violence nor terrorism nor relying on outside powers (the UN, the Arab League, the Soviet Union, the US, the European Union) succeeded in delivering statehood, which a people can achieve only by its own agency – what Zionist ideology calls “auto-emancipation.”
Fayyad is the first Palestinian leader who did not emerge from the Fatah movement, and he may thus understand what other Palestinian leaders failed to comprehend, mired as they were in a toxic combination of self-righteous ideology and violence.
It may just be that the Palestinians are on the verge of a new chapter in their history – and in the history of Israel and the whole region as well.
Palestine’s Time
PARIS – This September, Mahmoud Abbas, president of the Palestinian Authority, took the bold step of directly asking the United Nations to grant official recognition to the state of Palestine.
The UN’s 193 member states look geared to vote on that request within the next few months.
The world’s focus is now on Palestine.
It is almost two decades since the “quartet” – the UN, the United States, the European Union, and Russia – agreed that the Palestinian Authority and the Israeli government should establish peace by coexisting as two separate states.
And yet, while US President Barack Obama has referred to the quartet’s decision as his guiding principle for diplomatic action on the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, the situation remains as dire as ever, because the devil remains in the details.
The Palestinians want an independent state, but on the condition that they secure Jerusalem as its capital, and that Israel ceases to expand settlements on territory that it has occupied since the 1967 Six-Day War.
Israel, however, has never considered ceding Jerusalem to Palestine.
Many hope that, under pressure to reform municipal boundaries, Israel will consider this solution.
But the question of the settlements is even more difficult to resolve.
Even under pressure from the international community and, most powerfully, from the US, Israel has consistently refused to slow expansion of its settlements in the West Bank.
Tragically, strong resistance from Israel and the Jewish diaspora has led Obama to acknowledge openly his powerlessness in the conflict, and thus to abandon US political pressure on Israel.
As a result, a small group of pro-Israeli congressmen has been free to threaten and pressure those countries likely to vote for the recognition of the Palestinian state.
In any event, Israel’s leaders are not actually interested in a realistic peace.
Instead, they seem to want a solution reminiscent of nineteenth-century Ireland – which led to a century of casualties on both sides.
Israel is effectively demanding the disappearance of Palestinian identity.
The rest of the world should not tolerate that effort, even if the US does.
Every country knows that it is difficult and costly to engage in an explicit conflict with the US.
But when the US fails to act as a global leader because of its fragile internal politics, other countries do not have to follow its example.
Abbas well understands the riskiness of his strategy: there will be brutal retaliation from Israel.
But his persistence in pursuing this last chance at peace has clearly gained him increased popularity at home and greater respect abroad.
Hamas, the Palestinian Authority’s rival in Gaza, will undoubtedly try to thwart Abbas’s effort.
An organization like Hamas, which supports permanent war – and with which Israel negotiated for five years for the release of one abducted Israeli soldier, Gilad Shalit, in exchange for more than 1,000 Palestinian prisoners – is exactly the enemy that Israel needs to justify its hardline stance.
For a long time, Israeli leaders have lobbied supporters like me, who, since the Holocaust, have defended the Jewish people’s right to security and statehood.
But Israel’s tactics regarding Palestine have been unconscionable.
They have strengthened Hamas, a hostile opponent of peace, pushed the US to vote against the Palestinian state whose birth it defends, and refused outright to accept any conditions that might resolve the conflict.
No civilized country can permit this behavior.
Palestine must be granted legal status so that, at the very least, its people will have access to the international legal court, with the understanding that international support is required to aid and defend this young state.
The Americans have lost their moral right to leadership in resolving the Israel-Palestine conflict.
It is time for Europe to step into the fray.
Palestine’s War of Generations
Yasir Arafat may be dead, but his Machiavellian strategies linger.
Ever protective of his position as sole leader of the Palestinian people, Arafat sought to block any means by which a potential rival could challenge him. But in protecting his position, Arafat also blocked the appointment of a successor in his lifetime.
In the first weeks after Arafat’s death, that seemed not to matter.
Mahmoud Abbas, Arafat’s longtime deputy and the architect of the Oslo accords, quickly secured the backing of Fatah, the PLO’s core body.
A seamless transition appeared possible. But now Marwan Barghouti, Fatah’s leader in the West Bank during the current Intifada, has decided to contest Abbas for the presidency of the Palestinian Authority (PA) from his Israeli jail cell.
Facing economic stagnation and what Palestinian Authority Prime Minister Ahmed Qurei calls “the anarchy of weapons,” a succession struggle is the last thing Palestinians need.
Any new leader must spur the economy, enforce the rule of law, fight corruption, unify the PA’s security agencies, and preserve public safety – and he must do so quickly or lose authority.
Abbas (also known as Abu Mazen) represents the Old Guard of Palestinian politics.
But the Young Guard – those who led the first Intifada (1987-1993), as well as those making their names in the current Intifada – want a share of power.
Abbas will thus need to find support within this rising generation of nationalist leaders if he is to succeed.
Resolving this generational struggle peacefully will require democratic elections within Fatah for membership of both the Revolutionary Council and the Central Committee.
The Sixth Fatah Congress, the first in sixteen years, will take place in August 2005 and will seek to reconcile the conflict between the Old and Young Guard.
Unlike Arafat and his fellow exiles, Barghouti, the most prominent leader among the Young Guard, grew up under Israeli occupation, and was arrested and detained several times.
Barghouti’s popularity also stems from his refusal from the beginning to take any office in Arafat’s corrupt PA and its institutions.
Although he was elected to the Palestinian Legislative Council in 1996, Barghouti’s reputation soared when the current Intifada began in September 2000.
His support for attacks against Israeli soldiers and settlers in the occupied territories, which he argues is legitimate under international law, has earned him immense popularity among Palestinians, but also a sentence of five life terms plus 40 years in an Israeli prison.
Whether he can be released from prison is now a source of intense speculation.
But Barghouti has begun speaking out from his jail cell on the political situation, and his presence is growing.
His decision to challenge Abbas means that the “secular” forces within the Palestinian movement may be divided at a time when rivals with a robust Islamic agenda – principally Hamas and Islamic Jihad – are challenging them.
Both Hamas and Islamic Jihad are highly disciplined organizations, exercising tight control over their political and military wings.
Although Hamas has been weakened by Israel’s targeted assassinations of Sheik Ahmad Yassin and Abdel-Aziz Rantisi, it retains strong military capabilities and popular support ranging between 25-30%, making it the second leading faction in the West Bank and Gaza.
Hamas has declared that it will not nominate its own candidate for the PA presidency.
Hassan Yusuf, a Hamas leader who was recently released from an Israeli jail after 28 months of administrative internment, explained to Al-Jazeera that “if Hamas assumed the leadership at this time, it would be vilified and isolated by the international community, and then the people would suffer.”
Although Hamas is boycotting the election, many Hamas sympathizers will vote for the candidate most committed to defending the Palestinians’ core demands.
Here Hamas members are simply reiterating Arafat’s views, which will continue to limit the concessions any new leader can make.
Arafat set forth a blueprint including an independent Palestinian state in the West Bank and Gaza, with East Jerusalem as its capital, and a fair and just solution to the refugee problem.
Changing leaders will in no way alter these conditions for making peace.
So the question is this: who will Palestinians, in particular the Hamas constituency, think is better able to secure these goals, Abbas or Barghouti?
That answer will most likely determine who will be the PA’s next leader.
But in the end, Israel will also have to make a choice, because peace will require Israeli concessions, not just compromises from the Palestinians.
Israel must freeze its settlement activity in the West Bank and stop constructing its barrier wall on Palestinian territories. Israel must also free Palestinian prisoners, remove all checkpoints between Palestinian villages and town, and redeploy its forces to positions held prior to September 28, 2000, in accordance with phase I of the Road Map.
Either Abbas or Barghouti would certainly meet such a demonstration of good faith with good faith of his own.
The War on Secrecy
LONDON – What do the recently released Panama papers, ExxonMobil, and a Canadian mining company operating in Guatemala have in common?
They are all cases in which powerful individuals and organizations tried to obfuscate, deceive, or hide behind a front.
And they are all cases in which that effort didn’t work.
The global uproar triggered by the Panama Papers – 11.5 million files taken, apparently by computer hackers, from the world’s fourth-largest offshore law firm, Panama’s Mossack Fonseca – is likely to continue for some time.
The files’ release has revealed the extreme, and sometimes costly, lengths that individuals go to hide their assets and avoid taxation.
What has been uncovered thus far ranges from legal but ethically suspect use of tax loopholes to efforts to stash or launder money gained through corruption or other illegal activities.
The reaction has been swift, harsh, and almost universally excoriating.
Already, the prime minister of Iceland has been forced to resign, after it was revealed that he held stakes in offshore companies with his wife.
Relatives of senior Chinese officials, including President Xi Jinping, as well as members of Russian President Vladimir Putin’s inner circle, have been implicated as well.
Xi and Putin may have little to worry about.
But the sheer hypocrisy of government officials proclaiming the need for austerity and encouraging public sacrifice for the sake of long-term prosperity, while secretly avoiding that effort, is a galling violation of trust in democratic countries.
If their offshore shell companies and bank accounts are legal, why go to so much trouble to be secretive?
And if secrecy is legal, what is wrong with it?
Meanwhile, corporate secrecy has placed ExxonMobil in the crosshairs of the attorneys general of New York, Massachusetts, and the Virgin Islands, and many more states are waiting in the wings.
The investigation is focusing on whether the company knowingly made false statements about climate change, starting from the 1980’s.
Internal documents indicate that Exxon, and later ExxonMobil, knew about the damaging effects of climate change but revealed no information to investors or the public.
In fact, the company’s public statements – including as recently as last year – routinely dismissed the risk of climate change.
When given an opportunity to come clean and operate transparently, ExxonMobil opted for obfuscation.
In Canada, Hudbay Minerals is embroiled in a lawsuit that could open the door to real consequences for companies that offload onto subsidiaries all responsibility for their overseas operations.
Instead of applying their home countries’ ethical requirements and standards in the countries where they operate, Western companies draw a veil of subsidiaries, contractors, and supply chains over behavior that consumers and investors would consider reprehensible.
Hudbay Minerals is being sued over an episode of mass rape and property destruction in Guatemala, after soldiers and people claiming to be security officials from the company that owned a local mine arrived in a small village with orders to evict its residents.
The case is seemingly complex, as it involved multiple owners, numerous subsidiaries, and an array of jurisdictions.
But the principle at stake is simple: A parent company must be held responsible for overseeing the actions of those representing it.
Creating layer upon layer of ownership to preserve secrecy must not continue.
And it will not if a three-prong approach is embraced.
Call it the carrot, the stick, and fresh air.
The carrot – the inducement to behave ethically – should be to recognize and reward those who admit past mistakes and demonstrate the will and an effective strategy to correct them.
The stick – punishment of misconduct – requires stricter enforcement of legal and ethical requirements, whether concerning tax avoidance and evasion, or the ability to hide behind subsidiaries.
And fresh air takes the form of reporting, whether drawing attention to wrongdoing in local communities or deep investigative reports, like the extraordinary global effort by the hundreds of journalists who cooperated in bringing the Panama Papers to light.
This approach must not be turned into a marketing exercise by companies, government officials, or media companies.
Instead, the repudiation of secrecy should resemble a truth and reconciliation process, with wrongdoers providing a full public account of their behavior, perhaps accompanied by testimony from victims.
Most important, if corporate boards – and the lawyers, bankers, and accountants who advise companies and individuals – are to be vigilant about legal and ethical compliance, they must believe that they will be held accountable for their actions.
Once everyone gets the message that secrecy carries unacceptably large risks, they will act in ways that minimize those risks.
Whether they like it or not, it is time for our leaders to behave in ways that are good for them – and us.
The Last Gentlemen’s Club
LONDON – Is one of the last bastions of gender inequality in the rich democracies finally starting to crumble?
In the past few weeks, Janet Yellen was nominated as the first female chair of the US Federal Reserve Board, and Karnit Flug became the first woman to be appointed Governor of Israel’s central bank.
If money is power, then women must no longer be excluded from controlling the supply of it.
Although women do head central banks in 17 emerging markets – including Malaysia, Russia, Argentina, South Africa, Lesotho, and Botswana – they are the exceptions that prove a general rule: women are excluded from the world of monetary policymaking.
Yellen’s appointment is particularly important, because she breaks the glass ceiling in the advanced economies.
Until her promotion, no member of the G-7 had a woman heading its central bank.
Moreover, men occupy all 23 seats on the European Central Bank’s (ECB) Governing Council.
Since the Bank of England’s Monetary Policy Committee was established in 1997, only three women have been appointed as external members – and no woman has even been nominated since 2002.
The Bank of Japan has only one woman on its Policy Board.
Women, nowadays, are more likely to occupy top political jobs.
Angela Merkel was recently reelected for a third term as German Chancellor; Britain’s voters elected Margaret Thatcher three times as Prime Minister; and France has had a female prime minister.
But no woman has come close to leading these countries’ central banks.
Equality seems to have eluded central banks even in gender-conscious Scandinavia.
For example, Norway, which has been promoting positive gender discrimination for years and recently elected Erna Solberg as its first female prime minister, has yet to allow a woman to control the purse strings – at either the central bank or the finance ministry, with its powerful sovereign wealth fund.
Recent attempts to compel change have been counter-productive.
In an effort to promote diversity and gender equality in the ECB, the European Parliament in 2012 blocked the appointment of Luxembourg’s Yves Mersch to the bank’s executive board.
But MEPs then failed to propose a plausible female alternative, leaving the ECB understaffed for weeks during the eurozone sovereign-debt crisis.
Unsurprisingly, the European Parliament’s handling of Mersch’s appointment was widely ridiculed, and his nomination was eventually confirmed.
But many people drew the wrong conclusion from the episode, which they viewed as affirming the idea that competence and experience must always trump ill-conceived ideas about positive discrimination.
If there are no suitable female candidates, it was argued, then the best candidate should prevail, regardless of gender.
But this view misses the point.
Why were there no suitable female candidates in the first place?
Women hold around 30% of economics doctorates in developed countries, including Europe, and not one of them could be brought forward for the ECB post?
The more reasonable conclusion to be drawn from Mersch’s appointment is that no serious effort was made to identify qualified women early on.
On the contrary, female candidates tend simply to be overlooked.
This was the case for both Yellen and Flug – until the preferred, male applicants dropped out.
Flug was finally offered the top job only in the absence of a male rival, though she was already occupying the position temporarily while the board searched for Stanley Fischer’s successor.
Neither Yellen nor Flug was held back by a lack of academic credentials – both are accomplished scholars – or by the catch-all charge of having “limited experience.”
Flug has been the Bank of Israel’s deputy governor since 2011; Yellen has been involved in the Fed system for almost two decades, first in San Francisco and subsequently as Vice Chair of the Fed’s Board of Governors.
If a lack of skills or experience is not preventing women from reaching the summit of monetary policymaking, what is?
The most plausible explanation is that, as organizations with non-elected leaders and limited transparency, central banks tend to function as clubs whose largely male membership hire and promote familiar types; governments usually reinforce this by simply rubber-stamping the banks’ preferred candidate for the top job.
If gender is a proxy for diversity, then central banks fail a basic test of it.
Promoting diversity – not only in terms of gender, but also with respect to age and, in many countries, ethnic background – is a matter of effectiveness as much as a question of social justice.
A broader, more transparent recruitment process would reduce groupthink, challenge the status quo, and, one hopes, leave central banks better equipped to handle a financial crisis.
The promotion of Yellen and Flug is a good start; now the doors of these fusty male-dominated clubs must be flung wide open.
The Business of Korean Reconciliation
SEOUL – Can trade and commerce foster peace and mutual understanding between hostile governments?
When it comes to the Koreas, this question may seem to be beside the point, given the ruthless purge now underway in the North.
But it remains an essential consideration for the longer-term future of North Korea and other outcast regimes.
The Kaesong Industrial Complex, a joint venture of the North and South Korean governments, is both a tribute to the concept of diplomatic reconciliation through business and a difficult test of its feasibility.
Roughly 50,000 North Korean workers are employed in 123 factories that produce about $450 million worth of goods (mainly textiles, shoes, and household goods).
Kaesong is an expensive investment for South Korea, which provides capital and infrastructure, including a power station, a water purification plant, and a hospital.
But, more than a decade after its inauguration, the complex runs at 40% capacity and has attracted only medium-size companies.
Despite generous tax incentives, South Korea’s huge conglomerates, the chaebol, have spurned the experiment, at least partly because of enduring transportation and communications problems.
The complex can be accessed only through the demilitarized zone separating the two Koreas, which requires entry and exit passes.
The lack of mobile-phone networks and broadband Internet means that South Korean managers must communicate with their headquarters by landline phones and fax.
Of course, commercial gain is not the only motivation behind the Kaesong complex.
The South Korean authorities are rightly proud of the initiative, which they view as an investment in future reunification with the North.
Seen from this perspective, North Korea’s recent announcement that it will open another 14 special economic zones is a positive development – one that is underpinned by significant financial incentives.
Aside from enabling the North to acquire technology and learn market-oriented business practices, the Kaesong complex generates about $80 million annually in workers’ compensation (the monthly wage of $160 is far higher than in North Korea).
But political and historical tensions continue to shape daily life in Kaesong, where companies operate under the constant threat that North Korea, for whatever reason, will react rashly, even abandoning the joint project altogether.
Already last year, rising inter-Korean tensions led to a temporary shutdown of the complex.
As a result, firms must dedicate considerable time and effort to dealing with North Korea’s often volatile and opaque politics, exemplified in the recent execution of North Korean leader Kim Jong-un’s powerful uncle, Jang Song-thaek.
This challenging climate undermines the project’s viability, even though the business model – based on lower-cost workers from the North producing labor-intensive goods – makes sense.
Kaesong is a bit of George Orwell’s 1984, with added elements of nineteenth-century paternalism.
The atmosphere is stilted and muffled, with workers moving around in silence and guards everywhere.
During a recent visit – the first by a foreign delegation since 2006 – the cold and snowy weather intensified this feeling, creating the sense of being suspended in time and space.
The visit began with military jeeps escorting our convoy into North Korean territory.
The vehicles’ number plates were covered with white cardboard, and red flags had been affixed to the doors next to the side-view mirrors – for which none of our South Korean hosts was able to offer an explanation.
Even the preparation for our visit, which was confirmed less than 24 hours before it began, was somewhat Orwellian.
Detailed packing instructions were issued, informing us that we could not bring radios, mobile phones, wireless devices, printed materials, photos, cassette tapes, or DVDs.
Despite being limited to cameras with lenses under 160mm, we were not permitted to take photos of the demilitarized zone between the industrial complex and the border, or of North Korean soldiers or workers.
Our cameras were checked when we left the country to verify compliance.
The border between the two Koreas is virtually impenetrable, with gates that open for a half-hour at a time a few times per day.
As a result, all personal contact occurs through official channels.
Even as diplomatic visitors, we were prohibited from speaking with or giving anything to the workers, whom we watched with a mixture of curiosity and sympathy.
The North Koreans seemed to share our desire to connect, as they sought to engage with us to whatever extent they could.
The diminutive border guard looked into my eyes, smiled warmly, and asked where I was from.
Likewise, lined-up workers at one of the factories responded to my gesticulations with waves and smiles as we passed them.
Given the prevailing paranoia, fueled by propaganda and genuine ignorance, on both sides of the border, it is possible that our hosts were being excessively cautious.
Nonetheless, our pre-trip “indoctrination” stifled our reactions, regrettably preventing us from trying harder to reach out to the workers we encountered – an experience that seemed to exemplify the difficulty of bringing North Korea into the international community.
Despite their flaws, initiatives like the Kaesong complex help to build an environment of collaboration and trust.
As Asia’s recent history shows, authoritarian regimes tend to open up in response to a combination of grassroots movements and gradual top-down reforms.
North Koreans may well be prepared to provide the former, but whether the government is prepared to do its part remains highly uncertain, to say the least.
The expansion of special economic zones – supported by increased private investment, especially from firms that are not South Korean or Chinese – would significantly improve the odds that North Korea’s regime eases its repressive rule and embraces a program of economic reform, as China did more than three decades ago.
The task of defusing the threat to regional peace and stability that North Korea poses should be one that is shared across Asia.
The Paris Approach to Global Governance
WASHINGTON, DC – As a former president of the American Society of International Law, I should bemoan the recent Paris agreement on climate change as a failure.
By the standards of a traditional treaty, it falls woefully short.
Yet its deficits in this regard are its greatest strengths as a model for effective global governance in the twenty-first century.
The international legal gold standard is a treaty, a binding document that can be enforced by courts and arbitration tribunals.
Such agreements comprise more than expressions of intent; they contain codified, enforceable rules, along with sanctions for non-compliance.
Indeed, they must be ratified by national parliaments, so that they become a part of domestic law.
The Paris agreement is none of these things.
In the United States, as a matter of domestic law, it is an executive agreement, binding only on President Barack Obama’s administration.
An executive-legislative agreement would have the same status as a treaty, except that a treaty must be ratified by two-thirds of the Senate, whereas an executive-legislative agreement must be adopted by the Senate and the House under the same rules that apply to all domestic legislation.
An executive agreement made by one administration is not necessarily binding on its successor, but it would have to be explicitly repudiated.
Moreover, unlike in a traditional international treaty, the obligations of the Paris agreement are not fixed.