Of the three major candidates, the conservative Nicolas Sarkozy has expressed the most pro-American views and traveled to Washington for a photo opportunity with Bush. He told a Washington audience that anti-Americanism was an elite indulgence not shared by the French at large.
The centrist candidate, former education minister François Bayrou, for his part, has relatives in the US and has called for a “third way” in French politics analogous to the paths forged by Bill Clinton and Tony Blair.
The candidates differ in other ways as well.
Both Sarkozy and Royal have appealed to nationalism.
Sarkozy has boasted that he expelled tens of thousands of illegal immigrants when he was interior minister, and in 2005 he referred to Muslim rioters in the suburbs as “scum.”
Aware of the ultra-nationalist threat from Jean-Marie Le Pen, who took second place in the 2002 presidential election, Sarkozy has said that he wants “to talk to those who have moved toward the far right because they are suffering.”
While Royal has been critical of Sarkozy, she, too, has appealed to nationalism, calling for a “re-conquest of the symbols of the nation” from the right.
Only Bayrou has denounced the “nationalistic obsession” that has marked the campaign.
But one should not read too much into these differences.
All three candidates support Chirac’s opposition to the Iraq War, will protect French agriculture in global trade negotiations, and will promote French leadership in Europe.
Despite French voters’ rejection of a new constitution for the European Union in 2005 (in part a protest vote against Chirac), all three candidates recognize that the EU has been an important means to enhance French power in world affairs.
None is likely to become an American poodle.
Indeed, that is not the way French politics works.
French leaders often like to be seen resisting American pressure before striking a compromise and cooperating in a manner that serves both French and American interests.
Friction with the US is thus inevitable, but in the long run there is usually fruitful cooperation.
Despite the tension of the past few years, Europe and America have cooperated in Kosovo, Afghanistan, Lebanon, and Iran, and on countering Al Qaeda.
Whatever the outcome of the French election, French-American relations are likely to remain on a steady course, and may well improve further after the US presidential election 2008.
The Coming Showdown with Iran
FLORENCE – US President Barack Obama’s administration has lost little time in announcing that it will seek direct talks with the Iranian government.
This means, at the very least, a tough confrontation over Iran’s quest for a regional strategic advantage in the form of a nuclear weapon.
There is more at stake here than coming up with the right set of incentives and threats to change the Iranians’ minds.
Rather, the time has come to approach the nuclear question in its full regional context rather than piecemeal and operationally.
The entire world knows the risk posed by a nuclear Iran: a drastically altered balance of power in the Middle East and Central Asia, with Iran able to exert far more regional leverage – both overt and implicit – than it now possesses in pursuit of its interests.
Moreover, nearby states are likely to launch or further their own nuclear programs in response, leading to a protracted nuclear arms race in one of world’s most volatile regions.
It is not in the interest of the US or Europe for any of the states at the head of the list – Egypt, Turkey, Saudi Arabia, Syria, and Algeria – to have its own nuclear weapons capability.
While neither outcome is certain, each remains likely.
There is considerable domestic pressure in each of these countries – as there has been in Israel and Pakistan, currently the region’s only nuclear states – to secure the presumed benefits in power and prestige of possessing nuclear weapons.
Such pressure is magnified when rivals and neighbors are perceived to have any kind of strategic advantage.
Yet each of the region’s states has important security concerns and vulnerabilities.
Iran, a multiethnic state whose rulers have struggled to advance national cohesion, is no different.
Shi’a nationalism has followed Persian chauvinism as a rallying point, but neither has succeeded fully in bolstering Iran’s political institutions and securing the allegiance of its young population, nearly two-thirds of which is under the age of 30.
The nation’s unity is periodically threatened by its clerical rulers’ unpopularity among large sections of the population, as well as by regional and ethnic divisions, conflict and instability in its immediate neighborhood, and the hostility engendered by its regional clients and/or proxies in Iraq, Lebanon, Afghanistan, and elsewhere.
In theory, all of these factors are potential sources of leverage for outside powers like the US.
But opposing Iran’s nuclear ambitions directly has had the opposite effect so far.
Iran’s quest for nuclear weapons – with its boost to national pride and promise of regional preeminence – has played a critical unifying role, as well as a political and military one.
The challenge is to craft a consistent policy that both contains and deters Iran’s ambitions without exacerbating its inherent sense of national vulnerability.
The policy debate outside the region currently centers on whether to use force if talks fail.
Iran, predictably, has refused to back down, which some observers have suggested reflects the failure of the world’s major powers to speak with a unified voice.
This is true, but it is an insufficient explanation.
Others have claimed that Iran’s leaders do not care one way or the other about world opinion.
This, too, is an insufficient explanation, for no country, not even North Korea, lives in a vacuum.
Formulating the right mix of carrots and sticks is extremely difficult, and the US is hardly seen in the region as an honest broker.
Therefore, its focus should be less on calibrating tactics per se than on recasting the regional context in which Iran’s leaders will determine whether to proceed or desist.
The starting point should be further enhancement of conventional military forces throughout the region, which means more than increasing weapons inventories.
There should be more confidence-building measures, including joint training exercises and information exchanges, among all the region’s militaries.
A major boost to confidence would be a clear-cut strategic commitment from the West in the form of an extension of NATO’s own deterrent to the Middle East.
It need not single out Iran, and would be more effective than a unilateral US guarantee to Israel or any other single state.
Instead, NATO members should pledge to defend any Middle Eastern state that is attacked with nuclear weapons.
Under ideal diplomatic circumstances, Russia and China would be persuaded to join with NATO in a joint declaration.
Such steps alone are unlikely to deter Iran or fully to reassure the region’s other states.
But, along with continued international pressure from the United Nations Security Council and the International Atomic Energy Agency, they would send a clearer signal that the major powers of the world regard Middle Eastern peace and security as critical to their own.
That would help to diminish the possibility of an unbridled regional arms race if talks fail and Iran someday tests a weapon.
The Coming St. Putinsburg Summit
St. Petersburg is a great place in early summer, when the “White Nights” bathe the city’s imperial palaces and avenues.
Small wonder, then, that Russian President Vladimir Putin likes to show off his hometown.
Three years ago, during the Tsarist capital’s 300th anniversary, Putin hosted some 40 heads of state, ranging from George W. Bush and Gerhard Schroeder to Belarusian dictator Alexandar Lukashenka and Turkmenistan’s Saparmyrat Nyazov, who styles himself “Turkmenbashi,” the father of Turkmen.
Human rights activists questioned the wisdom of endorsing the leader of a growingly authoritarian Russia.
Yet Putin managed simultaneously to celebrate his anti-Iraq war cooperation with Europe, have the US swallow this, and be recognized in front of his local minions as a world leader.
This summer, St. Petersburg (dubbed by local wits “St. Putinsburg”) may see a repeat performance: Russia will preside over a G8 summit for the first time, despite increasing authoritarianism, the ongoing bloody war in Chechnya, and now support for Iran’s nuclear program.
Deflecting mounting criticism, Bush rejects appeals to boycott the summit.
“I need to be in a position where I can sit down with him [Putin] and be very frank about our concerns,” Bush said in late March at Freedom House in Washington.
Is Bush wrong?
The question of whether to meet with nasty but powerful people has dogged diplomacy since its inception, and both ends of the question have been argued endlessly – and inconclusively.
So it is probably best to examine the merits of each case separately, looking to precedents and agendas for guidance.
What is now known as the G8 was launched in 1975 as an informal group of the United States, Europe’s Big Four – Britain, France, Germany, and Italy – and Japan, with Canada added as an afterthought.
It expanded to include Russia in 1998 for political, not economic, reasons.
Russia’s unhappy status as a democratizing, but still potentially threatening, former superpower, played a role, as did its huge energy reserves, which is why China, incomparably more powerful economically but politically beyond the pale, was never invited to join.
Indeed, though supposedly grouping the world’s largest economies, the G8 now includes a country with an economy the size of Holland’s, even if it is still excluded from deliberations of the other members’ finance ministers.
In retrospect, Russian membership should probably be considered a mistake.
Russia has stabilized under Putin, but its has become markedly less democratic.
Its economy has boomed thanks to oil and gas exports, not to healthy market developments.
The state still controls the economy as it sees fit, as the de-facto renationalization of Yukos amply demonstrates.
On the other hand, the Kremlin has refrained from international adventurism, and rather consistently supported the US in its “war on terror.”
As European economies grew more dependent on Russian oil and gas, and the US military in Central Asia on Russian acquiescence, reversing the decision to admit Russia to the G8 became politically unthinkable.
The 2003 summit confirmed Russia’s privileged position.
A repeat performance this summer would make it all but unshakeable.
Has “being frank about our concerns,” the justification for hobnobbing with the likes of Putin, proven effective?
Perhaps not.
Nevertheless, although Russia has been backsliding since Putin took power in 2000, his policies might have been worse had he been ostracized.
In any case, a US boycott of the forthcoming summit would be a Russian triumph, as it would throw the West into disarray.
But there need to be limits to the West’s tolerance, particularly given the summit’s agenda, which features energy security, fighting disease, promoting education, counter-terrorism, and non-proliferation.
Is Russia a trustworthy partner in these areas?
Russia is, in fact, the main provider of energy insecurity in Europe.
Its gas blackmail of Ukraine frightened the entire Continent, and its new Baltic pipeline to Germany has provoked howls of outrage from Poland and the Baltic states, which are angry at losing the economic and political dividends a land route gives them.
They are also fearful that Russia will use the energy weapon against them in the future, once the new pipeline allows the Kremlin to do so without affecting Western Europe.
This made little impression on their German EU partners – unsurprisingly, since Schroeder now chairs the consortium that will build the pipeline.
As former French Prime Minister Pierre Mauroy put it in 1981, when he refused to cancel a gas deal with the USSR over the imposition of martial law in Poland, “Should the suffering of French people deprived of gas be added to the suffering of Polish people deprived of freedom?”
Old habits die hard.
Russia’s record is equally bleak on other items on the summit’s agenda.
It heads the list on the spread of preventable diseases – not only HIV, but tuberculosis, with 32,000 deaths last year alone – and its education standards are in severe decline.
On terrorism, Russia was the first country to host an official Hamas delegation after the Palestinian elections, and it continues to crush Chechen terror and resistance with methods that would bring it to an international court, were it not a Security Council member.
On non-proliferation, just ask the ayatollahs in Teheran.
Putin’s Russia is not a place for democratic leaders to hold a summit, especially after the paltry results of the last one.
Nor does the summit’s agenda justify holding it there.
While Putin’s policies could have been much worse – it is legitimate to give him credit where it is due – Russia should not be allowed to take the West for granted.
Nothing would be gained by breaking with Russia and engaging in confrontation with it, but there is no reason not to respond to Realpolitik with Realpolitik.
Merkel in the Land of Smiles
BERLIN – Germany’s elections are over.
The winners and losers are clear, and the political landscape has changed profoundly.
The real drama, however, occurred not among the country’s main parties but on the boundaries of the political spectrum.
Chancellor Angela Merkel is celebrating a landslide victory, with her Christian Democratic Union (CDU) having fallen just short of an outright parliamentary majority.
But the scale of her triumph is mainly due to the collapse of her liberal coalition partner, the Free Democratic Party (FDP), which for the first time in the German Federal Republic’s history will not be represented in the Bundestag.
The liberals have always formed a key part of German postwar democracy; now they are gone.
Responsibility for that lies, first and foremost, with the FDP.
No governing party can afford such woefully incompetent ministers and leadership; Merkel had merely to stand back and watch the liberals’ public suicide over the last four years.
The opposition parties, too, paid the price for their failure to come to grips with reality.
The economy is humming, unemployment is low, and most Germans are better off than ever before.
But, rather than focusing on the government’s weaknesses – energy, Europe, education, and family policy – they bet their political fortunes on social justice.
Merkel’s Panglossian campaign was much more in tune with the sentiment of the German electorate than the opposing parties’ tristesse about working-class distress, which was rightly seen as a ploy for raising taxes.
Governing majorities (and therefore elections) in Germany are always won in the center.
Merkel’s predecessor, the Social Democratic Party (SPD) leader Gerhard Schröder, knew this well.
But this time her opponents – the SPD, Die Linke (The Left), and the Greens – cleared the center and cannibalized each other on the left.
The leadership issue made matters worse – the SPD’s Peer Steinbrück and the Greens’ Jürgen Trittin never had the slightest chance against Merkel and Finance Minister Wolfgang Schäuble.
The only new factor that could bring about a structural change in German politics is the rise of the new Alternative for Germany (AfD).
Though its share of the popular vote fell just below the 5% threshold required to enter the Bundestag, the party performed surprisingly well.
If its leadership can build on this success, the AfD will make news in next spring’s European Parliament elections.
Indeed, the AfD scored well in eastern Germany – where three state elections will be held in 2014 – by gaining many votes from The Left.
This implies that the AfD could establish itself on the German political landscape permanently, which would make a comeback for the FDP all the more difficult.
Still, despite the FDP’s implosion and the opposition parties’ disastrous electoral strategy, Merkel needs a coalition partner.
The Left is not an option, and any attempt at building a coalition with the Greens – a party that will be reeling from the shock of its poor performance for quite some time – would court instability.
So Germany will be left with a grand coalition – just as the German electorate wanted.
The SPD will recoil at the prospect, sit on the fence, and finally give in, because Merkel has a powerful disciplinary instrument: she could call a new election, in which the CDU would probably win an outright majority.
A grand coalition is not the worst option.
Nothing fades as quickly as the glow of an election victory, and the German idyll will soon be disturbed by harsh reality – the European Union’s simmering crisis, Syria, Iran, and energy policy.
The need for consensus is especially acute with respect to the difficult decisions concerning Europe that the German government now faces.
Greece needs more debt relief.
A European banking union with joint liability cannot be put off much longer.
The same is true of many other issues.
A winter of discontent awaits Merkel, followed by a European election campaign that is likely to bring the CDU back down to earth.
But no one should expect a significant change in Merkel’s EU policy or her approach to foreign affairs and security questions.
Her positions on these issues have now been endorsed by a huge portion of the German electorate; and, from a certain age, most people – including those in high office – do not change easily.
Besides, in these matters, there is no longer much difference between the center-right CDU and the center-left SPD.
A grand coalition could show greater flexibility in addressing the euro crisis, but less on questions of foreign and security policy.
In this respect, however, Germany would gain much from the opportunity to craft a proper foreign policy in the framework of the EU and the Western alliance that in recent years has had a dangerous void where Germany used to be – though this is more a vague hope than a concrete expectation.
It will also be interesting to see if and how Merkel tackles Germany’s muddled Energiewende (energy turnaround) – the move to a low-carbon economy that is the most important domestic project of her tenure.
Either she will succeed with it, or it will become a monumental disgrace for Germany and a disaster for the German economy.
The decisive questions now are whether she musters the courage to concentrate all the necessary responsibilities for this mega-project in the energy ministry, and whom she entrusts with overseeing this Herculean task.
The late editor of the weekly magazine Der Spiegel, Rudolf Augstein, who never liked former Chancellor Helmut Kohl, titled his commentary about German reunification “Congratulations, Chancellor!”
For Merkel, Sunday’s election has opened a door, especially with respect to overcoming the euro crisis and to deepening European integration.
But, until she walks through it, I will refrain from congratulating her.
The Human Stew
LONDON – What defines a modern human?
The biological answer is simple: a member of the species Homo sapiens that is characterized by such features as a relatively large brain set in a globular braincase, small brow ridges over the eyes, a small retracted face, a chin on the lower jaw, and a lightly built skeleton.
Many of modern humans’ biological traits – at least those that can be preserved as fossils – were already present in Africa and Israel more than 100,000 years ago.
But other factors – such as complex societies, ceremonies, spiritual beliefs, art, music, technology, and language – also characterize modern human populations.
Which traits are crucial to the definition of a “modern human,” and how far back can the classification be applied?
Given that humans’ morphological and behavioral characteristics evolved at different rates, this question is a source of controversy.
Indeed, paleontologists studying the physical origins of Homo sapiens will inevitably differ from archaeologists reconstructing ancient behavior over what constitutes an early modern human.
Recent discoveries in paleontology, archaeology, and especially genetics of striking similarities between extant humans and some ancient populations are further complicating assessments of modern humans’ origins.
One leading idea was that modern humans’ primitive ancestor Homo erectus left Africa nearly two million years ago, and dispersed into other areas of the world.
Regional populations then steadily evolved into Homo sapiens, with modern human behaviors first emerging in Europe roughly 40,000 years ago.
But new evidence suggests that modern humans evolved relatively recently in Africa – and that the transformation that they underwent after their departure some 60,000 years ago was far from seamless.
Specifically, studies of Homo sapiens’ close but extinct relatives, the Neanderthals, are revealing new facets of modern human development, while intensifying the long-running debate over the differences between the two species’ behavioral capabilities.
Growing archaeological evidence of key elements associated with Homo sapiens is emerging at sites in Africa that are more than 60,000 years old.
These include complex tools (which require several stages of manufacture), symbolism (for example, red hematite pigments for notation and beads for display, made from sea shells and ostrich eggshells), and long-distance networks of contact and exchange.
These discoveries support some archaeologists’ view that only Homo sapiens was advanced enough to be considered truly modern humans, while non-modern groups like the Neanderthals displayed, at best, only incipient signs of such complexity.
Moreover, genetic evidence, based on distinct DNA coding that is known to be related to brain functions in modern humans, suggests at least some cognitive contrasts between Neanderthals and Homo sapiens.
And demographic differences (small, low-density populations) may have hindered Neanderthals’ cultural evolution, compared with the wider networks established by early modern human groups, initially in Africa, and subsequently worldwide.
But evidence also suggests that some Neanderthals buried their dead with grave goods (items presumably intended to help the deceased in the afterlife), produced complex tools (such as stone armatures mounted with mastics), and developed personal symbols (including manganese oxide pigments and pendants made from animal teeth).
They apparently also used plants with medicinal properties.
Furthermore, increasingly sophisticated DNA studies of extinct populations have shown that, despite their general classification as the distinct species Homo neanderthalensis, Neanderthals interbred with modern human groups as they dispersed out of Africa.
As a result, many people’s genomes contain roughly 1% Neanderthal DNA.
Given this hybridization, some researchers argue that the species boundary between modern humans and Neanderthals should be reconsidered, and that both should be classified as Homo sapiens. But I believe that a morphology-based species distinction is still warranted.
In fact, the scientific dispute reflects the real-world limitations of the concept of distinct biological species, which does not allow for interbreeding.
The situation is further complicated by additional instances of ancient interbreeding among native populations in Africa and Australasia (for example, Australia, New Guinea, and Bougainville).
In the latter case, the interbreeding derived from a population known so far from only one site – Denisova cave in southern Siberia.
Fossils from there contain DNA related to, but distinct from, that of the Neanderthals.
Today, remnants of this DNA – amounting to roughly 3% of some people’s genomes – are present in Australasia.
This indicates that the “Denisovans” must have existed not just in Siberia, but also along the southeast Asian route that early modern humans used to reach Australasia, where the hypothesized hybridization occurred.
Even Sub-Saharan Africans of today show traces of a distinct episode of interbreeding within the last 50,000 years.
In this case, the source may have been as-yet-unknown remnants of the ancient species Homo heidelbergensis – a direct ancestor of both Homo sapiens and Homo neanderthalensis – surviving somewhere in southern Africa.
But the real-world implications of the persistence of DNA from such interbreeding should not be misconstrued.
The fact that paleoanthropologists commonly refer to the Neanderthals as “archaic” humans, owing to their primitive features, could lead to the semantic trap of regarding living humans with greater inputs of DNA from ancient interbreeding as somehow less “evolved” than the rest of humanity.
In reality, given that most human DNA shares recent African origins, all living humans should be considered equally “modern.”
But the recent discoveries cannot be ignored.
The availability of commercial genetic tests that reveal roughly how much Neanderthal DNA an individual possesses provides an opportunity to appreciate the complex origins of modern humans.
While continuing to highlight humankind’s shared modernity and African origins, we must also begin to accept and understand the emerging patchwork nature of our biological history.
The Confidence Game
Confidence is a vital element of life, for nations and civilizations as much as for individuals.
Confidence is the ingredient of hope.
It allows you to project yourself into the future, to fulfill or even transcend your capabilities.
It comes from within, but can be reinforced or weakened by the way others perceive you.
But confidence, like blood pressure, must be balanced: the problem starts when you have too much or too little of it.
Overconfidence tends to be as destabilizing as a lack of it.
Consider, for example, America in Iraq.
The Bush administration’s overconfidence in the validity of its objectives – democratizing the Middle East – much more than implementation failures, was the key factor behind the unfolding catastrophe there.
I recently debated one of the key thinkers behind the decision to “liberate” Iraq from Saddam Hussein.
A prominent neo-conservative, he seemed to me something of a Bolshevik of democracy, owing to his unshakeable confidence in the validity of his vision.
According to him, the status quo in the Middle East was untenable and dangerous.
Democracy in Iraq would not only bring peace in Jerusalem, but also a new, safer, and better equilibrium in the entire Arab world.
Because the United States is the most powerful and wisest of nations, it has a unique role to play, and the world should rally behind it in courageously tackling this challenge.
In other words, even as late as the early summer of 2007, he was, like the Bush administration, in a state of denial.
For him, things were going well in Iraq, and a new balance of forces was being established – one that would benefit Iraq’s Shia majority, but not necessarily Iran.
The courage and audacity of the US government and its army was finally “paying off.”
Daily violence should not be allowed to hide deeper strategic realities: victory was around the corner, and soon, the world – despite all the anti-Bush propaganda – would recognize it.
At such a level, overconfidence is generally the product of an excessive assessment of one’s capabilities and an insufficient appreciation of the capabilities of one’s adversary.
Both are the product of an ideological reading of the world that bears little connection with reality.
In invading Russia in 1941, Hitler, like Napoleon, demonstrated a military overconfidence that resulted in catastrophe.
Saddam himself fatally overplayed his cards, convinced as he was that America would not dare to attack him.
At the same time, lack of confidence on the part of a country, a culture, or a civilization can be just as dangerous.
The deep conviction that reform can only lead to revolution and chaos results in a stultification of reality that can lead to immobility and despair – and thus become a dangerous and self-fulfilling prophecy.
For example, in Egypt, which is highly representative of the prevailing political situation in the Middle East, the status quo is the result of the regime’s absolute lack of confidence in its ability to open up and reform.
This same lack of confidence is behind the potentially explosive situations in Algeria, Tunisia, and even Morocco.
Because their legitimacy does not rest upon the support of their people, these non-democratic regimes consider the risk of opening themselves greater than the cost of maintaining the status quo.
Of course, confidence and self-doubt are not mutually exclusive.
A country like Israel booms with economic confidence, but is full of self-doubt when it comes to strategic and political considerations.
Can the right amount of confidence be instilled in countries or groups that badly need it?
And if overconfidence is so dangerous, can restraint and modesty be taught to those who do not have it?
Strangely, it may be easier to gain confidence than to restrain it.
Confidence can come from three things: hope, pride, and progress.
Success breeds confidence, and confidence brings progress.
Today’s Chinese and Indians are now convinced that they are succeeding.
They see in the West a mixture of respect for their achievements and apprehension for the challenge they now pose, and that fills them with pride.
Attempting to impose democracy on others is an act of unbounded arrogance.
But democracy is also the best remedy against overconfidence, because it allows ordinary people to decide whether their leaders are behaving arrogantly or responsibly.
Only the self-correcting mechanisms of truly democratic regimes can ensure the right balance.
The Consequences of Angela Merkel
LONDON – Germany has been leading the opposition in the European Union to any write-down of troubled eurozone members’ sovereign debt.
Instead, it has agreed to establish bailout mechanisms such as the European Financial Stability Facility and the European Financial Stabilization Mechanism, which can lend up to €500 billion ($680 billion) combined, with the International Monetary Fund providing an additional €250 billion.
These are essentially refinancing mechanisms.
Heavily indebted eurozone members can apply to borrow from them at less than the commercial rate, conditional on their committing to ever more drastic fiscal austerity.
Principal and interest on outstanding debt have been left intact.
Thus, creditors – mainly German and French banks – are not expected to suffer losses on their existing loans, while borrowers gain more time to “put their houses in order.”
That, at least, is the theory.
So far, three countries – Greece, Ireland, and Portugal – have availed themselves of this facility.
In mid-July 2011, Greece’s sovereign debt stood at €350 billion (160% of GDP).
The Greek government currently must pay 25% for its ten-year bonds, which are trading at a 50% discount in the secondary market.
In other words, investors are expecting to receive only about half of what they are owed.
The hope is that the reduction in borrowing costs on new loans, plus the austerity programs promised by governments, will enable bond prices to recover to par without the need for the creditor banks to take a hit.
This is pie in the sky.
Unless a large part of its debt is forgiven, Greece will not regain creditworthiness.
(Indeed, by most accounts, it is about to default.)
And the same is true, albeit to a lesser degree, for other heavily indebted sovereigns.
Any credible bailout plan must require creditor banks to accept that they will lose at least half of their money.
In the United States’ successful Brady Bond plan in 1989, the debtors – Mexico, Argentina, and Brazil – agreed to pay what they could.
The banks that had loaned them the money replaced the old debt with new bonds at par value, which averaged 50% of the old bonds, and the US government provided some sweeteners.
It was write-offs and devaluations, not austerity programs, that allowed bond prices to recover.
In the Greek case, creditors have yet to accept the need for write-offs, and European governments have provided them with no incentives to do so.
Germany’s opposition to debt forgiveness is thus bad economics, bad politics (except at home), and bad history.
The Germans should remember the reparations fiasco of the 1920’s.
In the Treaty of Versailles, the victorious Allies insisted that Germany should pay for “the cost of the war.”
They added up the figures, and in 1921 they presented the bill: Germany “owed” the victors £6.6 billion (85% of its GDP), payable in 30 annual installments.
This amounted to transferring annually 8-10% of Germany’s national income, or 65-76% of its exports.
Within a year, Germany had asked for, and obtained, a moratorium.
New bond issues, following a big debt write-down in 1924 (the Dawes Plan), enabled Germany to borrow the money to resume payments.
There then followed a crazy system:  Germany borrowed money from the US in order to repay Britain, France, and Belgium, while France and Belgium used a bit of it to pay back Britain, and Britain used more of it to pay back the US.
This whole tangle of debts was finally de facto written off in 1932 in the middle of the global slump.
But, until 1980, Germany continued repaying the loans that it had incurred to pay the reparations.
From the start, the economist John Maynard Keynes had been a fierce critic of the reparations policy imposed on Germany.
He made three main points: Germany didn’t have the capacity to pay were it to regain anything like a normal standard of living; any attempt to force it to reduce its standard of living would produce revolution; and to the extent that Germany was able to increase its exports to pay reparations, this would be at the expense of the recipients’ exports.
What was needed was cancelation of reparations and inter-Allied war debts as a whole, together with a big reconstruction loan to put the shattered European economies back on their feet.
In 1919, Keynes produced a grand plan for comprehensive debt cancellation, plus a new bond issue, guaranteed by the Allied powers, whose proceeds would go to victors and vanquished alike.
The Americans, who would have had to provide most of the money, vetoed the plan.
The point to which Keynes kept returning was that the attempt to extract debt payments over many years would have disastrous social consequences.
“The policy of reducing Germany to servitude for a generation, of degrading the lives of millions of human beings, and of depriving a whole nation of happiness should be abhorrent and detestable,” he wrote, “even if it does not sow the decay of the whole civilized life of Europe.”
History never repeats itself exactly, but there are lessons to be learned from that episode.
Germans today would say that, unlike reparations, the Greek and Mediterranean debts were voluntarily incurred, not coerced.
This raises the question of justice, but not the economic consequences of insisting on payment.
Moreover, there is a fallacy of composition: if there are too many debt collectors, they will impoverish the very people on whom their own prosperity depends.
In the 1920’s, Germany ended up having to pay only a small fraction of its reparation bill, but the long time it took to get to that point prevented the full recovery of Europe, made Germany itself the most conspicuous victim of the Great Depression, and bred widespread resentment, with dire political consequences.
German Chancellor Angela Merkel would do well to ponder that history.
Abenomics and Asia
SEOUL – Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe’s economic agenda – dubbed “Abenomics” – seems to be working for his country.
Expansionary monetary policy is expected to inject liquidity into the Japanese economy until inflation hits the Bank of Japan’s 2% target, while expansionary fiscal policy is expected to continue until economic recovery takes hold.
As a result, consumer and investor confidence is returning.
The Japanese stock market has soared more than 40% since November of last year, when it became clear that Abe would form the next government, and exports and growth are also picking up.
With a large output gap and low inflationary pressure, expansionary policies show great potential for reviving economic activity.
But other countries – including neighboring Asian economies – fear that Japan is devaluing the yen to bolster exports and growth at their expense.
Some have accused Japan of fueling a global “currency war.”
Anticipation of aggressive monetary expansion has sharply weakened the yen, which has fallen by almost 20% against the dollar in just over four months.
Of course, Japan’s escape from its 15-year deflationary trap and two decades of economic stagnation would be good for the world.
Japan remains the world’s third-largest economy, the fourth-largest trader, and the third-largest export market for neighboring China and South Korea, which thus stand to benefit if “Abenomics” revitalizes Japanese domestic demand.
More broadly, given Europe’s slide into recession and only a slow rise in world trade volume, renewed growth and stronger import demand in Japan would support global recovery.
The question now is whether Abenomics can achieve its goals without destabilizing the world economy, especially neighboring Asian economies.
Doing so requires Japanese policymakers to focus on more sustainable growth while averting a vicious cycle of competitive devaluation and protectionism with Japan’s trade partners.
In particular, expansionary monetary and fiscal policies – which are helpful in the short term – must be accompanied by fundamental structural reforms.
Japan’s deflation and economic stagnation over the last two decades stemmed largely from a dysfunctional financial system and a lack of private demand.
The collapse of asset bubbles in the 1990’s left Japan’s financial system and private sector saddled with a huge debt overhang.
Recovery began only after the balance-sheet weaknesses in the financial, household, and corporate sectors were addressed.
Sustainable growth requires sustained private-sector demand.
Monetary easing and fiscal stimulus, combined with structural measures to restore private firms to financial health, would stimulate household expenditure and business investment.
Indeed, the impact of real exchange-rate depreciation on growth is likely to be short-lived&#160;unless increased corporate profits in the export sector lead to higher household consumption and investment.
And yet risks to financial and fiscal stability could arise if higher inflation and currency depreciation were to spoil investors’ appetite for Japanese government bonds, thereby pushing up nominal interest rates.
That is why the success of “Abenomics” hinges not on the short-term stimulus provided by aggressive monetary expansion and fiscal policies, but on a program of structural reform that increases competition and innovation, and that combats the adverse effects of an aging population.
Japan, of course, is not alone in using exchange-rate policies to keep exports competitive.
Many emerging economies’ authorities intervene in currency markets to prevent exchange-rate appreciation and a loss of export competitiveness.
But if Japan starts to intervene directly in global currency markets to ensure a weaker yen, neighboring competitors will respond in kind.
The danger of a currency war and protectionism should not be underestimated.
In South Korea, the government and business leaders worry that a stronger won, which recently rose to its highest level against the yen since August 2011, will hurt key export sectors, including automobiles, machinery, and electronics.
One report by a Korean research institute shows that the Korean economy will slip into recession if the yen-dollar exchange rate nears 118, its average level back in 2007.
Moreover, unlimited quantitative easing by the Bank of Japan, the Federal Reserve, and the European Central Bank also increases the risk of volatile capital flows and asset bubbles in Asian emerging economies.
Chinese policymakers have raised serious concerns about the growing risks of inflation and property bubbles.
This delicate situation could escalate into further currency intervention, trade protectionism, and capital controls.
Beggar-thy-neighbor policies could lower total trade volume – a zero-sum game from which no one would benefit.
After all, Japanese exports rely on emerging and developing markets, with East Asia alone accounting for nearly half of Japan’s foreign sales.
The regional economy would benefit from closer coordination of exchange-rate and monetary policies.
Mechanisms like the G-20 and ASEAN+3 (ASEAN, with China, Japan, and South Korea) should be used more actively for policy dialogue and surveillance.
East Asian economies could then, over time, cooperate to enhance regional exchange-rate stability, thereby creating a more conducive environment for intra-regional trade.
Japan’s economy is moving at last, which bodes well for Asia and the world.
But, despite its new vigor, the benefits of recovery could prove to be short-lived unless a sustainable and cooperative growth path is found.
The Consequences of Korean Extremism
SEOUL – Once again, the Korean peninsula is experiencing one of its periodic bouts of extremism, this time marked by the suicide on May 22 of former president, Roh Moo-hyun, and North Korea’s second test of a nuclear device.
Roh’s suicide is a disaster for his family and a national shame, while North Korean leader Kim Jong-il’s nuclear blast is something of a temper tantrum, but one which may have dire consequences for the two Koreas and the world.
The North Korean bomb, estimated at four kilotons, does not come anywhere near the magnitude of the atomic bombs of 15-21 kilotons that America dropped on Japan 64 years ago.
Indeed, this vainglorious attempt by Kim Jong-il reminds Koreans of the mother bullfrog in Aesop’s Fables who puffed herself out to imitate an ox.
Yet North Korea’s world-defying belligerency is not utter madness.
Rather, it is a by-product of its own acute fears of regime collapse.
As a Korean, I am always puzzled by Korean extremism.
Where in the world can you find a more isolated, regimented and militarized dynastic mutation of a communist totalitarian system than in North Korea?
Where on earth can you see a nuclear-armed, missile-shooting panhandler such as Kim Jong-il?
Is there another country where only a father and his son have ruled like demigods for the last 61 years?
Likewise, where else but in South Korea can you find a Christian church whose registered membership runs upwards of 800,000, and where nearly 100,000 adherents attend each of the three Sunday services every week?
Where else can you witness an ex-president commit suicide by jumping off a cliff near his residence?
And this in a country that had an estimated per capita income of $40 in the 1940’s but has now become the world’s 12th or 13th largest economy.
Cornelius Osgood, an American anthropologist, attributed Korean extremism to the peninsula’s weather.
He observed that the Korean temperament is a product of long, harsh Siberian winters and hot, humid summers, with only short springs and autumns.
I believe, however, that Korean extremism stems from the country’s geography and history.
Surrounded by hostile neighbors, such as Chinese, Mongols, and Manchus in the north and Japanese across the sea, Koreans have struggle tooth and nail for thousands of years to retain their ethnic, linguistic, cultural, and political identity.
Setting the blame game aside, what can be done with North Korea?
Unfortunately, putting the nuclear genie back in the bottle is next to impossible.
The effectiveness of available options is limited, and all of them are pregnant with unpredictable political and military consequences.
“Economic strangulation” of North Korea appears to be the fallback option.
Strengthening and tightening United Nations Security Council Resolution 1718, crafted in the wake of North Korea’s first nuclear test in October 2006, should be the immediate task.
The Security Council is already at work drafting a new resolution.
But, to make the new resolution effective, China’s full and unwavering participation – which has not yet been the case – is critical.
Any unilateral measures against North Korea by individual countries must be executed within the broader framework of the new resolution.
And, even if new sanctions are imposed, the door to the Six-Party Talks must be left open for Kim Jong-il.
In this eyeball-to-eyeball situation, the other five parties in the talks – China, Japan, Russia, the United States, and South Korea – must not give in first to North Korea.
At present, public opinion worldwide, particularly in South Korea and Japan, is highly volatile.
A cooling-off period is necessary.
Seeking dialogue with North Korea immediately after its missile tantrum and nuclear brinkmanship is unwise and impractical.
After tough and effective UN-led sanctions are imposed, the concerned parties must wait until North Korea feels the pain of the economic squeeze.
But, as North Korea is one of the world’s poorest and least globalized states, the effectiveness of sanctions will be limited.
At the same time, the nuclear threat is not the most immediate danger.
The bigger threat today is actual combat, for, the day after North Korea’s nuclear test, South Korea announced its full participation in the US-led Proliferation Strategic Initiative, which seeks to intercept ships that may be involved in illegally transporting nuclear technology.
North Korea blasted this South Korean decision as a “declaration of war.”
So great care and cool heads will be needed in the seas around Korea in the days and weeks to come.
Rising tension on the Korean Peninsula is shattering fast the glimmers of hope for re-unity that followed ten years of progress under the Kim Dae-Jung and Roh Moo-hyun governments.
South Korean President Lee Myung-bak, through his flip-flops, and Kim Jong Il, with his renewed nuclear blackmail, both seem determined to see relations deteriorate.
The two current leaders in Korea must not repeat the mistake of their predecessors in the latter part of the nineteenth century.
Blinded by internecine domestic power struggles, they failed to see the great powers’ strategic gambits in the region.
That failure led directly to the colonization of Korea by Japan.
Worsening inter-Korean relations will certainly make both sides less secure and stable politically, economically, and militarily.
Caught in this vicious spiral, North and South Korea will become far more vulnerable to neighboring powers’ strategic maneuvers.
As a result, growing inter-Korean hostility may ultimately prove far more lethal to the well-being of all Koreans than Roh Moo-hyun’s tragic suicide and Kim Jong-il’s futile fireworks.
The Syria Lessons
PRINCETON – As the United States and Russia try to broker a conference that can bring the various sides in the Syrian conflict to the negotiating table, potential Western participants, at least, should be thinking about the larger implications of the Syrian conflict for dictators and democracies around the world.
Here are the lessons thus far:
Bad guys help their friends.
The Russians and Iranians are willing to do whatever it takes to keep President Bashar al-Assad in power.
Hezbollah, supplied by Iran, has now moved openly onto the battlefield in support of the Assad regime.
Russia and Iran have kept the Syrian government supplied with heavy weapons and other military assistance, including a Russian shipment of sophisticated anti-ship missiles with advanced radar systems.
These will help Assad hunker down and fend off all comers in an Alawite mini-state that will include the Russian-leased port facility at Tartus.
Diplomacy without a credible threat of force is empty talk.
“Speak softly and carry a big stick,” Theodore Roosevelt counseled.
President Barack Obama rightly wants to lead in global affairs through civilian more than military power; he understands that military solutions to foreign-policy problems are hugely expensive and often counter-productive in terms of advancing US security and prosperity over the long term.
But Obama’s strategy in Syria seems to be “speak loudly and throw away your stick.”
Obama has made it clear over and over (as has NATO Secretary General Anders Fogh Rasmussen) that he has no interest in intervening militarily in Syria.
And the US response to the latest Russian missile shipment?
Secretary of State John Kerry said: “I think we’ve made it crystal clear we would prefer that Russia was not supplying assistance.”
The US has cast aside one of its most important foreign policy tools, creating an incentive for the Syrian government and its supporters to keep fighting until they are in the most advantageous position possible to negotiate a settlement – that is, if they have any incentive to negotiate at all.
If you are a dictator facing sustained political protests, be as brutal as possible and incite sectarian killing.
Part of Syria’s agony is the self-fulfilling nature of the conflict.
From March to December 2011, hundreds of thousands of Syrians marched every Friday, seeking the same political liberalization that Tunisians, Egyptians, Yemenis, Bahrainis, Jordanians, and others across the Middle East and North Africa sought in what was optimistically called “the Arab Spring.”
Unarmed, they were shot in the streets by riot police and government snipers, until they finally started forming small local militias for self-protection – militias that gradually grew into the loose federation of forces now known as the Free Syrian Army.
All the while, Assad was describing the violence as the product of terrorists and Sunni extremists seeking dominion over minority Alawites, Druze, Kurds, Christians, and other groups.
He worked assiduously to fan the flames of sectarian civil war, succeeding to the extent that now the chief reason for not intervening to stop the killing is the impossibility of doing so effectively in an environment of sectarian violence.
Regional organizations are still unable to solve regional problems without great-power leadership.
Turkey has been threatening and calling for military action for 18 months, but US officials say that the Turks are not in fact ready to do anything beyond providing support for refugees and opposition fighters.
Qatar and Saudi Arabia are also sending arms to Syrian opposition groups, but the Arab League and the Gulf Cooperation Council are paralyzed.
Without a great power that is willing both to share the lead and to push from behind, regional organizations cannot take charge in their own neighborhood.
Human suffering, even on a massive and destabilizing scale, will not move the world to action.
In a recent conversation about Syria with a couple of well-known foreign policy experts, one participant suggested that the Middle East’s current borders, drawn in colonial times, cannot last and must be redrawn.
I pointed out the possibility of a Middle East conflagration equivalent to the Thirty Years War in Europe, which is estimated to have killed between half and three-quarters of the population of some of the participating states.
One of my interlocutors agreed, but said that we could do nothing to stop it, because “that’s the period of history we’re in.”
For all the world’s pious proclamations about “never again,” a mantra arising from the Holocaust, mass murder almost never motivates foreign intervention.
It is astounding to think that the world mobilized immediately to push Iraq out of Kuwait in 1991, but has dithered for more than two years as tens of thousands of Syrians have been killed, and their country, a cradle of civilization, laid waste.
“Humanitarian” intervention – action that is motivated by our concern for the fate of fellow human beings – is often described as reflecting “moral concern.”
But how many wars does it take for us to understand that killing always begets more killing?
People who watch the butchering of their children and parents, the rape of their wives, daughters, and sisters, and the wanton destruction of their homes and livelihoods do not forget.
They carry vengeance in their hearts from generation to generation, until a measure of justice is done, nursing their enmity in frozen conflicts that block economic growth, prevent the formation of social capital, and paralyze political institutions.
When no side in a war has a reason to stop fighting, a peace conference cannot succeed.
In Syria, the moral, strategic, and political arguments all converge in favor of decisive action to stop the killing, if not forever, at least for now, to create a space for peace.
But if the lessons of the past two years are any guide, the wheels of violence will keep on turning.
Will Europe End in Croatia?
MAYNOOTH, IRELAND – Despite its many woes, the European Union remains a lodestar for poorer states outside its borders.
Indeed, the gravitational pull of the EU’s enlargement process has been the most important factor in the reconstitution of economic, political, and civic life in the western Balkans since the end of the post-Yugoslav wars of the 1990’s.
Croatia’s accession to the EU on July 1 provides a welcome boost to a region that has been placed on the back burner as a result of “enlargement fatigue” and the EU’s crisis-induced introspection.
Enlargement advocates also point to the deal signed by Kosovo and Serbia in April as another key development in unlocking the Balkans’ European future.
The decisive break with more than a decade of war and confrontation came in December 2012, when Kosovo and Serbia began to implement an agreement on border control.
The April agreement goes further by establishing a power-sharing arrangement in northern Kosovo that is designed to bolster local self-government through an association of Serb-majority municipalities while providing new arrangements for policing and the judiciary.
The just-concluded meeting of the European Council acknowledged the progress made by both Serbia and Kosovo, with the Serbs being given a (somewhat conditional) start date for accession negotiations and Kosovo to begin a “pre-screening” process.
The EU bet here is that, on the back of Croatia’s accession, the enlargement logjam in the western Balkans will finally be broken.
But enlargement fatigue among the member states continues to muddy this optimistic forecast.
Although more than three-quarters of the EU’s member states are former enlargement countries, the Union’s expansion is no longer viewed as an unalloyed success story.
On the contrary, it is often presented as a bridge too far.
In fact, enlargement fatigue has been the dominant feature of EU relations with the western Balkan states and explains why the accession process has been flat-lining along a path of frozen negotiations and mutual mistrust toward an increasingly uncertain destination.
This remains the case even after Croatia’s accession.
Enlargement fatigue entered the European political lexicon in the wake of the dramatic failures of the French and Dutch referenda on the EU Constitutional Treaty in 2005.
The seismic shock of the treaty’s rejection by two original EU members cried out for a scapegoat, and the “big bang” enlargement completed the previous year – in which eight post-communist countries (along with Cyprus and Malta) joined simultaneously – seemed a good place to put the blame.
Suddenly, Polish plumbers were inundating the “old” member states.
The western Balkan applicants have thus had to contend with a process that is now managed on a more intergovernmental basis than was the big bang of 2004, and which has, at times, been held hostage to member states’ selfish bilateral demands.
Enlargement was traditionally viewed as an area where national interests would be more readily set aside than in conventional EU settings: the normative dimension of the process seemed to demand a more community-oriented approach to decision-making.
But that has changed fundamentally.
Enlargement is now more easily politicized in individual member states, and this is especially the case where there is a groundswell of Euro-skepticism upon which to draw.
The European Council, rather than the European Commission, is increasingly setting the benchmarks for delineating progress in accession talks, thus largely determining the pace at which negotiations proceed.
This intergovernmental mode of enlargement decision-making was evident as Slovenia made significant maritime territorial demands of Croatia.
It can also be seen in the continuing Greek objections to Macedonia’s name and the Bundestag’s insistence on approving the progress of individual applicant states – a demand that has complicated relations with Turkey enormously.
There is ample evidence from earlier enlargement rounds of the transformative power of the EU to democratize and “Europeanize” states in advance of their accessions.
But the EU will succeed in transposing its laws, norms, and values to accession candidates only if applicant governments take its promises seriously.
They must be willing to bear the costs of implementation because they believe that the benefits to their countries as EU members (or to themselves as political actors) will be realized.
So the EU’s promise of membership simply has to be credible if accession-driven reforms are to succeed and EU norms internalized in applicant states.
The EU’s real problem in the western Balkans is that the promise (of membership) made to aspiring states in 2003 is no longer sufficient to counter the currents of enlargement fatigue, which has led to reform fatigue, slowing the progress of the region’s applicants to a virtual standstill.
Indeed, unlike in previous accession rounds, the EU has provided no concrete timetable for achieving the promise of membership made in Thessaloniki ten years ago.
Rather, the process remains open and indeterminate.
EU Commissioner for Enlargement and European Neighborhood Policy Štefan Füle insists that enlargement is progressing, but the western Balkans remains a fragile region, defined by mutually antagonistic nationalisms, incomplete state formation, deep and pervasive patterns of corruption, and endemic economic mismanagement.
As the EU celebrates the accession of Croatia – which will undoubtedly provide a short-term boost to the reform process throughout the western Balkans – it faces a profound choice in its engagement with the region.
It can reinvigorate the spirit of earlier enlargement rounds, or it can succumb to enlargement fatigue.
Either way, the region’s future hangs in the balance.
The Latin Difference
PRINCETON – It is increasingly popular to think of Europe in binary terms.
French President François Hollande is constantly flirting with the idea of building a new Latin bloc, in which Spain and Italy would join France in the struggle against fiscal austerity.
In this vision, Latin superiority consists in a more expansive view of the state’s capacity to secure incomes and create wealth, and less of the “Protestant” obsession with the individual’s work.
The proposal is not altogether new.
As the Italian philosopher Giorgio Agamben recently emphasized, it appeared at the beginning of the postwar era.
In August 1945, a French intellectual, Alexandre Kojève, submitted to General Charles de Gaulle a sketch for a new foreign policy, based on a Latin “third way” between Anglo-American capitalism and Soviet-Slavic Marxism.
But there are even older variants of the French vision of Europe.
In the middle of the nineteenth century, the French Emperor Napoleon III actually created a Latin Monetary Union, which included Belgium, Italy, and Switzerland.
Napoleon saw the scheme as a potential basis for a single world currency.
The British economist Walter Bagehot replied at the time that there would probably be two competing world currencies, which he termed Latin and Teutonic.
A better way to understand economic differences is to view them as a reflection of alternative institutional and constitutional arrangements.
In Europe, that difference stems from two revolutions, one peaceful and wealth-enhancing (1688 in England), and the other violent and destructive (1789 in France).
In the late seventeenth century, in the wake of Britain’s Glorious Revolution, when Britain revolted against the spendthrift and autocratic Stuart dynasty, the British government that was formed after William and Mary assumed the throne adopted a new approach to debt.
Voting budgets in parliament – a representative institution – ensured that the people as a whole were liable for the obligations incurred by their government.
They would thus have a powerful incentive to impose controls on spending to insure that their claims could be met.
This constitutional approach limited the scope for wasteful spending on luxurious court life (as well as on military adventure), which had been the hallmark of early modern autocratic monarchy.
The result was a dramatic reduction in the British state’s borrowing costs and the emergence of a well-functioning capital market, which caused private borrowing costs to fall as well.
Representative government, and its logical outgrowth, the democratic principle, became part of the classic model of good debt management.
The alternative model to British constitutionalism was ancien régime France.
Official bankruptcy, a regular occurrence, required prolonging maturities on state debt and reducing interest payments.
But this solution raised the cost of new borrowing, so France began to consider the British model.
The problem was that the imitation was imperfect.
After the conclusion of the American War of Independence, instead of returning to the old model of default, which had been applied as recently as 1770, the French elite did everything it could to avoid that outcome.
Fearing that the system was fragile, the government opened its coffers in 1787, bailing out private investors who had lost in an immense speculative scheme to corner shares in a reorganized East India Company.
But there was an immediate problem: the existing tax system had reached its limits, and no more revenue could be raised without ending time-honored privileges and immunities.
In the end, the only viable course was massive confiscation – the creation of biens nationaux as the basis for the issuance of state debt.
But that measure, instead of restoring financial calm, led to an escalation of expectations regarding what the state could and should do, and exacerbated social tensions.
Adherence to the principle of non-default produced the French Revolution, the lesson being that political systems will collapse if they take on too much debt and try to pay at any cost.
The situation was the reverse of Britain.
In France, there was no adequately functioning market that differentiated among risks.
The state’s commitments became incredible as it absorbed losses produced in the non-functioning market.
The French experience exacted a high long-term price: French society was poorer relative to Britain in the century after the Revolution.
But the French Revolution also produced a powerful and attractive myth of social transformation.
Far from discrediting the flawed approach to debt management, the “nation,” which succeeded absolutist monarchy as the basis of political authority, remained wedded to statist solutions.
John Kerry’s Tricky Bid
LONDON – In Why You Lose at Bridge (the funniest book about bridge ever written), my uncle, S. J. Simon, advised players to aim “not for the best possible result, but the best result possible” with the partner you have.
This advice applies to the long-stalled Israel-Palestine peace process, newly revived by US Secretary of State John Kerry.
The United Nations spelled out the “best possible result” in 1947: Palestine – then a British mandate – was to be partitioned into two states of approximately equal size.
Israel accepted this, but the Palestinians did not, so the Palestinian state was never established.
In successive wars, Israel seized all the land allocated to Palestine, mainly the West Bank of the Jordan River and Gaza, now swarming with millions of Palestinian refugees.
Since the Oslo Accords of 1993, which envisaged a Palestinian state on the West Bank and in Gaza, “facts on the ground” have whittled down the putative Palestinian state still further.
Part of the West Bank has been annexed outright by Israel or seized by Israeli settlers.
The Palestinian Authority has been given limited autonomy over 25% of it, in non-contiguous parcels.
Kerry’s formidable task is to persuade the Palestinians to accept a smaller state than they want and the Israelis to accept a smaller state than they have.
But, with the security situation in the “occupied territories” under control, Israeli Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu’s government is content with the status quo.
So Kerry’s blandishments are directed toward the Palestinians.
His strategy seems to be to bribe them with $4 billion to accept a (temporary) “bantustan” solution (so named for the nominally autonomous states to which South Africa’s apartheid regime confined most of the country’s black majority).
It just might work.
Palestinian Authority President Mahmoud Abbas might be attracted by the money if it is accompanied by the trappings and symbols of statehood.
At 78, he is a president in urgent need of a state.
The Netanyahu government, too, might conceivably agree to a Palestinian “entity” on 75% of the West Bank, provided that Israel remained in overall control.
Kerry’s initiative would have a greater chance of success were more money on the table.
One way to increase it would be to convert the Palestinian demand for a “right of return” (to Israeli lands from which they fled in 1947-1948) into a right to compensation.
At the failed Camp David summit in 2000, Israeli negotiators suggested a $30 billion international fund that would make payments to genuine refugees.
By revisiting the Israeli offer, Kerry could neatly combine economic stimulus with fulfillment of a key Palestinian demand.
Nevertheless, even with the extra cash, neither side would be likely to accept such a simulacrum of the two-state solution.
Although such a deal might satisfy Israel’s security needs, it would mean abandoning the Greater Israel project championed by hardline Zionists and religious extremists.
And, although Abbas might be tempted by cosmetic changes to the status quo, most Palestinians probably would reject them as fraudulent.
A peace settlement should not be impossible.
There would need to be agreement on the amount of territory reserved for the Palestinian state.
Since no Israeli government would surrender the West Bank border areas that have the thickest settlements, land in Israel would need to be offered as compensation.
Jerusalem would have to be divided, with UN administration of holy sites, and an agreement would be needed to police the porous frontier with Jordan.
But there is little chance that such an agreement will emerge from the current round of talks.
Most Israelis – certainly the current government – are convinced that Palestinians must be prevented by force from killing Jews.
“How do we resolve the contradiction between our extreme morality and our blatantly immoral circumstances?” asks the writer Uri Avnery.
“Simple: we go into denial.”
The desire for peace is more urgent in Ramallah than in Tel Aviv.
But Abbas has his own intransigents in the form of Hamas, which has ruled Gaza since 2006, and whose commitment to violence is a mirror image of Netanyahu’s “peace through strength.”
A genuine two-state solution thus requires a change of heart – and leadership – on both sides.
On the Israeli side, this means a less paranoid view of the Palestinians, coupled with a recognition that Israel’s behavior runs contrary to modern ethics.
Past conquest cannot be a legitimate basis for current rule.
That is why all civilized countries have given up the claim to rule by force.
The Palestinian side, for its part, must accept that Israel is here to stay, and that huge benefits can be reaped from economic cooperation.
Both sides need political leaders willing to take real risks for peace, including the risk of being killed.
After all, ordinary soldiers take this risk, so why should political leaders – who can do much greater good or ill – be immune to it?
But external pressure may create new facts.
Hamas has always believed that only violence can achieve a genuine Palestinian state, so the Israelis must fear a third intifada if Abbas cannot deliver.
Such a popular uprising would be brutally suppressed, strengthening both sides’ intransigents in the short run and undermining America’s automatic support for Israel in the long term.
Pressure for change may also come from unfolding events in the Middle East, with regional turmoil bound to affect the West Bank and Gaza.
Increasingly unstable Arab neighbors might give the Israelis a motive to make peace in a small area and thereby hold at bay the chaos outside.