Indeed, the second conclusion to be drawn from the US government shutdown is the virtual disappearance of American triumphalism.
Chest-thumping exceptionalism has given way to a more sober patriotism, in which ordinary citizens recognize the long-term trends eroding the promise of equal opportunity, particularly the shortcomings that beset the country’s health-care, education, and infrastructure systems.
The anger of Tea Party Republicans (like the anger of Occupy Wall Street protesters) reflects a sense that nothing but dramatic, even revolutionary, measures can change the system.
In response, however, more pragmatic voters are increasingly irate about political paralysis and their governing institutions’ inability to respond to the preferences of a clear majority of the population.
In the midst of the shutdown, the Republican Party’s popular approval rating sank to barely a quarter of the national electorate, a historic low, while the approval rating for Congress as a whole stood at just 5%.
The final lesson of the shutdown is that political systems of every kind benefit from the addition of women.
Many commented on the critical role played by six women senators – Republicans and Democrats – in reaching the compromises needed to end the crisis.
These women have maintained relationships with one another across the partisan divide, while those among their male colleagues have steadily deteriorated, giving way to competitive grandstanding and vituperation.
Equally important, these women felt – and acted upon – the moral necessity of actually governing.
In the words of Senator Susan Collins, a Republican from Maine who first put together the outlines of a deal and took it to the Senate floor, the shutdown “hurt all the small businesses” around Acadia National Park in her home state, “and that is plain wrong.”
The world should note.
Women are not necessarily better than men at governing, but they often have different perspectives and habits of engagement that can be essential for cutting through the standoffs created by the need to defend male egos.
They are also often more focused on the plight of actual people than on the promotion of grand principles, preferring concrete progress to abstract victory.
From parliaments to peace negotiations, adding women improves outcomes.
The US government is back at work, for now.
Negotiations for a real budget that all sides can live with are beginning.
And assessments of how the shutdown will affect the Republican Party’s fortunes in the 2014 midterm elections are rife.
But the country’s social and economic divisions will ultimately find political solutions, through elections and the efforts of millions of Americans to achieve fundamental reforms.
As frustrating and embarrassing as the last several weeks have been, it could have been much worse.
Xi’s Recipe
WASHINGTON, DC – China’s government is cracking down hard on Western journalists, threatening not to renew visas for reporters from the New York Times and Bloomberg in retaliation for their reporting on the corruption of senior Chinese officials.
Times columnist Thomas Friedman recently penned an open letter to the Chinese government telling them that, because the top “cause of death of Chinese regimes in history is greed and corruption,” a free press is more likely to help than hurt.
Anyone who holds freedom of the press and freedom of expression to be universal human rights will agree with Friedman’s position.
But, in China, politics – including the politics of rights – is always intertwined with economics.
Last month, President Xi Jinping announced a set of sweeping economic reforms at the Central Committee’s Third Plenum, setting forth his vision of “the great rejuvenation of the Chinese nation.”
His 60-point plan included reforms of fiscal policy and the financial sector that would set market interest rates on loans and deposits, permit some private-investor participation in state-owned enterprises, increase the role of small and medium-size enterprises, loosen labor restrictions, and introduce property taxes to boost revenue for local authorities.
This renewed embrace of the market, reminiscent of Deng Xiaoping’s original turn to capitalism in 1979, will be hard medicine for China’s entrenched business and government elites to swallow.
If Xi’s administration is successful – a big if – its reforms may enable China to negotiate the necessary transition from an economy driven by exports and government investment to a more sustainable growth model based on domestic consumption.
The stakes are high.
A country that has lifted hundreds of millions of people out of poverty over the last two decades must now find a way to safeguard and gradually increase those gains while engineering the same miracle for the hundreds of millions still left behind.
The world has a significant economic, political, and moral interest in the success of China’s reform agenda.
In this context, it is important to understand that Xi’s economic reforms are only one ingredient of a carefully crafted cocktail.
The rest of the recipe includes two parts popular social reforms – an end to the one-child policy for many Chinese parents and the abolition of “reeducation through labor” – and one part political crackdown.
Increased censorship and intimidation of foreign journalists, together with the imprisonment of dissidents and tighter restrictions on dissent, are an effort to ensure that economic disruption does not give rise to political rebellion.
To implement his ambitious reform agenda, Xi has taken several steps to consolidate his personal and bureaucratic power.
He has reduced the membership of the Politburo from nine to seven, making it easier to obtain agreement in a system designed to institutionalize collective leadership.
He has increased the power of the Central Committee, which he chairs. And he has created a new State Security Council.
To understand how the State Security Council could serve Xi’s interest in centralizing power, consider the United States.
Without the National Security Council and the Domestic Policy Council, the US president would have no routine way to control and coordinate different bureaucracies.
White House staff working for the National Security Council call meetings at which officials from the State Department, Defense Department, Treasury, Justice Department, and other key agencies hash out their views on a given policy.
But it is the president’s staff who guide the outcome and determines the next steps.
Xi’s moves to strengthen his hand have helped to convince observers that he means business with the reform agenda.
Since the Third Plenum ended and the scope of Xi’s reforms has become clear, many China watchers have hailed him as the most transformative leader since Deng.
Time will tell, but a key difference between 2014 and 1979 is that today the Chinese cocktail is spiked with fear.
Evan Osnos, writing in The New Yorker, reports that two years ago, in the midst of the Arab uprisings, a senior official told a meeting in Beijing that if the Chinese government “waver[ed]” in the midst of social-media-fueled global dissidence, “the state could sink into the abyss.”
Recently, Osnos writes, a high-level Chinese diplomat explained the threatened expulsion of New York Times and Bloomberg journalists on the grounds that “the Times and Bloomberg were seeking nothing short of removing the Communist Party from power, and that they must not be allowed to continue.”
That fear is one of the principal forces driving Xi’s reform agenda.
The Communist Party must keep the Chinese economy growing (even if more slowly), while fighting rampant corruption and responding to citizens’ demands.
Chinese citizens cannot vote, but they can – and do – make their displeasure known, which places a premium on what Chinese bureaucrats call “stability maintenance.”
Will Dobson, author of The Dictator’s Learning Curve, describes the Chinese government as a technocracy whose legitimacy is founded on efficient problem-solving.
“When a regime’s legitimacy is derived from its performance,” he argues, “any crisis – and how the party responds to it – can raise existential questions about the regime’s right to rule.”
China’s leaders apparently worry that Western-style investigative journalism inside China could trigger just such a crisis.
In any case, they are taking no chances.
They are placing their faith in their ability to wash their own dirty laundry and drive economic, social, and political change from the top down.
And they are less and less willing to play by Western rules.
Germany Steps Up
WASHINGTON, DC – Since the start of his first administration, US President Barack Obama has repeated a simple mantra concerning other countries: “With power comes responsibility.”
France has demonstrated repeatedly that it understands and accepts this responsibility; Germany may now be following suit.
Several weeks ago, German President Joachim Gauck’s opening address to the 50th annual Munich Security Conference reflected on the Federal Republic’s evolution over those five decades, a period that gave rise to “a good Germany, the best we have ever known.”
And, because Germany benefits more than most countries from the current open, value-based international order, it has, Gauck said, a greater responsibility to defend and extend that order.
Gauck’s speech reflected the thinking in an important new report, entitled New Power, New Responsibility, released by the Stiftung Wissenschaft und Politik and the German Marshall Fund of the United States.
The report – the product of several months of debate within the German foreign-policy and security community – identifies Germany’s current values and interests as a commitment to “human dignity, freedom, democracy, the rule of law, and to an international order that is based on universal norms.”
As Gauck proclaimed, Germany’s “overriding strategic objective” must be the “preservation and continued adaptation” of this order.
To achieve this objective, Germany must become a “shaping power,” a state with the ability to solve problems and resolve conflicts affecting all or part of the international community.
The traditional determinants of states’ power relative to other states – geography, demography, economic heft, and military might, coupled with the availability of resources and technological proficiency – remain important; but they are often insufficient to confer actual influence in international politics.
A shaping power builds relationships and invests in institutions that allow it to work well with others and to create and mobilize “coalitions and networks of like-minded states.”
As a shaping power with an enormous stake in preserving and extending the openness of the international system, Germany has a special responsibility to help integrate new global powers into that system.
Here is where things get interesting.
Germany has long sought a seat on the United Nations Security Council, making common cause with Japan, Brazil, and India.
But New Power, New Responsibility suggests a different path, arguing for the reform of the Security Council in a way that would merge the French and British seats into a permanent European seat in a “slightly enlarged circle of permanent members,” while also ensuring European representation among the non-permanent members.
Under this scenario, Germany would play a role in global peace and security through the European seat, as well as serving as a periodic rotating member.
Moreover, Germany recognizes the need to consolidate Europe’s voting power and reduce the number of European seats in other global institutions, such as the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank, to make room for emerging powers.
This renewed commitment to a strong and united Europe is the second pillar of a twenty-first-century German foreign policy.
New Power, New Responsibility calls for “deepening” the European Union through measures that would include democratizing EU financial decision-making by directly engaging national parliamentarians and exchanging tighter European fiscal constraints on member governments’ budgets for a European banking union, a eurozone budget, and Eurobonds.
In foreign and security policy, New Power, New Responsibility proposes strengthening the role of the EU High Representative and the role of the European Action Service.
Current EU High Representative Catherine Ashton continues to prove the worth of EU foreign-policy institutions by, for example, brokering a remarkable peace between Serbia and Kosovo and playing a key role in nuclear negotiations with Iran.
The third surprise concerns the use of force.
Gauck told Germans in no uncertain terms that they had to be willing to use force, at least as a last resort, and reproached those of his fellow citizens “who use Germany’s guilt for its past as a shield for laziness or a desire to disengage from the world.”
More controversially, Gauck proclaimed the need for Security Council authorization of any use of force, but also hinted at a Kosovo precedent for possible military intervention in Syria.
As he put it, when the international community confronts a clear case for the use of force to protect a population from its own government, but the Security Council is divided, “the relationship between legality and legitimacy will continue to be awkward.”
The participants in the deliberations that resulted in New Power, New Responsibility split on this question.
Some argued for an absolute requirement of Security Council authorization, while others recognized an imperative to contemplate humanitarian intervention without such authorization in “very narrowly defined exceptional cases.”
US Secretary of State John Kerry also spoke at the Munich Security Conference.
But, by not referring to Gauck’s speech, he missed an opportunity to underline the success of one of Obama’s key foreign-policy tenets: as the US steps back from its role as global policeman and focuses more on diplomacy than force, other countries must step up.
Even more important, Kerry and Obama would do well to think hard about a key lesson embedded in Gauck’s speech and the report behind it.
Countries that want to retain power in a changing global order must learn to share it, which requires accepting and embracing the contours of a new world.
The Obama administration should think hard about Security Council reform.
It should signal a real willingness to replace an order that reflects the world of 1945 with one that reflects the world of 2015.
That means supporting a greater global role for all powers that understand and accept real responsibility for maintaining global peace and security.
Stopping the Syria Contagion
Indeed, the viability of Syria, a multi-ethnic state, is being threatened by multiple armed groups supported by external sponsors – Iran, Saudi Arabia, Qatar, Russia, the United States, Turkey, France, and many private donors – who themselves have conflicting aims.
Here are three ways to simplify the equation and maximize the chances that the parties to the Geneva II peace conference will be able to agree on more than the desirability of someday holding a Geneva III.
First, the most important contribution that this conference can make to the possibility of a negotiated settlement and a political transition in Syria is to change the principal parties’ incentives.
In the run-up to Geneva II, each party has sought to strengthen its hand at the negotiating table by killing as many adversaries and holding or regaining as much ground as possible.
The task now for would-be peace brokers is to halt that dynamic by agreeing on criteria for participation in whatever elections will eventually be held, regardless of whether President Bashar al-Assad remains in power until then.
Those criteria must include the parties’ willingness to allow humanitarian aid to flow to all Syrian civilians under their control and an end to war crimes and crimes against humanity, including systematic targeting of medical personnel, starvation of populations under siege, and executions of war prisoners.
Here the UN must reaffirm its “responsibility to protect” doctrine, not as a justification for military intervention, but as a fundamental principle agreed by all countries: governments must protect their citizens.
If Assad’s Ba’ath party cannot uphold that responsibility, it forfeits its own legitimacy as a participant in any future government.
Second, the international community must re-establish the basis for its engagement.
When the Syrian conflict began, it was an internal matter, with UN involvement limited to humanitarian and refugee issues.
But now the conflict has spread across the Middle East, destabilizing Lebanon and Jordan and threatening to fracture Iraq.
The UN Security Council is charged with addressing breaches or threats to international peace, a criterion that is now clearly met.
As a permanent member of the Security Council, Russia thus has an obligation to act; it (and China) can no longer hide behind the argument that the UN should not be engaged in Syria’s internal affairs.
At a time when the Winter Olympic Games in Sochi put Russia squarely on the international stage, the US and other Security Council members should plan a series of resolutions that confront the Kremlin with the choice of meeting its responsibility or applying its own leverage to bring the conflict to an end.
Finally, the single most important step that US President Barack Obama could take is to put the credible threat of force back on the table.
In three years of increasingly bloody conflict, the only diplomatic success was achieved when Assad believed that he faced US missile strikes.
He suddenly saw the desirability of getting rid of his chemical weapons.
But most experts believe that military force is off the table.
The US public sharply rejected Obama’s planned missile strikes to punish Assad for the repeated use of chemical weapons, and a recent Pew poll indicates that a majority of Americans believe that the US “should mind its own business internationally and let other countries get along the best they can on their own.”
Obama’s job, however, is to look beyond opinion polls, particularly when it comes to safeguarding national security.
The US has withdrawn from Afghanistan and Iraq, but the gains so painfully won are being reversed.
Al Qaeda is back and is fighting for its own proto-state in western Iraq and eastern Syria, which is far closer to Europe and the US than the caves of Afghanistan.
Perhaps Obama thinks that he or his successor can deal with that threat down the road.
If Al Qaeda operatives begin threatening the US from the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria, the US will just take them out with drones, as it has done in Afghanistan, Pakistan, and Yemen.
But if he is willing to contemplate using force against Al Qaeda without international authorization in the future, why not use drones now to strengthen the moderate Syrian opposition and force Assad into serious negotiations?
The threat of cruise-missile strikes last September was enough to send Al Qaeda members in Syria scrambling for the hills.
A strike designed to destroy Assad’s air force and prevent him from dropping bombs full of nails on his people would concentrate his mind on a diplomatic solution.
Obama should announce that the US is committed to a political solution in Syria, and that his government will do whatever it can to bring about such a solution through next week’s peace conference and follow-up action.
But if a ceasefire has not been achieved in the next three months, the US should work with regional organizations and all friends of the Syrian people to authorize a set of military strikes on Al Qaeda-linked forces and on the killing machine that Assad’s government has aimed at civilians.
The Obama administration should make the case for this to the American people in terms of straightforward US security interests.
After all, if Geneva II fails, Geneva III will not be about Syria alone.
It will be about how to end a war raging across the entire Middle East.
World Cup America
WASHINGTON, DC – Something changed – or perhaps was revealed – in the United States during the last month.
Many millions more Americans watched the World Cup soccer tournament in English and Spanish than ever before.
True, with the World Cup’s end, many are arguing, as usual, that Americans pay attention only every four years – and only when the US is playing.
But this time something was different: Americans continued to watch even after the US team was eliminated.
Indeed, on a weekday afternoon in the middle of summer, nearly 15 million Americans tuned in to the Brazil-Germany match in the semifinal.
That is more than the usual viewership for ESPN’s Monday Night Football, the biggest regular television draw for fans of American football.
Almost every young person at my organization, New America, found ways to watch the US games in the early rounds.
My apartment mate explained that everyone in her office, in the US Department of Education, had used the excuse of a birthday party to watch the US-Germany match.
On the Tuesday afternoon when the US played Belgium in the knockout round, every bar in Aspen, Colorado, was packed.
Of course, Aspen is one of the country’s wealthiest communities, and perhaps not representative of the US as a whole.
But US television showed an enormous crowd of fans in Kansas City following the US-Belgium match on a large outdoor screen.
It was not quite the equivalent of the final match between Italy and France in 2006, when virtually every small Italian town turned out to watch on the main square; but Americans all over the country spent the month ducking out of work and into sports bars.
America’s growing embrace of soccer reflects some important ways in which the US has “joined” the world.
For starters, both the US team and the US audience for soccer derive their growing strength from immigrants – many from countries where the sport is a national passion.
For example, in Washington, DC, almost all taxi drivers are newcomers to America.
When my driver was Ethiopian, as often happened, we would commiserate over the national team’s defeat by Nigeria in a qualifying round, then celebrate the US defeat of Ghana, and end by agreeing that in four years, or certainly in eight, the US team would be among the world’s best.
In almost every case, my driver would tell me that his children were playing in local youth leagues.
These immigrants are not only providing homegrown soccer talent for US teams; they are a core part of the expanding US audience for soccer worldwide.
Dan Levy, lead writer for the US sports website The Bleacher Report, points out that most commentators define “American soccer” as the number of Americans who watch American players in US league play.
Obviously, that is a ridiculous metric.
US tennis fans watch tennis wherever it is played all over the world, and the US audience for golf does not plummet when a tournament is played in the sport’s birthplace, Scotland.
More Americans watch soccer in the European and Mexican leagues, in English and in Spanish, than watch baseball and ice hockey, traditionally considered two of the “big four” US sports (along with American football and basketball).
For the US, in particular, the World Cup is a great equalizer.
My mother is originally Belgian, though she has been a US citizen for over 50 years; I still have an uncle, aunt, and cousins in Brussels.
During the US-Belgium match, emails flew fast and thick across the family network, with lots of friendly rivalry.
My mother claimed divided loyalty, because Belgium, after all, was “the David against the mighty Goliath.”
Her three American children all weighed in simultaneously, pointing out that in soccer it is the US that is the underdog.
Where else can the US experience what it is like to be a small country on the global stage?
Like viewers around the world, Americans rooted for their team together, regardless of their domestic differences.
At a bar in Aspen, where the only open seat was at a table with an older man and his son-in-law (who welcomed me and offered to put my beer on their tab), we cheered and groaned whenever the US got close to scoring a goal or missed a kick.
In the periodic short breaks, we sounded each other out enough to find out that we were definitely in opposing political camps.
Given the current state of polarization in US politics, I think it is likely that in most other settings, my tablemates would not willingly have bought several rounds of beer for someone who spent two years working at the State Department for Hillary Clinton.
Here, though, we were cheering not for our political side, but for our national side.
As our team maneuvered the ball down the field, politics fell away.
That happens at the Olympics, too, of course.
But the Olympics is a smorgasbord of sports, each with its core of devotees, who often cheer on their favorites at the same time, but separately, in different arenas.
And, more often than not, what we are witnessing is individual achievement – the deeply concentrated agility and courage of the downhill racer or the finely disciplined movements of the gymnast – rather than true team effort.
The World Cup allows all of the supporters of one country to come together at one moment for one game between two groups that must, like them, become more than the sum of their parts.
It actually feels incomplete to watch the World Cup alone.
At the end of the game, amid regret over the loss to mighty Belgium but convinced that the US had played a great game, my new friend said: “We need much more of this.”
US exceptionalism remains alive and well, of course.
I suspect that we will always call the world’s game “soccer.”
But now we love it, and it is our game, too.
The Shareholder Spring Continues
LONDON – It is annual general meeting season – the time of year when some of the world’s biggest companies gather to report to shareholders and have some semblance of a conversation with them.
For the next couple of months, a succession of companies will talk about what influenced their performance over the previous year, what they are planning for the future, and the decisions that their boards have made.
There was a time when these meetings took place without much fanfare, mostly unnoticed by the public.
That has not been true for a couple of years.
A worsening economy and widening inequality have spurred more people to become more engaged and take an interest in the activities of companies and those who run them.
And, with that change, attention has broadened from CEOs and executive teams to those who previously existed in a black box: the companies’ board members.
In 2012, shareholders and others started shining a bright light on boards, questioning their decisions and activities, and those of individual members, and thus was born the Shareholder Spring.
People grew tired of tone-deaf board directors operating in soundproof rooms, seemingly ignoring economic realities and the public’s mood.
They wanted to confront those who decide on executives’ often eye-popping compensation or approve companies’ decisions to undertake sophisticated tax engineering.
People wanted to know whether board members were actually doing their jobs or just filling seats and collecting a nice fee.
Many companies and company boards hoped that this heightened interest would pass quickly; instead, it has matured.
Discontent has continued to mount, and investors, employees, politicians, and members of the public now want to know not only about executive compensation, but also about the frequently staggering discrepancy between what companies’ highest- and lowest-paid personnel earn.
They want to know about living wages and zero-hours contracts.
They want to know what companies are doing to address climate change, whether they are responsible community members, how they behave in conflict zones, and much more.
Those asking the questions are no longer content to protest outside.
They are becoming increasingly sophisticated about how to be heard, buying shares, stepping up to the microphone, and looking board members in the eye, so that their questions become part of the official minutes.
And they are putting pressure on companies’ major investors to hold board members to account as well.
The questions posed and statements made can sometimes be longwinded.
But many of them are legitimate, and they are an important reminder to boards that they must serve the company’s entire ecosystem – investors, employees, customers, and community alike.
Indeed, these open meetings are a reminder that board members must ask the hard questions all year round, rather than simply rubber-stamping management proposals or going along to get along.
Interestingly, just as the movement to hold boards to account has gained greater traction, some companies have adopted new ways of convening annual shareholder meetings.
These were once fairly staid gatherings.
The companies’ senior management would walk investors and board members through the reporting formalities step by step, present results, take questions, vote, and move on.
There was tea, coffee, and biscuits, but nothing fancy.
In recent years, however, there has been a trend toward a more carnival-like atmosphere, with companies bringing in big-name entertainers and turning the event into a feel-good pep rally.
Last year, Wal-Mart’s annual meeting featured Harry Connick, Jr., Robin Thicke, and Pharrell Williams.
In 2013, Elton John performed.
In contrast, other companies have swung to the opposite extreme and embraced fully virtual meetings.
The board gathers in front of a camera for a live webcast to shareholders, takes questions submitted in advance, and avoids the protesters altogether.
This year, HP joined Sprint and Martha Stewart Living Omnimedia down this road.
There is a virtue to having a meeting with a virtual component: businesses are global, and so are their investors, who can participate without having to get on a plane.
But a webcast of a meeting with a live audience would be the ideal combination.
And while companies might argue that entirely virtual meetings save money – which of course is true – investors do not need Robin Thicke.
They will settle for good numbers, serious discussion, and a dry biscuit.
Boards and managers must take these meetings seriously.
Part of the job is facing those with something at stake.
Hosting circuses or hiding behind cameras will not keep tough questions from coming.
A seat at the boardroom table comes with the responsibility to stand up and do this vital part of the job – in person and without musical accompaniment.
An Obama Moment for India’s Untouchables
NEW DELHI – Among the many international consequences of Barack Obama’s stunning victory in the United States is worldwide introspection about whether such a breakthrough could happen elsewhere.
Could a person of color win power in other white-majority countries?
Could a member of a beleaguered minority transcend the circumstances of his birth to lead his or her country?
While many analysts in a wide variety of nations, especially in Europe, have concluded that such an event could not occur there in the foreseeable future, India is an exception.
Minority politicians have long wielded authority, if not power, in its various high offices.
Indeed, India’s last general election, in 2004, was won by a woman of Italian heritage and Roman Catholic faith (Sonia Gandhi) who made way for a Sikh (Manmohan Singh) to be sworn in as Prime Minister by a Muslim (President Abdul Kalam) in a country that is 81% Hindu.
Not only could it happen here, Indians say, it already has.
Such complacency is premature.
The closest Indian analogy to the position of black Americans is that of the Dalits – formerly called “Untouchables,” the outcastes who for millennia suffered humiliating discrimination and oppression.
Like blacks in the US, Dalits account for about 15% of the population; they are found disproportionately in low-status, low-income jobs; their levels of educational attainment are lower than the upper castes; and they still face daily incidents of discrimination for no reason other than their identity at birth.
Only when a Dalit rules India can the country truly be said to have attained its own “Obama moment.”
In theory, this already has happened: K. R. Narayanan, born into a poor Dalit family, served as India’s president, the highest office in the land, from 1997 to 2002.
But the Indian Presidency is a largely ceremonial position: real power is vested in the office of prime minister, and no Dalit has come close to holding that post.
Since independence in 1947, a majority of India’s prime ministers have been Brahmins, the highest Hindu caste.
Yet the next national elections, due before May 2009, may produce a plausible Dalit contender for the job of prime minister – Kumari Mayawati, the female chief minister of India’s largest state, Uttar Pradesh.
Since 1991, no Indian governing party has enjoyed a secure parliamentary majority on its own, necessitating multi-party coalition governments.
The current Congress Party-led government of Manmohan Singh comprises 20 parties; it succeeded a 23-party coalition headed by the Bharatiya Janata Party’s Atal Bihari Vajpayee.
When the election results are declared next year, no one doubts that the first challenge will be to cobble together another coalition.
Both the Congress and the BJP will seek to make alliances with the dozens of smaller parties likely to be represented in parliament.
But this time they are likely to face a third alternative: Mayawati, whose Bahujan Samaj Party (BSP) may command a bloc of at least 50 seats.
She has publicly expressed her disdain for both large national parties; she would much rather lead a coalition than join one.
And if the electoral numbers break down right, she could conceivably assemble a collection of regional and left-wing parties and stake a claim to rule India.
This is a remarkable development: the idea that a Dalit woman could lead India has been inconceivable for 3,000 years.
But India’s democracy has opened new pathways to empowerment for its underclasses.
The poor and the oppressed may not have much, but they do have the numbers, which is what matters at the ballot box.
Dalits and India’s aboriginals (listed in the Constitution as “Scheduled Castes and Tribes”) are entitled to 85 seats in India’s 543-member parliament that are “reserved” for candidates from their communities.
Mayawati’s shrewd alliances, including with some members of the upper castes, which propelled her to power in Uttar Pradesh, give her party a fighting chance to win a number of other seats as well.
In a coalition-dependent parliamentary system, that could be all she needs to become prime minister.
The daughter of a government clerk, Mayawati studied law and worked as a teacher before being spotted by the BSP’s founder, the late Kanshi Ram, and groomed for political leadership.
Her ascent has been marked by a heavy emphasis on symbolism – her rule in Uttar Pradesh has featured the construction of numerous statues of Dalit leaders, notably herself – and a taste for lavish celebrations.
Mayawati’s weakness for “bling” has been demonstrated at her extravagant birthday parties, which she presides over laden with diamonds, saying (rather like Evita Peron) that her luster brings glamour and dignity to her people.
She takes pride in being the Indian politician who pays the highest income taxes – about $6 million last year – though the sources of her income are shrouded in controversy.
She has been accused, but not convicted, of corruption several times, with one notable case involving the construction of an elaborate shopping complex near the Taj Mahal, in violation of zoning laws.
Critics argue that Mayawati’s promotion of Dalit welfare seems to start with herself.
But there is no denying that her rise to power in India’s largest state, which sends 80 members to parliament, has given her a vital platform to bid for India’s most powerful job.
With her diamonds and her statues, and a reputation for dealing imperiously with her subordinates, she’s clearly no Obama.
But if she succeeds, she will have overcome a far longer legacy of discrimination.
A No-Fly Zone for Syria
BRUSSELS – There is a saying, too often used in interpreting international relations, that my enemy’s enemy is my friend.
Sometimes it proves true; often it does not.
Thirty years ago, the Afghan mujahedin were mistaken for friends of the West when they fought their country’s Soviet invaders.
But how lazy that assumption seems now, given all that has since happened.
Syria’s deepening crisis, and the criminal use of chemical weapons there, has created a similar dynamic and dilemma.
But the West need not risk making the same mistake and accepting the same false choices.
Begin with first principles.
A chemical-weapons attack on the scale just seen in Syria must be deemed a game changer.
Although possessing these weapons of mass destruction is technically not illegal, most states are parties to the 1993 Chemical Weapons Convention, which Syria has refused to sign.
So the answer to the question “What happens next?” cannot be “Nothing.”
Principles of international law – in particular, the emerging “responsibility to protect” doctrine and enforcement of the global ban on the use of chemical weapons – dictate that some form of military intervention must occur in order to deter others from using WMDs, particularly against civilians.
But which measures are appropriate and genuinely useful?
What is more likely to strengthen the West’s security, and what runs the risk of weakening it?
I believe that the fairest and simplest proportionate response would be to impose a no-fly zone on Syria.
The proposal is particularly appropriate in the likely absence of any resolution under United Nations Chapter VII (“Action with Respect to Threats to the Peace”), owing to the (almost certain) cynical use by Russia and China of their veto power in the Security Council.
Of course, claims and counter-claims have been swirling in the aftermath of the appalling chemical-weapons attack on a rebel-controlled area east of Damascus.
But, given the brutality of President Bashar al-Assad’s regime, no one can doubt the lengths to which it would go to hide its guilt.
The five-day delay in allowing UN chemical-weapons experts to verify the attack gave Assad’s government ample time to conceal incriminating evidence, allow it to degrade, or destroy it with further shelling.
The United States, France, and the United Kingdom are adamant that all the intelligence and eyewitness evidence points to the Assad government as the perpetrator of the attack.
There also is no doubt about the legitimacy of concerns about elements of the Syrian opposition.
The Al Qaeda-led and Salafist extremist groups in the rebel forces, such a Al Nusra, have proved to be just as vicious as the government and its allies, the Iranian proxy Hezbollah and Iran’s Revolutionary Guard.
But the united view of Western intelligence services is that there is no evidence that these rebel groups launched the chemical-weapons attack.
In these circumstances, a no-fly zone would not only clear the skies of Syrian warplanes and missiles, thereby reducing the scale of the slaughter; it would also show Assad and his supporters that he truly is vulnerable.
Generals ordered to use chemical weapons would have to reckon with the prospect that the regime could, actually, fall, and that they then might find themselves on trial for war crimes.
It would be better, of course, if Russia and China would allow the Security Council to do the job for which it was intended – securing peace and preventing war crimes.
By continuing to support Assad despite his use of chemical weapons, Russia’s standing in the Arab world has gone from patron to pariah.
What little moral and political standing Russian President Vladimir Putin has retained in the rest of the world is also evaporating, as he will soon discover at the upcoming G-20 Summit in Saint Petersburg.
But the world cannot hold its breath waiting for a change of heart by Putin and China, which is why a no-fly zone should be examined as a military option.
In the aftermath of the Gulf War in 1991, a no-fly zone, initially proposed by British Prime Minister John Major, did not topple Saddam Hussein, but it did prevent him from carrying out further attacks from the air on Kurds in the north and Shia in the south.
Likewise, a no-fly zone in Syria would immediately restrict the Syrian government’s means of delivery of weapons of mass destruction.
Some military experts may say that Syria’s air-defense systems are too sophisticated to suppress, making a no-fly zone too dangerous to enforce.
But Israel has managed to attack Syrian territory twice – destroying a North Korean-staffed nuclear reactor in 2007 and, more recently, striking a Hezbollah convoy – with no casualties or loss of planes.
Mindful of this weakness, Russia has offered Syria its more modern S-300 missiles; but there is no evidence that they have arrived, let alone been deployed.
And once Syria’s air-defense system is sufficiently degraded, it would be best if Arab countries – Saudi Arabia, Qatar, and other Gulf states – and Turkey used their air forces to police the zone.
Any malicious wishful thinking on the part of Assad’s regime would be dispelled with every glance at the sky.
An Old Problem on China’s New Frontier
WARSAW – Had the August 1991 putsch against Mikhail Gorbachev not failed, the riots and death recently seen in Xinjiang could have been taking place in Russia.
Instead of hearing about a crackdown in Urumqi, Xinjiang’s capital, we might be reading about hundreds killed on the streets of Almaty, and columnists would be making comparisons to the bloody crushing of Ukrainian independence demonstrations in Lvov the previous year.
As with China today, there would have been some feeble international condemnation, and some speculation about possible links between Kazakh militants and exile groups, or Islamic fundamentalists.
Experts would remind us that Kazakhstan had never been a country, and that Ukrainian claims to independence are historically dubious.
Substitute Xinjiang for Kazakhstan and Tibet for Ukraine and you get the picture.
But that putsch, thankfully, ended as a farce. The decaying Soviet regime was unable to crush Russia’s growing democratic movement – it would take Vladimir Putin to do that a decade later.
By opting for the Tiananmen Square massacre in 1989, the Chinese Communist leadership set their country on a road starkly different from the one on which Russia subsequently embarked.
Though China’s policies have brought about Pinochet-style economic growth, if on the scale of a country that is almost a continent unto itself, they have also ensured that there is in no freedom for anyone, including the Han majority.
This, in turn, means that, while Kazakhstan and Ukraine are independent, Tibet and Xinjiang alternate between phases of violent agitation and bloody repression.
Though Russia today is autocratically governed, the introduction of a Chinese-style dictatorship seems hardly plausible, while GDP per capita was $15,800 last year, or almost three times that of China.
Yet a majority of the Chinese population seems to support its’ government’s policies, including its brutal suppression of minorities and denial of democratic freedoms.
In fact, the latter seems to be the price paid for the success of the former.
This is not a novel phenomenon.
In 1863, the Russian democratic émigré thinker Alexander Herzen, commenting on the brutal crushing of the Polish uprising by the Tsarist army, wrote in his publication
When Herzen was writing his words, Moscow was not only busy successfully putting down the Poles, reasserting its rule there for another half-century, but also, together with China, carving up Central Asia, known then as Turkestan.
The eastern part of the region fell under Chinese rule, and was renamed Xinjiang, or New Frontier.
Each time Chinese rule weakened, as in the 1930’s and 1940’s, short-lived East Turkestan Republics were established, with Russian support, only to flounder when Russia and China struck new deals.
The leadership of the second East Turkestan Republic was presumably murdered on Stalin’s orders, when the plane carrying it to Beijing for talks allegedly crashed in Soviet airspace.
Since then, East Turkestan has existed solely on paper, as a member of the Unrepresented Nations and Peoples Organization (UNPO), a would-be competitor of the United Nations set up in 1991.
In Xinjiang itself, the current agitation is more social than nationalist in character, and targets cultural oppression (Han Chinese by now make up half of the region’s population) rather than expressing aspirations for independence.
Yet the recent bloodbath there is almost sure to change that, as violence unavoidably breeds radicalization.
In the short and medium term, China’s rule in Xinjiang and Tibet seems secure: the international community will not challenge a Security Council member state.
Only its own citizens could do that, but Herzen’s package deal seems to prevent that: just like the Tibetans, the Uighurs elicit not Han solidarity, but a braying for their blood – somewhat understandable, given that ordinary Han in Lhasa and Urumqi were made to pay with their own for China’s misdeeds.
In the longer term, however, the Chinese authorities have every reason to be worried: Xinjiang will grow to be a problem like Tibet.
Indeed, though the UNPO, to which both belong – alongside Assyria and the Buffalo River Dene Nation – has a vaguely Marx Brothers’ air to it (one expects Freedonia, the mythical country of which Groucho Marx was prime minister, to be on the roster), six member states already have left it to join the UN, and Kosovo, now independent if lacking UN recognition, will eventually follow. Political maps are never carved in stone.
It is therefore safe to assume that not only obscure academics and correspondents, but officials in Beijing as well, are now busy studying the history of the Ghulja uprising and of Osman Batur’s guerillas.
Come to think of it: whatever happened to the Poles, whom Russia so successfully put down in 1863?
An OPEC for Migrant Labor?
DUBAI – In September 1960, delegates from Iran, Iraq, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, and Venezuela met in Baghdad to form the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries.
As the world’s dependence on oil increased, so did OPEC’s power.
Today, with many developing countries, including a majority of the countries in the Middle East, serving as some of the world’s main labor exporters, might it be time to consider the formation of an OPEC-like cartel for migrant workers?
OPEC succeeded in protecting its members’ shared interests that they could not protect individually.
When a market has structural distortions, political tools and collective action of the sort that OPEC embodied can be more effective than public policy.
Labor-exporting countries today are not so different from OPEC’s founding members in 1960.
They, too, are vulnerable in a market where their customers call the shots.
Rich labor-importing countries and poor labor-exporting countries have a mutually dependent relationship; but labor importers can unilaterally tighten or loosen immigration or labor-market regulations, leaving exporters in a constant state of uncertainty.
This imbalance can have serious costs for labor exporters.
When we think about migrant labor, we think of low-skill work in agriculture, construction, services, and domestic work.
But countries such as Jordan and Lebanon (among others) are now educating workers to compete as high-skilled expatriates, too.
Labor exporters now need to protect their investments in human capital, and a cartel-like political body is the most effective way to do this.
If the countries listed above were to join with China, Mexico, India, and other major labor exporters, they would be holding most of the chips in a collective negotiation about wages, visa terms, and other conditions – some of which would also benefit non-members as global norms changed.
Labor importers would have to vie for access to a collective market, rather than individual national markets, and countries that gained access would have a significant comparative advantage over those that did not.
A cartel would prevent labor-exporting countries from cannibalizing their own interests, as currently happens with bilateral arrangements.
For example, if they were to conclude separate agreements with Gulf Cooperation Council countries, individual Southeast Asian countries would undercut one another, with the result that they might end up with worse deals.
With a cartel, governments would instead set minimum-wage rates for different professions and trades, as well as for different skill levels.
As exporters trained their migrant workforces, demand for their labor would grow and spark competition among venders rather than suppliers, thus fueling a virtuous cycle of higher wages and even more skills training.
And, because this would all happen on global markets, the prices of certain skills would become more transparent to training institutions, students, employees, and employers alike.
In this new system, importing countries would collect taxes – on the basis of the newly set minimum wage – and remittances would remain untaxed.
In this sense, the cartel would double as an international workers’ union, lending bargaining power to employees in countries where unions are weak or not permitted at all.
A labor-exporting cartel would have far-reaching effects on the current system.
Cartel members would be empowered to reward and penalize third parties acting in bad faith.
And, most important, the workers themselves would be empowered to reclaim their dignity in a system that has long stripped them of it.
Indeed, we could expect xenophobia to wane worldwide as access to foreign workers became more privileged.
A cartel could advance the cause of comprehensive immigration and expat labor reform in many countries, including the United States, Japan, and the Gulf states.
Under a newly negotiated arrangement, labor-exporting countries would likely have an incentive to curb free riders and illegal emigration, and labor-importing countries would likely have an incentive to legalize and manage the status of illegal immigrants already within their borders.
One likely objection to this proposal is that low-skilled labor will cost more, which could accelerate automation.
But the jobs automation displaced from the production sector would simply move to the leisure sector, because demand for domestic workers, waiters, gardeners, and the like would increase.
Because a cartel would make these market changes more discernible, labor exporters would be able to respond and adjust their worker-training systems accordingly, increasing labor importers’ ability to recruit migrant workers better suited to the available jobs.
All told, a labor-exporting cartel would bring order to an industry that has long been mired in controversy, damaging the reputations of more than a few labor-importing countries.
It would change the dynamics of labor supply and demand to the benefit of both workers – who would have new protections – and importing countries, which would have access to trained laborers to respond to rapid changes – often driven by technology – in economic conditions.
An Open Letter to Ehud Olmert
Dear Mr. Olmert,
I am writing you in the hope that you will take time from your busy schedule as Israel’s acting Prime Minister to hear one Palestinian’s hopes.
Even though your ascension to the position of Prime Minister came in an awkward way because of Ariel Sharon’s stroke, I believe that you have an opportunity to be part of a historic reconciliation.
While I am sure you will insist that you are going to follow in the political legacy of Sharon, you have some important advantages with Palestinians that Sharon did not have.
The first advantage is that you’re not burdened with Ariel Sharon’s negative image among Palestinians and Arabs.
Having been the mayor of Jerusalem for 10 years, you know the situation of Palestinians close up.
I believe that the chances for a political breakthrough in our region have never been better.
On the Israeli side, your faith in the political process was demonstrated recently when you and Sharon decided unilaterally to go against your own ideology and take on the powerful settler movement.
The two of you also went against conventional Israeli thinking by breaking away from your Likud party, greatly weakening the ideological stranglehold that Likud’s far-right central committee held on Israeli politics.
The realization that withdrawal from populated areas, and thus an end to holding another people under permanent occupation, was necessary to preserve the Jewish nature of Israel clearly brought the two of you to the center of Israeli thinking.
On a much smaller scale, significant change has been taking place on the Palestinian side as well.
While I believe that the occupation, rather than the reaction to it, is the main cause of our conflict, the unilateral tahdia (“declared calm”) decision by Palestinian militant groups has reduced anti-Israeli attacks mightily, which shows that Palestinians also realize the limits of their military actions.
The decision by Hamas to join the political process by participating in the upcoming legislative elections shows that even this hardline Islamic movement has concluded that our conflict needs to be addressed by political rather than military means.
While I understand that you are an Israeli patriot, I believe that much can be done to reduce the tensions between our two peoples, eventually leading to genuine reconciliation and peace.
As a start, priority must be given to face-to-face negotiations.
Sharon and you might have felt that unilateral action was needed in Gaza, but the withdrawal from Gaza could have produced many more benefits for both sides had it been done bilaterally.
Direct talks should concentrate on two parallel tracks.
They should attempt to produce an immediate cessation of violence from both sides while simultaneously focusing on a permanent settlement of our conflict.
Contrary to territorial withdrawal, cessation of violence can be achieved only bilaterally.
Both sides should commit to an end to assassinations, shelling, bombings, and any other form of attacks on the other side’s military targets and citizens.
To be effective, such a cease-fire must contain a monitoring mechanism.
Neutral foreign observers should be asked to be deployed in major hot spots and be asked to identify anyone on either side who violates any of the agreement’s clauses.
Alongside this effort, vigorous negotiations on a permanent settlement should start immediately.
Historically, cease-fires have survived only when they are backed by talks that both parties believe are genuine and serious.
At the same time, the atmosphere among Palestinians and their attitude towards Israel must be improved, so that we can have a political environment that supports negotiations.
Improving the daily conditions of life, particularly increasing Palestinians’ freedom of travel both between Gaza and the West Bank and within the West Bank, will also go a long way in helping to create a positive atmosphere.
I truly wish you success in your responsibilities as acting Prime Minister and acting head of Kadima.
Your efforts to move forward towards resolving the Palestinian-Israeli conflict will generate significant improvement in the political atmosphere in the entire Middle East.
But, whatever you do in the next few months to win the forthcoming parliamentary elections, please remember that the support that Kadima has received from the Israeli public derives precisely from the fact that it has taken a moderate centrist position.
So please don’t allow yourself to be drawn into pandering to Israel’s radicals and hawks.
The support that you and your colleagues will get from Israelis and Arabs will depend on the resolve that you show in making serious progress in the peace process.
That process, now as before, must culminate in an independent and democratic Palestine alongside a safe and secure Israel.
Another Asian Wake-Up Call
NEW HAVEN – For the second time in three years, global economic recovery is at risk.
In 2008, it was all about the subprime crisis made in America.
Today, it is the sovereign-debt crisis made in Europe.
The alarm bells should be ringing loud and clear across Asia – an export-led region that cannot afford to ignore repeated shocks to its two largest sources of external demand.
Indeed, both of these shocks will have long-lasting repercussions.
In the United States, the American consumer (who still accounts for 71% of US GDP) remains in the wrenching throes of a Japanese-like balance-sheet recession.
In the 15 quarters since the beginning of 2008, real consumer spending has increased at an anemic 0.4% average annual rate.
Never before has America, the world’s biggest consumer, been so weak for so long.
Until US households make greater progress in reducing excessive debt loads and rebuilding personal savings – a process that could take many more years if it continues at its recent snail-like pace – a balance-sheet-constrained US economy will remain hobbled by exceedingly slow growth.
A comparable outcome is likely in Europe.
Even under the now seemingly heroic assumption that the eurozone will survive, the outlook for the European economy is bleak.
The crisis-torn peripheral economies – Greece, Ireland, Portugal, Italy, and even Spain – are already in recession.
And economic growth is threatened in the once-solid core of Germany and France, with leading indicators – especially sharply declining German orders data – flashing ominous signs of incipient weakness.
Moreover, with fiscal austerity likely to restrain aggregate demand in the years ahead, and with capital-short banks likely to curtail lending – a serious problem for Europe’s bank-centric system of credit intermediation – a pan-European recession seems inevitable.
The European Commission recently slashed its 2012 GDP growth forecast to 0.5% – teetering on the brink of outright recession.
The risks of further cuts to the official outlook are high and rising.
It is difficult to see how Asia can remain an oasis of prosperity in such a tough global climate.
Yet denial is deep, and momentum is seductive.
After all, Asia has been on such a roll in recent years that far too many believe that the region can shrug off almost anything that the rest of the world dishes out.
If only it were that easy.
If anything, Asia’s vulnerability to external shocks has intensified.
On the eve of the Great Recession of 2008-2009, exports had soared to a record 44% of combined GDP for Asia’s emerging markets – fully ten percentage points higher than the export share prevailing during Asia’s own crisis in 1997-1998.
So, while post-crisis Asia focused in the 2000’s on repairing the financial vulnerabilities that had wreaked such havoc – namely, by amassing huge foreign-exchange reserves, turning current-account deficits into surpluses, and reducing its outsize exposure to short-term capital inflows – it failed to rebalance its economy’s macro structure.
In fact, Asia became more reliant on exports and external demand for economic growth.
As a result, when the shock of 2008-2009 hit, every economy in the region either experienced a sharp slowdown or fell into outright recession.
A similar outcome cannot be ruled out in the months ahead.
After tumbling sharply in 2008-2009, the export share of emerging Asia is back up to its earlier high of around 44% of GDP – leaving the region just as exposed to an external-demand shock today as it was heading into the subprime crisis three years ago.
China – long the engine of the all-powerful Asian growth machine – typifies Asia’s potential vulnerability to such shocks from the developed economies.
Indeed, Europe and the US, combined, accounted for fully 38% of total Chinese exports in 2010 – easily its two largest foreign markets.
The recent data leave little doubt that Asia is now starting to feel the impact of the latest global shock.
As was the case three years ago, China is leading the way, with annual export growth plummeting in October 2011, to 16%, from 31% in October 2010 – and likely to slow further in coming months.
In Hong Kong, exports actually contracted by 3% in September – the first year-on-year decline in 23 months.
Similar trends are evident in sharply decelerating exports in Korea and Taiwan.
Even in India – long thought to be among Asia’s most shock-resistant economies – annual export growth plunged from 44% in August 2011 to just 11% in October.
As was true three years ago, many hope for an Asian “decoupling” – that this high-flying region will be immune to global shocks.
But, with GDP growth now slowing across Asia, that hope appears to be wishful thinking.
The good news is that a powerful investment-led impetus should partly offset declining export growth and allow Asia’s landing to be soft rather than hard.
All bets would be off, however, in the event of a eurozone breakup and a full-blown European implosion.
This is Asia’s second wake-up call in three years, and this time the region needs to take the warning seriously.
With the US, and now Europe, facing long roads to recovery, Asia’s emerging economies can no longer afford to count on solid growth in external demand from the advanced countries to sustain economic development.
Unless they want to settle for slower growth, lagging labor absorption, and heightened risk of social instability, they must move aggressively to shift focus to the region’s own 3.5 billion consumers.
The need for a consumer-led Asian rebalancing has never been greater.
Another Balkan High Noon
With the world focused on Iraq, North Korea, and a possible clash with Iran over nuclear weapons, Kosovo has fallen off the radar screen.
That inattention will end soon; a decision about the province’s fate is looming.
The United States and its European friends have repeatedly stated their intent to make the difficult decision before the end of the year on whether to separate Kosovo from Serbia.
This decision – crucial to the future of an unstable region – will test Western determination and unity.
Negotiations this year in Vienna, brokered by the United Nations, showed that an agreed settlement between Serbia and Kosovo on “final status” will not happen.
Talks continue, but, as UN negotiator and former Finnish President Martti Ahtisaari diplomatically told the Security Council, they are effectively dead.
No Serbian leader will agree to Kosovo’s independence, because nationalism remains the dominant political force in the country.
Indeed, Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica, the apostle of Serbian nationalism, has been trying in every way to undermine Kosovo’s interim government.
He is rushing to hold a national referendum this month on a new constitution without serious parliamentary debate or the usual public education.
The main purpose of his new constitution is its preamble, which enshrines Kosovo as an inalienable part of Serbia.
Kosovo’s ethnic Albanians have proclaimed that they will not accept any tie to Serbia, no matter how tenuous.
Throughout the 1990’s, they virtually opted out of Serbian-run Kosovo by creating parallel institutions.
Their forced mass exodus in 1999 and NATO’s subsequent intervention, which ended Serbia’s rule and established a quasi-state under UN administration, has made anything other than independence intolerable.
Some time over the next month or two, the Balkan Contact Group — the US, UK, France, Germany, Italy, and Russia – will consider Ahtisaari’s recommendations on Kosovo’s final status and possibly propose a solution to the Security Council, which must make the final decision.
In public, all Contact Group members have tried to leave the question of Kosovo’s final status open, but informally the US and some of its allies have told the two parties that they will propose independence this year.
Some members of the Security Council – particularly Russia and China – are opposed to or skeptical of an imposed settlement, and few governments favor dividing up another country’s territory, however compelling the circumstances.
Whether the Security Council will approve independence largely depends on averting a Russian veto, which will require considerable diplomatic effort.
The nature of the independence bestowed is also important.
An independent Kosovo must be secured and its minorities protected.
Northern Kosovo, now largely under Belgrade’s control, must not be partitioned off in all but name.
In the interest of reducing the blow to Serbia, the Security Council must avoid granting independence in ways that are so contorted that the new state cannot effectively function.
If the Security Council fails to reach a decision on final status, it will produce a GRAVE situation: Kosovo would declare independence unilaterally, and all nations would have to make up their mind whether or not to recognize the new state.
If that happens, it is likely that the Serbs of North Kosovo would declare their own independence.
At a minimum, Serbia would campaign strongly against recognition.
In fact, Serbia’s government is already trying to persuade the West to postpone a decision until mid-2007.
It claims that if Kosovo is granted independence, the ultranationalist Radical Party will come to power in the next elections, and believes that holding elections as early as this year will cause the Contact Group to delay a proposal to the Security Council.
Moreover, the government has encouraged the leaders of Bosnia’s Republika Srpska to threaten to hold their own referendum on separation from a still fragile Bosnia.
And they continue to push &#45;&#45; unsuccessfully &#45;&#45; for Ahtisaari’s removal in order to prolong the Vienna talks.
The timing of the constitutional referendum appears to be a part of this delaying strategy.
Some hope that postponement will stimulate violence in Kosovo and further encourage Western reconsideration of independence.
That tactic may be working.
Many European Union countries are worried about the implications of taking away a country’s territory, as well as the impact of Kosovo’s independence on Serbian democracy.
Given Serbia’s political instability, they question the harm of a short-term postponement – albeit mostly self-inflicted.
But delay only offers more room for Kostunica to find ways to make a Security Council decision more difficult.
The West must ignore Belgrade’s siren song.
Serbian politics will be chaotic and unstable for the foreseeable future, and Serbian politicians will attempt to present this as an excuse to avoid facing the loss of Kosovo.
Likewise, there will be problems establishing ties between Serbia and Kosovo under any circumstances.
But failure to proceed definitively now on Kosovo’s final status will produce a worse Balkan situation, one that blocks Serbia’s move toward the West and ultimate membership in the EU, condemns Kosovo’s ethnic minorities to dangerous ambiguity, and imperils fragile states like Bosnia and Macedonia.
No realistic solution exists for Kosovo but independence.
If Serbia wants to join the West, it must not forsake that opportunity by trapping itself in its nationalist past.
Another BRIC in the Wall?
NEW YORK – Conventional wisdom rarely survives a good stress test, and few tests have been as stressful as that which the global economy has endured over the past 24 months. A healthy season of reappraisal has dawned, shining a new light on boom-time notions like the value of opaque markets, the untouchable status of the American consumer, or the wisdom of deregulation.
One piece of bubble wisdom that has escaped relatively unscathed, however, is the assumption that the “BRIC” countries – Brazil, Russia, India, and China – will increasingly call the economic tune in years to come.
The BRIC notion, coined in a 2003 Goldman Sachs report, is not all bad: at 75% correct, it scores a good deal better than most economic prognostications of the day.
Yet the economic crisis that began in 2008 exposed one of the four as an impostor.
Set the vital statistics of the BRIC economies side-by-side and it becomes painfully obvious that, in the words of the old Sesame Street game, “One of these things is not like the other.”  
The weakness of the Russian economy and its highly leveraged banks and corporations, in particular, which was masked in recent years by the windfall brought by spiking oil and gas prices, burst into full view as the global economy tumbled.
Saddled with a rust-belt infrastructure, Russia further disqualifies itself with dysfunctional and revanchist politics and a demographic trend in near-terminal decline.
Even with the modest recovery in commodity prices over the past six months, Russia’s energy sector has experienced declining production in recent years, due in part to fears among foreign investors of expropriation.
Russia’s sovereign wealth fund, integral in propping up an increasingly re-centralized economy, is being depleted fast. If negative trends continue, Russia’s reserve fund could eventually be exhausted.
Russia’s fall back to earth, meanwhile, spawned a kind of parlor game among academics, foreign-policy wonks, and educated investors, aimed at replacing the country in the club of major emerging-market economies.
A variety of acronyms has been suggested, from the cutesy BRICET (adding Eastern Europe and Turkey) to BRICKETs (the former plus South Korea) and – an even greater stretch – BRIMC, which shoehorns Mexico into the mix.
Indonesia, moreover, has shown resilience not only economically, but also as a nation.
In spite of its diverse ethnic makeup and far-flung island territory, the country has made a quick transition from military dictatorship and has recovered from myriad challenges and setbacks, including the 1997 Asian financial crisis, the tsunami in 2004, the emergence of radical Islam, and domestic unrest.
While Indonesia’s per capita GDP remains low, it is a country’s potential that matters in economic affairs, and here Indonesia shines.
Indonesia depends less on exports than its Asian peers (let alone Russia), and its asset markets (timber, palm oil, and coal, in particular) have attracted major foreign investment.
The government in Jakarta, meanwhile, has taken a strong stand against corruption and moved to address structural problems.
Even demographic trends favor Indonesia, which, with 230 million people, is already the fourth largest country in the world by population – a full Germany (80-plus million) larger than Russia.
But catchy ideas die hard, and Russia has moved to cement the current concept of the BRICs into an irreversible reality.
The ossification of the BRICs into a
That meeting produced a notable broadside against the United States, as each member declared its desire to unseat the dollar as the global reserve currency.
A few months earlier, the four were moved to issue a joint communiqué ahead of the G-20 Summit in April noting their shared determination to change the rules of the global economic system.
In the private sector, BRIC index funds have proliferated, though Goldman Sachs has radically hedged its own BRIC bet by introducing a second term – the “Next 11,” or N-11 – to the debate.
This grouping adds Bangladesh , Egypt , Indonesia , Iran , Mexico , Nigeria , Pakistan , the Philippines , South Korea , Turkey , and Vietnam to the economic radar, and, together with the four BRIC countries, probably comprises a more logical and defensible “first tier” of emerging economies.
Russia sniffs at the idea of demotion, and American officials appear to have decided to steer clear of the semantic debate.
Still, it should surprise no one that Russia lobbied hard for the Yekaterinburg BRIC summit, and footed the bill for much of it as well. Why risk exposure too soon?
Another Buddha Destroyed
NEW YORK &#45;&#45; The world watched in horror when Taliban forces destroyed the monumental Buddha statues in Bamiyan, Afghanistan in 2001.
Political and cultural leaders from around the globe condemned the attacks.
Offers of help poured in.
Everyone asked: will the world be ready next time?
Alas, the answer is a resounding “no.”
In northwest Pakistan’s Swat valley armed Islamist militants recently attacked one of the oldest and most important sculptures of Buddhist art.
Dating from around the beginning of the Christian era, and carved into a 130-foot-high rock, the seated image of the Buddha was second in importance in South Asia only to the Bamiyan Buddhas.
This, moreover, was the second attack in less than a month.
Murtaza Razvi of Pakistan’s Dawn newspaper has pointed out that the image that was attacked was not in a remote area.
In fact, it was next to the central road that runs through the valley.
Despite repeated requests by Pakistani archeologists to the local authorities to protect the seated Buddha and other sites, especially after the first attack, no action was taken.
In fact, militants were able to carry out their work – drilling holes in the rock, filling them with explosives, and detonating them – in broad daylight.
They did this not once, but twice.
The first time, the image escaped heavy damage because of the militants’ incompetence.
The second time, they were more successful, destroying not only the sculpture’s face, but also its shoulders and feet.
As if that were not enough, there are now reports of a third attack. In 1995, I traveled through the Swat valley to study the area’s Buddhist treasures.