Both Jacques Chirac and Gerhard Schroeder have repeatedly pronounced that what happens in Iraq is a strategic challenge to their countries. Yet their actions in response to this insight have been modest.
The recent turmoil in Iraq has, on the contrary, strengthened those in both capitals who argue that there is now even less reason to get involved on the ground.
At the very least, France and Germany are demanding that the Bush administration openly admit to its failure and the need for help.
Yet not only is such a demand naïve, with the Bush team battling for re-election, it is not at all certain that most of America's European allies would heed a US call for solidarity if one were issued.
Confronting the threat that an unsettled Iraq poses to Europe and to the transatlantic relationship implies stopping these tactical games.
The passing of authority in Iraq from the US-led coalition to an Iraqi government and the need for a much stronger UN role now offers the chance and imposes the need for everyone to stop posturing and get serious.
For their part, EU governments should provide the UN - on whose involvement in Iraq they have long insisted - with the protective force it needs to prepare nation-wide elections in Iraq later in the year, and ask others to join.
A UN staff protected by US marines simply cannot do that job.
With the consent of both the US and Iraq's new leadership, EU governments should also offer to organize an international conference uniting all those with a stake in Iraqi stability, including Iraq's neighbors, to work out a strategy and commit resources in order to save Iraq from slipping into protracted turmoil.
If Europe is to act, France and Germany must lead.
Precisely because they opposed the war, they are now the only countries that can restore Europe's unity of action in promoting stability.
France professes to bearing a special responsibility for international order, but so does Germany; only a few weeks ago, Chancellor Schroeder based his claim to a permanent German seat in the UN Security Council on Germany's readiness to shoulder such responsibilities.
Of all the crisis regions in the world today, instability in Iraq constitutes the greatest challenge to international order.
But France and Germany can also block European responsibility for international order and for solidarity with a US facing possible defeat in Iraq.
The decision is theirs.
It is time for both to realize that the consequences of inaction will be no less severe for the region than for the Atlantic relationship.
The Battle of the Burkini
LONDON – There has been a lot of fuss lately about the handful of Muslim women who choose to bathe on French beaches wearing a special garment that covers the head (not the face), and much of the body.
That garment – the so-called burkini – was invented in 2004 by an Australian-Lebanese woman named Aheda Zanetti, with the goal of enabling even the strictest Muslim women to swim or play sports in public.
Little did Zanetti know that her creation would generate a national controversy.
The imbroglio started when mayors in several southern French seaside towns banned burkinis on their beaches.
A grotesque photograph soon appeared in newspapers around the world of three armed French policemen forcing a woman to undress on a beach in Nice.
Though the ban has now been invalidated by France’s highest court, it is still enforced in several seaside resorts.
And, indeed, the controversy is far from over.
Former French President Nicolas Sarkozy, who is now running for a new term, recently called the burkini a “provocation,” while Lionnel Luca, the mayor of Villeneuve-Loubet, spoke of “rampant Islamization.”
The equally outraged Prime Minister Manuel Valls has called bare breasts a symbol of French republican liberty.
After all, he concluded, wasn’t Marianne, the female symbol of the French Republic, usually depicted with her breasts exposed?
There is little doubt that Sarkozy’s opposition to the burkini is entirely opportunistic.
The controversy represents yet another opportunity to stoke prejudice against an unpopular minority, in the hope of siphoning votes from the far-right National Front’s Marine Le Pen in the 2017 election.
But, in a tradition that spans centuries of European missionary zeal, his opportunism has been cloaked in moral terms: “We don’t imprison women behind fabric.”
Sarkozy would have us believe that the ban on burkinis is really meant to liberate Muslim women from primitive restrictions imposed by authoritarian Muslim men, just as British colonial rulers once liberated Indian Hindu widows from being burned alive to accompany their spouses in death.
This reflects a broader tendency, which has been gaining traction since the end of the last century, to couch anti-Muslim rhetoric in the language of human rights, as though equal rights for women or gays were ancient Western customs that must be defended against alien religious bigotry.
In Valls’s version of history, public nudity is a cherished French tradition and a sign of freedom.
To be fully French, it seems, women must, like Marianne, bare their breasts.
Yet, in the nineteenth century, when Marianne became a symbol of the French Republic, nudity was acceptable only in an idealized form, in paintings or sculptures of Greek deities and other mythical heroines.
It was fine to gaze at the breasts of a painted nude Marianne or Venus; but for a real, living woman to expose even part of her ankle was considered highly improper.
Of course, nowadays, these attitudes are rare in the Western world.
So even though Valls’s version of history is skewed, one might argue that European Muslims who insist that women of their faith should be covered up are out of step – especially given that women sometimes have little choice in the matter.
Indeed, in some immigrant areas, Muslim women feel obliged to cover their heads, lest Muslim men see them as prostitutes, who may be molested with impunity.
But this is not always the case.
Some Muslim women actually choose to wear a hijab and, in rare cases, a burkini.
The question is whether the state should be determining what citizens should or should not wear.
The French republican answer is that people may wear whatever they like in private, but must conform to secular rules in public.
In recent years, however, those rules have been applied more strictly to Muslims than to members of any other faith.
I have not heard of policemen forcing orthodox Jewish women to bare their heads by ripping off their wigs.
Well, some might argue, orthodox Jews are not responsible for massacres in the name of their religion.
And that is true.
But the assumption that women in burkinis are all potential terrorists is farfetched.
A woman lying on a beach in a body-covering swimsuit is probably the least likely person to start shooting or bombing.
As for the argument that Muslim women need the state to free them from Muslim men who force them to wrap their heads in scarves or cover up their bodies, the question is whether this is worth depriving other women of their choice to appear in public in these ways.
I am inclined to doubt that it is.
The best way to help women escape from domestic authoritarianism is to encourage them to lead public lives as well, in schools, in offices, and on beaches.
It is better for a woman to be educated in a headscarf than not to be educated at all.
For certain public functions, it is perfectly legitimate to ask people to show their faces.
Some jobs come with certain dress codes.
Private companies can insist on their own rules; there is no need for national legislation.
The excessive imposition of conformity by the state can actually have the opposite effect than what is intended.
Forcing people to adhere to a common identity fosters a rebellious insistence on difference.
It is no good telling people named Fatima or Mohammed that they are French and must adhere to the norms laid down by Sarkozy or Valls, if they are not treated as equals by people called Nicolas or Marianne.
Wearing a headscarf, beard, or bodysuit can be a harmless way for humiliated people to defend their pride.
Take away that pride, and defensiveness can swiftly become less harmless.
Aliansi Politik Progresif untuk Eropa
WASHINGTON, DC – Dalam waktu kurang dari tiga minggu, dunia akan menyaksikan terpilihnya presiden baru Amerika Serikat.
Negara mana pun yang dijadikan mitra pilihan presiden AS di Eropa akan sangat tergantung pada hasil dua pemilu pada tahun 2017: pemilihan presiden Perancis pada awal bulan Mei dan pemilihan federal Jerman pada akhir bulan Oktober.
Tentu hengkangnya Inggris dari Uni Eropa juga berdampak pada masa depan Eropa.
Opsi “hard Brexit” yang mendapat banyak sorotan akhir-akhir ini – terutama sejak Perdana Menteri Inggris, Theresa May, mengumumkan niatnya untuk fokus pada pembatasan imigrasi, meski itu berarti kehilangan akses pada pasar tunggal – akan mengubah cara kerja Eropa.
Sebagaimana dinyatakan Perdana Menteri Perancis, Manuel Valls, baru-baru ini, pertanyaan utama yang perlu disikapi para pemimpin di Eropa ialah “menyerah dan membiarkan European project hancur begitu saja” atau “mengubah Uni Eropa”.
Transformasi tersebut tidak akan mudah.
Eropa membutuhkan visi kelembagaan baru dan restrukturisasi politik yang relatif besar, terutama di Perancis dan Jerman.
Visi kelembagaan yang layak, seperti saya utarakan ketika mendekati referendum Brexit, adalah pentingnya pembentukan “two Europes in one.”  Negara-negara eurozone akan membentuk “Eropa A” yang lebih terintegrasi, sementara sejumlah negara lainnya akan membentuk “Eropa B” yang lebih beragam dan tidak begitu erat.
Kedua Eropa ini akan menjadi bagian dari “continental partnership” pasca-Brexit, yang barangkali bisa menggantikan Uni Eropa sepenuhnya.
Visi semacam ini agak radikal, sebuah visi yang hanya bisa diwujudkan jika institusi-institusi politik mau merangkulnya, terutama di Perancis dan Jerman.
Kepemimpinan politik setiap negara perlu dipedomani – bahkan dibangkitkan – oleh tujuan menyelamatkan “Eropa”.
Secara khusus, ini berarti mengedepankan kebijakan ekonomi yang menyeimbangkan pasar kompetitif dan solidaritas pasar, dengan ruang besar bagi keberagaman lokal.
Di Perancis dan Jerman, dinamika politik yang diharapkan akan tergantung pada aliansi kekuatan pro-Eropa sayap center-right dan center-left – sebuah dinamika yang bisa memecahkan dan pada akhirnya menghapus unsur-unsur ekstremisme dari setiap kelompok, sehingga memastikan kecenderungan politik anti-Eropa tidak akan menghambat progres.
Sebagai contoh nyata – dan provokatif – atas penataan ulang apa yang mungkin terjadi di Perancis: Presiden Alain Juppé yang condong center-right mungkin bekerja sama dengan Perdana Menteri Emmanuel Macron berusaha memupuk gerakan pemuda sayap center-left yang mengusung ide “beyond the past”.
Di Jerman, partai Christian Democratic Union yang berhaluan center-right ini umumnya kurang pro-Eropa.
Secara internal, partai ini dibatasi oleh sayap konservatif yang memiliki pandangan tidak sejalan dengan progres jangka panjang Eropa.
Secara eksternal, partai ini dibatasi oleh Alternative for Germany (AfD) sebagai gerakan sayap kanan yang akhir-akhir ini semakin populer.
Dalam konteks ini, walaupun partai CDU yang dipimpin Kanselir Angela Merkel memperoleh suara terbanyak dalam pemilu tahun depan, partainya membutuhkan bantuan untuk membangun Eropa baru, dengan lebih banyak tanggung jawab bersama untuk negara-negara di Eropa A dan pengaturan fleksibel dengan negara-negara di Eropa B. Secara khusus, elemen-elemen pro-Eropa di CDU harus bersanding dengan sekutu-sekutu di kiri – yakni, mayoritas partai Social Democratic dan the Greens (partai Hijau).
Koalisi informal tersebut beberapa kali memungkinkan proyek pro-Merkel memenangkan dukungan di Parlemen, meskipun ada penolakan dari unsur-unsur sayap kanan CDU.
Namun, demi menyelamatkan Eropa, koalisi tersebut harus lebih kukuh dan dapat diandalkan, memperjuangkan tujuan-tujuan bersama untuk kepentingan kolektif.
Kebutuhan atas penataan ulang institusi-institusi politik tidak hanya berlaku untuk Perancis dan Jerman.
Diperlukan reformis dan pendukung gerakan globalisasi realistis untuk menyatukan daya upaya demi melawan gerakan populis yang ingin mengubah nostalgia menjadi nasionalisme ekstrem yang terbangun sepenuhnya dari politik identitas.
Dunia banyak mengalami perubahan dalam beberapa dekade terakhir, sama halnya di Eropa.
Maka kita tidak bisa mengharapkan tata kelola yang lama untuk mampu merespon kebutuhan kebijakan atau dinamika politik sekarang dengan tepat.
Spanyol mengalami betapa sulitnya mendapatkan mayoritas baru – proses yang sudah berjalan dua tahun namun belum juga berakhir.
Dengan demikian, reshuffle politik tidak terelakkan; pergeseran partai dan konflik-konflik yang mewarnai pemilihan presiden AS sekarang menjadi contoh.
Akan tetapi reshuffle tersebut bisa mengarah pada sejumlah hasil.
Guna menjamin masa depan yang positif, terbuka, dan penuh kemakmuran bagi Eropa, pihak yang menduduki posisi teratas haruslah partai atau kelompok yang mengakui manfaat besar di balik masyarakat yang terbuka secara politik dan ekonomi, serta kebutuhan atas kebijakan-kebijakan publik di tingkat nasional dan global untuk menunjang inklusi lebih luas.
Akan tetapi, meskipun kaum center-right and center-left yang progresif berhasil mengalahkan lawannya yang senantiasa merujuk pada masa lalu atau bersikap backward-looking, itu tidak cukup.
Struktur politik biasa selalu berisiko diambil alih atau dikepung oleh populasi yang berpusat pada identitas.
Itu sebabnya kelompok-kelompok politik yang berpikiran maju harus mengatasi perbedaan diantara mereka dengan cara lebih struktural untuk memajukan visi kelembagaan baru Eropa.
Restrukturisasi politik secara besar-besaran yang bertujuan membangun mayoritas progresif baru tidak akan mudah dan prosesnya tidak instan.
Tetapi ini satu-satunya pilihan bagi Eropa.
Jika tidak, “Eropa” akan kehilangan nyawanya, dan serangan melawan keterbukaan ekonomi dan nilai-nilai demokrasi akan semakin mendapat dukungan di seluruh dunia – konsekuensinya akan sangat menyengsarakan.
A European Plan for France and Germany
PARIS – Europe is falling into a stagnation trap.
With growth barely visible, and dangerously low inflation causing real interest rates to rise, the weight of public and private debt has grown very heavy, and many fear that another lost decade is at hand.
And, though the threat of eurozone fragmentation has receded, it has not disappeared.
Given all of this, Europe is losing relevance internally and externally.
France and Germany – which largely drove European integration for more than six decades – must not resign themselves to this state of affairs.
They urgently need a common plan, not mutual recrimination by German supply-siders and French demand-siders.
We find such controversies pointless.
Lackluster productivity growth is prima facie evidence of a supply deficiency.
The combination of high unemployment and falling inflation is prima facie evidence of a demand shortfall.
Interest-rate differentials within the same currency area are prima facie evidence of fragmentation.
The truth is that Europe suffers from multiple ills.
So action is needed on all three fronts.
The question is how to carry it out.
If Europe were a single country with a single government, it would adopt a two-handed strategy, combining ambitious pro-growth reforms with fiscal-policy support.
The central bank would make it clear that it stands ready – provided that the reforms are real and the commitment to subsequent fiscal consolidation is credible – to serve as a “backstop for government funding” (as European Central Bank President Mario Draghi put it in August).
Europe can do none of this, and no easy solutions are available.
Some say that Germany should stimulate demand while other countries, including France, implement supply-side reforms.
But an increase in debt in one country beyond what is desirable from a national perspective cannot be traded for the benefits of pro-growth reform in other countries.
One solution would be to establish a fiscal capacity at the eurozone level, or, in plain words, a eurozone budget, including the ability to borrow.
But, though that is certainly desirable in the long term, currently there are no revenue flows into such a budget, and there is no governance structure to execute it.
In this context, investment has emerged as everybody’s favorite response.
The European Commission has proposed a plan to stimulate investment spending through a new financing scheme, one that we hope will succeed.
But solving Europe’s growth problem requires more than just throwing money at it.
In a recent report to the French and German economy ministers, we propose a pragmatic agenda that accounts for the fact that, while both France and Germany need reforms, they face different challenges and must focus their policies accordingly.
In France, short-term uncertainties are reducing confidence, but the longer-term outlook looks promising.
In Germany, longer-term uncertainties are reducing confidence, but short-term prospects look good.
In France, we fear a lack of boldness; in Germany, we fear complacency.
French policymakers should give priority to a new growth model, based on greater flexibility and security for employees, and a leaner, more effective state.
Germany, meanwhile, must address its demographic challenges, in particular by preparing German society for increased immigration, and promote the transition to an inclusive growth model based on improved demand and a better balance of saving and investment.
We also call for a clearer regulatory environment.
Private investment is a judgment about the future.
In energy, transport, and the digital sector, to name just a few, regulators must set the right parameters and ensure predictability.
Investors need to know with certainty that Europe is committed to accelerating its transition to a low-carbon, knowledge-based economy.
This requires eliminating uncertainty about the future price of carbon and the future regime for data protection.
France and Germany should also promote a “borderless sector” model in a few strategically important industries, which means common legislation, common regulation, and even a common regulator.
We think that energy and the digital economy are such sectors, and we propose a similar initiative to ensure the full portability of skills and social benefits.
Moreover, like the European Commission, we believe that higher investment is a big part of the answer to Europe’s growth question.
Germany’s public-finance framework rightly attributes constitutional status to keeping debt under control, but it neglects investment promotion within the remaining fiscal space.
Leaving a worn-out house to future generations to repair is not a responsible way to manage wealth.
The German government can and should increase public investment.
At the same time, while authorities are asking banks to assume less risk, they also must prevent pervasive risk aversion in the financial system.
We propose injecting new European public money into the development of risk-sharing instruments and vehicles that support equity investment.
We also propose creating a European grant fund to support public investment in the eurozone that advances common aims, strengthens solidarity, and promotes excellence.
Europe is more than a market, a currency, or a budget.
It was built around a set of shared values.
To uphold those values, France and Germany must join forces to rediscover and reinvent Europe’s social model, starting with concrete initiatives in the fields of minimum-wage standards, labor-market policies, retirement, and education.
For decades, the Franco-German alliance bound Europe together and drove it forward.
Today, French and German officials issue joint declarations and exchange accusations.
But the time for bickering is over.
Europe needs action.
France Goes to Hollande
PARIS – France has now conducted its ninth presidential election under direct universal suffrage.
And, for the first time in 17 years, after three consecutive defeats, the left – embodied in the Socialist candidate, François Hollande – will return to Élysée Palace.
Indeed, the first implication of this unquestionably significant election is that it confirms a return to stability.
France is the largest country in Europe to have so much trouble finding its balance.
Its revolution in 1789 initiated a long period of profound instability, featuring two empires, three monarchies, and five republics.
The French have gone through 13 constitutions in less than 200 years.
At 54 years old, the current Fifth Republic is the second longest-lasting regime since the revolution.
At times, there has been talk of a Sixth Republic, which would address limited but real concerns and difficulties.
But voter turnout in the latest presidential election (80% in the first round, and 81% in the second round) leaves no doubt: our current system is strong, and we French are attached to it.
But the primary importance of the election result is the left’s return to power for only the second time in 31 years. In fact, when François Mitterand was elected in 1981, the left had been out of power since 1957.
Back then, the Communist Party was still powerful, and maintained close ties with the Soviet Union.
The prospect that the Party could come to power in an electoral alliance with the Socialists struck fear in opponents.
The Socialists, for their part, had not yet shed their intellectual skin.
Mitterand’s political program was a hymn to economic planning, and the free market was still, for him, synonymous with oppression.
Today, there is no longer international communism, or, for that matter, French communism.
We remember having seen the left govern without drama.
Its two passages to power – ten years under Mitterand and five years with Prime Minister Lionel Jospin – forced the left to reconcile with reality.
France’s international reputation was not damaged, and, at home, the left’s performance, especially concerning unemployment, compared well with that of other governments.
So, there will be no panic this time.
On the contrary, the left’s return to power appears to be an entirely normal, almost trivial, example of alternation in government.
In fact, Hollande’s victory was underpinned not by a leftward shift among the electorate, but by voters’ rejection of Nicolas Sarkozy.
Indeed, the result represents a stunning and historic defeat: during the Fifth Republic, three sitting presidents – Charles de Gaulle, Mitterrand, and Jacques Chirac – have been reelected after their first term in office.
Only Valéry Giscard d’Estaing, weakened by the long decline of Gaullism, was not. &nbsp;
The rejection of Sarkozy is very different; above all, it is a matter of style.
There remains a type of royalism among the French, and our constitution has many features of an elective monarchy.
With his over-familiarity, simplicity, and occasional vulgarity, Sarkozy undermined the dignity of his sacred function.
This was not forgiven, and was judged more severely than the shortcomings of his presidential record, which was not significantly worse than that of his predecessors.
Moreover, in substantive terms, Sarkozy’s tax policies, in particular, favored the upper classes and the wealthy.
So a powerful combination of social and economic anger emerged, particularly given the perception that the excessive greed of financiers and bankers was the primary cause of the crisis that erupted in 2008, and that still menaces us today.
A social and political correction was necessary, and it has occurred with a vengeance unique to France.
But the state’s coffers are dangerously depleted, and France now finds itself among the many countries whose debt burden compromises the eurozone’s existence.
Thus, it is now subject to the discourse of economic orthodoxy, which, in insisting that all debts be paid to the penny, ignores that public spending is also an engine of growth.
Just how much will actually have to be repaid?
With Germany as the primary exponent of orthodoxy, the debate has raged on.
But now we see that austerity has plunged Greece, Portugal, and especially Spain and Italy deeply into recession.
The president of the European Central Bank, as well as the International Monetary Fund, acknowledge the gravity of the problem.
But what happens if we refuse to accept Germany’s position?
The victory of Hollande, who has said that he wants to “renegotiate” the European Union’s new, German-backed “fiscal compact,” will weigh heavily in this debate.
Furthermore, the Socialists now control not only the presidency and the government, but also a majority in the Senate, all of the regional presidencies, 55% of the country’s departments, and most major cities’ town halls.
In less than two months, they may control a majority of the National Assembly as well, implying a concentration of power that has never before been seen in modern France.
The Socialists can govern without limits, so it is up to them to govern well.
It is this uncertainty that hovers over the future of France, if not that of Europe.
France in Search of Europe
With its ten new members, the European Union comprises 25 countries and 453 million citizens.
In light of the fact that during the past millennium the EU’s members fought countless wars with each other, and that for forty five years a cold war split the continent into two hostile blocs, today’s Europe is a success of monumental historical significance.
Indeed, the EU represents many things simultaneously.
First, it is a guarantee of peace: war is now technically impossible between the Union’s interlinked member countries.
Moreover, the EU is a majestic instrument for international reconciliation.
The Germans and the French, who 60 years ago loved each other about as much as Serbs and Bosnians do today, are now a married couple.
Catholics and Protestants in Ireland were killing each other for a century, but now that they are in the EU, they have recognized the idiocy of their conflict and the inevitability of reconciliation.
Hungarians and Romanians, after nine centuries of hatred and wars, are embarking on the same process.
Greece has just decided to support the opening of negotiations for Turkey’s entry into the EU in the next twelve years.
The Union has also been a bearer of prosperity, because it is an effective mechanism for lagging members to surmount long-standing barriers to development.
Ireland and Greece, once the two poorest countries of Europe have surged economically, with Greece coming close to the European average and Ireland having already taken its place among the richest.
It is for these reasons that countries outside the EU want to join.
In less than two years, this will become a reality for Bulgaria and Romania, while negotiations are beginning with Croatia and Turkey. There is also talk about membership for Serbia and Ukraine.
For each of these countries, membership will mean a stable peace with its neighbors and reconciliation at home, as well as accelerated economic growth.
All of this entails a certain amount of instability, particularly if expansion is driven by negotiations among governments, rather than by democratic choices.
The project of the new European Constitution was devised to remedy this problem.
And, lo and behold, France, which is scheduled to ratify the Constitution by a referendum on May 29, gives the impression of wanting to vote against it.
If it does, the result will be an earthquake.
Although every member nation has played its part in integrating Europe, France has without doubt been the country that provided most of the ideas and master builders.
So what is going on?
In France, as elsewhere in Europe, there have always existed unbridled nationalists, the “sovereignists” who say no to Europe in the name of defending the nation.
But whether they belong to the extreme right or the communist left, they represent barely 20% of the electorate.
Over and above that, two factors explain the bizarre phenomenon captured by recent opinion polls in France.
The first is that the French have accounts to settle with their president and the government.
Jacques Chirac was re-elected president with 82% of the vote because of the menace from the extreme right.
According to all evidence, half of his votes came from the left.
But Chirac acted as if his mandate had been unequivocal and put in place one of the most conservative governments France has seen for half a century.
“Let’s make the poor pay” is his fiscal order of the day.
It smacks of usurpation and is inciting many of the French to vote their anger.
The other factor is that France, like the rest of the world, suffers from an ill-managed form of globalization.
As a result, France suffers from growing inequality, high and still-rising unemployment, constant corporate restructurings entailing layoffs, threats to public services and social welfare programs, and a general feeling of insecurity.
The world has undergone massive economic deregulation, prescribed by the monetarist doctrine supported by the conservative forces dominant in the developed countries of North America, Europe, and the Far East.
This economic tsunami has come to us from the United States – there is nothing in it for Europe, but the right-wing forces in all our countries, which have coalesced into the majority that governs Europe, have rallied to its support.
It is the desire to reject this state of affairs that, above all else, explains the “No” many French people want to shout.
But to do so would be a big mistake.
Only Europe as a whole, focused politically on the idea of better regulation, is big enough to block the neo-liberal tsunami.
But it needs great doctrinal clarity, a firm political will, and a constitution.
Indeed, rejection of the EU Constitution is a sure way to kill European dynamism and weaken Europe’s ability to defend itself.
The debate in France is still raging, and nothing is yet lost.
The French people still have time to pull themselves together – and opinion polls suggest that they are beginning to do it.
Europe deserves it.
France is Not Working
France’s chronic malaise is marked by periodic explosions of protest.
The two most recent episodes – the rioting and arson in French cities last autumn and the successful student campaign earlier this year against a new law governing young labor-market entrants – seem to have little in common.
But their unifying thread is youth, unemployment, and uncertainty about the future, as well as the suffocating state paternalism that underlies the wider malaise itself.
Take, for example, the desirable goal of job security.
French governments have sought it in the only way they know – by ever more regulation.
Unsurprisingly, rules that make it difficult to fire established workers discourage employers from hiring new ones.
Insiders enjoy lavish protections, while entry barriers to the millions left outside are insurmountable.
On paper, wealth redistribution through high taxes and state transfers, reflecting Republican ideals of equality and social cohesion (
 fraternité
 ), has brought good results.
Unlike most other OECD countries, where inequalities have increased over the last 30 years, in France pre-tax income inequality decreased slightly, or at worst remained stable, from 1970 to 2000.
But this aggregate stability masks shifts in income distribution that have favored older age cohorts.
Those around retirement age (51-65) saw their share in total income rise by three percentage points in the last ten years, while younger groups, particularly those aged 18-25, lost ground, with their income share falling by five percentage points.
By 1995, relative poverty was increasing sharply for young adults, while the opposite trend occurred among the elderly.
In 1970, a quarter of all pensioners lived in poverty; today, the figure is only 4%.
Joblessness is the main cause of poverty, and the best protection against it is earned income, for which even France’s generous welfare payments are an inadequate substitute.
Moreover, the high payroll taxes needed to finance these benefits constitute another deterrent to hiring, as does the high minimum wage, which tends to price unskilled labor above its potential productivity.
The relatively generous dole and the prospect of high taxes once in work merely reduces the incentive to take low-paid jobs.
As a result, 40% of all transfers go to poor but able-bodied people of working age.
The full extent of the French system’s pathology becomes fully clear in the light of successive governments’ attempts at reform, with piecemeal measures the norm – and thus proving counter-productive on balance, or failing altogether.
Minimum-wage increases, for example, counteract income-tax credits and lower payroll taxes aimed at encouraging youth employment.
The unspoken premise is that there must be no losers, not even in the short term.
The logical answer would be to reduce equally the degree of job security enjoyed by the entire labor force.
But no French government in recent decades has been remotely strong enough to face down opposition – often involving illegal action that goes unpunished – to any reduction in entrenched privileges.
Perhaps the only way out of France’s current impasse is the no-less traditional French route of revolution.
According to this view, the system is unreformable, and real change will be possible only after it finally collapses, perhaps owing to fiscal weakness, since the combination of deficit-financed transfers, low growth, and low labor-market participation may prove unsustainable.
After all, whatever the deeper causes of the French Revolution of 1789, the immediate trigger was a public-finance crisis.
The social strains of high unemployment – especially among young people – may force decisive change even before any fiscal meltdown.
But evolutionary progress is always preferable to revolutionary upheaval, and, despite all the difficulties of genuine incremental reform, the prospects are not absolutely hopeless.
This is clear from the remarkable recent experience of “Sciences Po,” one of the elite 
 grandes écoles
 in the center of Paris.
An ostensibly meritocratic competitive admission system to the 
 grandes écoles
 is in fact monopolized by the socially privileged, who accounted for 81% of students admitted to Sciences Po in 1998 (compared to the roughly 60% of students at Oxford and Cambridge who come from fee-paying private schools).
The head of Sciences Po, Richard Descoings, implemented a program of positive discrimination that favors disadvantaged candidates, such as those from immigrant suburbs and rural areas, and charges increased fees to wealthier students.
Descoings faced strong – and often cogent ­– opposition.
But the dynamic of all reform is clinched when even weighty arguments succumb to the urgency of change.
For France as a whole, the long-term cost of withholding tough medicine will ultimately be much higher than the short-term pain of reforming the country’s fiscally unsustainable and spiritually impoverishing welfare state.
Young people in France will rediscover trust and hope when they can be shown a world where fairness consists not just in egalitarian and unconditional redistribution, but also in hard work and good behavior.
Change for the better will be founded on the basic conviction that one should get what one deserves and deserve what one gets.
France à la Sarkozy
Eight months into his presidency, is Nicolas Sarkozy delivering the “rupture” from 30 years of French immobility that he promised?
Dubbed the “hyper-president” by bewildered media, he has launched a vast number of reforms, many of which were once considered political suicide.
He has targeted many areas – including universities, the judiciary, foreign policy, immigration, taxation, and the environment – but it is the economy that will prove to be the make-or-break issue.
The main reason for the slow pace – noting that previous presidents had no pace at all – is a 2005 law that requires that all measures affecting the labor market first be negotiated in good faith with the trade unions.
Naturally, the unions impede negotiations as much as possible.
As a result, France is likely soon to surpass Sweden as the world’s highest public spender.
All French finance ministers lament that they had very little room for cutting costs, given the scope of entitlements, particularly civil servants’ salaries and pensions.
From the outset, both sides expected a defining fight, which occurred last November, after the government decided to align the retirement age in the public sector with that of the private sector.
When President Jacques Chirac’s first government attempted such a reform in 1995, railroad workers, who can retire at age 50 or 55, spearheaded the resistance.
After nearly three weeks of complete stoppage of trains, the government caved in, and soon thereafter lost a general election.
The 1995 strike became an icon of “social legitimacy,” instilling fear in all succeeding governments.
But this time around, the unions caved in after nine days, largely because the reform had been explained and promised to the public during the presidential campaign.
Democratic legitimacy won a major battle over social legitimacy.
This opens the way to more and deeper reforms.
A law restricting transport strikes took effect on January 1, and Sarkozy intends to break the 35-hour workweek, albeit indirectly.
Instead of repealing the law, overtime work is to become easy and relatively cheap.
He is also preparing to raise the retirement age to 61, from 60.
Even more provocative are the next steps: a plan to revamp the standard work contract and to require that all workers be invited to vote after eight days of a strike.
Indeed, probably the most fundamental measure is to transform radically the way trade unions operate.
But Sarkozy is not quite turning France, long a country hostile to supply-side reform, into what many would consider a normal economy.
While he has the right instincts concerning labor markets, he is very French on other issues.
Nobody’s perfect, least of all Sarkozy, so we should expect some infuriating initiatives.
France’s Broken Dream
CAMBRIDGE – The crisis in the eurozone is the result of France’s persistent pursuit of the “European project,” the goal of political unification that began after World War II when two leading French politicians, Jean Monnet and Robert Schuman, proposed the creation of a United States of Europe.
Monnet and Schuman argued that a political union similar to America’s would prevent the types of conflict that had caused three major European wars – an appealing idea, but one that overlooked America’s horrific Civil War.
A European political union could also make Europe a power comparable to the United States, and thereby give France, with its sophisticated foreign service, an important role in European and world affairs.
The Monnet-Schuman dream led to the 1956 Treaty of Rome, which established a small free-trade area that was later expanded to form the European Economic Community.
Establishing the EEC had favorable economic effects, but, like the North American Free Trade Area, it did not reduce national identification or create a sense of political unity.
That was the purpose of the 1992 Maastricht Treaty, which established the European Union.
The influential report “One market, one money,” issued in 1990 under the leadership of the former French Finance Minister Jacques Delors, called for the creation of a single currency, relying on the specious argument that the single market could not function well otherwise.
More realistically, advocates of a single currency reasoned that it would cause people to identify as Europeans, and that the shift to a single European Central Bank would herald a shift of power away from national governments.
Germany resisted the euro, arguing that full political union should come first.
Since there was no chance that the other countries would accept political union, Germany’s position seemed like a technical maneuver to prevent the establishment of the single currency.
Germany was reluctant to give up the Deutsche Mark, a symbol of its economic power and commitment to price stability.
Germany eventually agreed to the creation of the euro only when French President François Mitterrand made it a condition of France’s support for German reunification.
Moreover, under pressure from France, the Maastricht Treaty’s requirement that countries could introduce the euro only if their national debt was less than 60% of GDP was relaxed in order to admit countries that were seen to be “evolving” toward that goal.
That modification allowed Greece, Spain, and Italy to be admitted.
The pro-euro politicians ignored economists’ warnings that imposing a single currency on a dozen heterogeneous countries was bound to create serious economic problems.
They regarded the economic risks as unimportant relative to their agenda of political unification.
But the creation of the euro caused a sharp fall in interest rates in the peripheral countries, leading to debt-financed housing bubbles and encouraging their governments to borrow to finance increased government spending.
Amazingly, global financial markets ignored the credit risks of this sovereign debt, requiring only very small differences between interest rates on German bonds and those of Greece and other peripheral countries.
That ended in 2010, after Greece admitted that it had lied about its budget deficits and debt.
Financial markets responded by demanding much higher rates on the bonds of countries with high government debt ratios and banking systems weakened by excessive mortgage debt.
Three small countries (Greece, Ireland, and Portugal) have been forced to accept help from the International Monetary Fund, and to enact painful contractionary fiscal cuts.
The conditions in Greece are now hopeless, and are likely to lead to further defaults and a withdrawal from the eurozone.
Spain, too, is in serious trouble, owing to the budget deficits of its traditionally independent regional governments, the weakness of its banks, and its need to roll over large sovereign-debt balances each year.
It is already clear that the EU’s recently agreed “fiscal compact” will not constrain budget deficits or reduce national debts.
Spain was the first to insist that it could not meet the conditions to which it had just agreed, and other countries will soon follow.
French President François Hollande has proposed balancing deficit limits with growth initiatives, just as France had earlier forced the EU’s Stability Pact to become the Stability and Growth Pact.
The fiscal compact is an empty gesture that may be the last attempt to pretend that EU members are moving toward political unification.
The European project has clearly failed to achieve what French political leaders have wanted from the beginning.
Instead of the amity and sense of purpose of which Monnet and Schuman dreamed, there is conflict and disarray.
Europe’s international role is shrinking, with the old G-5 having evolved into the G-20.
And, with German Chancellor Angela Merkel setting conditions for the eurozone, France’s ambition to dominate European policy has been thwarted.
Even if most eurozone countries retain the single currency, it will be because abandoning the euro would be financially painful.
Now that its weaknesses are clear, the euro will remain a source of trouble rather than a path to political power.
France’s Fourth Moment
KYIV – Since World War II’s end, France has consistently risen to the challenge of restructuring Europe in times of crisis.
In doing so, France became the catalyst not only for building European unity, but also for creating the prosperity that marked Europe’s post-war decades – a prosperity now under threat because of the global financial and economic crisis.
If we are to see a stronger Europe emerge from today’s challenges, visionary French leadership is needed again.
The first moment when decisive French leadership began to unify Europe came when Robert Schuman and Konrad Adenauer created the European Coal and Steel Community.
By rooting the then West Germany in the political, economic, and social fabric of the West, that step heralded the start of Germany’s rebirth and economic miracle.
The second time that France consolidated Europe’s internal architecture came in 1983, during the debates over the stationing of American cruise and Pershing missiles in Germany to counter the deployment of SS20 missiles by the Soviet Union.
France’s resolve to stand with Germany helped prevent Germany from drifting into a dangerous neutrality that would have shaken the European community to its core.
The third moment came after the Berlin Wall fell, and it was feared that an enlarged Germany might destabilize Europe.
After initially trying to delay reunification, France embraced it, in exchange for Germany’s reaffirming its commitment to European unity and Franco-German leadership of the European community.
As a result, Germany bound itself to the idea of “ever closer union” even more definitively by pledging to join the common European currency, the euro.
It is now urgent that the insights that have animated Franco-German relations be applied to all of Central and Eastern Europe.
Only by securing the European identity of this entire region, and by anchoring the growing Russo-German relationship in a European context, can the European Union continue on its path of stability and prosperity.
Only by reinforcing open trading and financial relations across Europe can we hope to subdue today’s crisis.
For it is in no European country’s interest, or in the interest of the EU as a whole, that Central and Eastern Europe feel that they have been cast adrift or that Germany and Russia fixate on each other in this time of crisis.
As with Germany in the 1950’s, the nature of Russia’s links with its immediate neighbors is turning out to be the defining factor in shaping the country’s international image.
Many observers regard these relations as a signal not just to the region, but to the rest of the world, of the sort of power that Russia wishes to be.
The issue is partly one of “internationalism” itself.
In contrast to Europe – with its close-knit network of multilateral organizations through which states formulate and conduct much of their foreign policies – Russia is not accustomed to intensively cooperative international procedures.
But keeping Russia at arm’s length from Europe has only strengthened the sense of isolation that many Russians feel, tempting them to define the country’s interests in ways that are irreconcilable with those of Europe.
It has also heightened Russia’s desire to construct a special, bilateral Russo-German relationship heedless of the context of the EU.
European history during the past 60 years makes clear that the most promising approach to meeting the challenge of national reconciliation and stability is not to focus on specific contingencies, but to establish procedures that encourage orderly change.
A singular vision has always animated this process: animosity between neighbors must not be allowed to fester, and the rule of law must reign not just within countries, but also between them.
To believe that such a vision can work for Russia, Ukraine, and Europe is not wishful thinking, but rests on the successful experience of France and Germany in promoting amity.
Indeed, the existence or absence of a framework of cooperation often determines whether a dispute mutates into a crisis.
Such cooperative frameworks seek to reconcile national independence with regional interdependence, focusing political leaders’ minds on prosperity for their people rather than on gaining unilateral advantages that ultimately impoverish and unsettle everyone.
The first lesson of European unity is that times of crisis must draw the continent closer together, not divide it through protectionism, competitive devaluations, and expulsions of immigrants.
Similarly, the euro must not be allowed to become an Iron Curtain that consigns non-members to a high-risk zone where investors dare not venture.
For Ukraine, Europe can help by embracing the free-trade agreement that we are now negotiating.
Coupled with our successful membership in the World Trade Organization, Ukraine would stand to benefit when world and European trade begins to recover.
Europe can also consider using various stabilization funds to help our economy through the crisis that we are all enduring.
I do not ask for these things out of a narrow concern for my country’s health.
Just as the US Federal Reserve has engaged in credit and currency swaps with Brazil, Mexico, Singapore, and South Korea and other countries to ease their access to the dollars they need, the European Central Bank must offer such swap arrangements to Europe’s non-euro countries in order for trade and production processes to continue.
Yes, these are dark times, and all politicians want to protect their voters.
But Europe’s greatest postwar leaders understood that keeping the wider view of Europe in mind is the best way to achieve this goal.
As at so many times before, now – with all of our economies in peril – is a moment for decisive French leadership.
France’s Identity Politics
One big surprise of the current presidential campaign in France is how “national identity” has surged to the forefront of the political debate.
During the 1995 presidential campaign, the main issues were unemployment and social divisions.
In 2002, the priority was security.
But the three main candidates this time around – Nicolas Sarkozy, Ségolène Royal, and François Bayrou – have given an entirely different shape to this campaign.
Sarkozy, for example, proposes to establish a ministry of immigration and national identity.
Likewise, while Royal carefully maintains the distinction between nation and nationalism, she is drifting away from the Socialist Party’s old embrace of The Internationale , instead defending La Marseillaise and suggesting that all citizens should display a French flag on the National Day.
Bayrou criticizes the “nationalist obsession” of his competitors, but he supports abrogating the jus soli (the right to obtain French nationality by birth) for people from the French island of Mayotte, owing to massive inflows of pregnant women to the island.
For his part, the far-right leader, Jean-Marie Le Pen, says that he is very happy with this evolution.
Indeed, the debate over national identity is nothing new.
The problem is that French identity has always been made up of contradictory and sometimes adversarial elements, such as France’s Catholic and secular traditions, its revolutionary ideology and conservative inclinations, and the cultural outlooks of its rural and working-class citizens.
The historian Ernest Renan, who pondered about national identity after France’s 1871 defeat in the Franco-Prussian War, has defined the nation as a “soul” made up of two parts.
One part, the “rich inheritance of memories,” is rooted in the past, while the other, related to the present and opening the way to the future, consists in the common will of citizens to build their public life together.
Renan gave priority to this will for a common life over any ethnic definition and set the French idea of the nation in direct contrast to the almost racial notion of people (Volk) that dominates the German tradition.
In this view, national identity, is a “spiritual concept” based on a common history and set of values.
Some of these values are rooted in a kind of secular Christianity, and others in the Enlightenment’s revolutionary beliefs about human rights, equality, the French language, secular schooling, and the idea that the state is responsible for the common interest and application of republican principles.
It is this view of national identity – one that transcends race, color, origin and religion – that is now disputed.
The identity crisis now roiling France is fueled by the conjunction of many factors: globalization, which produces uncertainty, the European Union, which curtails the freedom of national leaders, American strategic dominance, which has reduced France’s position in the world, and the rising Asian powers.
This represents a serious challenge to thinkers who sometimes ridicule the idea of the nation itself, arguing that we now inhabit a “post-national” world.
For them, national identity should be abandoned in favor of a European identity, even if the feeling of belonging to Europe is not deeply held among the peoples of the EU.
Instead, the link between identity and immigration, an old refrain of the far right, remains strong, and the issue has grown more heated because of France’s inability to develop an effective policy to integrate immigrants from Africa.
Making matters worse, while religion and culture have traditionally been restricted to the personal sphere in France, some religious demands have intruded into public life, as demonstrated by the disputes over Muslim girls’ wearing of veils in schools.
The problem of the link between national identity and cultural pluralism is now surfacing in nearly the same way in the United Kingdom, Holland, and Denmark – countries that, contrary to France, long ago chose a policy of multiculturalism.
In the United States, a country of huge immigration, communities can bring together a strong cultural identity and a deeply engrained patriotism.
It has been the same in France, which has been built by successive waves of immigrants.
But, contrary to the US, integration in France is not based on assimilation, but on a desire to promote homogeneity – the nation unified as “one and indivisible.”
Today, in a world changed by globalization, France must face the difficult challenge posed by its new immigrants: maintaining the principles at the core of French identity while meeting the desire of some of its new citizens to maintain their own identity, which may in fact oppose some of those principles.
Today’s debate over national identity arises from this tension, so it’s not surprising that it has become a central issue of the presidential campaign.
But what is at stake in that debate are values that not only built France, but that also have built and will continue to build Europe.
France’s Judicial Revolution
PARIS – A new and important acronym has entered the French political lexicon: QPC, which stands for the rather austere-sounding “Priority preliminary ruling on the question of constitutionality.”
Under QPC, which was part of the constitutional reforms that France implemented in July 2008, any citizen involved in legal proceedings can now contest the constitutionality of a legislative provision.
This is a far-reaching innovation.
France has long been characterized by Jean-Jacques Rousseau’s philosophy, which placed the law – the expression of the General Will – at the absolute top of the hierarchy of judicial norms.
As a result, a veritable allergy to assessing the constitutionality of any law has long held sway.
Not until Charles de Gaulle’s 1958 Constitution was even a limited assessment of a law by the Conseil Constitutionnel (Constitutional Council) allowed, and then only with extensive precautions.
Indeed, the Constitutional Council made its assessments a priori, one month after adoption of the law, and only four officials could initiate a review: the president, the prime minister, and the presidents of the National Assembly and the Senate.
This list was broadened in 1974 to include any 60 members of the National Assembly or the Senate, thus allowing the opposition to submit the laws adopted through parliamentary majority to some examination of their constitutionality.
But the idea that any citizen could challenge the constitutionality of legislation, as is possible in many European countries and the United States, was inconceivable.
The 2008 constitutional reform finally recognized this possibility.
But a double filter of safeguards was established: the jurisdiction before which the matter is brought, and the competent Supreme Court – either the Council of State [Conseil d’État] or the Final Court of Appeal – which has three months to decide whether to refer a case to the Constitutional Council.
One year after its implementation in March 2010, the reform has shown impressive results.
Of the 400 cases examined by both Supreme Courts, 120 were referred to the Constitutional Council, which has issued 102 rulings, including 22 striking down the challenged legislation.
The reform has allowed the Constitutional Council to reconsider a whole set of laws that had never before been submitted for constitutional review, mainly because they were drafted prior to 1958.
One of the most emblematic decisions concerned the code of criminal procedure, with the Council repealing several articles concerning the legal custody of defendants inside police stations.
Other decisions have dealt with taxation, social legislation, or electoral laws.
But nothing has done as much to cement the QPC’s standing as the recent motion submitted by a lawyer in the ongoing criminal proceedings against former President Jacques Chirac, who is charged with having created fictitious jobs at the Paris City Council when he was mayor.
The Court’s President complied with the lawyer’s motion to adjourn the proceedings until the Constitutional Council ruled on the constitutionality of the laws under which Chirac is charged.
We will find out in the coming weeks whether the Cour de Cassation (Court of Final Appeal) will agree to refer the matter to the Council.
France is thus joining the cohort of countries that, over the past half-century or so, have developed within their legal culture a judicial form of constitutional review of legislation.
Indeed, in June 2009, Germany’s Constitutional Court strengthened its political role by demanding that ratification of the European Union’s Lisbon Treaty be accompanied by a law warranting powers of co-decision to the German Parliament.
More recently, in October 2009, the United Kingdom, despite having no written constitution, replaced its supreme judicial body, which sat in the House of Lords, with a Supreme Court.
The recent legal revolution in France is no less important, even if it is still in a transitional phase.
With the QPC, the entire process of assessing the constitutionality of legislation has gained greater acceptance in French legal practice.
It is no longer the privilege of the political class: testing a law for its constitutionality has become a right of all citizens.
At the same time, after one year of implementation, the Constitutional Council has avoided a drift toward a “government of judges,” instead indicating a genuine desire for dialogue with other institutions, notably policymakers.
For example, when answering a request to deal with marriage and the right of homosexual couples regarding adoption, the Council refused to substitute itself for the legislature, which it considered the only competent body to rule on the matter.
And when the Constitutional Council does censure a law, it leaves Parliament the time it needs to review the decision and bring the law into compliance with the Constitution.
Thus, an equilibrium of sorts between constitutional review and a concern not to cause excessive legal instability has been found.
As the Constitutional Council gets closer to functioning like a Supreme Court, its membership, still heavily influenced by politics, will need to be reassessed.
But a huge step has now been taken towards anchoring all laws in the Constitution, which will strengthen the protection of all citizens’ rights.
France’s Path Not Taken
The new president of France, be it Nicolas Sarkozy or Ségolène Royal, will face a tough challenge when it comes to putting the French economy back on its feet.
France is currently one of Europe’s laggards, only slightly ahead of Italy and Portugal.
Even Germany is performing better.
With a growth rate of 2.7%, the German economy clawed its way back to the average of the old EU countries in 2006, and it can be expected to grow at 2.4% in 2007 and 2008, far faster than France.
France’s meager growth is surprising.
Until recently, the economy was doing fairly well, outperforming many EU countries.
While Germany grew by only 14% in the ten years from 1995 to 2005, ranking as Europe’s “vice-laggard” next to Italy, France grew by 23.6%, which was nearly the old EU countries’ average of 24.3%.
In 2001, France’s gross national income per capita overtook that of Germany, and is now 4% higher.
And yet recent growth figures seem to have reversed this trend for the time being.
French employment data has been worrisome for even longer.
If the boom in the world economy falters, France will again violate the Stability and Growth Pact, as it did in 2002, 2003, and 2004.
Why are France and Germany behaving so differently during this global boom?
Among the potential explanations, the dissimilar specializations of each country stand out.
While France has specialized in consumer goods such as food and pharmaceutical products, Germany is a leading exporter of investment goods.
As the current boom in the world economy is largely fueled by investment demand rather consumption demand, only Germany profits from it to full measure.
Germany is the tool-shop of the world, with 450 world market leaders in niche products and another 500 companies in the top-three category.
Fifteen of the world’s 20 biggest trade fairs (measured by indoor exhibition space) are held in Germany, and the country tops the list in world commodity exports.
Small wonder, then, that Germany’s economy rockets when the world’s demand for capital goods soars.
True, Germany has its share of problems.
The country is gradually turning into an industrial bazaar that is relocating its workbench to low-wage ex-communist countries.
This is one of the reasons why the boom of 2006 was incapable of creating additional jobs in German manufacturing; why Germany still has the OECD’s highest unemployment among low-skilled workers; and why aggregate full-time employment has not yet returned to its level in 2000.
The French economy could be slightly more stable in the medium term insofar as it seems to have more solid internal sectors.
But Germany definitely is partaking more of the current boom than France does.
Perhaps one French mistake was to neglect its small and medium-size firms and specialize too much on state-controlled mega-companies.
Airbus, Renault, Crédit Lyonnais, and Alstom are well-known examples of a mistaken industrial policy that has wasted French taxpayers’ money – and that is partly connected with the name Sarkozy.
The true problem for France is the huge chunk of state-owned companies that go through the motions without being particularly successful in the market.
In France, 25% of dependent employees work in the government sector, compared with 19% in the old EU and 12% in Germany.
The French government share in GDP is 54%, while Germany’s is only 47%.
In France, more than 7% of voters cast their ballots for Trotskyite and Communist candidates in the first round of the presidential election, while the Socialists, who received 27% of the votes, are much more left-leaning than Germany’s Social Democrats.
Dirigiste attitudes are more popular in France than in most other European countries.
To the extent that these attitudes may have led to a political system in which small and medium-size firms find it difficult to flourish, they may have contributed to France’s problems.
It remains to be seen whether the new French president will be able to embark on a more promising course.
The odds are not good.
Royal will do nothing to increase the flexibility of the French labor market so as to facilitate structural change and enable new firms to be created, while Sarkozy is likely to continue to support France’s lumbering giants, as he as done so frequently in the past.
Sound policy aimed at reviving the economy seems beyond the grasp of both candidates.
France’s Presidential Reality Show
The Socialists’ anointment of Ségolène Royal’s as their presidential candidate is an important step on the road to the Fifth Republic’s eighth presidential election, which is set for April 22, 2007, with a second-round runoff two weeks later.
All candidates should be known by the end of January – the deadline for printing the ballots.
So, by that point, France’s four main political parties, two on the left and two on the right, must prepare their party manifestoes and choose candidates.
That, at least, is how the system is supposed to work in theory.
In practice, while the official campaign is supposed to last only two months (long enough in a democracy, in which candidates have to endure an unrelenting media barrage), the jockeying of potential candidates, together with the media’s appetite for a horse race, helped kick off the real campaign nearly a year and a half ago.
So today’s public debates have a somewhat surreal character, because the programs on which the candidates will stake their campaigns are still not developed.
In their absence, personality and style, not political programs, have proven decisive.
I am not sure this is good for democracy, but that’s the way it is.
Two such stylish personalities have so far commandeered the public opinion polls, and appear destined to meet in the second round.
On the right is Nicolas Sarkozy, the interior minister (and briefly the economy minister), whose political rise took place within the grab-bag framework of the Union for a Popular Movement (UMP).
The UMP is the political heir of Gaullism, but its ideological inconsistency is legendary – and reflected in party name changes every eight to ten years.
Sarkozy is philosophically a conservative, but an ultra-liberal on economic issues, making him totally foreign to the Gaullist tradition.
Preaching privatization and social repression, he has placed himself to the right of the right, hoping to take back the votes that the mainstream right has been losing to Jean-Marie Le Pen’s “fascistoid” National Front for the past 20 years.
Sarkozy imposed himself on the Gaullist movement against the will of President Jacques Chirac; indeed, he snatched the presidency of the UMP despite Chirac’s active opposition.
Much of the public likes his raw language and harsh criticism of the rest of the right, notably of Prime Minister Dominique de Villepin, but above all of Chirac.
He knows nothing about international affairs, but no one seems to hold it against him.
On the left, Royal, the Socialist president of the region of Poitou-Charentes, has scant government experience, serving brief stints as environment minister, family minister, and education minister.
The anger of the Socialist Party’s barons at Royal’s rise was amusing to observe.
She has yet to deal with the major problems of the day – financial instability, Europe’s sluggish growth, the Middle East – and she cannot avoid them during her campaign.
But, full of elegance and charm, and treating social problems with good sense and energy, she has topped public opinion polls for over a year.
So Sarkozy and Royal are universally expected to be the two leading candidates heading into the “High Noon” encounter of the second round.
But, judging from the past, this is not how French politics works.
Ever since de Gaulle, all candidates for the French presidency who started too early have lost.
Poher, Chaban-Delmas, Barre, Balladur, and I were picked out by the media and treated as candidates for more than two years before the election, whether declared or not, and we were all eventually beaten.
My own feeling is that the bombardment by the media is of such violence that the credibility of a candidate cannot endure for more than a few weeks.
Overexposure hurts.
So in this bizarre dance, where the big parties and important candidates know that it is better to start later, the real beneficiaries of today’s media circus are the candidates without any real chance of winning: a fascist, another extreme rightist, a communist, two Trotskyites, and a few other marginal personalities.
They are candidates only in order to benefit from two years of free publicity.
But those minor candidates underscore a deeper problem.
To be elected President of France, one needs more than charisma, a good program, and a strong political party.
One also must avoid the fragmentation that doomed the left in 2002, when none of its six candidates qualified for the second round, leaving Jacques Chirac, who had received 19% of the vote in the first round – a record low for a final winner ­– to defeat Jean-Marie Le Pen in the runoff with 82% of the vote.
The most openly conservative French government of the past decade was essentially elected by the left.
A repeat of this scenario seems possible: on the left, outside of the Socialist Party, there are already four announced candidates, and a fifth is likely.
On the right, Chirac’s antagonism toward Sarkozy makes it that another candidate will appear at some point, either Michele Alliot-Marie, the defense minister, or Chirac himself.
At this point, the main point to remember is that all of France’s last seven presidential elections have sprung a surprise.