This is an organization that usually delivers its requests under seal, meaning they remain secret.
In this case, the FBI took the unusual step of making its demand public, so as to push the issue into the press by hitting the hot button of “terrorism.”
The FBI’s intent, it seems, is to prompt lawmakers to respond to public outrage.
Most legal arguments against “unlocking” this particular phone cite the constitutionally protected right to free speech.
But a better parallel is the right to gun ownership in the US and the constitutional provisions that support it.
In the past, technology in the US was primarily developed in a military context and justified in the service of war, but also to maintain civil order.
At the end of the eighteenth century, the apotheosis of that technology was the firearm.
No other technology was as apt, so the US Constitution specified that it would not be used to curtail speech (First Amendment) or be denied to the citizenry (Second Amendment), and that government holders of firearms could not be placed in citizens’ homes (Third Amendment).
The Ninth and Tenth Amendments proscribe the use of firearms to compromise other implicit rights as they may become apparent.
Today’s most powerful technologies relate to information concerning our thoughts, associations, and bodies.
If the framers of the US Constitution were alive today and as well educated as they were then, the Bill of Rights would likely be focused on balancing access to information to ensure that the government remains within bounds.
With this public request from the FBI, the balance between people and policing is being called into question.
As the debate unfolds, we need to consider whether it makes sense, legally or as a matter of policy, for everyone – law enforcement, hackers, and terrorists – to be able to possess or access information.
The Apple case will affect the balance of informational power, and the scales currently are weighted against the citizen.
Resolving the case requires a more considered response from US politicians than hysterical tweeting.
In view of the modern power of information, they must think carefully about the legal ramifications of the FBI’s demand.
Realism on North Korea
BERLIN – The world’s task in addressing North Korea’s saber rattling is made no easier by the fact that it confronts an impoverished and effectively defeated country.
On the contrary, it is in such circumstances that calm foresight is most necessary.
The genius of the Habsburg Empire’s Prince Klemens von Metternich in framing a new international order after the Napoleonic Wars was that he did not push a defeated France into a corner.
Although Metternich sought to deter any possible French resurgence, he restored France’s prewar frontiers.
By contrast, as Henry Kissinger has argued, the victors in World War I could neither deter a defeated Germany nor provide it with incentives to accept the Versailles Treaty.
Instead, they imposed harsh terms, hoping to weaken Germany permanently.
We know how that plan ended.
John F. Kennedy was in the Metternich mold.
During the Cuban missile crisis, he did not try to humiliate or win a total victory over the Soviet Union. Rather, he put himself in Nikita Khrushchev’s shoes and agreed to dismantle, secretly, American missiles in Turkey and Italy in exchange for withdrawal of Soviet missiles from Cuba.
Kennedy’s pragmatism prevented World War III.
Sadly, North Korea has not received such far-sighted statesmanship.
Faced with the North’s dangerous nuclear game, we should ask what would have happened if, over the last 20 some years, the North Korea problem had been approached with the sagacity of Metternich and Kennedy.
Of course, North Korea is not early-nineteenth century France or the USSR of 1962.
In the eyes of Western (including Japanese) political leaders, it has never amounted to more than a small, fringe country whose economic failings made it appear to be poised perpetually on the edge of self-destruction.
For the most part, world leaders preferred not to be bothered with North Korea, and so reacted in an ad hoc way whenever it created a security problem.
But now, following the North’s recent nuclear tests, and given its improving ballistic-missile capabilities, that approach is no longer tenable.
Perhaps the best chance to address the problem at an earlier stage was immediately after the Soviet Union’s collapse in 1991.
Back then, Kim Il-sung – the North’s founder – faced economic collapse, diminution of his conventional military forces, and diplomatic isolation.
In interviews with Asahi Shimbun and The Washington Times in March and April 1992, Kim clearly expressed a wish to establish diplomatic relations with the US.
But US and South Korean leaders were not ready to accommodate Kim’s overture.
Their received ideas about North Korea prevented them from recognizing a fast-changing political reality.
Another opportunity was missed later in the decade.
If North Korea had reciprocated in a timely manner following US envoy William Perry’s visit to Pyongyang in May 1999, President Bill Clinton’s policy of engagement with the North might have been upgraded to a push for normalization of diplomatic relations.
Instead, the North procrastinated, sending Vice Marshall Jo Myong-rok to the US only in October 2000, near the end of Clinton’s presidency.
A few months later, newly elected President George W. Bush reversed Clinton’s North Korea policy.
I still recall the difficulty that I faced, as South Korea’s foreign minister, in convincing Bush administration policymakers to negotiate with North Korea instead of merely applying pressure and waiting for the North to capitulate.
Back then, North Korea was restarting its Yongbyon nuclear facility and producing plutonium, thus strengthening its bargaining position vis-à-vis the US.
Precious time was squandered before North Korea’s first nuclear test in 2006.
Though Bush shifted his policy toward bilateral negotiations with the North a few months later, the Kim regime had become much more obstinate.
Indeed, North Korea’s behavior has since become even more volatile.
Its sinking of the South Korean corvette Cheonan and the shelling of Yeonpyeong Island in 2010 were unprecedented, and raised inter-Korean tensions to their highest level in decades.
Today, following the North’s third nuclear test, we seem to have entered the most precarious stage yet, with the regime declaring that it will never surrender its nuclear option.
So, what should be done?
The first option should be deterrence of further aggression through diplomacy.
But achieving diplomatic deterrence will depend on China’s cooperation, and this requires that China’s vital national-security interests be recognized.
China fears not only the social and economic consequences of a North Korean implosion, but also the strategic consequences of reunification – in particular, that the US military, through its alliance with South Korea, would gain access to territory on its border.
A mere statement by the US that it has no intention to press this military advantage will not assuage China’s fears.
Chinese leaders recall that the US promised Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev that German reunification and democratic transition in Eastern Europe would not mean eastward expansion of NATO.
So a more concrete undertaking, one that preserves South Korea’s bedrock security concerns, is needed.
Only after its security is assured will China free itself from complicity in North Korean brinkmanship and be better able to control the North’s behavior.&#160;
But Chinese cooperation, though necessary, will not resolve the North Korea problem on its own.
A comprehensive approach must recognize the speed of internal change, especially in the minds of ordinary North Koreans.
Simply put, North Koreans are not as isolated as they once were, and have a growing appreciation of their impoverishment, owing primarily to greater trade and closer connections with booming China.
This internal change needs to be encouraged, because it will prove more effective than external pressure in influencing the regime’s behavior.
But such encouragement must be undertaken in ways that do not incite the North’s fears of being destroyed by indirect means.&#160; South Korean President Park Geun-hye’s recent proposal to provide humanitarian assistance despite the recent spike in tension, is a start in the right direction.
The lives of ordinary North Koreans matter as much as the security of North Korea’s neighbors.
A comprehensive approach is required – one that focuses as much on the human dimension as on the security dimension.
It remains to be seen whether this approach requires more foresight and courage than today’s political leaders in South Korea, the West, and China can muster.
A President in the Dock
NEW YORK – In a way, the stir aroused by the decision by the International Criminal Court (ICC) to indict Sudan’s President Omar al-Bashir for war crimes and crimes against humanity in Darfur is a surprise.
After all, the Court has no means of its own to arrest anyone in Sudan, much less a head of state who commands the country’s armed forces.
Nor is there any prospect that someone else will intervene in Sudan to make an arrest.
While the ICC’s chief prosecutor, Luis Moreno-Ocampo, expresses confidence that Bashir will be brought to justice, it is unclear how this will happen.
But it could.
Despite the ICC’s seeming powerlessness, many governments’ leaders are engaged in strenuous efforts to block the indictment.
They do not seem concerned that the charges are unfair; rather, they appear to be demonstrating solidarity with a fellow head of state. 
Those denouncing the attempt to put Bashir on trial include the large blocs of countries that are members of the Organization of the Islamic Conference and the African Union, together with such powerful states as China and Russia.
One can only guess whether some of those joining this effort are motivated by concern that they themselves may some day face charges like those leveled at Bashir by the ICC judges.
Though Bashir may be able to avoid arrest simply by limiting his international travel, the commotion provoked by the indictment is not irrational.
The charges against him have a powerful stigmatizing effect.
The fact that a panel of judges representing the 108 governments that are parties to the ICC has accused Bashir of principal responsibility for the crimes committed in Darfur during the past six years undermines the legitimacy of his continued rule.
Those crimes have caused more than 300,000 deaths, and have forcibly displaced at least another 2.7 million people.
Even if Bashir’s fellow heads of state succeed in their effort to persuade the United Nations Security Council to defer prosecution – which is highly unlikely – the charges will continue to hang over Bashir’s head unless and until he stands trial.
In 1999, an international criminal tribunal indicted another sitting head of state, Slobodan Milosevic of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.
Though he seemed secure at the time, a year and a half later he was sent to The Hague to stand trial.
Similarly, in 2003, an international criminal tribunal indicted Liberia’s then president, Charles Taylor.
He had to flee Liberia a few months later and initially received asylum in Nigeria, but is now on trial in The Hague.
When those indictments were issued, no one could have predicted how events would unfold; in retrospect, it is evident that the indictments’ delegitimizing effects had important consequences.
Of course, the ICC’s prosecutor and judges are themselves taking a substantial risk in the indictment of Bashir.
The Court is still in its infancy, and antagonizing the many government leaders expressing solidarity with him could jeopardize its future. 
Yet it should be recognized that the Court’s personnel are carrying out their duties.
The treaty establishing the ICC explicitly states that heads of state do not enjoy immunity.
And the Security Council referred the Darfur case to the Court in 2005.
This was an investigation that had to be conducted, and those found to have the highest level of responsibility for the crimes had to be indicted.
Many of those now objecting to the prosecution of Bashir participated in the decisions leading to the indictment.
If the ICC’s indictment now causes them discomfort, that is only because they did not anticipate that the Court would carry out the responsibilities that they themselves assigned to it.
A Primer for Pandemics
A few times each year, the world is reminded that a pandemic threat is immanent.
In 2003, it was SARS.
Today, it is a potential avian virus similar to the one that killed 30 million people after 1914.
“Bird flu” has already shown that it can jump from fowl to humans, and now even to cats, which indicates that it might be the next global killer.
But there are many other potential pandemics, and many are not even viruses.
Bacteria, prions, parasites, and even environmental factors could suddenly change in a way that slays us.
It is widely predicted that when this happens, the economic and human losses will exceed that of any previous war.
Indeed, it is humbling to remember that some of history’s most deadly invasions were carried out by single-cell organisms, such as cholera, bubonic plague, and tuberculosis.
Countries with the resources to do so are making resistance plans against pandemics – limited strategies that would protect their own citizens.
Most governments are hoping that early detection will make containment possible.
Containment depends heavily on vaccines, but vaccines are only part of the answer.
While they are a good defense against many viruses, each vaccine is highly specific to the threat.
Viruses are parasites to cells, and each virus attacks a particular type of cell.
The virus is shaped so that it can drill into a particular feature of that cell and inject parts of itself inside, confusing the cell into making more viruses and destroying itself in the process.
With their very specific forms, the most effective anti-viral vaccines must be designed for a narrow range of factors.
Sometimes the tailored nature of viruses works in our favor.
For example, they usually find it difficult to jump between species, because they would have to change their structure.
But if large numbers of a host – say, birds – encounter a great number of people, eventually the virus will find a way to prosper in a new type of cell.
Birds are the greatest concern today only because the spread is easy to see.
But AIDS jumped from monkeys and several types of flu jumped from swine.
Deadly mutations of any kind need to be identified urgently, so that an effective vaccine can be designed before the strain becomes comfortable in the human body.
Unfortunately our present methods of detection are not sensitive enough.
This is even more worrying when you realize that scientists should also be monitoring bacteria, prions, and parasites.
There are more bacteria than any other life form.
Many live harmlessly in our bodies and perform useful functions.
They evolve and adapt easily, which means that they learn to sidestep our drugs over time.
Bacteria should be checked for two types of mutation: adaptation by a hostile form that enables it to become super-immune to drugs, or a deadly mutant strain that appears in one of the multitude of “safe” bacteria.
Prions are a relatively new discovery.
They are made from proteins similar to those that the body uses during healthy operations, which means that they are able to fool the body’s tools into making more prions.
They have only recently been recognized as the cause of several infectious diseases, including mad cow disease and Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease, which kill by crowding out healthy brain cells.
Many nerve, respiratory and muscle diseases might also be caused by prions.
Finally, parasites, simple animals that infect us, are already classified as pandemics.
Malaria afflicts 300 million people and is the world’s biggest killer of children.
Many parasites are worms: hookworm (800 million people infected), roundworm (1.5 billion), schistosomes (200 million), and the worm that causes Elephantiasis (150 million).
There are also antagonists that are currently ignored.
Environmental chemicals and particulates might warrant their own categories.
Or consider combinations of problems, such as these chemical infectors mixing with airborne pollens, and apparently pushing up incidences of asthma.
New fungal infections are even scarier and might be harder to treat.
The bottom line is that we can’t predict where the threat will emerge, so we need a distributed, intelligent detection system.
In practical terms, how should it be built?
“Detectors” would have to be expert enough to know when an ordinary-looking symptom is actually an emergency.
They would be located everywhere, with an emphasis on vulnerable regions.
Initial warning signs of a pandemic are most likely to appear in the developing world, but detection nodes should be positioned in every country, with the least possible expense.
This is not as difficult as it sounds.
The key is to harness existing infrastructure.
Medical infrastructure exists everywhere, in some form.
It also tends to be the least corrupt of institutions in regions where that is a problem.
Medical centers and clinics would be expected to investigate the cause of ailments in a large number of their patients, even in cases where the symptoms seem common.
A small amount of additional scientific expertise and lab equipment would need to be added to a public health system that serves ordinary needs.
Enhancing existing resources would be effective for two reasons. First, illness is more likely to be reported in a city hospital than at a specialist institute.
Second, the investment would boost latent public health in that region.
For poor regions, investment in equipment and training would have to come from wealthier counterparts.
Rich countries could justify the expense in terms of the savings that would result from early detection of a major threat.
Tropical climates and urban slums are humanity’s front line against pandemics, and they should be equipped properly.
Public health is an important asset for any nation.
With so much at stake, it makes sense to place sentinels near every swamp, city, public market, and farmyard on earth.
A Prisoner’s Christmas
LUKYANIVSKA PRISON, KYIV – It has been said that there are no atheists in a foxhole.
Here, after my show trial and four and a half months in a cell, I have discovered that there are no atheists in prison, either.
When, despite unbearable pain, you are interrogated – including in your cell – for dozens of hours without a break, and an authoritarian regime’s entire system of coercion, including its media, is trying to discredit and destroy you once and for all, prayer becomes the only intimate, trusting, and reassuring conversation that one can have.
God, one realizes, is one’s only friend and only available family, because – deprived even of access to a trusted priest – there is no one else in whom to confide one’s worries and hopes.
In this season of love and family, the loneliness of a prison cell is almost unbearable.
The gray, dead silence of night (guards peer in voyeuristically through a slot in the door), the sudden, disembodied shrieks of prisoners, shrieks of distress and rage, the distant rattles and clangs of prison bolts: all make sleep impossible, or so restless as to be a torment.
But what is strange is that your senses are not dulled by this dead and dreadful world. On the contrary, they are ignited by it: your mind is set free from mundane concerns to ponder the inestimable and your place within it – a freedom of spirit that is a truly unexpected gift this Christmas season.
In the cell’s darkness, I gather strength and hope from the fact that God somehow seems so near to me here.
For where else would Christ be but with those who suffer and are persecuted?
Indeed, I have recently been reading Dietrich Bonhoeffer’s sublime and challenging Letters from Prison, in which he yearns for a Christ capable of offering mercy to a world, our world, then in the process of being martyred for a single man.
Written in a cramped, dank, and putrid cell, where hope was meant to die before the body, Bonhoeffer crafted a book rich in faith, openness, possibility, and, yes, hope – even in humanity’s darkest hour.
One particular passage resonates with me as I contemplate Ukraine’s plight. As he awaited his approaching execution by the Nazis, Bonhoeffer wrote that, in prison, “the godlessness of the world is not...concealed but, rather, revealed, and is thus exposed to an unexpected light.”
So I take some comfort this Christmas in knowing that the godlessness, inhumanity, and criminality of the regime that is now ruling in Kyiv is, at long last, being exposed to the world in a clear light.
Its democratic posturing has been unmasked as cynical political theater, its claim to desire a European future for Ukraine’s people revealed to be a lie, and the rapaciousness of its kleptocrats has been laid bare.
The regime’s contempt for the constitution and the rule of law is now undeniable, and that clarity is empowering.
More importantly, the suffering of Ukraine’s people has also become more widely known, and we are no longer so alone in our plight.
Alleviating it has been embraced as a just cause across Europe and around the world.
The everyday oppression, stifled media, and shakedowns and extortion of businesses for bribes all point to a mafia state on Europe’s border.
Now our European friends can no longer deny the smug vileness of the regime with which they are forced to deal.
And I am thankful this Christmas for being able to believe that democratic Europe will not tolerate this state of affairs.
Ukrainians will be strong knowing that they are not alone in their fight.
I do not pretend to be an expert on religious faith and spiritual values.
I am only a believer who cannot accept that our existence is the result of some freak cosmic accident.
We are, I believe, part of a mysterious yet integral act, whose source, direction, and purpose, though difficult to grasp at times, does have meaning and purpose – even when one is confined behind prison bars.
It is only faith in the idea that our lives matter, and that our decisions must be judged by their moral content, that we in Ukraine, and elsewhere, will be able to find our way out of the misery, unhappiness, and despair that has consumed us over the last two years.
It is within our power to recover or reinvigorate our freedoms and our societies, not by individual efforts, but by joining forces with likeminded people all over the world.
I know that we will manage this.
This Christmas, I ask my family and friends everywhere not to worry about me.
As Anna Akhmatova, the great poetic chronicler of Stalin’s terror, said, “I am alive in this grave.”
Can a public figure have a private life?
Recent events in three countries have highlighted the importance of this question.
In the French presidential election, both candidates tried to keep their domestic life separate from their campaign.
Ségolène Royal is not married to François Hollande, the father of her four children.
When asked whether they were a couple, Royal replied, “Our lives belong to us.”
Similarly, in response to rumors that President-elect Nicholas Sarkozy’s wife had left him, a spokesman for Sarkozy said, “That’s a private matter.”
The French have a long tradition of respecting the privacy of their politicians’ personal lives, and French public opinion is more broad-minded than in the United States, where an unwed mother of four would have no chance of being nominated for the presidency by a major party.
Indeed, last month, Randall Tobias, the top foreign aid adviser in the US State Department, resigned after acknowledging that he had used an escort service described as providing “high-end erotic fantasy” – although Tobias said he only had a massage.
In Britain, Lord John Browne, the chief executive who transformed BP from a second-tier European oil company into a global giant, resigned after admitting he had lied in court about the circumstances in which he had met a gay companion (apparently, he met him through a male escort agency).
In resigning, he said that he had always regarded his sexuality as a personal matter, and he was disappointed that a newspaper – The Mail on Sunday – had made it public.
Candidates for public office, and those holding high administrative or corporate positions, should be judged on their policies and performance, not on private acts that are irrelevant to how well they carry out, or will carry out, their public duties.
Sometimes, of course, the two overlap. The Mail on Sunday and its sister paper, The Daily Mail, justified their publication of revelations by Browne’s former companion on the grounds that they include allegations that Browne had allowed him to use corporate resources for the benefit of his own private business.
The company denied that there was any substance to these allegations.
As the administrator of the US Agency for International Development, Tobias implemented the Bush administration’s policy that requires organizations working against HIV/AIDS to condemn prostitution if they are to be eligible for US assistance.
That policy has been criticized for making it more difficult to assist sex workers who are at high risk of contracting and spreading HIV/AIDS.
Arguably, the public has an interest in knowing if those who implement such policies are themselves paying for sexual services.
Where there is no suggestion that a matter of personal morality has had an impact on the performance of a business executive or government official, we should respect that person’s privacy.
But what about candidates for political leadership?
Since politicians ask us to entrust them with sweeping powers, it can be argued that we should know as much as possible about their morality.
For example, we might reasonably ask whether they pay their fair share of taxes, or inquire about their charitable donations.
Such things tell us something about their concern for the public good.
Similarly, the revelation three years ago that the then-Australian opposition leader and aspiring prime minister, Mark Latham, had assaulted a taxi driver and broken his arm in a dispute about a fare was relevant for those who believe that a nation’s leader should be slow to anger.
But does the legitimate interest in knowing more about a politician extend to details about personal relations?
It is hard to draw a line of principle around any area and determine if knowledge of it will provide relevant information about a politician’s moral character.
The problem is that the media have an interest in publishing information that increases their audience, and personal information, especially of a sexual nature, will often do just that.
Even so, whether people choose to marry or not, whether they are heterosexual or homosexual, even whether they pay to fulfill their erotic fantasies or have fantasies they can fulfill at no cost, tells us little about whether they are good people who can be trusted with high office – unless, of course, they say one thing while doing another.
If we can cultivate a wider tolerance of human diversity, politicians, business leaders, and administrators would be less fearful of “exposure,” because they would realize that they have done nothing that they must hide.
Prostitution is illegal in most of the US, including Washington DC, and this could be one reason why Tobias had to resign.
But when New Jersey Governor John Corzine was involved in a serious road accident last month, it became known that he violated his own state’s law by not wearing his seat belt.
By any sensible measure, Corzine’s violation of the law was more serious than that of Tobias.
Laws requiring the wearing of seatbelts save many lives.
Laws prohibiting prostitution do no evident good at all, and may well do harm.
Yet no one suggested that Corzine should resign because of his foolish and illegal act.
In the US, at least, breaching sexual norms still brings with it a moral opprobrium that is unrelated to any real harm it may do.
Memperkenalkan Pendidikan Daring (online) kepada Dunia Arab
DUBAI – Sejak dahulu, pendidikan merupakan tantangan bagi dunia Arab, rendahnya akses pada pendidikan berkualitas berkontribusi terhadap semakin besarnya skills gap yang menyebabkan banyak pemuda, bahkan lulusan perguruan tinggi, menjadi pengangguran dan putus asa.
Di kawasan yang sering dilanda konflik dan kekacauan, tentu tidak mudah memecahkan permasalahan tersebut.
Namun, melalui pendekatan yang tegas dan inovatif, jalan keluarnya bisa dicapai.
Sudah pasti satu strategi tunggal tidak menjamin akan menyelesaikan tantangan pendidikan di dunia Arab.
Melalui yayasan Abdulla Al Ghurair Foundation for Education yang baru dibentuk dan memiliki dana sebanyak 1,1 miliar dolar AS dan mandat untuk membuka peluang lebih besar bagi pemuda-pemudi Arab dengan pemberian beasiswa, kami telah mengkaji efektivitas berbagai pendekatan yang layak – termasuk efektivitas biaya.
Ada satu opsi yang menonjol: online learning.
Bahkan negara-negara Arab membuat kemajuan luar biasa cepat dalam perluasan konektivitas internet.
Pada tahun 2018, diperkirakan terdapat 226 juta pengguna internet di dunia Arab, lebih dari 55% populasi penduduknya – hampir 7% lebih tinggi dibandingkan rata-rata global.
Akan tetapi mayoritas pemuda menggunakan internet untuk mengakses media sosial, daripada keperluan ekonomi atau pendidikan.
Dengan demikian, mereka kehilangan peluang besar, apalagi mengingat kemajuan yang dicapai dalam hal peningkatan efektivitas dan daya tarik online learning.
Kini, banyak universitas terbaik di dunia melakukan perkuliahan ilmu komputer dan teknik secara online.
Bahkan, berlawanan dengan kepercayaan umum, pembelajaran semacam ini tidak berupa ceramah online selama 2 jam penuh tanpa praktik.
Justru, pembelajaran tersebut berisikan video tutorial singkat, aktivitas interaktif untuk mempraktikkan konsep-konsep dalam skenario yang realistis, serta kuis dan penilaian sejawat yang memberi masukan berharga bagi siswa.
Berkat model yang berkembang dengan cepat, online learning kini menjadi alternatif yang sangat baik dibandingkan pendidikan tradisional.
Ini merupakan kabar baik.
Bagaimanapun juga, pembelajaran melalui teknologi internet memecahkan sejumlah tantangan besar yang dihadapi sistem pendidikan negara-negara Arab saat ini.
Pertama, banyak pemuda membutuhkan akses kepada pendidikan yang terjangkau.
Ketika sebuah komunitas memiliki akses internet, seperti di sebagian besar negara Arab saat ini, perluasan online learning untuk menjangkau jutaan pemuda yang saat ini putus sekolah atau tidak mampu memasuki lembaga pendidikan berkualitas, dapat dilakukan dengan biaya relatif rendah.
Beberapa perguruan tinggi ternama di dunia Arab jelas tidak dapat mengakomodasi siswa sebegitu banyaknya.
Meskipun mampu, mereka mungkin memilih untuk tidak.
Kami menyaksikan sendiri betapa sejumlah universitas di negara-negara Arab dan di kawasan lainnya menutup pintunya dari pengungsi-pengungsi asal Suriah dan negara lain, hingga memaksa mereka menghadapi kesulitan keuangan dan beban birokrasi yang rumit.
Tantangan kedua adalah rendahnya kualitas pendidikan.
Sudah terlampau lama, perguruan tinggi di kawasan Timur Tengah dijalankan tanpa perlu membuktikan bahwa program pendidikan yang diselenggarakan selaras dengan standar-standar mutu dan ekspektasi global.
Metode online learning akan memudahkan pengukuran keberhasilan dan memastikan bahwa siswa memperoleh pengetahuan dan keterampilan yang bisa digunakan.
Sementara itu, online learning akan memfasilitasi pengenalan metode pengajaran dan pembelajaran baru dan inovatif.
Contohnya, berkurangnya perkuliahan dengan ceramah dan pembelajaran hafalan akan menciptakan ruang bagi pembelajaran bersifat self-paced (mandiri) dan metode belajar serta instrumen penilaian berbasis personal/individu yang digunakan para dosen di platform pendidikan online seperti Massive Open Online Courses (MOOC) dari EdX dan platform lainnya.
Ketiga, dunia Arab menghadapi kesulitan dalam penyelenggaran pembelajaran berkesinambungan (continuous learning).
Agar mampu bertahan di tengah perekonomian yang dinamis, dimana teknologi berdampak pada redundancy di banyak pekerjaan dan pentingnya mempunyai spesialisasi, tenaga kerja dimana pun harus secara konsisten memutakhirkan atau mengembangkan berbagai keterampilan yang dimiliki.
Saat ini, hanya pemuda dari keluarga kaya di dunia Arab, tanpa komitmen pribadi seperti keluarga dan pekerjaan, yang bisa memperoleh pembelajaran berkesinambungan, dalam bentuk gelar pasca sarjana di universitas-universitas terbaik.
Kursus online terbuka akan menyetarakan kedudukan (level the playing field) dengan memberikan kualifikasi profesional dari perguruan tinggi terkemuka yang bisa membuat prospek karir seseorang meroket.
Dengan mempertimbangkan semua hal di atas, kami membentuk Al Ghurair Open Learning Scholars Program, bertujuan untuk menyediakan pendidikan terbaik di dunia kepada pemuda di dunia Arab melalui kuliah jarak jauh (online degree program).
Kami menetapkan standar yang tinggi melalui kolaborasi perdana dengan MIT, pemimpin di dunia pembelajaran online terbuka.
Kolaborasi antara MIT dan Open Learning Scholars Program akan menghasilkan dua program “MicroMasters” baru yang terdiri atas lima kursus selama 12 minggu dalam bidang STEM (sains, teknologi, engineering/teknik, dan matematika) yang saat ini tidak diajarkan di dunia Arab.
Kami berharap program-program tersebut – bisa diakses pemuda di negara-negara Arab dan sekitarnya – akan memikat siswa dan mendapat dukungan kuat dari pemberi kerja.
Akan tetapi, untuk memaksimalkan dampak investasi kami, persepsi atas online learning harus diubah dan ini memerlukan upaya gabungan dari lembaga penyelenggara pendidikan, pemerintah, dan sektor swasta.
Sesungguhnya, perguruan tinggi di negara-negara Arab harus mulai mendalami perluasan online learning yang bermutu tinggi.
Pemerintah harus mengkaji ulang persepsinya untuk memberi pengakuan pada program-program yang dikelola perguruan tinggi yang kredibel dan berakreditasi internasional.
Bagi sektor swasta, kuncinya adalah memberi penghargaan bagi pekerja yang memegang gelar dan sertifikasi dari program kuliah online.
Sementara itu, Abdulla Al Ghurair Foundation for Education akan mengawali upaya bersama untuk menawarkan gelar sarjana dan pasca-sarjana secara online di bidang STEM dari universitas-universitas terbaik di dunia kepada pemuda-pemudi Arab.
Apabila terus ditunda, mayoritas pemuda Arab akan jauh ketinggalan.
Arab Fathers and Sons
The deaths of Yasir Arafat and of Sheikh Zayd, the long-standing ruler of the United Arab Emirates, continues the generational change that began in 1999-2000, when the leaders of Jordan, Morocco, Bahrain, and Syria died in quick succession.
Across the Middle East people are younger, and their political leaders older, than the world average.
The gradual replacement of one generation of elites by another may be one of the key factors in determining whether or not effective reform takes place in the Arab world.
At present, four political generations co-exist on the region’s socio-political map.
The outgoing leadership generation – that of Arafat, King Hussein or Hafiz al-Assad, King Fahd and President Mubarak – was born before 1935 and has determined events in the Middle East since the 1970’s.
These leaders came of age and began their careers during the era of decolonization.
They were weaned on Gamal Abdel-Nasser’s pan-Arab nationalism, and the crucial political event for them was the Arab defeat in the 1967 Arab-Israeli war.
Members of this generation sought a strong Arab leadership that would create a balance of power with Israel.
They also believed in – or at least toyed with – forms of socialism and étatism, and did not consider democracy or civil rights to be priorities.
The next generation was born between 1935 and 1955, and in many respects represents a generation “in between.”
Most benefited from the economic growth and expanded educational opportunities associated with the oil boom of the 1970’s.
At the same time, political participation remained blocked by the previous generation, which never intended to give up power voluntarily.
Unsurprisingly, many in this generation grew dissatisfied, and not a few began to look for Islamic alternatives to the prevailing political systems.
Rather than determining events in the coming two or three decades, this generation is likely to be sidelined by the next cohort, born between 1955 and 1975.
This is the generation of Syria’s President Bashar al-Assad, Jordan’s King Abdullah and Morocco’s King Muhammad VI.
Some call this the “generation of sons” – sons of leaders who led their states for decades.
This age cohort was not much influenced by the Arab-Israeli wars or the East-West conflict.
Instead, their political education included the Gulf War of 1991 and the Arab-Israeli peace process of the 1990’s, with its crises and breakdown.
Jailed West Bank Fatah leader Marwan Barghouti is as representative of this group as the leaders of Syria and Jordan.
Members of this generation are better acquainted with notions of globalization and economic reform than with socialism and revolution.
Except for the Palestinians, they have never known their countries other than as independent and comparatively stable states.
In the Palestinian territories, the jil al-intifada , the generation of the (first and second) Palestinian uprising, will likely become the founding generation.
But it is the fourth group that underscores the relevance of generational issues in the Arab world.
Even when combined, the first three generations make up barely one-third of the entire Arab population.
Almost 60% of all Arabs are younger than 20, with roughly 70% below the age of 30.
This raises a key question: what happens to these Arab “baby boomers” if the generation now coming to power clings to it as tenaciously as the generation of Mubarak, Assad, and Hussein?
The political generation of Bashar al-Assad, King Abdullah, and Gamal Mubarak – son of Egypt’s ailing president – forms a less coherent picture than that of the outgoing leadership.
In that elder generation, many had pursued military careers, and many of their aides and collaborators were engineers and civil servants.
The socio-professional profile of the new elite is broader.
Economists, bankers, and entrepreneurs as well as of technology or communication experts are common.
There are also more traditional politicians: personalities who see themselves as representatives of particular social or economic interests, not as apolitical technocrats.
This new leadership elite is in many ways more cosmopolitan than its predecessors; their average level of education is higher; a few have foreign degrees.
Women also play a somewhat greater role.
Developments in Morocco, Bahrain, and Jordan certainly seem to suggest that this changing of the guard can help soften rigid political structures and allow for broader participation.
But generational change need not be accompanied by economic reform and steps towards political liberalization – witness North Korea under Kim Il Sung’s son, Kim Jong Il.
Indeed, experience gives little reason to presume that a modern way of speaking, willingness to liberalize the economy, and an urge for technological development automatically translates into a democratic opening.
It is more realistic to expect that the new Arab elites will make use of their states’ authoritarian institutions, both to overcome resistance to their economic agendas and to consolidate their newly acquired power.
This is anything but a risk-free path.
Without a significant increase in opportunities for political participation, including genuinely competitive elections, the chasm between a predominantly young population and a ruling elite with a narrow generational base will widen.
Such continuing political inertia leaves an increasingly young Arab population prey to the appeal of extremist ideologies, while driving the best and brightest to seek their fortune elsewhere.
Arab Fathers and Sons
The problem of succession in the Arab secular republics highlights their predicament in the transition to a post-revolutionary phase, for succession in regimes that fail to build strong institutions always risks triggering a systemic crisis.
While the decision by some in favor of dynastic succession may be lacking in democracy, it is not entirely devoid of merit.
Arguably, it is a choice for economic modernization, for an end to the politics of conflict, and for positive political change further down the road.
Years of Western-backed repressive authoritarianism nipped in the bud any potential growth of a liberal alternative to the incumbent Arab regimes, and turned any abrupt move to free elections into a dangerous exercise in Islamic democracy.
A democracy that produces governments led by Hamas, Hezbollah, or the Muslim Brotherhood is inevitably bound to be anti-Western and opposed to an American-inspired “peace process” with Israel.
Syria has already sought to assure regime continuity through quasi-monarchic hereditary succession with the move from Hafez al-Assad to his son Bashar.
There are indications that Egypt might follow suit, with Hosni Mubarak’s son, Gamal, taking over.
Likewise, Libya’s Muammar Khaddafi may be succeeded by his son, Seif el Islam.
As products of revolutionary military takeovers, these secular nationalist regimes failed to produce genuine popular legitimacy and have had to fall back on the dynastic succession practiced by the regimes they toppled.
The centrality of hereditary succession in the quest for peace and stability was shown by Hafez al-Assad when he agreed to unprecedented good will gestures aimed at drawing Ehud Barak’s Israeli government into a peace deal.
An old and sick man who was to die a few months later, he acted with a sense of urgency to reach a deal that would relieve his inexperienced son of the burden of struggling for the recovery of the Golan Heights.
Bashar Assad remains essentially loyal to his father’s legacy.
Not unlike North Korea’s and Iran’s defiant nuclear policies, Bashar’s membership in the region’s “axis of evil” is a call for dialogue with America, not an invitation to an invasion, and for a settlement with Israel, not a drive to wage war on it.  
In Egypt, Mubarak turned his back on the lofty rhetoric of Gamal Abdel-Nasser’s revolution and its grand strategic designs. Stability is at the heart of his thinking.
Hence, he could not accept America’s awkward pro-democracy agenda. But he was more than willing to occupy center stage in Arab diplomacy’s support of the Annapolis peace conference.
After all, the passion that the Palestinians’ plight evokes among ordinary Egyptians is a dangerous source of instability.
Mubarak’s succession is being conducted in an especially sophisticated manner.
His son’s ascension, unlike that of Bashar on the eve of his father’s death, is anything but settled.
But, by being allowed to acquire popular legitimacy and a high degree of acceptance within the political establishment as the driving force behind the ruling party’s preparations for the post-Mubarak era, Gamal is being positioned strategically to compete effectively for the presidency.
He is widely credited for setting the country’s agenda, and for being the motor behind the liberal economic reforms that since 2004 have meant a qualitative leap in the Egyptian economy.
It may be, as President Mubarak’s critics argue, that the faltering progress of democratization reflects the attempt to block all potential challengers to Gamal.
But, with the decline of secular nationalism and Islamism’s rise, the hidden electoral power of the Muslim Brotherhood poses a mortal threat to the regime and its strategic alliance with the West.
As a result, the regime refuses to take any chances.
Nor was Muammar Khaddafi’s decision to stop being an international pariah entirely unrelated to his concern to bequeath to his son a state that lives in peace with the world.
His abysmal human rights record remains, but the flamboyant “Guide of the Revolution” ceased flirting with weapons of mass destruction and global terrorism in exchange for the end of sanctions and international rehabilitation.
A sick man whose rule at home is being challenged by Islamist opponents, he decided that international ostracism and domestic troubles is too explosive a combination for his son, a spoiled playboy, to handle.
Algeria is an especially difficult case.
The last of the revolutionary generation, President Abdulaziz Buteflika must still conceive a succession that ends his country’s civil war.
Fully-fledged democracy might lead to victory for Islamists, as it did in 1991.
A transition to democracy in the old revolutionary Arab regimes will not correspond to a Western model, nor can it be imposed by American F-16’s.
But, as countries like Egypt, Syria, and Lybia might be indicating, hereditary succession is not an inherently reactionary move.
Rather, it means opting for a controlled transition to a post-revolutionary phase in which economic modernization and international integration might usher in greater political change in the future.
Mayoritas Diam (Silent Majority) di Arab Harus Bersuara
ALJIR – Sejak UNDP (United Nations Development Program) mulai mengerjakan Laporan Indeks Pembangunan Manusia di Negara-negara Arab atau Arab Human Development Reports (AHDR) pada tahun 2001, situasi di kebanyakan negara Arab telah beranjak dari buruk menjadi semakin buruk.
Faktanya, kini negara-negara di kawasan tersebut bahkan tidak bisa bersatu untuk menerbitkan laporan baru.
Hal ini sungguh disayangkan, sebab menyepakati visi bersama yang terbaru untuk masyarakat Arab, terutama pemudanya, merupakan prasyarat bagi terciptanya perdamaian dan kesejahteraan di Timur Tengah dan Afrika Utara.
AHDR pertama yang diterbitkan pada tahun 2002, mengidentifikasi tiga “defisit pembangunan” utama yang menghambat dunia Arab: pengetahuan, pemberdayaan perempuan, dan kebebasan.
Laporan tersebut, dikenal sebagai dokumen yang “ditulis oleh warga Arab untuk rakyat Arab”, mempunyai pengaruh jelas pada narasi pembangunan kawasan dan sikap elite nasional ketika membahas persoalan-persoalan yang dihadapi masyarakatnya.
Pada masa perumusan ADHR pertama, dunia Arab cukup optimis.
Israel, sehabis keluar dari Lebanon pada tahun 2000, juga hengkang dari Gaza pada tahun 2005.
Pemimpin-pemimpin Arab baru – seperti Raja Abdullah II di Yordania, Raja Mohammed VI di Maroko, dan Presiden Bashar al-Assad di Suriah – mulai memangku jabatan dan memberi harapan perubahan.
Arab Saudi mengumumkan pemilu daerah yang pertama pada tahun 2003 dan berikutnya pada tahun 2005.
Mesir dan Irak juga menyelenggarakan pemilu demokratis.
Kemudian, upaya Aljazair untuk menghentikan pergulatan sipil yang tiada habisnya juga relatif berhasil, berkat tingginya harga minyak ketika itu.
Setelah Arab Spring, yang bermula di bulan Desember 2010 dan memuncak selama 2011, UNDP mengawali ADHR tahun 2015 dengan fokus pada dilema pemuda Arab.
Saya adalah salah satu anggota tim AHDR 2015 bersama 30 tokoh intelektual dan aktivis dari dunia Arab.
ADHR 2015 memiliki tema serupa dengan laporan sebelumnya, namun kali ini kami melibatkan langsung pemuda Arab yang berpengaruh untuk mengumpulkan data terbaik dan menonjolkan efek-efek perang yang merajalela di kawasan.
Laporan tahun 2015 kemudian dirampungkan di bulan Mei 2015.
Namun sejak itu hanya tersimpan rapi di kantor Biro Arab UNDP di New York, mungkin sebagian besar dikarenakan kritik keras yang dimuat dalam laporan terhadap penguasa elite di Arab.
Satu temuan dari laporan tahun 2015 yang bisa saya angkat secara terbuka adalah kebangkitan “mayoritas diam” (silent majority) di dunia Arab yang berpikiran lebih liberal, terutama di kalangan pemuda.
Tren menjanjikan ini muncul dalam bentuk perbandingan antar generasi dari survei opini global.
Akses kepada informasi yang dimiliki pemuda Arab saat ini jauh lebih hebat dibandingkan sebelumnya dan mereka merangkul nilai-nilai yang dipegang pemuda di negara-negara lain, bukan nilai-nilai dari generasi orangtua mereka.
Selain itu, pemuda Arab haus akan partisipasi lebih besar dalam masyarakat sipil, emansipasi dari hirarki patriarkal, dan ruang lebih luas bagi kreativitas individual. Walaupun disana pendidikan tidak mendapat kebebasan dibandingkan negara-negara lain, sebab kurikulumnya yang konservatif, pemuda Arab bisa memperoleh sejumlah kebebasan.
Mayoritas diam yang baru adalah pertahanan terbaik melawan arus radikal dan kekecewaan yang mengisi kekosongan politik yang diakibatkan oleh runtuhnya orde lama.
Penduduk Arab yang berorientasi pada reformasi harus berupaya membesarkan jalan tengah, daripada menyatukan ujung-ujung ekstrem atau radikal.
Mayoritas diam pun harus mengakhiri kesunyian. Jika tidak, revolusi melawan status quo yang tidak layak akan terus dipimpin oleh kelompok ekstrem yang cuma bisa menyuarakan keluhan dan kecaman, bukan aspirasi.
Tahun 2000-an awal memberi harapan bagi dunia Arab dan kini kita bisa saksikan harapan tersebut diperbarui kembali.
Para reformis dari masyarakat sipil di Arab harus didorong untuk bangkit dan bersuara sekarang, atau terpaksa merugi dan kehilangan harapan ke generasi berikutnya.
Pertumbuhan Ekonomi Pasca Arab Spring
CAMBRIDGE – Lima tahun setelah pemberontakan Arab Spring dimulai, Mesir, Yordania, Maroko, dan Tunisia telah mencapai tingkat stabilitas politis yang memadai.
Akan tetapi pertumbuhan ekonomi masih setengah hati dan perkiraan pesimis IMF (Dana Moneter Internasional) menyatakan laju pertumbuhan tidak akan melebihi 1,5% per kapita tahun ini.
Mengingat besarnya potensi catch-up dan tingginya jumlah tenaga kerja muda, kondisi ini patut dipertanyakan. 
Salah satu penjelasan termudah adalah, meskipun terjadi kemajuan yang signifikan dalam pembentukan pemerintahan yang stabil, negara-negara tersebut masih memiliki risiko politik yang menakut-nakuti investor swasta.
Tetapi jumlah investasi sebelum pemberontakan terjadi di tahun 2011 juga biasa-biasa saja dan saat itu risiko sudah tinggi.
Pasti ada penjelasan lain.
Mempelajari riwayat ekonomi terkini di negara-negara tersebut akan memberikan pemahaman tentang permasalahan yang ada.
Perekonomian pasar yang relatif baru di Timur Tengah dan Afrika Utara, muncul setelah tahun 1980an, ketika model pertumbuhan ekonomi yang bersifat state-directed jatuh akibat tidak adanya efisiensi (dan utang negara sebagai konsekuensinya).
Namun, berbeda dengan Amerika Latin atau Eropa Timur, negara-negara Arab meliberalisasi perekonomiannya tanpa meliberalisasi politiknya.
Kelompok autokrat yang disokong dunia Barat masih berkuasa dengan kuat.
Akibatnya, bahkan ketika reformasi di tahun 1990-an mengembalikan peran negara dalam perekonomian – di Mesir, belanja negara turun dari 60% PDB pada tahun 1980 menjadi 30% PDB pada tahun 1990-an – politik masih mempengaruhi pasar.
Karena hak-hak istimewa dalam ekonomi dibagikan melalui cara yang menghambat kebangkitan pengusaha-pengusaha independen yang akhirnya mungkin bisa melawan kekuasaan kelompok autokrat, perusahaan-perusahaan yang lebih disukai lalu memperoleh virtual monopoly pada sektor perekonomian yang sepenuhnya mengalami liberalisasi.
Di Mesir, contohnya, perusahaan-perusahaan milik 32 pengusaha yang berhubungan dekat dengan Presiden terpilih, Hosni Mubarak, mendapat lebih dari 80% pinjaman dibandingkan jumlah yang diterima sektor swasta formal dan bahkan memperoleh 60% dari total keuntungan, walaupun hanya mempekerjakan 11% tenaga kerja dari seluruh angkatan kerja di Mesir.
Di Tunisia, kroni-kroni mantan Presiden Zine El Abidine Ben Ali mendapat 21% dari total keuntungan sektor swasta pada tahun 2010, meskipun perusahaan-perusahaan mereka hanya mempekerjakan 1% dari total tenaga kerja di Tunisia.
Tidak mengherankan, sistem ini menghasilkan pertumbuhan yang sekedarnya.
Loyalitas politik tidak terwujud dalam efisiensi ekonomi, dan para loyalis pemimpin autokratik telah gagal membangun perusahaan-perusahaan kelas dunia yang berdaya saing.
Dengan pesaing potensial berbakat memiliki kelemahan yang jelas, tidak ada seorang pun yang termotivasi untuk membuat inovasi atau berinvestasi secara layak.
Selain itu, tidak hanya sektor tradisional yang penuh dengan hak-hak istimewa (rent-filled sector), seperti bisnis properti atau sumber daya alam, yang gagal mencapai potensi pertumbuhannya.
Di sektor yang dapat menghasilkan devisa (tradable sector), seperti manufaktur dan utilitas, hak-hak istimewa dibuat melalui perlindungan non tarif dan subsidi sehingga mengakibatkan pertumbuhan ekspor yang lesu.
Akibatnya adalah kelangkaan pekerjaan di sektor formal yang jarang sekali menyerap lebih dari 20% tenaga kerja.
Dengan beberapa pekerjaan layak dicadangkan untuk kelompok tertentu, banyak tenaga kerja muda berpendidikan dihadapkan dengan pekerjaan kualitas rendah di sektor informal.
Semua itu ditambah dengan layanan kualitas rendah, akhirnya berakibat pada mobilitas sosial yang terhenti.
Tingginya ketidakpuasan sosial diperburuk dengan banyaknya penindasan.
Ketika risiko-risiko politik meningkat, kroni-kroni autokrat menuntut keuntungan lebih.
Pada akhirnya, ketidakmampuan rezim mengendalikan sektor “jalanan” dan swasta memuncak dalam aksi unjuk rasa dan revolusi politik.
Pemerintah yang tercipta dari reruntuhan Arab Spring mewarisi sistem tawar-menawar yang buruk.
Rendahnya perlindungan terhadap hak properti juga menghambat investasi, namun penerapan aturan-aturan yang adil dan tegas bukan suatu prospek yang realistis saat ini, mengingat korupsi kecil-kecilan yang terjadi dalam birokrasi yang bergaji rendah dan situasi politik yang mengalami polarisasi.
Negara-negara ini bisa mencoba meniru keberhasilan perekonomian Turki pada tahun 2000-2010 ketika aliansi politik antar partai yang berkuasa dan sekelompok perusahaan skala kecil dan menengah yang gesit berkontribusi pada kenaikan ekspor sebanyak tiga kali lipat.
Tantangannya disini adalah menemukan investor yang tepat yang mampu mendorong pertumbuhan dan menciptakan lapangan kerja, bukan sekedar memberikan dukungan politik.
Dalam hal ini, Maroko dan Yordania telah berhasil, ketika monarki di kedua negara terbukti mampu mengatur kelompok elit yang menawarkan dukungan politik dan bekal/modal ekonomi.
Tetapi, ketika pemerintah di negara-negara tersebut berhasil memperluas koalisi bisnisnya, kroni-kroni yang mencari bagiannya ini masih menghambat kemajuan.
Dengan melemahkan investasi di sektor-sektor tradable, memenuhi tuntutan mereka berarti semakin menghambat pertumbuhan ekspor.
Tunisia bisa belajar dari pengalaman Maroko, memperluas sektor ekspor dengan menarik investasi asing langsung (FDI), sementara membuka sektor jasa dalam negeri untuk UKM lokal.
Tapi Tunisia masih harus menghadapi tantangan liberalisasi ekonomi walaupun adanya tekanan besar dari serikat buruh untuk melindungi perusahaan-perusahaan tidak efisien dari tingginya persaingan.
Di dalam negeri, Mesir mengandalkan perusahaan publik dan swasta agar berhubungan erat dengan militer serta pembiayaan dari Dewan Kerjasama Teluk (Gulf Cooperation Council atau GCC) untuk menyokong perekonomiannya.
Tapi mengingat jatuhnya pendapatan GCC dari minyak – serta kekecewaaan terhadap tidak efisiennya pengaturan ini – pilihan ini semakin terbatas.
Di empat negara tersebut, penambahan lapangan kerja akan masih mengalami keterbatasan dalam beberapa waktu ke depan.
Peningkatan inklusi ekonomi tanpa mengancam pemimpin politik tentu tidak mudah dicapai, sebab upaya ini menuntut pembentukan tata kelola pemerintahan yang lebih inklusif.
Bagi Maroko dan Tunisia, konvergensi kepentingan antara kelompok islam moderat dan liberal memberikan secercah harapan.
Namun harapan tersebut nampaknya tidak nampak di Mesir atau negara lain di kawasan ini.
The Lonely Arab Crowd
PARIS – Melalui The Hubris of the Zero Point, filsuf asal Kolombia Santiago Castro-Gomez menggambarkan pernyataan yang dikemukakan oleh René Descartes pada tahun 1637 “I think, therefore I am” sebagai momen ketika warga kulit putih Eropa menetapkan kedudukan mereka di atas Tuhan selaku sumber utama pengetahuan dan kebenaran.
Dengan titik balik ini, mereka mulai menganggap diri mereka sebagai pengamat dimana metode-metode, moral, dan etika ilmiahnya lebih superior dibandingkan masyarakat dari budaya lain.
Cultural “zero points” ini penting karena berfungsi sebagai garis pemisah – demarkasi jelas antara “sebelum” dan “sesudah” yang memiliki implikasi besar pada pengembangan kehidupan pribadi dan publik.
Jadi layak untuk kita pertimbangkan dampak konsep Castro-Gomez terhadap dunia Arab.
Memang, dapat dikatakan bahwa sebagian besar masalah di kawasan ini disebabkan oleh tidak adanya “zero points” setempat yang dapat melekat secara kuat pada budaya modern.
Dalam buku The Lonely Crowd, sosiolog asal Amerika David Riesman mengidentifikasi tiga jenis budaya umum: budaya yang diarahkan oleh tradisi (tradition-directed) yang berpedoman pada ritual-ritual, moral, dan nilai-nilai yang diwariskan; budaya yang diarahkan dari dalam (inner-directed) dimana masyarakat berperilaku sesuai dengan nilai-nilai yang dipupuk secara mandiri (self-nourished); dan budaya yang diarahkan oleh keadaan di luar (outer-directed) yang umumnya bereaksi pada norma-norma eksternal dan pengaruh sejawat.
Kerangka milik Riesman ini memiliki pengaruh khusus di dunia Arab sekarang, ketika angka melek aksara meningkat dan kemajuan teknologi komunikasi secara cepat telah membangkitkan gejolak dari cultural narratives yang bersaing, sementara tiga jenis budaya yang ia utarakan saling beradu untuk menentukan masa depan negara.
Ironisnya, justru gabungan antara kenaikan angka melek aksara dengan teknologi modern yang menambah kobaran api konflik antara dua jenis “refomis” – tokoh revivalisme agama dan tokoh modernisasi yang berorientasi Barat.
Dengan memanfaatkan kemampuannya untuk melakukan produksi secara massal dan langsung menyebarluaskan teks-teks agama kuno dan kesusastraan yang berasal dari Barat, dua kelompok ini bersaing untuk memenangkan hati dan pikiran masyarakat yang tradisional.
Akan tetapi menurut penerbit asal Lebanon Samar Abou-Zeid, buku-buku tentang agama adalah jenis karya sastra yang paling banyak diunduh di dunia Arab.
Persoalannya adalah sebagian besar teks-teks agama yang dibaca di dunia Arab saat ini ditujukan bagi sekelompok spesialis yang sudah tidak ada lagi – sebagaimana diperingatkan oleh Riesman -  dan sering disalahartikan.
Kondisi masyarakat dan waktu ketika teks-teks tersebut ditulis sudah jauh berbeda dengan pembaca di masa sekarang.
Umat Islam yang taat, tentu saja memiliki zero point mereka sendiri: tahun 610 ketika Malaikat Jibril menyampaikan wahyu pertama dalam Al-Qur’an kepada Nabi Muhammad.
Sejak saat itu, banyak pemeluk agama Islam menganggap dirinya sebagai pengusung kebenaran dan keadilan dan visi moral yang lebih diutamakan dibandingkan hal lainnya.
Mau tidak mau hal ini menempatkan tokoh revivalisme agama bertentangan dengan jenis budaya kedua yang bersaing untuk unggul di dunia Arab: tokoh-tokoh pembaharu yang berpendidikan Barat dan berbudaya inner-directed yang berpegang pada pernyataan Descartes sebagai acuan mereka.
Masyarakat Arab ini – umumnya kelompok elit ekonomi – membaca, mengagumi, dan menggunakan produk-produk dari suatu budaya, meskipun memiliki komitmen pada “nilai-nilai universal”, yang terus menjadi lebih sedikit Eurosentrik dan didominasi oleh tradisi intelektual Kristiani.
Akibatnya mereka semakin cenderung merasa terasingkan baik di dalam maupun luar negeri.
Jenis other-directed pada budaya Arab yang terakhir ini bisa dibilang yang paling dominan: kelompok orang yang disebut “lonely Arab crowd” oleh Riesman.
Terbebas dari tradisi, mereka bersembunyi di balik kedangkalan agar terlindung dari konflik-konflik di sekitar mereka, mencari kepuasan dalam konsumerisme, karir, dan gaya hidup.
Bagi mereka zero point adalah tren terkini atau mode/fesyen.
Pergolakan budaya ini diakibatkan – setidaknya sebagian – oleh tidak adanya tradisi intelektual kontemporer setempat yang mampu memberikan inner compass bagi masyarakat berdasarkan nilai-nilai lokal dan perspektif modern.
Kekosongan budaya ini paling jelas terlihat dalam ketidaksesuaian antara kebiasaan membaca di kawasan dengan respon industri penerbitan.
Penduduk Mesir, misalnya, membaca selama rata-rata 7,5 jam per minggu, dibandingkan dengan lima jam dan 42 menit di Amerika Serikat.
Akan tetapi pada tahun 2012, menurut Abou-Zeid, semua negara-negara Arab dan penduduknya yang berjumlah 362 juta jiwa hanya menghasilkan 15.000 judul, menjadikannya berada di peringkat yang sama dengan Romania (dengan populasi 21,3 juta jiwa), Ukraina (45,6 juta jiwa) atau penerbit asal Amerika, Penguin Random House.
Supaya bisa menciptakan proporsi yang sama dengan populasinya, dunia Arab harus bisa menerbitkan judul buku yang 10-20 kali lebih banyak dibandingkan jumlahnya sekarang.
Dominasi teks-teks agama kuno dan karya-karya yang dihasilkan dunia Barat telah menyebabkan pembaca Arab modern mengalami polarisasi, tanpa memiliki zero point mereka sendiri.
Sungguh ironis melihat bahwa kenaikan angka melek aksara dan penggunaan teknologi modern berkontribusi tidak hanya pada pertumbuhan intelektual, tapi juga perselisihan regional.
Mungkin bukan kebetulan bahwa Lebanon, salah satu negara pertama di kawasan yang mampu meningkatkan angka melek aksaranya, juga negara pertama yang menderita perang saudara.
Kecuali masyarakat Arab dan Muslim berhasil menemukan kembali, membangkitkan, dan pada derajat tertentu menciptakan tradisi intelektual kontemporer mereka, hasilnya adalah penyimpangan budaya, atau bahkan lebih buruknya, bentrokan sipil berdarah yang berkepanjangan.
Arafat\u0027s Ghost
History gave Yasir Arafat far more time than most leaders to achieve his mission.
After all, at the time of his death he had been leader of the Palestinians for 35 years.
Yet he left his people in a terrible situation, with no state, in the midst of a losing war, and with a bankrupt economy.
Whether his successors can revive and complete the Palestinians' historic mission depends on how they define their goal.
Looking back at his career, Arafat never really veered from the belief that his life's mission was to destroy Israel by any means necessary and replace it with a Palestinian Arab state.
An independent Palestinian state that did not include all of Israel held no appeal to him.
He was equally indifferent to his people's material welfare and anything particular about the design of a viable political and economic system.
Now, in the post-Arafat era, Palestinians must choose one of several strategies.
Unfortunately, most of the alternatives call for the continued use of violence and terrorism.
The moderate strategy seeks an independent Palestine state as quickly as possible, on the assumption that once there is no more Israeli presence or violence, the Palestinians can concentrate on constructive pursuits, including resettling refugees and improving living standards.
But this is the view of only a small minority of leaders, notably former Prime Minister Abu Mazin and Muhammad Dahlan, who heads his own militia in the Gaza Strip.
If Arafat had taken this road - accepting Israel's existence, ending terrorism, and confronting Palestinian extremists - the conflict would have ended long ago.
First, long-term continuation of violence will force Israel to withdraw from the occupied territories.
But none of the main leadership factions are proposing that the masses be consulted very much. Nor did Arafat leave in place any institutional mechanisms for doing so.
Moreover, the popular appeal of radical religion, ideology, and misinformation should not be underestimated.
Few Palestinians are even aware that four years ago Arafat turned down an independent state equal in size to the entire West Bank and Gaza Strip, in addition to more than $20 billion in refugee compensation.
The main problem left by Arafat is the lack of any leadership at all.
Rarely in history has a political movement been so deliberately set by its founder on a course toward chaos.
Arafat not only left no successor, but no order.
Over the decades, the movement has developed a political culture of indiscipline.
Arafat presided over a sort of anarchy, encouraging rivalries, undermining other potential leaders, and ensuring that all authority (and money) ran through his hands.
Only if the post-Arafat movement decides that it really wants a Palestinian state in exchange for ending the conflict with Israel in every respect will there be a real chance of peace.
Arafat's death may well mark the beginning of that process, but the transition to a new Palestinian leadership could take years, and there is no assurance that it will be a moderate one.
Arafat’s Last Hurrrah
In his protracted moment of death, Yasir Arafat performed his last act of duty to the Palestinian cause to which he devoted his entire life.
Everything about the man was, indeed, protracted.
He carried out a protracted war of national liberation. He withstood a series of protracted sieges – in Amman (1970), Beirut (1982), and in Ramallah (2002-2004).
Arafat’s leadership was the most protracted among his counterparts in the Arab World, as he outlived three Egyptian Presidents (Naguib, Nasser, Sadat and spanned all of Mubarak’s quarter of a century), five Lebanese Presidents, three Iraqis, five Algerians, three Syrians, three Saudi Monarchs, and two in Morocco, not to mention other world leaders, from Eisenhower to Bush in the US, from de Gaulle to Chirac in France, and from Maó to three successors in China.
Probably no other political figure alive today met and endured as many world leaders as Arafat.
But there is much more to Arafat’s legacy than endurance.
It has been correctly said over and again that Arafat was a mixed blessing for his people.
Their fate and destiny have been inextricably linked, to the near demise of both at times.
For several decades after the usurpation of their homeland, Palestinians were reduced to aggregates of refugees, some remaining in the newly-created state of Israel as second-class citizens, with others scattered over the Arab World and far beyond.
It was Yasir Arafat, through the Palestinian Liberation Organization (PLO) he founded, that gave them a sense of identity as a people.
Regardless of its effectiveness, the armed struggle waged by the PLO did empower the Palestinians and internalize a sense of collective dignity and self respect within them.
Their cause could no longer be ignored.
No other modern issue has appropriated as many UN resolutions or as much international diplomacy.
If politics is defined as the art of compromise, Arafat was a master of it at the Palestinian and Arab levels.
He managed to stay at the helm for over forty years with no serious challengers.
Internationally, however, he was out of step with the post Cold War era.
Whether or not he was solely to blame, a true opportunity for historical compromise was missed at Camp David in August 2000, and he himself acknowledged it a year later.
By that time it was too late, as the leadership in both the US and Israel had changed and there was no interest to engage him.
During the last four years of his life, Arafat’s public space was literally and metaphorically diminishing.
He was unable to re-engage his Israeli adversaries or control his suicide-bound Palestinian militants.
Nor was he able to contain let alone combat rampant corruption in the Palestinian Authority.
Nor was Arafat helped by world events that shifted the spotlight to Bush’s wars on terrorism in Afghanistan and Iraq.
If anything, they had adverse effects for him and his life-long cause.
Like his own body, Arafat’s familiar world was steadily fading away with irreversible loss of control.
Ironically however, as he was dying, world leaders and the media were rediscovering the importance of Arafat’s leadership if not his persona.
The sustained focus of the media on him, to the point of near saturation, focused world attention on the Palestinian Question once again.
Statements by Tony Blair, Jacques Chirac, Kofi Annan and others on the occasion of Arafat’s death have been forceful in demanding a speedy and long overdue resolution of the conflict.
It is as if in death, Arafat has given his people a chance to achieve what he could not achieve in life –the dream of an independent democratic Palestinian state.
It is Arafat’s last hurrah.
Why Are Central Banks on Trial Again?
LONDON – Central banks have been on a roller-coaster ride in the last decade, from heroes to zeroes and back again.
Is another downswing in their fortunes and reputations now starting?
In 2006, when Alan Greenspan retired after his 18-year reign as Chair of the US Federal Reserve Board, his reputation could hardly have been higher.
He had steered the US economy through the dot-com boom and bust, had carefully navigated the potential threat to growth from the terror attacks of September 11, 2001, and presided over a period of rapid GDP and productivity growth.
At his final Board meeting, Timothy Geithner, then-President of the New York Fed, delivered what now seems an embarrassing encomium, saying that Greenspan’s stellar reputation was likely to grow, rather than diminish, in the future.
Only three years later, the Nobel laureate economist Paul Krugman, borrowing from Monty Python’s parrot sketch, was able to say that Greenspan was an ex-maestro whose reputation was now pushing up daisies.
Central banks were widely seen to have been dozing at the switch through the early years of this century.
They allowed global imbalances to build up, looked benignly on a massive credit bubble, ignored flashing danger signs in the mortgage market, and uncritically admired the innovative but toxic products devised by overpaid investment bankers.
The early reactions by central banks to the deepening crisis were also unsure.
The Bank of England (BoE) lectured on moral hazard while the banking system imploded around it, and the European Central Bank continued to slay imaginary inflation dragons when almost all economists saw far greater risks in a eurozone meltdown and associated credit crunch.
Yet, despite these missteps, when governments around the world considered how best to respond to the lessons of the crisis, central banks, once seen as part of the problem, came to be viewed as an essential part of the solution.
They were given new powers to regulate the financial system, and encouraged to adopt new and highly interventionist policies in an attempt to stave off depression and deflation.
Central banks’ balance sheets have expanded dramatically, and new laws have strengthened their hand enormously.
In the United States, the Dodd-Frank Act has taken the Fed into areas of the financial system which it has never regulated, and given it powers to take over and resolve failing banks.
In the United Kingdom, bank regulation, which had been removed from the BoE in 1997, returned there in 2013, and the BoE also became for the first time the prudential supervisor of insurance companies – a big extension of its role.
The ECB, meanwhile, is now the direct supervisor of more than 80% of the European Union’s banking sector.
In the last five years, central banking has become one of the fastest-growing industries in the Western world.
The central banks seem to have turned the tables on their critics, emerging triumphant.
Their innovative and sometimes controversial actions have helped the world economy recover.