The International Monetary Fund’s latest forecast suggests that the surplus will hold at around 2% of GDP in 2014.
Seen against this background, US officials’ handwringing over the recent modest reversal in the renminbi’s exchange rate appears absurd.
With China’s external position much closer to balance, there is good reason to argue that the renminbi, having appreciated by nearly one-third since mid-2005, is now within a reasonable proximity of “fair value.”
The IMF conceded as much in its latest in-depth review of the Chinese economy, which calls the renminbi “moderately undervalued” by 5-10%.
This stands in contrast to its earlier assessments of “substantial” undervaluation.
America’s fixation on the renminbi is a classic case of political denial.
With US workers remaining under intense pressure in terms of both job security and real wages, politicians have understandably been put on the spot.
In response, they have fixated on the Chinese component of a long-gaping trade deficit, charging that currency manipulation is the culprit to the long festering woes of the American middle class.
This argument is politically expedient – but wrong.
The US trade deficit is a multilateral imbalance with many countries – 102 in all – not a bilateral problem with China.
It arises not from the alleged manipulation of the renminbi, but from the simple fact that America does not save.
Lacking in domestic savings and wanting to grow, the US must import surplus savings from abroad, and run massive current-account deficits to attract the foreign capital.
And that leads to America’s multilateral trade imbalance.
Yes, trade with China is the largest component of this imbalance, but that largely reflects the complexity of multinational supply chains and the benefits of offshore efficiency solutions.
That brings us to the uncomfortable truth about America’s politically inspired China bashing: It will backfire.
If America fails to solve its saving problem – a reasonable scenario in light of fiscal gridlock and persistently subpar personal saving – the current-account deficit will persist.
That means that any reductions in China’s share of America’s external imbalance would simply be shifted to other foreign producers.
Significantly, this alternative sourcing will most likely have a higher cost base than Chinese production, thereby imposing the functional equivalent of a tax hike on already-beleaguered middle-class Americans.
As China rebalances toward a growth model that draws greater support from domestic demand, Washington should stop ranting about the renminbi and start focusing on the opportunities that this bonanza will create.
That means emphasizing US companies’ access to China’s domestic goods and services markets.
Pushing for a bilateral investment treaty that relaxes caps on foreign ownership in both countries would be an important step in that direction.
Similarly, the US needs to give China credit for having taken meaningful steps on the road to further currency reform.
The mid-March widening of the daily renminbi-dollar trading bands to plus or minus 2% (from the earlier 1% band) is an important step in relaxing control over the so-called managed float.
That, coupled with the 3% depreciation in the past few months, should send a strong signal to speculators that one-way renminbi bets are hazardous – a signal that could help dampen inflows of hot money, which have complicated liquidity management and fueled asset-market volatility in China.
There are two views of the future of the US-China economic relationship: one that sees only risk, and another that sees opportunity.
Fixating on the renminbi falls into the former category: It misses the rebalancing and reforms already under way in China and deflects America’s focus from addressing its most serious long-term macroeconomic problem – a lack of saving.
By contrast, viewing China as an opportunity underscores the need for America to undertake its own rebalancing – rebuilding US competitiveness and pushing for a meaningful share of China’s coming boom in domestic demand.
Unfortunately, the revival in US saving that this will require is being drowned out by the renminbi rant.
The Fed Trap
NEW HAVEN – As the US Federal Reserve attempts to exit from its unconventional monetary policy, it is grappling with the disparity between the policy’s success in preventing economic disaster and its failure to foster a robust recovery.
To the extent that this disconnect has led to mounting financial-market excesses, the exit will be all the more problematic for markets – and for America’s market-fixated monetary authority.
The Fed’s current quandary is rooted in a radical change in the art and practice of central banking.
Conventional monetary policies, designed to fulfill the Fed’s dual mandate of price stability and full employment, are ill-equipped to cope with the systemic risks of asset and credit bubbles, to say nothing of the balance-sheet recessions that ensue after such bubbles burst.
This became painfully apparent in recent years, as central banks, confronted by the global financial crisis of 2008-2009, turned to unconventional policies – in particular, massive liquidity injections through quantitative easing (QE).
The theory behind this move – as espoused by Ben Bernanke, first as an academic, then as a Fed governor, and eventually as Fed Chairman – is that operating on the quantity dimension of the credit cycle is the functional equivalent of acting on the price side of the equation.
That supposition liberated the Fed from fear of the dreaded “zero bound” that it was approaching in 2003-2004, when, in response to the collapse of the equity bubble, it lowered its benchmark policy rate to 1%.
If the Fed ran out of basis points, the argument went, it would still have plenty of tools at its disposal for supporting and guiding the real economy.
But this argument’s intellectual foundations – first laid out in a 2002 paper by 13 members of the Fed’s Washington, DC, research staff – are shaky, at best.
The paper’s seemingly innocuous title, “Preventing Deflation: Lessons from Japan’s Experience in the 1990s,” makes the fundamental assertion that Japan’s struggles were rooted in a serious policy blunder: the Bank of Japan’s failure to recognize soon enough and act strongly enough on the peril of incipient deflation.
(Not coincidentally, this view coincided with a similar conclusion professed by Bernanke in a scathing attack on the BOJ in the late 1990s.)
The implication was clear: substantial monetary and fiscal stimulus is critical for economies that risk approaching the zero bound.
Any doubt as to what form that “substantial stimulus” might take were dispelled a few months later, when then-Fed Governor Bernanke delivered a speech stressing the need for a central bank to deploy unconventional measures to mitigate deflationary risks in an economy that was approaching the zero bound.
Such measures could include buying up public debt, providing subsidized credit to banks, targeting longer-term interest rates, or even intervening to reduce the dollar’s value in foreign-exchange markets.
A few years later, the global financial crisis erupted, and these statements, once idle conjecture, became the basis for an urgent action plan.
But one vital caveat was lost in the commotion: What works during a crisis will not necessarily provide sufficient traction for the post-crisis recovery – especially if the crisis has left the real economy mired in a balance-sheet recession.
Indeed, given that such recessions clog the monetary-policy transmission mechanism, neither conventional interest-rate adjustments nor unconventional liquidity injections have much impact in the wake of a crisis, when deleveraging and balance-sheet repair are urgent.
That is certainly the case in the US today.
QE may have been a resounding success in some ways – namely, arresting the riskiest phase of the crisis.
But it did little to revive household consumption, which accounts for about 70% of the US economy.
In fact, since early 2008, annualized growth in real consumer expenditure has averaged a mere 1.3% – the most anemic period of consumption growth on record.
This is corroborated by a glaring shortfall in the “GDP dividend” from Fed liquidity injections.
Though $3.6 trillion of incremental liquidity has been added to the Fed’s balance sheet since late 2008, nominal GDP was up by just $2.5 trillion from the third quarter of 2008 to the second quarter of this year.
As John Maynard Keynes famously pointed out after the Great Depression, when an economy is locked in a “liquidity trap,” with low interest rates unable to induce investment or consumption, attempting to use monetary policy to spur demand is like pushing on a string.
This approach also has serious financial-market consequences.
Having more than doubled since its crisis-induced trough, the US equity market – not to mention its amply rewarded upper-income shareholders – has been the principal beneficiary of the Fed’s unconventional policy gambit.
The same is true for a variety of once-risky fixed-income instruments – from high-yield corporate “junk” bonds to sovereign debt in crisis-torn Europe.
The operative view in central-banking circles has been that the so-called “wealth effect” – when asset appreciation spurs real economic activity – would square the circle for a lagging post-crisis recovery.
The persistently anemic recovery and its attendant headwinds in the US labor market belie this assumption.
Nonetheless, the Fed remains fixated on financial-market feedback – and thus ensnared in a potentially deadly trap.
Fearful of market disruptions, the Fed has embraced a slow-motion exit from QE.
By splitting hairs over the meaning of the words “considerable time” in describing the expected timeline for policy normalization, Fed Chair Janet Yellen is falling into the same trap.
Such a fruitless debate borrows a page from the Bernanke-Greenspan incremental normalization script of 2004-2006.
Sadly, we know all too well how that story ended.
The Sino-American Trust Deficit
NEW HAVEN – The recently concluded Strategic and Economic Dialogue (S&ED) between the United States and China was a major disappointment.
It lacked strategy at a time when both countries face formidable challenges on many fronts.
And what passed for dialogue was a series of speeches and tightly scripted talking points.
Most significant, it failed to address an increasingly corrosive trust deficit that poses the most serious threat to Sino-American relations in 25 years.
Conditions were tough heading into the talks.
The US Treasury was complaining yet again about the Chinese currency, which had depreciated by 2.4% against the dollar in the first half of 2014, after having appreciated by 37% over the previous eight and a half years.
The US State Department and China’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs were engaged in a war of words over mounting territorial and sea-lane disputes in the East and South China Seas.
But the darkest clouds were on the cyber front.
Two months before the S&ED, the US Department of Justice indicted five officers of the People’s Liberation Army (PLA) on 31 counts of charges ranging from computer fraud and hacking to identity theft and economic espionage.
In response, China suspended its participation in bilateral military exchanges on cyber threats.
Meanwhile, revelations of the pervasive scope of US cyber-espionage activities reverberated from Capitol Hill to Berlin, giving rise to legislation aimed at controlling America’s largely unchecked National Security Agency and casting a pall over the all-important US-German relationship.
Charges and countercharges on the cyber issue have focused primarily on motives.
The US has been quick to distinguish between commercial and military espionage.
But for China, this distinction rings hollow.
Chinese officials see little difference between the cyber threat posed by the NSA and that posed by the PLA, especially given that America’s cyber intrusions have also been aimed at foreign companies, trade negotiators, and international leaders – all of whom are directly or indirectly engaged in commercial activity.
In the end, moral hair-splitting is less important than the blame game itself – a visible manifestation of the deepening bilateral distrust wrought by a destructive phase of Sino-American codependency.
Against this backdrop, it was hardly surprising that the S&ED produced so little.
Cyber exchanges between the two militaries were not restarted, and negotiations over a bilateral investment treaty – a mutually beneficial rules-based framework that would go a long way in opening up both countries’ markets to increasingly globalized US and Chinese companies – were particularly disappointing.
A year ago, there was an encouraging breakthrough on the investment treaty; this year, there was a setback, as the launch of explicit negotiations over which industries would be exempt – the always contentious “negative list” – was deferred until 2015.
The problem with “kicking the can down the road” is that the road is leading directly toward the upcoming US presidential election cycle – a time when the debate over China always intensifies.
Add to that a polarized and dysfunctional Congress, and the timeframe for concluding a US-China investment treaty is beginning to appear eerily reminiscent of the decade-long process that was required for Chinese accession to the World Trade Organization in 2001.
That would be bad for both countries, as each now faces urgent economic challenges.
I was in China during the week following the S&ED, and official circles were abuzz about the new growth opportunities of services-led rebalancing.
There was also clear recognition of meaningful progress on this front, with China’s tertiary sector (services) growing more rapidly than its secondary sector (manufacturing and construction) for the third year in a row – sufficient to make services the Chinese economy’s largest sector for the first time.
And there is plenty more to come.
At around 47% of GDP, China’s embryonic services sector remains well short of the 60-65% share that a middle-income economy typically possesses.
At the same time, Chinese officials understand that further progress toward a services-led economic rebalancing will stall without the talent, systems, experience, and scale of global multinational services providers.
And who better to provide what is needed than the US – the world’s largest and most competitive services economy.
Given that the US has experienced yet another year of weak performance, one might have thought that this growth opportunity would have resonated on the American side of the S&ED table.
The failure of both US and Chinese leaders to recognize the mutual benefits of an investment treaty is disturbing.
Going slow on such an obvious “win-win” reform suggests either that each country attaches little importance to its growth imperative or that they are unwilling to address that urgency by coming to grips with the increasingly insidious trust deficit that divides them.
I suspect that it is the latter.
Leaders on both sides understand their countries’ growth challenges.
But neither seems willing to address the intensification of distrust that has arisen during the past year from the cyber issue.
Here is where the blame game belies the obvious: Both countries hack, and both have lost control over their hackers.
Moreover, cyber-hacking itself is growing at an exponential rate in today’s interconnected world.
In other words, the cyber blame game is pointless.
Acceptance of shared responsibilities in coming to grips with cyber tensions is essential if the US and China are to re-engage on the other geostrategic and economic challenges that they both face.
The failure of July’s S&ED was a red flag, yet another indication that the bilateral relationship is headed in the wrong direction.
Staying the course is not an option.
China’s Wake-Up Call from Washington
NEW HAVEN – Yes, the United States dodged another bullet with a last-minute deal on the debt ceiling.
But, with 90 days left to bridge the ideological and partisan divide before another crisis erupts, the fuse on America’s debt bomb is getting shorter and shorter.
As a dysfunctional US government peers into the abyss, China – America’s largest foreign creditor – has much at stake.
It began so innocently.
As recently as 2000, China owned only about $60 billion in US Treasuries, or roughly 2% of the outstanding US debt of $3.3 trillion held by the public.
But then both countries upped the ante on America’s fiscal profligacy.
US debt exploded to nearly $12 trillion ($16.7 trillion if intragovernmental holdings are included).
And China’s share of America’s publicly-held debt overhang increased more than five-fold, to nearly 11% ($1.3 trillion) by July 2013.
Along with roughly $700 billion in Chinese holdings of US agency debt (Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac), China’s total $2 trillion exposure to US government and quasi-government securities is massive by any standard.
China’s seemingly open-ended purchases of US government debt are at the heart of a web of codependency that binds the two economies.
China does not buy Treasuries out of benevolence, or because it looks to America as a shining example of wealth and prosperity.
It certainly is not attracted by the return and seemingly riskless security of US government paper – both of which are much in play in an era of zero interest rates and mounting concerns about default.
Nor is sympathy at work; China does not buy Treasuries because it wants to temper the pain of America’s fiscal brinkmanship.
China buys Treasuries because they suit its currency policy and the export-led growth that it has relied on over the past 33 years.
As a surplus saver, China has run large current-account surpluses since 1994, accumulating a massive portfolio of foreign-exchange reserves that now stands at almost $3.7 trillion.
China has recycled about 60% of these reserves back into dollar-denominated US government securities, because it wants to limit any appreciation of the renminbi against the world’s benchmark currency.
If China bought fewer dollars, the renminbi’s exchange rate – up 35% against the dollar since mid-2005 – would strengthen more sharply than it already has, jeopardizing competiveness and export-led growth.
This arrangement fits America’s needs like a glove.
Given its extraordinary shortfall of domestic saving, the US runs chronic current-account deficits and relies on foreign investors to fill the funding void.
US politicians take this for granted as a special privilege bestowed by the dollar’s position as the world’s major reserve currency.
When queried about America’s dependence on foreign lenders, they often smugly retort, “Where else would they go?”
I have heard that line many times when I have testified before the US Congress.
Of course, America benefits from China’s outward-facing growth model in many other ways, as well.
China’s purchases of Treasuries help hold down US interest rates – possibly by as much as one percentage point – which provides broad support to other asset markets, such as equities and real estate, whose valuation depends to some extent on Chinese-subsidized US interest rates.
And, of course, hard-pressed middle-class American consumers benefit hugely from low-cost Chinese imports – the Walmart effect – that enable them to stretch their budgets in an era of unrelenting pressure on jobs and real incomes.
For more than 20 years, this mutually beneficial codependency has served both countries well in compensating for their inherent saving imbalances while satisfying their respective growth agendas.
But here the past should not be viewed as prologue.
A seismic shift is at hand, and America’s recent fiscal follies may well be the tipping point.
China has made a conscious strategic decision to alter its growth strategy.
Its 12th Five-Year Plan, enacted in March 2011, lays out a broad framework for a more balanced growth model that relies increasingly on domestic private consumption.
These plans are about to be put into action.&nbsp; An important meeting in November – the Third Plenum of the Central Committee of the 18th Chinese Communist Party Congress – will provide a major test of the new leadership team’s commitment to a detailed agenda of reforms and policies that will be required to achieve this shift.
The debt-ceiling debacle has sent a clear message to China – and comes in conjunction with other warning signs.
Post-crisis sluggishness in US aggregate demand – especially consumer demand – is likely to persist, denying Chinese exporters the support they need from their largest foreign market.
US-led China bashing – a bipartisan blame game that reached new heights in the 2012 political cycle – remains a real threat.
And now the safety and security of US debt are at risk.
Economic alarms rarely ring so loudly. The time has come for China to respond with equal clarity.
Rebalancing is China’s only option.
Several internal factors – excess resource consumption, environmental degradation, and mounting income inequalities – are calling the old model into question, while a broad constellation of US-centric external forces also attests to the urgent need for realignment.
With rebalancing will come a decline in China’s surplus saving, much slower accumulation of foreign-exchange reserves, and a concomitant reduction in its seemingly voracious demand for dollar-denominated assets.
Curtailing purchases of US Treasuries is a perfectly logical outgrowth of this process.
Long dependent on China to finesse its fiscal problems, America may now have to pay a much steeper price to secure external capital.
Recently, Chinese commentators have provocatively referred to the inevitability of a “de-Americanized world.”
For China, this is not a power race.
It should be seen as more of a conscious strategy to do what is right for China as it confronts its own daunting growth and development imperatives in the coming years.
The US will find it equally urgent to come to grips with a very different China.
Codependency was never a sustainable strategy for either side.
China just happens to have understood this first. The days of its open-ended buying of Treasuries will soon come to an end.
Bringing the Chinese Consumer to Life
BEIJING – History will be the ultimate judge, but there is good reason to believe that China’s recently completed Third Plenum will come to be regarded as a pivotal moment in the country’s development.
At long last, China’s senior leadership has endorsed a raft of reforms that could impel the economy’s shift from reliance on exports to consumption-led growth.
Until now, this transformation was framed in terms of broad goals and aspirations.
For example, the 12th Five-Year Plan, adopted in March 2011, promised the emergence of a consumer-led economy, resting on the building blocks of urbanization and the development of an embryonic services sector.
Notwithstanding the importance of these commitments in setting out opportunities for China’s middle class, they lacked a critical component: incentives for Chinese families to convert their newfound income into discretionary consumption.
On the contrary, financial and economic insecurity has gripped Chinese households since the “iron rice bowl” – the cradle-to-grave support that the socialist state offered workers and their families – was discarded in the late 1990’s.
Fearing for the future, households have hoarded incremental income, rather than spending it on consumer goods.
Economists call that precautionary saving.
China’s leaders called it frustrating.
The reforms endorsed by the Third Plenum focus on this wedge between income and consumption, offering specific proposals aimed at altering the behavior of fear-driven Chinese families.
Especially important is the proposal to channel 30% of the profits of state-owned enterprises (SOEs) – currently running at close to $400 billion – into the country’s woefully under-funded social safety net.
China’s national health-insurance plan, for example, boasts nearly universal coverage, but the benefits it provides are negligible.
The same is true of China’s retirement system: the workforce’s enrollment rate is around 50%, but only $600 of assets per worker (in national, local government, and private pension schemes, combined) are available to cover lifetime retirement benefits.
Little wonder that Chinese families, fearful of such an uncertain future, save to excess.
An adequately funded safety net could go a long way in tempering the expectations underlying this behavior.
Several other measures proposed at the Third Plenum seek to shift Chinese families’ behavioral norms.
A major reconsideration of the one-child policy is especially important, given the need to relieve pressures arising from the inevitable decline in China’s working-age population.
Reform of the hukou (residency permit) system to allow citizens to transfer their welfare benefits from one city to another is vital for an increasingly flexible labor force that now includes almost 200 million migrant workers.
China’s consumers should also draw comfort from the likely move to market-based deposit rates on their savings accounts, which will reinforce incremental growth in wage income.
This long overdue policy shift is an important component of the Third Plenum’s official elevation of market-based pricing as the “decisive” mode of resource allocation in China.
The word “decisive” holds important implications for key resources – including fuels, financial capital, and, of course, the currency – that historically have been subject to state-administered pricing.
Rhetorical flourishes have always been an important signaling mechanism for major policy changes – think of Deng Xiaoping’s “reforms and opening up” of the late 1970’s.
The Third Plenum’s use of “decisive” to anchor a market-based approach is a similar gambit.
All of this casts modern China’s development strategy in a new light.
Beginning with Deng in the late 1970’s, scientists and engineers – technocrats with the determination to convert a dysfunctional centrally planned economy into an investment- and export-led colossus – framed and implemented a producer-oriented development model.
Today, the task at hand is very different: to transform the technocratic framework of the producer model into the aspirational vision of a flourishing consumer society.
The need to navigate this shift raises the toughest question of all: Is the new “fifth-generation” Chinese leadership, headed by President Xi Jinping, up to the challenge?
There are three reasons to believe that it is.
First, the role of technocrats in China’s senior leadership is on the wane.
Research by Cheng Li of the Brookings Institution reveals that only about 15% of the current 25 Politburo members are engineers and scientists, down from 40% in 2007 and 72% in 2002.
Li’s analysis points to the related ascendance of senior officials trained in law and the social sciences – providing a skill set that is more closely aligned with the vision of a consumer society.
Second, the Third Plenum established a new high-level organization – the so-called Central Leading Group on Reforms.
This small group, likely to be headed by Xi, will play the key role in drafting specific guidelines for implementing the Plenum’s proposed reforms – thus threatening to marginalize the long-dominant technocrats of the National Development and Reform Commission, the heir to the old State Planning Commission.
Finally, Xi’s power base is far broader than that of his two predecessors, Jiang Zemin and Hu Jintao, both of whom had shaky transitions in the first years of their leadership.
Unlike Jiang and Hu, Xi assumed quick command of the Chinese Communist Party, the government, and the military, and very effectively shepherded the Third Plenum’s historic reforms.
As always, proof will come only with implementation.
But with China’s leaders now focusing squarely on aligning the vast population’s behavioral norms with the next phase of transformation, the case for a consumer-led China has become more compelling than ever.
The End of Chinese Central Planning
BEIJING – “Isn’t it now time for China to abandon the concept of a growth target?”
That was the question I asked Chinese Finance Minister Lou Jiwei this week at the 15th annual China Development Forum, which brings together top Chinese officials and an international delegation of academics, leaders of multilateral organizations, and business executives.
Having attended the CDF since former Premier Zhu Rongji initiated it in 2000, I can attest to its role as one of China’s most important platforms for debate.
Zhu welcomed the exchange of views at the Forum as a true intellectual test for China’s reformers.
It was in that spirit that I posed my question to Lou, whom I have known since the late 1990’s.
In that period, he has been Deputy Minister of Finance, founding Chairman of China’s sovereign wealth fund, China Investment Corporation, and now Minister of Finance.
I have always found him to be direct, intellectually curious, a first-rate analytical thinker, and a forward-looking advocate of market-based reforms.
He is cut from the same cloth as his mentor, Zhu.
My question was set in the context of the new thrust of Chinese reforms announced at last November’s Third Plenum of the 18th Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party, which emphasized the “decisive role” of market forces in shaping the next phase of China’s economic development.
I prefaced my question by underscoring the inherent contradiction between a target and a forecast in framing China’s major economic objectives.
I argued that the former embodied the obsolete straitjacket of central planning, while the latter was far more consistent with market-based outcomes.
A target perpetuates the image of the all-powerful state-directed Chinese growth machine – a government that will essentially stop at nothing to hit a predetermined number.
While it may seem like splitting hairs, continuing to frame the economic goal as a target sends a message of determined and explicit guidance that now seems at odds with the government’s market-oriented intentions.
Wouldn’t dropping the concept send a far more powerful message?
Isn’t it time for China to let go of the last vestiges of its centrally planned past?
Lou’s response: “Good question.”
China, he went on, is in fact moving away from its once single-minded emphasis on growth targeting.
The government now stresses three macroeconomic goals – job creation, price stability, and GDP growth.
And, as evidenced by the annual “work report” that the premier recently submitted to China’s National People’s Congress, the current emphasis is in that order, with GDP growth at the bottom of the list.
This gives China and its policymakers considerable room for maneuver in coping with the current growth slowdown.
Unlike most Western observers, who are fixated on the slightest deviation from the official growth target, Chinese officials are actually far more open-minded.
They care less about GDP growth per se and more about the labor content of the gains in output.
This is particularly relevant in light of the important threshold that has now been reached by the structural transformation of the Chinese economy – the long-awaited shift to a services-led growth dynamic.
Services, which now account for the largest share of the economy, require close to 30% more jobs per unit of output than the manufacturing and construction sectors combined.
In an increasingly services-led, labor-intensive economy, China’s economic managers can afford to be more relaxed about a GDP slowdown.
Last year was a case in point.
At the start of 2013, the government announced that it was targeting ten million new urban jobs.
In fact, the economy added 13.1 million workers – even though GDP expanded by “only” 7.7%.
In other words, if China can hit its employment goal with 7.5% GDP growth, there is no reason for its policymakers to panic and roll out the heavy counter-cyclical artillery.
That, in fact, was pretty much the message conveyed by a broad cross-section of senior officials at this year’s CDF: Slowdown, yes; major policy response, no.
Zhou Xiaochuan, the head of the People’s Bank of China, was just as emphatic on this point.
The PBOC, he argued, does not pursue a single target.
Instead, it frames monetary policy in accordance with what he called a “multi-objective function” comprised of goals for price stability, employment, GDP growth, and the external balance-of-payments – the latter factor added to recognize the PBOC’s authority over currency policy.
The trick, Zhou stressed, is to assign weights to each of the four goals in the multi-objective policy function.
He conceded that the weighting problem has now been seriously complicated by the new need to pay greater attention to financial stability.
All of this paints China with a very different brush than was used during the first 30 years of its growth miracle.
Since Deng Xiaoping’s reforms of the early 1980’s, less and less attention has been paid to the numerical targets of central planning.
The State Planning Commission evolved into the National Development and Reform Commission (NDRC) – though it is still housed in the same building on Yuetan Street in Beijing.
And, over time, economic managers succeeded in drastically curtailing sector-by-sector Soviet-style planning.
But there was still a plan and an aggregate growth target – and an all-powerful NDRC hanging on to the levers of control.
Those days are now over.
A new “leading committee” on reforms is marginalizing the NDRC, and China’s most senior fiscal and monetary policymakers – Lou Jiwei and Zhou Xiaochuan – are close to taking the final step in the long journey to a market-based economy.
Their shared interpretation of flexible growth targeting puts them basically in the same camp as policymakers in most of the developed world.
The plan is now a goal-setting exercise.
From now on, fluctuations in the Chinese economy, and the policy responses that those fluctuations imply, need to be considered in that vein.
America’s False Dawn
NEW HAVEN – Financial markets and the so-called Davos consensus are in broad agreement that something close to a classic cyclical revival may finally be at hand for the US.
But is it?
At first blush, the celebration seems warranted.
Growth in real GDP appears to have averaged close to 4% in the second half of 2013, nearly double the 2.2% pace of the preceding four years.
The unemployment rate has finally fallen below the 7% threshold.
And the Federal Reserve has validated this seemingly uplifting scenario by starting to taper its purchases of long-term assets.
But my advice is to keep the champagne on ice.
Indeed, much of the acceleration in GDP growth has been bloated by an unsustainable surge of restocking.
Over the first three quarters of 2013, rising inventory investment accounted for fully 38% of the 2.6% increase in total GDP.
Excluding this inventory swing, annualized growth in “final sales” to consumers, businesses, and the government averaged a tepid 1.6%.
With inventory investment unlikely to keep accelerating at anything close to its recent rate, overall GDP growth can be expected to converge on this more subdued pace of final demand.
That gets to the toughest issue of all – the ongoing balance-sheet recession that continues to stifle the American consumer.
The lackluster trend in consumption is all the more pronounced when judged against the unprecedented decline that occurred in the depths of the Great Recession.
From the first quarter of 2008 through the second quarter of 2009, real consumer spending plunged at a 1.8% average annual rate.
In the past, when discretionary spending on items such as motor vehicles, furniture, appliances, and travel was deferred, a surge of “pent-up demand” quickly followed.
Not this time.
The record plunge in consumer demand during the Great Recession has been followed by persistently subpar consumption growth.
This should not be surprising.
The American consumer was, in effect, ground zero in this horrific crisis.
Far too many US households made enormous bets on the property bubble, believing that their paper gains were permanent substitutes for stagnant labor income.
They then used these gains to support a record consumption binge.
Compounding the problem, they drew freely on a monstrous credit bubble to finance the gap between spending and income-based saving.
When both bubbles burst – first housing, and then credit – asset-dependent US consumers were exposed to the American strain of the Japanese disease first diagnosed by Nomura economist Richard Koo.
Koo has stressed the lingering perils of a balance-sheet recession centered on the corporate sector of the Japanese economy; but the analysis is equally applicable to bubble-dependent US consumers.
When the collateral that underpins excess leverage comes under severe pressure – as was the case for Japanese businesses in the early 1990’s and American consumers in the mid 2000’s – what Koo calls the “debt rejection” motive of deleveraging takes precedence over discretionary spending.
The Japanese parallels do not stop there.
As research by the economists Richard Caballero, Takeo Hoshi, and Anil Kashyap has shown, Japan’s corporate “zombies” – rendered essentially lifeless by their balance-sheet problems – ended up damaging the healthier parts of the economy.
Until balance sheets are repaired, such “zombie congestion” restrains aggregate demand.
Japan’s lost decades are an outgrowth of this phenomenon; the US is now halfway through the first lost decade of its own.
Indicators of US balance-sheet repair hardly signal the onset of the more vigorous cyclical revival that many believe is at hand.
Optimists see it differently.
Encouraged by sharp reductions in households’ debt-service costs and a surprisingly steep fall in unemployment, they argue that the long nightmare has finally ended.
That may be wishful thinking.
Plunging debt service is largely an outgrowth of the Fed’s unprecedented zero-interest-rate policy.
As long as the stock of debt remains excessive, consumers will dismiss the reduction in interest expenses as nothing more than a temporary subsidy from the Fed.
Moreover, the decline in unemployment largely reflects persistently grim labor-market conditions, which have discouraged many workers from remaining in the labor force.
If the labor-force participation rate was 66%, as it was in early 2008, rather than 62.8%, as it was in December 2013, the unemployment rate would be just over 11%, not 6.7%.
Yes, there has been some progress on the road to recovery.
But, as Carmen Reinhart and Ken Rogoff have long documented, post-crisis healing is typically slow and painful.
Notwithstanding the Fed’s claims that its unconventional policies have been the elixir of economic renewal in the US, the healing process still has years to go.
Rethinking the Sino-American Relationship
NEW HAVEN – In early July, senior US and Chinese officials will gather in Beijing for the sixth Strategic and Economic Dialogue.
With bilateral frictions mounting on a number of fronts – including cyber security, territorial disputes in the East and South China Seas, and currency policy – the summit offers an opportunity for a serious reconsideration of the relationship between the world’s two most powerful countries.
The United States and China are locked in an uncomfortable embrace – the economic counterpart of what psychologists call “codependency.”
The flirtation started in the late 1970s, when China was teetering in the aftermath of the Cultural Revolution and the US was mired in a wrenching stagflation.
Desperate for economic growth, two needy countries entered into a marriage of convenience.
China was quick to benefit from an export-led economic model that was critically dependent on America as its largest source of demand.
The US gained by turning to China for low-cost goods that helped income-constrained consumers make ends meet; it also imported surplus savings from China to fill the void of an unprecedented shortfall of domestic saving, with the deficit-prone US drawing freely on China’s voracious appetite for Treasury securities.
Over time, this marriage of convenience morphed into a full-blown and inherently unhealthy codependency.
Both partners took the relationship for granted and pushed unbalanced growth models too far – the US with its asset and credit bubbles that underpinned a record consumption binge, and China with an export-led resurgence that was ultimately dependent on America’s consumption bubble.
The imbalances only worsened.
China’s three decades of 10% annual hyper-growth led to unsustainable strains – outsize resource and energy needs, environmental degradation and pollution, and mounting income inequality.
Huge Chinese current-account surpluses resulted from too much saving and too little consumption.
Mounting imbalances in the US were the mirror image of those in China – a massive shortfall of domestic saving, unprecedented current-account deficits, excess debt, and an asset-dependent economy that was ultimately built on speculative quicksand.
Predictably, in keeping with the pathology of codependence, the lines distinguishing the two countries became blurred.
Over the past decade, Chinese subsidiaries of Western multinationals accounted for more than 60% of the cumulative rise in China’s exports.
In other words, the export miracle was sparked not by state-sponsored Chinese companies but by offshore efficiency solutions crafted in the West.
This led to the economic equivalent of a personal identity crisis: Who is China – them or us?
In personal relationships, denial tends to mask imbalances – but only for so long.
Ultimately, the denial cracks and imbalances give rise to frictions and blame – holding a codependent partner responsible for problems of one’s own making.
Such is the case with the US and China.
America blames China for its trade deficits and the pressures they inflict on workers, citing a massive accumulation of foreign-exchange reserves as evidence of an unconscionable currency manipulation.
China counters by underscoring America’s saving shortfall – a gap that must be plugged by surplus saving from abroad, a current-account deficit, and a multilateral trade imbalance with more than 100 countries.
China blames the US for fixating on a bilateral imbalance as the source of America’s multilateral problem.
The same blame game of codependency is apparent in the cyber-security controversy.
The US contends that China steals intellectual property for competitive reasons, inflicting grave damage on companies and workers.
China, for its part, claims that the US is guilty of equally egregious violations – widespread cyber spying on international leaders, trade negotiators, and foreign firms.
Equally worrisome are the security disputes that have flared up in the East and South China Seas, which, via treaty obligations, directly involve the US.
America’s strategic “pivot” to Asia adds more tension.
The longer these frictions fester, the greater the risk of an accident or miscalculation leading to a military response – culminating in the ultimate break-up nightmare.
The US and China could escape the potentially destructive endgame of a codependent relationship by recasting their ties as a more constructive and sustainable interdependency.
An interdependent relationship fosters healthy interaction between partners, who satisfy their own needs rather than relying on others to do so, and maintain their own identities while appreciating the relationship’s mutual benefits.
The upcoming Strategic and Economic Dialogue provides the US and China a platform of engagement to seize their collective opportunities.
Both countries should press ahead with a bilateral investment treaty, which would enhance rules-based market access and eventually foster greater trade liberalization.
That would allow the US, the world’s preeminent services economy, to seize the opportunity that is about to be provided by the emergence in China of a services-led consumer society.
And it would enable China to draw on America’s expertise and experience to help master its daunting economic rebalancing act.
At the same time, the upcoming dialogue should aim to restart the military-to-military exchanges on cyber-security issues that were launched a year ago.
These efforts were recently suspended in the aftermath of the US Justice Department’s decision to file criminal charges against five members of the People’s Liberation Army.
Here as well, the goal should be a rules-based system of engagement – especially vital for all modern economies in an era of IT-enabled globalization.
Progress on these fronts will not be possible if the US and China remain stuck in the quagmire of codependency.
Only by embracing the opportunities of interdependency can the hegemon and the rising power reduce tensions and focus on the benefits of mutually sustainable prosperity.
The Stall-Speed Syndrome
NEW HAVEN – Relapse is the rule in the post-crisis global economy.
In the United States, Japan, and Europe, GDP growth faltered again in the first half of 2014.
These setbacks are hardly a coincidence.
Persistent sluggish growth throughout the developed world has left major economies unusually vulnerable to the inevitable bumps in the road.
Sure, there are excuses – there always are.
A contraction in the US economy in the first quarter of the year was dismissed as weather-related.
Japan’s plunge in the second quarter was blamed on a sales-tax hike.
Europe’s stagnant growth in the second quarter has been explained away as an aberration reflecting the confluence of weather effects and sanctions imposed on Russia.
As tempting as it may be to attribute these developments to idiosyncratic factors, the latest slowdown in developed countries is not so easily dismissed.
Lacking cyclical vigor in the aftermath of severe recessions, today’s economies are finding it especially difficult to shrug off the impact of shocks and break out of anemic growth trajectories.
Consider the US.
Though annual GDP growth is estimated to have rebounded to 4% in the second quarter of 2014, following the 2.1% first-quarter contraction, that still leaves average growth in the first half of the year at a measly 1%.
The problem is even worse in Japan, where consumers brought forward expenditures in anticipation of the sales-tax hike.
The 6.1% first-quarter growth surge to which this gave rise was more than offset by a 6.8% second-quarter contraction.
The net result in the first half of this year – an average decline of 0.3% – is broadly in line with the 0.2% contraction now estimated for the fourth quarter of 2013.
With the trajectory of real (inflation-adjusted) growth having moved into negative territory, on average, for three consecutive quarters, Japan may once again be reverting to recessionary form.
Europe’s fragile economy has similarly failed to recover strongly enough to ward off periodic growth setbacks.
During the acute phase of the euro crisis, recession was concentrated in peripheral economies such as Greece, Portugal, and Spain.
Now, however, the malaise has spread to the core economies of Germany and Italy, both of which contracted in the second quarter, and to France, which recorded zero growth.
As a result, annual growth in the 18-country eurozone slipped to just 0.4% in the first half of 2014.
This poor performance can only exacerbate the European Central Bank’s deflationary concerns.
Collectively, the annual growth rate in the major developed economies averaged a little less than 0.7% in the first half of 2014.
America’s paltry 1% growth led the way, while Japan and Europe, whose combined GDP is roughly equal to that of the US in purchasing-power-parity terms, recorded no better than a 0.3% increase.
On balance, that is easily 1-1.5 percentage points below the developed world’s longer-term, or potential, growth trend – a worrisome outcome, to say the least, for employment, deflation risk, global trade, and export-dependent developing economies, such as China, which remain heavily reliant on external demand in developed countries.
But there is another problem with persistently subpar growth: It provides no cushion to shield economies from unexpected blows.
That is especially true when growth falls below 1%, leaving a thin margin between expansion and contraction.
Such sluggish performance is the economic equivalent of “stall speed” – the heightened vulnerability that aircrafts can encounter at low velocity.
Under such circumstances, it does not take much to lead to an aborted takeoff, or worse.
The analogy is all too apt today.
Shocks, whether traceable to weather, geopolitical disturbances, strikes, or natural disasters, are the rule, not the exception.
When hit by them, vigorously growing economies have cushions to withstand the blows and the resilience to shrug them off.
Economies limping along near stall speed do not.
The odds of a recessionary relapse in an environment of unusually weak growth – very much the problem today – should not be minimized.
The big question is what should be done about it.
The current approach, centered on unconventional monetary policy, is not the answer.
Though monetary policy provided a powerful antidote to frozen credit markets in the depth of the global financial crisis, it has failed to spark classic cyclical recoveries.
That should be no surprise.
The world’s major developed economies are not suffering from cyclical deficiencies in aggregate demand that are amenable to a monetary cure.
As the Bank for International Settlements correctly points out, they are still struggling in the aftermath of wrenching balance-sheet recessions.
In the US, a lingering overhang of household debt implies that deleveraging and the rebuilding of savings continues to take precedence over discretionary consumption.
In Japan, long-standing structural problems, such as aging, labor-market rigidities, and a generalized productivity malaise, can be addressed only through the so-called “third arrow” of Prime Minister Shinzo Abe’s reform agenda, which remains woefully incomplete.
And Europe faces a desperate need to build pan-European institutions to ensure banking and fiscal union, and to address serious competitiveness problems in France and Italy.
Unfortunately, the more that central banks give the impression that that they are on the case, and the more that markets cheer them on, the less pressure there is on politically gridlocked governments to deploy fiscal policy and push through structural reforms.
Moreover, the fixation on monetary accommodation leaves slow-growth, balance-sheet-constrained economies stuck at stall speed, increasing the risk of yet another global growth relapse.&nbsp;
Myopic authorities need to take less guidance from frothy financial markets and focus more on the structural repair of a post-crisis world.
This is a time for heroes, not cheerleaders.
Diet and Growth
KIGALI – There is no greater hindrance to a country’s long-term economic development than childhood undernourishment.
When a growing body does not get enough essential vitamins and nutrients, the harmful effects last long into adulthood.
In low-income countries, diets consist primarily of starches, such as rice, and legumes, like peas, that contain very little protein.
So even a child with a full belly does not necessarily get the right balance of nutritious food and vitamins required for healthy physical development.
This takes an enormous toll.
Undernourished children are more susceptible to illness.
According to UNICEF, children who suffer from severe under-nutrition are 9.5 times more likely to die from diarrhea and 6.4 times more likely to die from pneumonia.
Fully one in three preventable deaths among young children worldwide – up to 2.5 million each year – are the result of inadequate nutrition.
Worldwide, one in four children under the age of five is stunted, meaning that chronic under-nutrition has caused serious and often irreversible physical and cognitive damage.
There were 165 million stunted children in 2001, equivalent to half the population of the United States.
Stunted children often struggle to reach their potential in school and ultimately the workplace, diminishing economic productivity and development.
A World Bank study found that under-nutrition can cost an individual up to 10% of his or her potential lifetime earnings, and as much as 3% of a country’s GDP.
To combat this problem, we need a multi-pronged approach that marshals all available resources to ensure good nutrition among children.
That starts with strong leadership in countries where the challenge is acute.
While my country, Rwanda, has reduced child mortality by 70% over the past decade, the rate of stunting remains high, with 44% of children under the age of five chronically malnourished.
Rwandan President Paul Kagame has initiated a national emergency plan to address the fundamental causes of malnutrition.
This means not only increasing available food sources for children, but also educating families about the importance of nutritious diets.
Between 2006 and 2011, for example, we doubled the agriculture budget, distributed more than 2,000 cows to low-income families, and expanded milk delivery and fruit and vegetable gardens across the country.
Community health workers in each of Rwanda’s 15,000 villages, as well as nurses at health centers across the country, periodically measure the weight and height of each child under the age of five, referring for help those identified as malnourished or at risk.
At the same time, ensuring that these efforts translate into better health outcomes requires a revolution in the way families prepare their children’s food.
Our government has started a massive educational campaign to broaden understanding of the importance of nutritious diets.
Pamphlets have been distributed across the country detailing the kinds of foods that children need, how to cook them, and the need for proper hygiene and exclusive breastfeeding for children under the age of six months.
In each village, a woman skilled in communication will teach families how to prepare balanced meals and ensure adequate nutrition for children.
Providing proper nutrition in a child’s first thousand days is particularly important.
The British medical journal The Lancet has described a package of effective interventions to accomplish this.
Recommended measures include providing essential vitamins and minerals through enriched foods and supplements; promoting breastfeeding and nutritious complementary feeding for weaning babies; and treating severely malnourished children with therapeutic foods such as specially fortified peanut butter.
There is an emerging consensus on the need to address under-nutrition worldwide.
Last year, the Copenhagen Consensus – an esteemed panel of economists including several Nobel Laureates – ranked child nutrition as the top priority on its list of cost-effective investments that would improve global welfare.
In many low-income countries, making these investments will require forging partnerships with foreign governments – and we welcome the vital role that donor programs, aid agencies, and volunteer organizations can play by working within the framework of national plans.
Regional collaboration will also be key to fulfilling our commitment to succeed in fighting malnutrition.
For us, this means working closely with our neighbors in the East African Community.
On June 8, just ahead of the G-8 Summit, the United Kingdom will convene a summit on Nutrition for Growth.
Leaders from rich and poor countries, foundations, non-governmental organizations, and private industry will gather to make specific commitments to invest in nutrition.
I hope that they will increase their efforts – and that they think hard about how to ensure that all sectors of recipient countries’ economies benefit through local procurement.
Simply flooding markets with cheap high-calorie, low-nutrient grains will never solve chronic malnutrition.
A change of mindset among development partners is required, along with long-term commitments to building sustainable, diversified, and equitably distributed systems of food production and distribution.
The investments needed to make this happen represent a fraction of most donor assistance to low- and middle-income countries, but would have a massive global impact on human development in the long term.
All of these efforts – production of affordable and nutritious food, ensuring its availability everywhere, and education about how to prepare it – will be essential if Rwanda and other countries are to succeed in ensuring that children receive the nourishment they need to live healthy and productive lives.
Our job will not be finished until every child is assured a healthy and balanced diet and the opportunity to reach his or her full potential.
A World of Pain
BALTIMORE – Pain is ubiquitous in life.
Inextricably bound to consciousness, it is an experience that all living creatures with advanced nervous systems share.
For our ancestors, whose lives were fraught with danger, pain conferred an evolutionary advantage, signaling the need to separate oneself from its immediate source.
But evolution has failed to keep pace with biomedical and technological advances, allowing chronic pain (pain that persists beyond an acute injury or condition) to become a disease in itself.
It is difficult to overestimate chronic pain’s societal impact.
According to the US Institute of Medicine, one in three people suffer from chronic pain – more than from heart disease, cancer, and diabetes combined.
Pain is the leading cause of disability, especially back pain among people under 45 years of age and joint pain in older individuals.
In the United States alone, chronic pain is estimated to cost more than $600 billion annually.
Pain can be classified according to a variety of factors, such as duration or location.
But the most useful categorization is based on mechanism.
Nociceptive pain, which arises from damage to non-nervous tissue, occurs when, say, a person twists an ankle.
An example of chronic nociceptive pain is arthritis.
Neuropathic pain, by contrast, arises after a lesion or disease affects the nervous system.
Nerve damage resulting from diabetes (diabetic neuropathy) and persistent pain after shingles (postherpetic neuralgia) are among the most common causes.
Chronic pain is difficult to treat; even the most effective medications provide only modest relief to a minority of patients.
This can be explained partly by pain’s subjective nature, and partly by the fact that its source can be difficult to pinpoint.
Although neuroscientists are adept at studying pain, animal models fail to account for its “affective-motivational” component – that is, pain’s emotional, cognitive, and contextual features.
Indeed, physiological indicators have less of an impact on a patient’s prognosis after a painful injury than psychological and social factors such as depression or poor coping skills.
The problem is that subjective measures are much more difficult to study – not least because they are associated with high placebo response rates.
Unrealistic expectations exacerbate these psychological impediments to progress.
In an era of instant access, people often expect immediate relief from symptoms, which is difficult to achieve when it comes to chronic pain.
For example, the best way to relieve back and neck pain is often to exercise, while treating underlying contributing factors like obesity.
But few people are willing to devote the time and effort that such a therapeutic plan demands; they would prefer an injection, operation, or medication.
When there is no instant fix available, they can become discouraged, hampering their recovery further.
Making matters worse, people are being inundated with information – and often misinformation – through television, the Internet, and other direct-marketing channels.
This fuels misconceptions and, in many cases, gives people false hope about the kind of relief they can expect from a particular drug or treatment.
Not even physicians are immune to these influences; indeed, in some cases, they actually create the bias.
For example, studies of epidural steroid injections for back pain have been shown to be almost three times more likely to yield positive results when conducted by doctors who routinely administer them.
Financial incentives have compounded the problem, leading to some alarming trends.
Procedures, operations, and prescription opioid use aimed at curbing chronic pain have increased dramatically over the last decade, driving up health-care costs, while failing to stem the increase in the prevalence of pain or the number of disability claims.
This is particularly problematic in countries where health-care delivery is based on a fee-for-service model.
The rate of spine surgery in the United States, for example, is more than twice as high as in Europe.
And, despite having less than 5% of the world’s population, the US accounts for more than three-quarters of global opioid consumption – leading to a surge in addiction rates and overdoses.
What can be done to improve management and treatment of chronic pain?
For starters, health-care providers and individuals should view chronic pain more as a “syndrome” than a symptom – one that may not be “curable.”
For patients who have not responded to conventional treatment, restoring function should replace eradicating pain as the primary objective.
Similarly, patients must recognize that there are no “silver bullets” for pain treatment.
Indiscriminate use of procedures that may benefit only a select few patients merely drives up health-care costs.
Likewise, for chronic non-cancer pain, there is virtually no evidence to support the long-term use of high doses of opioids, which often do more harm than good.
The long-term pain treatment with the strongest empirical support involves lifestyle modifications such as exercise, stress reduction, and weight loss – all of which require significant time and effort.
Finally, researchers should compare the long-term cost-effectiveness of different treatments in typical chronic-pain patients.
Such an approach would be more relevant and generalizable than industry-sponsored short-term studies that compare new treatments to placebos in a fastidiously chosen population that does not reflect real-world conditions.
A thorough and realistic understanding of the nature of chronic pain is crucial to devising effective treatments.
Indeed, without better evidence, efforts to help patients may well end up creating more problems than they solve.
A Bad Bet on Synthetic Biology
LAS VEGAS – Las Vegas seems to be an apt place to launch a risky corporate gamble that could destroy the livelihoods of millions of small-scale farmers.
Earlier this month, the international food conglomerate Cargill chose the city’s famous Strip to introduce what it hopes will be its next blockbuster product: EverSweet, a sweetener made of “the same sweet components in the stevia plant.”
And yet, despite Cargill’s heavy reliance on stevia in its promotional material, EverSweet does not contain a single leaf of the plant.
Cargill’s new product is an example of synthetic biology, a form of genetic engineering that uses modified organisms to manufacture compounds that would never be produced naturally.
What makes EverSweet taste sweet is not stevia; it is a compound produced by a bioengineered yeast.
Synthetic biology is high-tech, and it is also potentially high-risk.
Even as it attracts billions of dollars in investment, it is the subject of growing international concern.
Tellingly, Cargill does not advertise its use of the controversial technology; instead, the company describes EverSweet as the product of “specially crafted baker’s yeast,” as if it were a recipe brewed for centuries in Bavarian villages.
Discerning the risks that may be posed by food ingredients made from this kind of genetic engineering – different from those known from other types of transgenic foods – is still at an early stage.
In a recent opinion, European Union scientific committees concluded that while the risk assessment used for evaluating genetically modified organisms should be applicable to aspects of synthetic biology, in specific cases new approaches may be needed to evaluate the safety of the technology.
And yet there is one area in which the dangers are already apparent: the economic damage that will be caused as lab-grown compounds replace field-grown stevia.
The Guarani indigenous people of Paraguay have grown and used the herb for centuries.
More recently, it has become a food-industry craze, driven in part by fear of obesity lawsuits.
As major brands like Coke and Pepsi aggressively market stevia-sweetened cola drinks as natural and healthy, the agricultural acreage of the plant has exploded.
Analysts expect the stevia market to reach $275 million by 2017.
The global leaders in stevia production are Paraguay, China, and the United States, with Kenya close behind.
Early in 2015, Marian Bassey (representing the ETC Group) met stevia farmers in Kenya to understand what competition from synthetic biology might mean for them.
They were very worried.
For Ann Nduta Kanini, a widowed mother of eight, selling stevia has allowed her to send her children to school and put food on the table.
Nor are stevia farmers the only ones who should be concerned.
Ingredients that are being replaced or are likely to be exchanged for products made through synthetic biology include vanilla, saffron, coconut oil, patchouli, olive squalene, and rose oil.
Indeed, the world’s largest cosmetics, flavor, and fragrance companies are hoping that synthetic biology will help them replace more than 200 natural botanical extracts.
According to the International Federation of Essential Oils and Aroma Trades (IFEAT), around 95% of these botanical products are produced by small-scale farmers, bringing much-needed cash income to some of the world’s poorest communities.
Fortunately, consumers are becoming increasingly aware of the risks posed by synthetic biology, and companies are responding.
Earlier this year, the iconic ice cream brand Ben and Jerry’s pledged not to use any ingredients produced through synthetic biology.
Similarly, Häagen-Dazs confirmed that it will not use vanilla flavor produced through synthetic biology in its ice cream.
And, after the natural cleaning products brand Ecover was petitioned by tens of thousands of angry consumers, the company quickly rolled back an experiment in which it used algal oil produced through synthetic biology in a laundry detergent.
These are unlikely to remain isolated examples.
The Non-GMO Project, an increasingly influential labeling organization, has ruled that the 33,000 products carrying its seal must not use synthetic biology.
Meanwhile, the European Stevia Association (EUSTAS), has expressed concern that EverSweet will undermine stevia’s reputation as safe and natural.
The dark clouds gathering around synthetic biology may not have been visible at Cargill’s sunny product launch.
But, by competing with poor farmers and misleading consumers about the origins of its ingredients, EverSweet and other examples of synthetic biology are generating bitterness at both ends of the product chain.
That is why what happened in Vegas should stay in Vegas.
Stick to the Resolution
MELBOURNE – The international military intervention in Libya is not about bombing for democracy or for Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi’s head – let alone keeping oil prices down or profits up.
Legally, morally, politically, and militarily, it has only one justification: protecting Libyans from the kind of murderous harm that Qaddafi inflicted on unarmed protestors four weeks ago; has continued to inflict on those who oppose him in the areas that his forces control; and has promised to inflict on his opponents in Benghazi and other rebel-held territory.
When that job is done, the military’s job will be done.
Regime change is for the Libyan people themselves to achieve.
It should not be necessary to rearticulate and reargue these basic points.
But it is.
Despite the best efforts of US President Barack Obama, UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, and others who have stayed admirably focused and consistent, other voices – from the right, the left, and the simply muddled – are now capturing media attention, and are beginning to drown, or at least confuse, the basic message.
US Senators John McCain and Joseph Lieberman, for example, have said that the aim must be not only to protect civilians, but also to drive Qaddafi from power.
British Defense Minister Liam Fox has suggested that Qaddafi could be targeted.
And from the other side, many commentators – anxiously or cynically, according to taste – have drawn parallels with Iraq and other past misuses of Western military power.
Many others talk of being drawn inexorably into an Afghanistan-style quagmire.
To clarify the issues, the best place to start is with the two UN Security Council resolutions.
The first, Resolution 1970, adopted on February 26, invoked “the Libyan authorities’ responsibility to protect its population,” condemned its violence against civilians, demanded that this violence stop, and sought to concentrate Qaddafi’s mind by applying targeted sanctions, an arms embargo, and the threat of prosecution for crimes against humanity.
The follow-up Resolution 1973, adopted on March 17, deplored the failure to comply with Resolution 1970, reasserted a determination to ensure the protection of civilians, and called for an immediate ceasefire and a complete end to violent attacks against and abuses of civilians.
Then, for the first time ever, the Council explicitly authorized military intervention by member states to achieve these objectives.