And language is symbols that interact to build meaning.
And, yes, of course, it was the same Cliff Reid I knew back in the late 1980’s.
What Complete Genomics is doing with the $91 million it has raised so far is exciting.
It has built a genome-sequencing factory and plans to build several more over the next few years.
Many academic and commercial research facilities want one, as do several countries.
What I find interesting are the implications.
Right now, a genome is akin to a novel written in an unknown language.
There is a huge amount of information in there, but we can’t understand it.
Imagine getting a copy of Tolstoi’s War and Peace in Russian and (assuming you can’t read Russian) trying to figure out the story.
Impossible.
That’s pretty much the situation of natural-language understanding at the time Reid joined Verity.
On the other hand, we have started recognizing some words – specific genetic variants – that seem to correspond to certain incidents in history.
In the case of genetics, those incidents are diseases and conditions.
And just as it usually takes several individuals to cause an incident, so it often takes several genetic variations, plus ambient factors, to cause a disease.
Genes often work together, sometimes aided by factors such as a person’s diet or behavior, to cause a condition.
There are two key challenges in genomics.
One is simply detecting the genes, alone or in combination, that seem to lead to certain diseases.
That alone can be useful.
With enough data, we can then figure out that the same “disease” is in fact a variety of different disorders, some susceptible to particular known treatments and some susceptible to others or simply incurable.
For this, mere correlation is sufficient.
People with BRCA-derived breast cancer benefit from treatment with herceptin, whereas those with other kinds of breast cancer do not.
We don’t know why, but the correlation is clear.
The second challenge is to understand how the genes interact among themselves or with other factors to produce the condition, which should enable the development of new preventive measures or treatments based on the details of how the condition begins and how it progresses.
That, of course, is much more interesting – and harder to do.
In a sense, it’s the difference between matching words and understanding a piece of text.
So, it is no surprise that Reid has found a role in this new marketplace.
Complete Genomics and its competitors are about to create huge amounts of data.
CGI’s edge is not just sequencing the genomes cheaply, but also refining the data into lists of variations.
In other words, for most research the questions revolve not around an entire genome, but around the relevant differences of any individual’s genome from the norm.
There are common differences, like the differences between blue eyes and brown eyes, or even between people likely to have Crohn’s disease and those who are unlikely to have it.
Then there are differences that result simply from a “broken” gene, which is not a variant but simply a mistake.
Most of these are harmless; the really harmful ones don’t survive long enough to show up anywhere.
The researchers’ task is to find meaning from all this data.
We’re just at the beginning of this process, which will take many years.
While some researchers are looking for statistical correlations, others are studying how the individual genes interact.
For all of them, access to genome sequences is important.
But the genomes mean little without the corresponding medical records, just as the Russian novel – in any language – means little without a corresponding knowledge of Russian history.
Obtaining that history requires consent from the individuals whose genomes are sequenced.
It also requires a lot of data processing to make the records usable.
Much of the information is simply not recorded.
And much is still on paper, or in scanned images, insurance company records, and pharmacy transactions.
There is a standard language for representing diseases, but in many cases the records containing this language might as well be hidden in mattresses.
The current movement in many developed countries towards electronic medical records will improve health care directly, but it will also lead to much improved information liquidity to help genetic and other medical research.
We now have the ability to sequence genomes at increasingly lower costs, and we are slowly making the corresponding health information computer-readable.
Companies such as Complete Genomics are developing software that can process the information.
There is, of course, still a huge amount of data to collect and process, and huge amounts of research and discovery to happen.
But it is hard not to be optimistic about our increasing medical knowledge.
The challenge five years from now will be to turn all that knowledge into practice through better preventive measures, better drugs, and better care.
The Language of Global Protest
PRINCETON – The protest movements that have flared up across the West, from Chile to Germany, have remained curiously undefined and under-analyzed.
Some speak of them as the greatest global mobilization since 1968 – when enragés in very different countries coalesced around similar concerns.
But others insist that there is nothing new here.
The Bulgarian political scientist Ivan Krastev, for example, has claimed that what we are actually experiencing is 1968 “in reverse.”
“Then students on the streets of Europe,” he says, “declared their desire to live in a world different from the world of their parents.
Now students are on the streets to declare their desire to live in the world of their parents.”
No name and no clear interpretation have yet attached itself to the movements.
But how they describe themselves – and how analysts describe them – will make an important difference in the direction they might take.
Such self-understandings should also influence how citizens generally should respond to these movements.
Nineteen sixty-eight was famously over-theorized.
Student leaders, or so most people remember, were constantly producing convoluted manifestos that combined Marxism, psychoanalysis, and theories about Third World liberation struggles.
What is easily forgotten is that even the most theory-eager leaders of the time understood that ultimately, the protest movements that helped to define 1968 didn’t come out of seminar-room discussions.
The German leader Rudi Dutschke, for example, insisted that the movement was driven by “existential disgust” – and anger, provoked by the Vietnam War in particular.
Many putative “theorists” themselves declared that the enragés should let go of revolutionary textbooks and, instead, “practically problematize” inherited radical strategies.
Put more simply: they were supposed to make it up as they went along.
In that sense, 1968 and today’s protests are not as different as some observers claim.
There is no political playbook, but there are events and also books that inspired outrage: Frantz Fanon’s Wretched of the Earth in the 1960’s and, nowadays, the unlikely bestseller Indignez-Vous!, by the 93-year old former French Resistance fighter Stéphane Hessel.
As critics have mockingly pointed out, Hessel’s booklet at times reads more like a call for a free-floating, almost arbitrary desire to be agitated by something – almost anything, really, as long as it can somehow be justified by one’s own subjective sense of justice.
It did not help that Hessel nostalgically invoked Jean-Paul Sartre and existentialism, and the “great stream of history” – longings reflected on a hand-painted sign at Occupy Wall Street: “Get excited and do something.”
Tellingly, that sign was flanked by posters for the left-wing anarchist philosopher Noam Chomsky and the right-wing libertarian politician Ron Paul.
Still, for all the theoretical weaknesses of Hessel’s treatise, “indignation” has become a watchword for movements in France, Spain, and elsewhere.
And language matters here: indignation suggests that some social actors – a government or elites in general – have violated shared norms or moral understandings.
This is the literally “reactionary” interpretation of these movements: they are animated by a sense that the social contract has been broken, and that elites ought to return to the status quo that preceded the policies which ultimately led to the financial crisis.
If so, the people on the squares of Madrid, Athens, and New York are not so much demonstrating against those in power – give or take a few anarchists – as demonstrating to those in power that they should feel ashamed for having reneged on supposedly shared commitments.
Indignation is different from outrage – a sentiment that is ultimately blind and not necessarily connected to any presumption that one shares commitments with the people against whom it is directed.
This is to some degree also the story of 1968: righteous disgust led to outrage, but, when channeled through completely unrealistic revolutionary theorizing, also to self-righteousness and, ultimately, to elaborate justifications for physical violence on the part of radical factions.
In such a scenario, self-empowered minorities come to speak in the name of imaginary majorities – a populism of sorts, and, like all populism, driven by emotions more than by norms, let alone reasons.
Or it simply all ends in riots.
The distinction between indignation and outrage might seem like nitpicking.
But the lessons that elites learn – and they clearly will want to turn the protests to their electoral advantage – will partly depend on how these movements are described, and how they conceive of themselves.
On that point, the demonstrators have so far remained curiously mute: they have yet to articulate any wider demands or a sense of what a different society, or “real democracy” – a stock phrase of the Spanish movement – should be all about.
If today’s protest movements are based on righteous indignation, the lack of concrete demands should not be a problem: shared norms (and the policies that would follow from them) can still broadly be assumed.
But if they are being driven by rage, then a lack of clear goals might merely produce more anger and frustration, which in turn could eventually lead to physical violence and some kind of political nihilism.
This also means that political elites should try to understand and work with the message of indignation – and not cynically play up anger for electoral advantage.
It is not just ridiculous, but downright irresponsible, for example, that the British Labour Party intellectual Maurice Glasman now feels compelled to reveal the so-far hidden “angry insurgent side” of party leader Ed Miliband.
Elites – and protesters’ fellow citizens – should respond conscientiously and creatively to moral indignation, comprehending that it is ultimately about an affirmation of liberal democracy, and not about all-out revolution, let alone nihilism.
And they should seek to calm anger and defuse outrage, which can be a serious threat to liberal democracy.
The Last Extinction
BONN – Farmers across Africa are currently engaged in an unequal struggle against a pestilent fruit fly whose natural home is in Asia.
The fly, first detected in 2004 in Mombasa on the Kenyan coast, has since swept across the continent, decimating mangoes and other crops and devastating livelihoods.
In a bid to counter the fly, a team from the world-renowned ICIPE institute in East Africa recently went to Sri Lanka looking for a natural predator.
Researchers have now pinpointed one, which, after careful screening, has been deemed safe to release into Africa’s environment and appears likely to defeat the unwelcome invader.
But the pioneering work is now on hold, as are the hopes of millions of farmers for an effective, environmentally friendly answer to the crisis.
Countries in Asia – indeed, countries throughout the developing world – are simply not exporting their abundant and economically important genetic resources.
The Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD), signed in 1992, promised an international regime on Access and Benefit Sharing (ABS) of genetic resources.
This would allow researchers and companies access to the developing world’s genetic treasure trove in return for a share of the profits from the products that are then developed.
But brokering the ABS regime has proven elusive, and, in the absence of an international deal, there has been diminishing access and thus declining benefit-sharing over the past five or so years.
This implies potentially huge economic, environmental, and social losses to both the developed and developing world.
These losses include missed opportunities for breakthroughs in pharmaceuticals, foods, biologically-based materials and processes, and biological pest controllers like the promising one isolated by ICIPE.
The losses also include failure to conserve the world’s dwindling wildlife and rapidly degrading ecosystems, which are worth trillions of dollars in terms of life-supporting services.
An intelligently designed ABS regime offers the chance for poorer countries, which possess the lion’s share of the globe’s remaining genetic resources, to begin to be paid properly for maintaining them.
It could also play an important part in meeting the United Nation’s Millennium Development Goals, which include halving poverty by 2015.
From May 20-30, governments from more than 190 countries and an estimated 6,000 delegates will meet in Bonn, Germany for the Ninth Meeting of the Parties to the CBD.
Governments have set their sights on securing an ABS regime by 2010, which is also the deadline, agreed at the World Summit on Sustainable Development in 2002, to reduce substantially the rate of loss of biodiversity.
But accelerated action on many other broad biodiversity-related fronts is urgently needed.
Indeed, according to the UN Environment Program’s Global Environment Outlook-4 , the world is currently experiencing a sixth wave of extinctions, triggered in large part by our failure to manage natural assets.
Thirty percent of global fish stocks have collapsed, up from roughly 15% in 1987, and the proportion of fish stocks classified as over-exploited has doubled, to around 40%.
Populations of freshwater vertebrates have declined on average by nearly 50% since 1987, while populations of terrestrial and marine species have fallen by around 30%.
In the Caribbean, more than 60% of coral reefs are threatened by sediment, pollution, and over-fishing.
Since the end of the Second World War, more land has been converted to agricultural use than in the previous two centuries.
Every year, 13 million hectares of tropical forests, which contain up to 80% of the planet’s biodiversity, are destroyed.
Roughly 35% of mangroves have been destroyed in the last 20 years.
But, alongside these sobering facts, the world is also full of shining and intelligent management.
Indeed, protected areas now cover over 12% of the Earth’s surface, although the creation of marine reserves remains woefully low.
For example, Paraguay, which until 2004 had one of the world’s highest rates of deforestation, has reduced rates in its eastern region by 85%.
And in Fiji, no-take zones and better management of marine areas has increased species like mangrove lobsters by 250% per year.
Iraq’s marshlands have been restored, and local wheat varieties in Jordan and Syria have been preserved.
Nevertheless, despite these signs of progress, we are failing to confront the magnitude of the challenge, particularly in the translation of global agreements into legislation and action at the national and regional levels.
In Bali six months ago, the world achieved a breakthrough on climate change, and both developed and developing countries have embarked on a Road Map towards a new climate regime for 2012.
We must become equally committed to reversing the rate of biodiversity loss.
The Bonn Biodiversity Conference represents an ideal opportunity to achieve a breakthrough, including on ABS.
All of us, not just Africa’s fruit farmers, ultimately depend on nature’s bounty for our prosperity – indeed, for our very survival.
The Last Interventionist
When Tony Blair, having procrastinated about his departure almost to the point of unreason, finally gives up the British premiership this month, it will be to the general relief not only of the British public as a whole, but also of the overwhelming majority of his own party.
After three terms in office, it could hardly be otherwise.
Despite the cliché, power does corrupt, and the late Blair era, like that of Margaret Thatcher before it, has been a squalid spectacle.
The paradox is that, for a man who wielded so much power for so long, it is unclear what domestic legacy, if any, Blair will leave.
Blairism was a mood, a style, but, in substantive terms, it represented no radical break with the Thatcherite legacy that New Labour repackaged so cleverly, and, in fairness, administered more humanely than the Iron Lady ever did.
Foreign policy is another story.
Whatever one thinks of him, in international affairs Blair was a leader of consequence.
Indeed, he can be plausibly described as being chiefly responsible for formulating and successfully propagating the doctrine of “humanitarian intervention.”
That idea captured the imagination of much of the elite of the developed world over the course of the 1990’s, and provided the moral rationale for the principal Western military interventions of the post-Cold War period, from Bosnia to Iraq.
Given how catastrophic the invasion of Iraq has turned out to be, it is hard even to remember when interventions on moral grounds – whether to thwart a dictator, as in the case of the Balkan wars, or to put an end to anarchic cruelty, as in the case of British intervention in Sierra Leone – seemed like a great advance in international affairs.
No longer would the powerful sit by idly while butchers like Slobodan Milosevic or Foday Sankoh slaughtered their own people.
Today, humanitarian intervention has become a dirty word for many of the same people who once believed in it.
Only American neo-conservatives, understandably grateful for his championing of the Iraq war and his ability to argue for it coherently and eloquently (unlike President Bush, who was and is unable to do either), are sorry to see Blair go.
But what may be lost is how many people did believe.
Blair still does.
In a recent interview, he replied to the question of the core of his foreign policy with two words: “liberal interventionism.”
The world may have moved on, chastened by the realization that interveners, even when intervening in the name of human rights, can be as barbaric as tin pot dictators. But Blair, it seems, is not to be moved.
What was famously said of Thatcher – “the lady’s not for turning” – can be said of him as well.
In fairness to Blair, this is not mere stubbornness, as it seems to the case with Bush and his current and erstwhile minions, Donald Rumsfeld, Paul Wolfowitz, and, of course, Vice President Dick Cheney.
For Blair, there is a moral unity between the interventions in Kosovo and Iraq, both of which he presents as examples of a post-Westphalian idea that powerful states are called upon to defend suffering communities globally, including by military means.
To the charge that this idea is actually old-fashioned liberal imperialism updated for the post-Cold War world, Blair has consistently replied that what he called for in Kosovo, Sierra Leone, and Iraq are wars of “values, not interests.”
In his more petulant moments, he has asked why so many of those who saw no harm in NATO undermining Milosevic adamantly opposed the ouster of Saddam Hussein.
Actually, the answer is quite simple.
Blair’s vision of wars of values rather than interests has increasingly come to seem like a moral flag of convenience – in a way similar to the use of human rights by the rich world’s governments to justify their continued domination of institutions like the World Bank and the IMF.
The fact that NATO now considers its area of operations to legitimately extend all the way to the Hindu Kush has given pause even to many who once believed as fervently in humanitarian intervention as Blair still does.
Of course, Blair does not think of himself as a new imperialist.
On the contrary, as he has frequently made clear, he considers his critics immoral for not supporting liberal interventions.
But nor did nineteenth-century colonialists think of themselves as immoral.
Indeed, perhaps the greatest of British imperial conquerors in Africa, Cecil Rhodes, once defined imperialism as “philanthropy plus 5%.”
Take that, Dick Cheney and Halliburton.
Doubtless, we will learn more about Blair’s justifications for what he did, and further articulations of his interventionist creed, when he goes on the lecture circuit and, in due course, publishes his memoirs.
The pathos of his situation, though, is that no one is listening anymore.
Blair is the last interventionist.
Neither his successor, Gordon Brown, nor George W. Bush’s successor, whoever he or she turns out to be, will be able to mount another intervention similar to that in Kosovo, let alone Iraq.
Those pressing for military intervention in Darfur would probably say that this is a bad thing.
But, as they rail against the failure of the West to take action, they should remember why such action is impossible.
By putting liberal interventionism at the heart of his foreign policy, Tony Blair has made it radioactive – a political non-starter for at least a generation.
The Lawless Sheriff
I usually limit myself in my newspaper commentaries to my area of expertise, economics.
But as an American, I am so horrified by what has happened in my country - and what my country has done to others over the past two years - that I feel I must speak out.
I believe American abuses of human rights and the canons of civilized peoples that have come to light in Iraq, Afghanistan, and Guantanamo Bay, and the more horrendous abuses that almost surely will come to light later, are not merely the act of aberrant individuals. They are the result of a Bush administration that has trampled on human rights and international law, including the Geneva conventions, and tried to undermine basic democratic protections, ever since it took office.
Sadly, torture and other atrocities do happen in war - and the Iraq war is certainly not the only time torture has been used - but I believe that the Bush administration is responsible for creating a climate in which international law and democratic processes have been disregarded.
When Vice President Dick Cheney spoke at the last World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland, he was asked how the administration could justify what was taking place in Guatanamo Bay, where prisoners are being kept without being charged and without counsel.
Cheney's answer was jarring: he said that because the detainees were captured in Afghanistan where they had been trying to kill US troops, the rules regarding prisoners of war did not apply.
Many in the audience were shocked by his remarks, but Cheney seemingly failed to grasp how appalled his audience was.
They were not concerned with legalisms, about whether, technically, the Geneva conventions did or did not apply. They were concerned about basic canons of human rights.
Among the most appalled were those who had recently struggled to achieve democracy, and were continuing to fight for human rights.
The Bush administration has also trampled on citizens' basic right to know what their government is doing, refusing, for example, to disclose who was on the task force that shaped its energy policy - though one really doesn't need that information to see that it was shaped by the oil industry and for the oil industry.
When abuses occur in one area, they can quickly spread to others.
For weeks the Bush administration kept the report on abuses in Iraqi prisons from the American people by pressuring CBS not to air the photographs in its possession.
Similarly, it was only through the use of the Freedom of Information Act that the dramatic photographs of the coffins of US soldiers coming home were finally made public.
The American media have not emerged unscathed.
Why did CBS refuse to release information of vital concern to the public?
The abuses should have been covered months ago.
Amnesty International held a press conference on the topic in Baghdad in July 2003. And while the pictures and the story of Abu Ghraib ran on front pages in Europe and elsewhere, it was at first buried in many American newspapers, including leaders like The New York Times .
Were they worried about offending the Bush administration?
Defenders of President Bush, Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld, and the military emphasize the difficulty of the task they face in Iraq, human frailty and fallibility, and the fact that there are always a few "rotten apples."
America's system of government, however, recognizes all of this, and attempts to guard against it.
Had the letter and spirit of these safeguards been followed, we would not have been in this war at all, or at least not alone.
Yes, it is conceivable that Bush did not have accurate information about whether Iraq possessed weapons of mass destruction.
But under the international rules that America is supposed to follow, wars should not be undertaken based on the judgment of one individual and his cabal.
The judgment of the world was that the evidence was not there - and the world was right.
Had Bush only gone along with the democratic processes enshrined in the UN Charter, the trauma of Iraq need not have occurred.
We know that individuals and institutions make mistakes. Such mistakes are all the more likely in times of stress.
We have to put in place rules and procedures, safeguards, a system of due process, to make it more likely that justice is done; and in times of stress it is all the more important that we respect these safeguards.
It is clear that the checks needed to prevent abuse in the Iraqi and Afghan prisons were not in place, and that the Bush Administration had created a climate that made such abuses more likely, if not inevitable.
More fundamentally, something has gone wrong with the system of checks and balances in America's democracy.
Congress and the press should have checked the president.
The international community tried.
Unfortunately, the global system of international law and governance remains too weak to prevent the determined misbehavior of the president of the world's most powerful country if he is hell bent on starting a war on his own.
It is at moments such as these that we realize how thin a veneer our civilization may be.
As statements of shared values and principles, the UN Charter, the Declaration of Human Rights, and the Geneva conventions are great achievements.
Whether they have the force of law is not the point; they provide guidance for civilized behavior.
Each of them was motivated by the horrific lessons of the past.
Let us hope that, emerging out of today's scandals, there will be a renewed commitment to live up to these ideals and to strengthen the institutions that were designed to enforce them.
The Lebanese Labyrinth
Lebanon is poised to hold a presidential election that none of its contending factions – indeed, none of the rival parties in the region – can afford to lose.
Let’s start with Syria.
In 2005, President Bashar Assad’s regime was forced to withdraw its army from Lebanon, following the assassination of former Lebanese Prime Minister Rafiq Hariri.
Syria is widely believed to have been responsible for the crime, and domestic Lebanese and international pressure helped force Syria’s pullout.
Yet in a speech soon thereafter, Assad warned that nothing could sever the Syrian-Lebanese relationship.
Assad knows that the election of a president who bolsters Lebanon’s sovereignty and independence would make Syria’s return difficult – and Assad, as even his allies privately admit, wants nothing less.
Indeed, it was his decision to extend, unconstitutionally, the term of the reliably pro-Syrian Emile Lahoud as Lebanon’s president in 2004 that triggered the political crisis leading to Hariri’s murder and the emergence of a coalition of anti-Syrian groups, which included many former Syrian allies.
Assad is particularly worried about the creation of a mixed Lebanese-international court to try suspects in the Hariri assassination.
The court was approved under Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter and will be situated in Holland.
Once the trial begins, Syria may find itself in the dock.
Closely allied with Syria is Hezbollah, which presides over a virtually autonomous mini-state in south Lebanon.
Hezbollah has an armed militia that is far more effective than Lebanon’s national army, and has openly rejected UN Security Council resolutions asking for its disarmament.
Hezbollah’s priority is to maintain the military capacity to fight Israel, and also to play a pivotal role in the broader regional rivalry between Iran, Syria, Hezbollah, and Hamas on one side, and the United States, the Sunni-led mainstream Arab states, the Mahmoud Abbas-led Palestinian Authority, and Syria’s Lebanese foes on the other.
But there are constraints on Hezbollah.
The party’s leaders know that any crisis in Lebanon could provoke a Sunni-Shiite conflict.
Hezbollah’s patrons in Iran, like the party itself, realize that the consequences would be disastrous.
Iran would find itself the bogeyman of the Arab world’s Sunnis, while Hezbollah could be swallowed up by another debilitating Lebanese civil war.
In the coming weeks, Hezbollah will have to calculate at several levels.
It will, above all, take Syrian priorities into consideration.
If Assad decides to scuttle the presidential election in order to strengthen Syria’s hold in Beirut, then the party will go along.
But a political vacuum in Lebanon only makes violence more likely, which Hezbollah doesn’t want.
On the other side, interests vary.
Syria’s Lebanese enemies know that the election’s outcome will determine their fate.
Given that several prominent critics of Syria have been killed since 2005, there is little room for compromise.
The problem is that the anti-Syrian coalition, known as “March 14,” is not yet united around a single presidential candidate.
That said, the leaders of March 14, which controls a parliamentary majority, will block any step that revives Syrian domination.
The US has made it clear that it will not accept a president close to Hezbollah or Syria.
While America will not bargain with Syria over the election, it would probably accept a candidate with whom Syria feels comfortable, provided he is acceptable across the political spectrum.
The US must also calculate what the Europeans will accept.
France, Italy, and Spain all have large contingents in the UN force in south Lebanon that was expanded after the summer 2006 war.
No election, they fear, would endanger their soldiers.
This makes them vulnerable to Syrian leverage, and is why they may be more amenable to dealing with Syria on the presidency.
Another key actor is Saudi Arabia, whose relations with Syria are at an all-time low.
The Saudis, deeply disturbed by the Syrian-Iranian alliance, worry that re-imposition of Syrian supremacy in Lebanon, and with it the strengthening of Iranian and Shiite power there, would threaten the Kingdom itself.
But, as the Saudis also want Syria to be included in King Abdullah’s regional peace plan, and with the US planning to hold a regional peace conference in November, they are not looking for an open-ended confrontation with Assad.
These clashing interests will be played out after September 25, when the two-month period during which Lebanon’s parliament must elect a president begins.
No side has a yearning for war, which is why compromise solutions are possible.
But what would such a compromise look like?
One idea – to elect a candidate with whom everyone can live – would likely produce a weak president.
So would an agreement by all sides to elect an interim president for two years, buying time until the regional balance of power changes or solidifies.
Whatever the outcome, the choice of Lebanon’s next president will emerge from a political maelstrom – one that he will almost certainly be powerless to allay.
The Lebanon War One Year Later
LONDON &#45;&#45; It is now almost one year since the European Union committed to stabilize Lebanon following last summer’s war.
With its decision to send thousands of soldiers to Lebanon to implement United Nations Security Council Resolution 1701, the EU took its boldest step yet in creating a common foreign and security policy.
But it remains an open question as to whether the EU will actually be able to stabilize the most fractured polity in the most dangerous area of conflict in Europe’s immediate neighborhood.
The Israel-Hezbollah war of 2006 reminded the Union, once again, that its strategic interests do not always coincide perfectly with those of the United States.
Because the Bush administration took a “hands off” approach to the Israel-Hezbollah war in south Lebanon, and given the military straitjacket the US finds itself in because of the Iraq war, the EU had to take the lead.
The EU remains – for now – relatively uncontaminated by America’s disintegrating reputation in the Middle East.
But the Union could see its reputation worsen if it allows its commitment to Lebanon to become part of the emerging US strategy of isolating Iran by hardening today’s regional Sunni-Shia divisions.
To avoid this fate, the EU’s commitment in Lebanon needs to be supplemented with a nuanced political strategy that seeks to avoid isolating Lebanon’s long suppressed Shia population.
The threats emanating from the Middle East are diverse: regional conflicts, totalitarian religious ideologies (mainly led by Shia Iran and Wahhabi Saudi Arabia), terrorism, nuclear armament programs, obstacles to modernization, and unstable regimes.
All of these affect Lebanon, and are aggravated by the country’s own peculiar socio-political dynamics – i.e., its Maronite, Sunni, and Shia divisions.
The EU’s mission in Lebanon is risky.
Neither Hezbollah nor Syria, let alone Iran, has an interest in stability without some say in creating it.
Resolution 1701 presupposes – in addition to separating the combatants – enforcement of the internal and external sovereignty of Lebanon’s elected government, without saying how this is to be accomplished given Hezbollah’s superior military power relative to the government’s forces.
In effect, the resolution envisaged reversing Hezbollah’s gains and ignores the deep changes that have occurred in Lebanese society, most importantly the Shia community’s growing self-confidence.
Attempting to politically isolate and disarm Hezbollah is a task that the EU-led UN force cannot accomplish and should not attempt, for it would mean war, with Syria and Iran in the background.
But were the EU to resign itself to mere observer status in Lebanon, the UN and Europe would lose all credibility.
An armed peace has held for a year. But an armed peace never lasts.
The mission must therefore walk a fine line to bridge the country’s communal divisions, which will be possible only with a clear understanding of Lebanon and the wider Middle East. 
The road toward peace rather than ceasefire in Lebanon precludes the EU’s participation in America’s emerging “containment” strategy vis-à-vis Iran, at least in its current form, which is based on organizing the resistance of Sunni states to Shia influence.
For the Shia are the biggest of Lebanon’s three religious communities.
They also form a majority in some Gulf states, as well as in the oil-rich regions of Saudi Arabia.
So a neat Shia-Sunni dividing line cannot be drawn.
Europe should instead push for new constitutional and institutional solutions that ensure the Shia a legitimate role in the political arrangements of Lebanon, Saudi Arabia, and the Gulf states – all places where they now regard themselves as third-class citizens.
Giving the Shia a real stake in the nations in which they live is the only way to satisfy the craving for empowerment that they feel after so many years of suppression.
Europe must also recognize why leaders like Hezbollah’s Sheikh Hasan Nasrullah are popular.
Anti-Americanism and an aggressive foreign policy are, of course, part of the allure of men like Nasrullah.
But what has really allowed Hezbollah (and Hamas, for that matter) to win elections and cement support is their ability to provide education, health, and other social services, particularly to the poor.
The US and the political groups that it tends to support in the region, by contrast, offer very little in this regard.
The Bush administration stresses democracy and human rights, which is a good agenda as far as it goes.
But it is an agenda for the region’s “haves,” not its “have nots.”
In places like south Lebanon, which suffer from deep social cleavages and inequalities, free elections and free trade hold little resonance for people who are impoverished and marginalized.
If the EU mission is to compete successfully against Lebanon’s Islamists and populists, it must start thinking seriously about a social agenda that appeals to the poor.
Of course, no one wants to break budgets or create dependency.
But healing Lebanon’s wounds requires finding the means to offer alienated Shia what they want and need most, and not what outsiders think they should want or need.
Europe’s Troika Should Grow Up
PARIS – In early 2010, a group of men (and a few women) in dark suits landed in Athens.
They belonged to a global institution, the International Monetary Fund, and to a pair of regional ones, the European Commission and the European Central Bank.
Their mission was to negotiate the terms and conditions of a financial bailout of Greece.
A few months later, what became known as the “troika” was dispatched to Ireland, then to Portugal, and later to Cyprus.
This endeavor was bound to have wide implications.
The troika negotiated what ended up being the largest financial assistance packages ever: loans to Greece from the IMF and European partners are set to reach €240 billion ($310 billion), or 130% of the country’s 2013 GDP – far more in both absolute and relative terms than any country has ever received.
Loans to Ireland (€85 billion) and Portugal (€78 billion) are also significantly bigger than those usually provided by the IMF.
Moreover, cooperation between the three institutions is unprecedented.
Back in 1997-1998, during the Asian crisis, the G-7 flatly rejected Japan’s proposal for an Asian Monetary Fund.
Now the IMF has even accepted a minority-lender role, with the bulk of assistance coming from the European Stability Mechanism (ESM), a new institution often viewed as an embryonic European Monetary Fund.
It is frequently argued that the size of the assistance packages is a testament to Europe’s clout within the IMF.
Perhaps, but the packages are, first and foremost, a consequence of the constraints to which Europeans were (and still are) subject.
Economic adjustment is necessarily slower within a monetary union than it is for countries with their own currency, because, even for very flexible economies, prices change more slowly than the exchange rate.
Delivering the same result therefore takes more time, and requires keeping countries in intensive care for longer – and at higher cost.
Three years later, the results are mixed at best.
Unemployment has increased much more than anticipated and social hardship is unmistakable.
There is one bright spot: Ireland, which is set to recover from an exceptionally severe financial crisis.
But there is also a dark spot: Greece, where GDP has shrunk by 20% since 2009 and where the public debt/GDP ratio is now higher than anticipated at the launch of the program, despite the debt reduction negotiated with private creditors in February 2012.
This is not because of a lack of fiscal consolidation.
On the contrary, the Greek authorities have done more than planned on this front.
But the collapse of GDP has necessarily implied a rising debt ratio, driving the country into a recessionary spiral as economic contraction forces further spending cuts.
Could the troika have done better?
It was not responsible for existing monetary conditions – a currency union with a central bank focused on price stability.
But European officials’ hesitant response to the crisis added to the difficulty.
Prolonged controversies over the terms and conditions of assistance and the absurdly high interest rate initially set on official loans exacted a heavy toll on countries already under stress.
Furthermore, the troika made three mistakes.
First, Greek debt reduction was postponed for too long.
Once it became clear that the burden was unbearable, debt should have been cut expeditiously.
Too many creditors were reimbursed at par on their maturing claims.
Second, the troika based its programs on overly optimistic assumptions.
It misjudged the consequences of fiscal consolidation and credit constraints, underestimating the contraction of employment and overestimating exports and privatization receipts.
Finally, not unlike what happened during the Asian crisis in the late 1990’s, the troika took country cases one by one.
As a result, it did not pay enough attention to cross-country spillovers and deteriorating conditions in the wider eurozone.
Should the troika survive?
Its three participating institutions have different mandates and different roles.
It was perhaps inevitable that initially they worked jointly; but there is reason to question such an approach now.
Operationally and financially, the IMF has become much more involved in Europe than its global shareholders deem sustainable.
It should become a catalytic lender whose participation in eurozone programs remains desirable but not indispensable – giving it the possibility to disagree and walk away.
The ECB is in an odd position as well, but for different reasons.
As the eurozone’s central bank, rather than a lending institution, it does not have a clear role in negotiations on behalf of creditors.
If it remains in the troika, its participation should be mostly silent.
Finally, Europe should transform the ESM into a European Monetary Fund capable of providing policy assessment and advice, as well as financial assistance – possibly drawing on European Commission staff.
Beyond European specifics, the troika experiment answers a question of major importance to other parts of the world: Can the IMF cooperate with regional institutions?
The answer is yes – but not easily.
The troika has proved functional, and Europe would have been at pains to provide conditional assistance to eurozone countries without the IMF’s participation and support.
But cooperation has proved to be difficult, if only because each participating institution has rules and constraints that are not easy to reconcile with the others’.
This column draws on a Bruegel report co-authored with André Sapir and Guntram Wolff.
The Lessons of Perestroika, 20 Years After
Twenty years after Mikhail Gorbachev launched perestroika, many people have come to lament the slow pace of reform in Russia under President Vladimir Putin.
But could it have been otherwise?
This should not be a surprise, because the tumultuous Gorbachev and Yeltsin eras left the country exhausted. So who can blame Russians for suffering from the reform fatigue?
But if Russia is to get back on its feet, more reforms are needed.
Yet before a new round of reforms is to begin, some basic principles about Russia's political capacities must be understood.
The first question that any would-be Russian reformer should ask nowadays (and which we did not ask during Gorbachev's perestroika) is the following, is society prepared to endure the short-term pains of reforms, and how willing it is to endure the pain?
The experience of perestroika underscores the importance of this question.
Perestroika took place at a unique moment in Russian history.
The great reforms of the past, including the liberation of the serfs in 1861, followed many years of discussions among westerners, slavophiles, and others.
The revolutions of 1905 and 1917 also came at a time when those discussions were finished, and everyone knew who stood for what.
Indeed, I once read that Stalin's appointment to his first key party post was a mistake.
But it is still obvious that the entire party knew who Stalin was.
When they entrusted him with responsibility for convening the constituent assembly, the Bolsheviks knew what they wanted to do with the constituent assembly, because they knew Stalin as a person who would not stop at anything.
Perestroika was different, because debate had not ended; indeed, countless debates were raging about what Gorbachev should do.
Moreover, all previous eras of Russian reform eras and revolutions were connected with some historical model.
Perestroika had no such historic precedent.
The transformation from state socialism into a postindustrial society had never occurred anywhere else.
Thus, perestroika took place in a void.
Alas, this experience is being repeated.
Various political leaders of different political parties flash across Russia’s television screens, but there is no real national discussion about how to lead the country forward.
We are not moving toward a choice reached after countless discussions.
The second lesson of perestroika concerns the program of reform.
After two decades of earthshaking change, Russia has still not had a real program of constructive reform.
To use a modern expression, we don’t have a road map.
Practically everyone knows what is unacceptable, and what needs to be eliminated.
But we simply don’t know what should replace things that are eliminated.
Of course, the exit from socialism was unprecedented.
Much of what socialism built needed to be undone.
But it was done using slogans, not a program of change that ordinary Russians could understand and embrace.
All we have are endless arguments, not practical alternatives to discuss and decide upon.
One reason that Russia’s reform debates are so barren is the country’s lack of coherent political parties.
During perestroika and the Yeltsin presidency, the legacy was a widespread hatred and fear of the Communist Party with all its force and power.
This fear extended to all political parties and all in all blocked the desire to create powerful parties.
But this suspicion of political parties as such meant that there was no organized body across the country committed to carrying out a consistent, well-thought-out reform program.
Instead the reforms were decreed from high above, without having any grassroots support – and thus with no lasting durability.
All we had were direct appeals to the street and the masses rather than encouragement of a genuine social consensus.
Such a direct method is the wellspring of authoritarianism.
We must recognize that and understand that it emerges not only when the public is apathetic or frightened, but also when there is no apparent stable advanced guard, such as powerful political parties, which choose the leaders and control them.
As a result Russia now confronts a situation in which the election of the president is the only political issue.
In reality, what Russia need are powerful independent social and political organizations that would say: in any presidential term the following things should be done to steer policy, thus making the question of who is president secondary.
In this respect, Putin’s recent effort to assert tighter state control over private organizations is particularly worrisome.
But the final and most vital lesson of perestroika concerns the pace of reforms and society’s expectations.
Simply put, the government must meet the people halfway. Yet it also cannot reduce reform to a nullity in order to ingratiate itself with the masses.
This is a tricky road to pursue, but it is the only one worth taking.
Indeed, perestroika and the decade of reform that followed demonstrated that just following the formal structures of the Western democratic model isn’t enough if Russia is to see reform implemented consistently.
For this model, as we have seen in Russia, leads to populist democracy and timid reform.
The country needs a deeper commitment to reform that will come only when its institutions engage the Russian public in the sort of open debate that we have lacked.
We must jettison populist democracy and embrace what democracy has always stood for—the engagement of all citizens in running their government.
The Meaning of Cyprus
BRUSSELS – The root of the problem in Cyprus is well known.
Its two major banks had attracted huge deposits from abroad, largely from Russia, and presumably mostly from individuals who wished to escape scrutiny at home or elsewhere.
The proceeds were then invested in Greek government bonds and loans to Greek companies.
When Greece imploded, the investments turned sour, and the Cypriot banks that had engaged in this strategy became insolvent.
Given this situation, the logical choice for the country should have been clear: if the government wanted to survive, foreign depositors must bear part of the losses.
It is thus difficult to understand why the Cypriot government was at first so reluctant to inflict any losses on depositors.
But the solution that was eventually agreed makes sense: the country’s two largest banks are effectively resolved.
Their bad assets will be separated and wound down over time.
Neither the Cypriot government nor European taxpayers will put any additional funds into these banks.
The losses that remain after the bad assets have been disposed of will thus have to be borne by the banks’ uninsured creditors, which in this case means those with deposits of more than €100,000 ($130,000).
Although Cyprus is too small to matter for global financial markets, the crisis there could turn out to be an important precedent guiding how European policymakers deal with future banking problems.
In particular, it could affect current plans for a “banking union,” which needs three elements: a single supervisor, a common resolution authority, and a credible system of deposit insurance.
The Cyprus crisis holds important lessons on all three counts.
First, the crisis has underscored the need for a single supervisor that is not captured by local interests.
The European Central Bank would never have allowed Cypriot banks to attract huge deposits by paying above-market interest rates, and then to put all of their eggs in one basket (Greece).
This was a high-risk strategy without a safety net.
Second, while there is still some discussion about how to create a common resolution mechanism for eurozone banks, events have shown that the ECB already de facto fills this role.
No bank in difficulties can survive if the ECB does not grant or renew emergency liquidity assistance.
This accumulation of power in the hands of a completely independent institution is, of course, not ideal from the standpoint of democratic accountability.
But this should serve as an additional incentive for the eurozone’s member states to agree to the creation of a genuine common resolution authority with enough funding to resolve even larger banks in an orderly way.
Finally, the revolt of Cyprus’s small savers highlighted the need for a credible system of deposit insurance.
The EU directive that stipulates the protection of bank deposits up to €100,000 does not provide a European guarantee; it only requires member states to create a deposit-insurance system at the national level.
In reality, however, there has been a widespread misperception that somehow “Europe” protects small depositors.
Yet a common deposit-insurance system had, at least so far, not even been under discussion, because the issue was not perceived as a live problem.
Cyprus has shattered this complacency.
Leaving deposit insurance exclusively at the national level is no longer an option.
Cyprus also holds a more general lesson: Given the extreme reaction of financial markets to the collapse of Lehman Brothers in 2008, it had become axiomatic among European policymakers that no bank should be allowed to become insolvent.
But financial markets reacted calmly to the news that, for the first time, even depositors in a bank in the European Union will lose part of their money (and this was noted with glee in Berlin and elsewhere in northern Europe).
The key lesson for European policymakers is thus that it is possible to “bail in” a bank’s creditors.
This has not been officially admitted, but Eurogroup President Jeroen Dijsselbloem, the Dutch finance minister, expressed it clearly, saying that, after Cyprus, Europe should become more courageous in bailing in bank creditors.
This realization – that the European taxpayer does not have to save every troubled bank – might have a very beneficial effect, because Germany’s resistance to a banking union is motivated by the fear that German taxpayers would be forced to underwrite indirectly the losses of banks in the distressed countries of the eurozone periphery.
This fear may now ease.
The crisis in Cyprus represents an extreme and special case in many respects.
But the way that the problem arose, and the solution that was finally adopted, is likely to have very important consequences for the way that Europe will address its banking problems.
America’s Flawed Election
PRINCETON – No doubt many people around the world, if not most, breathed a sigh of relief over the re-election of US President Barack Obama.
A BBC World service poll of 21 countries found a strong preference for Obama everywhere except Pakistan.
Joy over the election’s outcome, however, should not blind us to its failure to meet a series of ethical benchmarks for democratic choice.
According to the US-based Center for Responsive Politics, spending on the election – for President and Congress, and including spending by outside groups as well as by the candidates and their political parties – is estimated to have exceeded $6 billion.
That makes the 2012 US election the most expensive ever held.
The bulk of this spending is just the two opposing parties canceling each other out.
This benefits advertising agencies and the media, but no one else, and surely not the parties themselves, or the viewers who are bombarded with ads, especially if they happen to live in hotly contested swing states.
It is difficult to believe that, say, $200 million would not have been enough to inform the electorate adequately of the candidates’ policies.
In this scenario, spending limits would have saved about $5.8 billion.
And, if such limits were combined with public financing of election campaigns, they would also help the election to meet an important ethical standard by denying the rich a disproportionate influence on outcomes, and hence on the subsequent actions of the president and Congress.
No one really expects political advertising to provide citizens with the information they need to assess the candidates’ merits properly.
For the presidential election, however, the practice of holding three televised debates between the two major parties’ candidates should be an opportunity for a thorough airing of those issues.
Unfortunately, the most recent debates failed to achieve that goal.
Consider, for example, the final debate in October, which was supposed to focus on foreign policy.
The US may no longer be the world’s undisputed leader, as it was in the decade following the Soviet Union’s collapse, but it nonetheless has a vital role to play in international affairs.
Obama referred to the US as “the indispensable nation,” and that description still holds true, in part because US military spending exceeds that of the next nine countries combined – five times more than China, the world’s second-largest military spender.
There was, however, no serious discussion of the conditions under which it would be right to use that military might.
Both candidates indicated that they did not favor military intervention to prevent the Syrian government from killing more of its citizens; but, neither was prepared to say when they would be prepared to accept the responsibility to protect citizens who come under attack from their own government, or from forces that their government is unwilling or unable to restrain.
Both candidates said that they would support Israel and not allow Iran to develop nuclear weapons, but there was no discussion of solutions to the Israel-Palestine conflict, or of the grounds on which countries that possess nuclear weapons might be justified to use force to prevent others from developing them.
Indeed, what was not discussed in the candidates’ debate on foreign policy was more significant than what was.
All of the discussion focused on the region that stretches from Libya to Iran.
China was mentioned only in terms of its supposed “cheating” on trade and currency matters.
Issues like the eurozone’s troubles and relations with Russia received no attention at all.
Needless to say, neither candidate thought it worthwhile to put forward a proposal to assist the more than one billion people living in extreme poverty.
The gravest omission was climate change.
The closest Obama got to it during a debate was to talk about “energy independence,” which implies not being reliant on oil from the Middle East.
That, obviously, is something that every patriotic American wants.
In response, Obama acknowledged that climate change is “a threat to our children’s future, and we owe it to them to do something about it.”
Now that he has been re-elected, the question is whether he will pay that debt to our children and to the generations that follow them.
The Lessons of the World Cup
This year’s World Cup has proven once again that football is the world’s most popular sport; it has also proven that football is probably the world’s most globalized profession.
It is inconceivable that Brazilian, Cameroonian, or Japanese doctors, computer scientists, blue-collar workers, or bank tellers could move from one country to another as easily as Brazilian, Cameroonian, or Japanese football players do.
Indeed, London’s Arsenal football club is composed entirely of foreigners, including a French coach.
Even the captain roles are no longer reserved for domestic players: Thierry Henry, a Frenchman, is Arsenal’s captain, Andriy Shevchenko, a Ukrainian, was often the captain of AC Milan and will play next year for the English champions Chelsea.
Christiano Zanetti, an Argentine, is captain of Inter Milan.
Similarly, dozens of South Americans and Africans play in Russian, Turkish, Polish, and various Southeast European leagues.
Football thus provides a glimpse of how true globalization of labor would work.
In football, as in other occupations, restrictions on labor mobility came entirely from the demand side.
No limits were ever imposed on players’ movements, except by Communist countries.
But the demand side was heavily regulated, owing to a rule that clubs could field no more than two foreign players in any single game.
The Bosman ruling, named after a Belgian player who successfully challenged the rule’s application to players from other European Union countries, eroded the limit, which collapsed altogether under the onslaught of the richest European clubs’ demand for a free hand in hiring the best players, wherever they might be found.
So wherever globalization and full commercialization reign supreme, there is an unmistakable concentration of quality and success.
Consider the number of clubs that have qualified for the European Champions’ League top eight slots.
If we look at five-year periods between 1967 and 1986, the number of different teams that qualified for the quarterfinals varied between 28 and 30.
In the next two five-year periods, however, the number fell to 26, and in the most recent period (2000-2004), there were only 21.
The bottom line is simple: fewer and fewer clubs are making it into the European elite.
National leagues are similar.
Since the English Premier League was started in 1992, only one championship was not won by Manchester United, Arsenal, or Chelsea.
In Italy, all but two Serie A championships since 1991 have been won by either Juventus or AC Milan.
In Spain, all but three championships since 1985 have been won by either Real Madrid or Barcelona.
The reason for this concentration at the top is obvious: the richest clubs are now able to attract the best players in the world.
Yet this has arguably been accompanied by improved quality in the game itself, owing to what economists call “increasing returns to scale.”
When the best players play together, the quality of each, and of the team as a whole, increases exponentially.
When Ronaldinho and Messi, or Kaka and Shevchenko, play together, their combined “output” (number of goals) is greater than the sum of goals that each would score if he played in a different club with less talented co-players.
Free mobility of labor in other areas would probably produce the same effect.
If doctors, computer specialists, or engineers (let alone the proverbial Polish plumbers!) were allowed to move freely, the concentration of talent in the richest countries would most likely increase.
Inequality in the distribution of talent across countries would rise, even if total world output of goods and services, and their average quality, improved, as with football today.
Poorer or smaller countries can hardly dream of winning a European championship, as Steaua (Romania), Red Star (Serbia), or Nottingham Forest (now languishing in the English third division) once did.
Remarkably, they are not trounced by the traditional powerhouses.
On the contrary, the elite eight teams of the last four World Cups have included two “newcomers ” that had never been quarterfinalists, such as Turkey and South Korea in 2002.
There are again two reasons for this.
First, free movement has meant that good players from small leagues improve much more than they would had they stayed home.
A good Danish or Bulgarian player improves much faster if he joins Manchester United or Barcelona.
Second, that improvement in quality was “captured” by national teams playing in the World Cup thanks to FIFA’s rule requiring players to play only for their national team.
Eto’o can play for any Spanish, Italian, or English club, but in the national competitions, he can play only for Cameroon.
In other words, FIFA has introduced an institutional rule that allows small countries (in the football sense) to capture some of the benefits of today’s higher-quality game, thereby partly reversing the “leg drain.”
The same rule could be applied to other activities.
Free movement of skilled labor could be accompanied by binding international requirements that migrants from poor countries spend, say, one year in five working in their countries of origin.
They would bring home skills, technology, and connections that are as valuable as the skills that Eto’o, Essien, or Messi bring back to Cameroon, Ghana, or Argentina.
Job placement would remain a problem, but the principle is sound: the world should learn from the World Cup.
The Liars’ Last Reunion
Next week’s G-8 summit will probably be the last such meeting for Presidents George W. Bush and Vladimir Putin.
Seven years ago, at their first meeting in Ljubljana, Slovenia, Bush looked into Putin’s eyes and somehow spotted the soul of a Christian gentleman, not that of a secret policeman.
Next week, they shouldn’t be surprised if they see a mirror of each other, because both men have exemplified the arrogance of power.
Bush and Putin both came to power in 2000, a year when their countries were scrambling to regain international respect, Russia from the chaos of the Yeltsin years and the US from the failed impeachment of President Clinton.
Each country thought it was getting an unthreatening mediocrity.
But both men, on finding themselves in positions of authority, ruled from their default positions: Bush as an evangelical convinced that God was on America’s side, and Putin as a KGB graduate convinced that all power comes from intimidation and threats.
And what was the result?
Convinced that he is right, and incurious to hear contrary arguments, Bush felt free to undermine the rule of law in America with warrantless domestic surveillance, erosion of due process, and defense of torture, in addition to misleading the public and refusing to heed expert advice or recognize facts on the ground.
From the tax cuts in 2001 to the war in Iraq, Bush’s self-righteous certitude led him to believe that he could say and do anything to get his way.
The damage Bush’s self-confidence and self-delusion has inflicted was magnified by his gross overestimation of America’s power.
Quite simply, he thought that America could go it alone in pursuing his foreign policy because no one could stop him.
While his father lined up world support, and troops from over a dozen countries, for the first Gulf War, the son thought that allies were more hindrance than help; except for Tony Blair, he did not care to have them.
Four years later, Bush’s arrogance and mendacity have been exposed for the entire world, including the American public, to see.
Putin also succumbed to the same arrogance of power.
Buoyed by high oil prices, he now seeks to bestride the world as if the social calamities that bedevil Russia – a collapsing population, a spiraling AIDS and tuberculosis crisis, corruption mushrooming to levels unimagined by Yeltsin – do not matter.
At a high-level security meeting in Munich this past February, Putin, who usually draws on the secretive, manipulative, and confrontational Cold War paradigm of what constitutes Russian diplomatic behavior, lashed out at the United States with the sort of language unheard of since Khrushchev said “We will bury you.”
American actions were “unilateral,” “illegitimate,” and had forged a “hotbed of further conflicts.”
Putin’s assessment of US unilateralism (if stripped of its overheated rhetoric) may be correct; the trouble is that he lacks credibility to extol moderation in foreign policy.
High oil prices have helped him rebuild and centralize the “strong state” that was his goal from the outset of his presidency.
But his recent attempts to use Russia’s energy resources for political coercion in Georgia, Ukraine, Belarus and elsewhere have exposed Russia as an unreliable partner, unnerving even the Chinese, who do not wish to see a reconstituted Russian empire on their border.
The Russian public, habituated to authoritarianism, wants Russia’s rulers to be firm.
Yet the true test of a ruler is not to pander to his people’s expectations, but to peer into the future and match the country’s aspirations with its needs and capacities.