Akan tetapi, model yang banyak ditemukan saat ini terlalu fokus pada solusi cepat dan mudah.
Selain itu, model ini juga mempertegas pentingnya ekonomi dan melupakan tingkat transformasi yang diperlukan.
Bukannya menyesuaikan fungsi ekonomi yang ada dengan batasan dan kepentingan lingkungan, ekonomi hijau yang ada saat ini mencoba mendefinisikan ulang alam untuk menyesuaikannya dengan sistem ekonomi yang ada.
Kita lalu menetapkan nilai ekonomi atas alam dan menambahkannya ke dalam neraca kita, dengan mengukur perlindungan “modal alam,” seperti layanan ekosistem, penutupan penurunan lingkungan, dengan mata uang  carbon metrics.
Mekanisme berbasis pasar yang baru, seperti perdagangan kredit keragaman hayati, semakin mengembangkan pendekatan ini.
Semua pendekatan ini tidak menghentikan pengerusakan lingkungan; hanya mengatur ulang pengerusakan itu sesuai dengan garis pasar yang ada.
Karena pendekatan yang sempit ini, pengertian ekonomi hijau saat ini memiliki begitu banyak kekurangan sehingga upaya yang dilakukan sekarang hanya berdasarkan keyakinan semata.
Inovasi teknologi dianggap sebagai jawaban semua masalah, sehingga yang dilakukan hanyalah menunggu penemuan yang akan menyelesaikan semua masalah.
Kenyataannya, meskipun ide dan inovasi memainkan peran penting dalam menjawab tantangan-tantangan yang rumit, terkait lingkungan atau lainnya, hal ini tidak begitu saja tercipta dan belum pasti terjadi.
Inovasi, khususnya inovasi teknologi, selalu terbentuk dari kepentingan dan kegiatan para protagonis, sehingga harus dilihat dalam konteks sosial, budaya, dan lingkungan.
Jika para pemain terkait tidak bekerja keras mendorong teknologi transformatif, hasil inovasi hanya akan mempertegas situasi yang ada saat ini, seringkali dengan memperpanjang umur produk dan sistem yang tidak dapat menjawab kebutuhan masyarakat.
Coba lihat industri otomotif.
Meskipun mesin yang diproduksi semakin efisien dalam pemakaian bahan bakar, kendaraan yang dibuat semakin besar, bertenaga dan berat, sehingga efisiensi pun berkurang karena adanya “efek rebound”.
Belum lagi dengan adanya godaan untuk berusaha memanipulasi bacaan emisi, seperti yang dilakukan Volkswagen, daripada mengembangkan kendaraan-kendaraan yang benar-benar “hijau”.
Bahan bakar hayati/biofuel juga bukan jawaban.
Kenyataannya, penggunaan biomassa merusak ekologi dan kemasyarakatan di ekonomi-ekonomi berkembang, dan secara de facto memperpanjang umur teknologi pembakaran yang sudah usang.
Jelas bahwa industri otomotif tidak dapat begitu saja dipercaya untuk memimpin reorganisasi, untuk meninggalkan kendaraan pribadi, yang diperlukan dalam sektor transportasi.
Sebenarnya, itulah intinya.
Jika kita ingin memisahkan pertumbuhan ekonomi dari konsumsi energi dan mencapai efisiensi sumber daya yang nyata dengan sembilan miliar penduduk di dunia, apalagi untuk memastikan keadilan bagi semua orang, ekonomi tidak dapat dibiarkan memimpin. 
Kita harus memandang transformasi hijau sebagai tugas politis.
Hanya pendekatan politis yang dapat mengatur, melalui institusi yang benar-benar mewakili, perbedaan pendapat dan kepentingan, yang dipimpin oleh debat terbuka dan keterlibatan masyarakat sipil yang penting bagi demokrasi majemuk.
Tentunya tidak semua negara menganut demokrasi majemuk.
Di banyak negara yang bukan (bahkan di beberapa negara yang mengaku sebagai) demokrasi majemuk, mereka yang berupaya mewujudkan dunia yang lebih adil secara sosial, ekonomi, dan ekologi mengalami penolakan keras.
Untuk memastikan bahwa mereka dapat memenuhi peran mereka dalam mendorong transformasi yang diperlukan, negara-negara demokratis harus menghormati hak asasi manusia yang mendasar, seperti kebebasan berbicara dan perkumpulan yang damai, dalam agenda kebijakan luar negerinya.
Hak-hak mendasar ini adalah fondasi normatif bagi negosiasi strategi-strategi transformatif.
Pada dasarnya, tantangan terbesar transformasi sosial ekologis yang diperlukan dunia pada akhirnya bukanlah teknologi; banyak hal yang diperlukan, dari pertanian organik hingga sistem mobilitas jejaring yang tidak bergantung pada kendaraan pribadi, sudah tersedia.
Masalah yang sesungguhnya adalah kurangnya kemauan politis untuk menerapkan dan meningkatkan inovasi-inovasi yang bertentangan dengan kepentingan-kepentingan ekonomi yang ada.
Tantangannya adalah bagaimana mengatasi kepentingan minoritas ini dan memastikan perlindungan kepentingan umum yang lebih luas – sesuatu yang seringkali berada di tangan masyarakat sipil.
Banyak anggapan bahwa transformasi radikal, dibandingkan dengan perubahan bertahap, bukanlah pendekatan yang sesuai.
Ketika dunia menghadapi begitu banyak tantangan yang mendesak, dari kemacetan ekonomi hingga pergolakan politik dan arus pengungsi yang besar, perkembangan apa pun ke arah keberlanjutan merupakan suatu peningkatan.
Solusi pragmatis yang dapat dilakukan secara politis atas krisis lingkungan harus didukung dan bukannya dikritisi.
Namun pandangan ini secara jelas menyepelekan tingkat krisis lingkungan yang dihadapi dunia, dengan upaya perubahan linear pada saat yang dibutuhkan adalah transformasi yang tidak linear.
Meskipun beberapa fitur dari ekonomi hijau – konservasi sumber daya, transisi ke arah energi terbarukan, inovasi teknologi spesifik, dan insentif ekonomi yang efektif, seperti perpajakan – sangatlah penting, mereka tidak akan menghasilkan perubahan besar-besaran yang diperlukan untuk melindungi kepentingan generasi sekarang dan masa depan.
Tugas negara-negara demokrasi dunia saat ini adalah untuk melanjutkan proyek modernitas, menerima pengetahuan terkini mengenai batasan planet, sambil memajukan partisipasi demokratis secara luas dan mengurangi kemiskinan dan ketidakadilan sosial.
Tugas ini memang berat dan membutuhkan kesabaran dan kegigihan, namun bukannya tidak mungkin.
Langkah pertama yang perlu diambil adalah mengakui batasan-batasan pemikiran dan tindakan yang akan diakibatkan oleh “ekonomi hijau”.
Lincoln, Roosevelt, Churchill...Obama?
PARIS – Exceptional circumstances – namely, the depth and urgency of the financial and economic crisis – have contributed to bringing an exceptional man, Barack Obama, to the American presidency.
But will they also prevent him from succeeding?
Will the spirit of hope that brought Obama to power triumph over the winds of economic and social despair, or will fear in the West of the looming global recession spread to Asia and destabilize its giants, China and India?
These are the major questions looming before us as the president-elect prepares the American people for what can only be a rough ride ahead.
The same Americans who cried with joy on the night of November 4 are now seized with apprehension as economic hardship becomes more real by the day, as they witness the consequences of the crisis for their neighbors, if not themselves.
Faced with the urgent necessity of alleviating so many Americans’ suffering, Obama knows only too well that the “audacity of hope” will not be sufficient to the immensity of the challenges confronting him.
As the world slowly moves from elation to sober realism, it is important to maintain a balanced view of what’s happening and avoid the dual risks of underestimating the truly revolutionary nature of what took place and overestimating the ability of Obama’s team to find miracle solutions.
On the positive side, a tragic legacy of American history has been transcended.
The “color wall” has fallen nearly 20 years after the collapse of the Wall that divided Germany and Europe.
The pride that Americans – and Africans – have felt since Obama’s election is important and, one hopes, will bring long-term benefits.
America has not only re-consolidated at least part of its “soft power” abroad; it has done so at home as well.
Unemployment and the housing crisis are affecting Americans without regard to their color or origins.
Dignity may not provide you with a roof or a job, but it helps in maintaining hope in hard times.
You can ask for greater sacrifices and require greater patience from people whose trust and full support you have managed to gain.
We are also witnessing the establishment of a new balance between state and market.
But this should not go too far, for there are limits to what the state can do, and the strength of private initiative constitutes one key aspect of America, which became the world’s leading nation thanks to its dynamism, flexibility, and individual inventiveness.
More importantly, beyond the decline of the market and the re-legitimization of the state, we may be witnessing a rehabilitation of politics and politicians, if not of idealism.
For the first time in America since John F. Kennedy’s presidency, politics is seen as a potentially noble venture.
The idea that you can make a difference not only for yourself but for your country and the world, that self-interest and personal enrichment are not the only possible goals in life for the “best and the brightest,” has slowly and irresistibly been gaining ground in the Obama generation.
On the night of November 4, countless Americans and non-Americans felt that ideals could indeed become facts.
But this renewal of idealism is as much a product of hope as of fear.
The moment young people became tempted to join Obama’s quiet revolution was also the moment the doors of Wall Street began closing on them.
There are no new openings in a world of banking and finance brought low by the greed and hubris of some of its key members.
Wall Street is now facing one of the worst contractions in history.
Obama has a unique combination of intellect, character, and – so far – luck, but can he prove able to channel Abraham Lincoln, Franklin Roosevelt, and Winston Churchill at the same time?
It may be too much to ask from one man.
Yet the cards Obama is holding should not be underrated.
Unlike Roosevelt, he has a perfect understanding of the nature of the economic challenges facing him, and, like Churchill, he benefits from the support of a population ready to follow him in a climate of national unity, at least in the short run.  
The Two Rabbits of International Trade
SEOUL – If you chase two rabbits at once, the old saying goes, both will escape.
And yet this is precisely what many governments are required to do: pursue both growth and distributional fairness.
The two objectives, though not incompatible, are entirely different from one another, and few policy tools can simultaneously help to achieve both.
This idea matters a lot in trade policy.
Much theoretical and empirical research demonstrates that opening trade can spur a country’s GDP growth.
But increasing a pie’s size does not guarantee that it will be shared fairly.
Often, the incremental growth that comes with a trade opening is unevenly shared; moreover, in many cases, some receive a smaller share than they did before.
Here is where government must intervene using its traditional tools, taxation and redistribution, as well as complementary policies such as social safety nets and adjustment assistance.
Similarly, from a global perspective, opening trade can contribute to the world’s overall economic growth, but does not guarantee that the benefits will be fairly distributed among countries.
Some say that no country loses, in absolute terms, from opening trade; otherwise, they would not participate in free-trade deals.
Still, the uneven distribution of the benefits created by a global trade opening means that some countries, especially the least developed, gain little in comparative terms, and are possibly even hurt.
This explains growing concern about the role of trade in development, despite the obvious fact that increased global trade has lifted hundreds of millions of people out of poverty in recent decades.
Unlike individual countries, there is no central authority that can enforce redistribution of wealth around the globe, so the problem of fairness must be addressed through the development mandates embedded in trade negotiations.
A key aspect of these development concerns is identifying the appropriate balance in any trade agreement.
“Special and differential treatment” is the technical term used in trade negotiations to indicate that the balance must be tilted toward developing countries, with the extent of this treatment to be decided by the parties to the talks.
But, while the tendency in current trade negotiations to allow developing countries to open their markets less than others helps to achieve more balance, it may undermine the original goals of enhancing efficiency and boosting growth.
Furthermore, it fails to encourage more South-South trade.
And, in the end, this focus on the defensive side of trade liberalization makes negotiations more difficult.
For example, one of the critical issues blocking progress on the World Trade Organization’s Doha Development Agenda of global free-trade talks centers on the extent to which major developing countries should open their markets.
A better method of seeking balance is to give developing countries greater access to global markets, including those of other developing countries.
Yet, as of now, there is neither the will nor the energy to adopt this approach.
And, for developing countries that lack supply-side capacity, greater access to the global market is a moot point, as they remain far from even considering what size their share of it should be.
This raises another concern.
Because “aid for trade” – assistance for developing countries that aims to ease their trade-related constraints – takes the form of financial support, a practical issue is whether donors can maintain their level of funding, given today’s economic difficulties.
Moreover, an intrinsic and often neglected problem is how to divide management of aid-and-trade schemes among international and domestic institutions.
Among the major multilateral institutions, the WTO maintains jurisdiction over trade.
It is the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund that are better equipped to deal with aid issues.
Within member governments, relations with the WTO are usually the responsibility of the trade or foreign ministry, while multilateral financial institutions, including the regional development banks, are generally the responsibility of the finance ministry.
Thus, aid for trade, one of the key tasks on the WTO agenda, has weak institutional links to trade negotiations.
In fact, it might be more accurate to say that it is wholly separate.
The practicable solution is more effective coordination among the relevant institutions.
The Marrakesh Agreement, which established the WTO as the successor to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade in 1994, sets out the purpose of achieving greater coherence between the WTO and other international agencies.
One particularly noteworthy initiative is the Enhanced Integrated Framework for least-developed countries, which encompasses extensive engagement and coordination among partner agencies, including the IMF, the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, the World Bank, and the WTO.
A more ambitious approach would be to link aid and trade explicitly.
A concrete funding mechanism in trade agreements warrants serious consideration, particularly in areas such as the WTO’s trade-facilitation negotiations, where capacity-building in developing countries is a key issue.
Nonetheless, requiring donations from member countries would be a step in the wrong direction; the WTO is not an aid agency.
Rather, WTO trade agreements could establish effective links with multilateral and regional development banks, thereby helping to realize the principle of closer international coordination set out in the Marrakesh Agreement.
The two rabbits of international trade can be caught.
But doing so requires innovative approaches that help to ensure that trade serves developing countries, rather than vice versa.
The Liquidity Time Bomb
NEW YORK – A paradox has emerged in the financial markets of the advanced economies since the 2008 global financial crisis.
Unconventional monetary policies have created a massive overhang of liquidity.
But a series of recent shocks suggests that macro liquidity has become linked with severe market illiquidity.
Policy interest rates are near zero (and sometimes below it) in most advanced economies, and the monetary base (money created by central banks in the form of cash and liquid commercial-bank reserves) has soared – doubling, tripling, and, in the United States, quadrupling relative to the pre-crisis period.
This has kept short- and long-term interest rates low (and even negative in some cases, such as Europe and Japan), reduced the volatility of bond markets, and lifted many asset prices (including equities, real estate, and fixed-income private- and public-sector bonds).
And yet investors have reason to be concerned.
Their fears started with the “flash crash” of May 2010, when, in a matter of 30 minutes, major US stock indices fell by almost 10%, before recovering rapidly.
Then came the “taper tantrum” in the spring of 2013, when US long-term interest rates shot up by 100 basis points after then-Fed Chairman Ben Bernanke hinted at an end to the Fed’s monthly purchases of long-term securities.
Likewise, in October 2014, US Treasury yields plummeted by almost 40 basis points in minutes, which statisticians argue should occur only once in three billion years.
The latest episode came just last month, when, in the space of a few days, ten-year German bond yields went from five basis points to almost 80.
These events have fueled fears that, even very deep and liquid markets – such as US stocks and government bonds in the US and Germany – may not be liquid enough.
So what accounts for the combination of macro liquidity and market illiquidity?
For starters, in equity markets, high-frequency traders (HFTs), who use algorithmic computer programs to follow market trends, account for a larger share of transactions.
This creates, no surprise, herding behavior.
Indeed, trading in the US nowadays is concentrated at the beginning and the last hour of the trading day, when HFTs are most active; for the rest of the day, markets are illiquid, with few transactions.
A second cause lies in the fact that fixed-income assets – such as government, corporate, and emerging-market bonds – are not traded in more liquid exchanges, as stocks are.
Instead, they are traded mostly over the counter in illiquid markets.
Third, not only is fixed income more illiquid, but now most of these instruments – which have grown enormously in number, owing to the mushrooming issuance of private and public debts before and after the financial crisis – are held in open-ended funds that allow investors to exit overnight.
Imagine a bank that invests in illiquid assets but allows depositors to redeem their cash overnight: if a run on these funds occurs, the need to sell the illiquid assets can push their price very low very fast, in what is effectively a fire sale.
Fourth, before the 2008 crisis, banks were market makers in fixed-income instruments.
They held large inventories of these assets, thus providing liquidity and smoothing excess price volatility.
But, with new regulations punishing such trading (via higher capital charges), banks and other financial institutions have reduced their market-making activity.
So, in times of surprise that move bond prices and yields, the banks are not present to act as stabilizers.
In short, though central banks’ creation of macro liquidity may keep bond yields low and reduce volatility, it has also led to crowded trades (herding on market trends, exacerbated by HFTs) and more investment in illiquid bond funds, while tighter regulation means that market makers are missing in action.
As a result, when surprises occur – for example, the Fed signals an earlier-than-expected exit from zero interest rates, oil prices spike, or eurozone growth starts to pick up – the re-rating of stocks and especially bonds can be abrupt and dramatic: everyone caught in the same crowded trades needs to get out fast.
Herding in the opposite direction occurs, but, because many investments are in illiquid funds and the traditional market makers who smoothed volatility are nowhere to be found, the sellers are forced into fire sales.
This combination of macro liquidity and market illiquidity is a time bomb.
So far, it has led only to volatile flash crashes and sudden changes in bond yields and stock prices.
But, over time, the longer central banks create liquidity to suppress short-run volatility, the more they will feed price bubbles in equity, bond, and other asset markets.
As more investors pile into overvalued, increasingly illiquid assets – such as bonds – the risk of a long-term crash increases.
This is the paradoxical result of the policy response to the financial crisis.
Macro liquidity is feeding booms and bubbles; but market illiquidity will eventually trigger a bust and collapse.
What is Italy Saying?
NEW YORK – The outcome of the Italian elections should send a clear message to Europe’s leaders: the austerity policies that they have pursued are being rejected by voters.
The European project, as idealistic as it was, was always a top-down endeavor.
But it is another matter altogether to encourage technocrats to run countries, seemingly circumventing democratic processes, and foist upon them policies that lead to widespread public misery.
While Europe’s leaders shy away from the word, the reality is that much of the European Union is in depression.
The loss of output in Italy since the beginning of the crisis is as great as it was in the 1930’s.
Greece’s youth unemployment rate now exceeds 60%, and Spain’s is above 50%.
With the destruction of human capital, Europe’s social fabric is tearing, and its future is being thrown into jeopardy.
The economy’s doctors say that the patient must stay the course. Political leaders who suggest otherwise are labeled as populists.
The reality, though, is that the cure is not working, and there is no hope that it will – that is, without being worse than the disease.
Indeed, it will take a decade or more to recover the losses incurred in this austerity process.
In short, it is neither populism nor shortsightedness that has led citizens to reject the policies that have been imposed on them.
It is an understanding that these policies are deeply misguided.
Europe’s talents and resources – its physical, human, and natural capital – are the same today as they were before the crisis began.
The problem is that the prescriptions being imposed are leading to massive underutilization of these resources.
Whatever Europe’s problem, a response that entails waste on this scale cannot be the solution.
The simplistic diagnosis of Europe’s woes – that the crisis countries were living beyond their means – is clearly at least partly wrong.
Spain and Ireland had fiscal surpluses and low debt/GDP ratios before the crisis.
If Greece were the only problem, Europe could have handled it easily.
An alternative set of well-discussed policies could work.
Europe needs greater fiscal federalism, not just centralized oversight of national budgets.
To be sure, Europe may not need the two-to-one ratio of federal to state spending found in the United States; but it clearly needs far more European-level expenditure, unlike the current miniscule EU budget (whittled down further by austerity advocates).
A banking union, too, is needed.
But it needs to be a real union, with common deposit insurance and common resolution procedures, as well as common supervision.
There will also have to be Eurobonds, or an equivalent instrument.
European leaders recognize that, without growth, debt burdens will continue to grow, and that austerity by itself is an anti-growth strategy.
Yet years have gone by, and no growth strategy is on the table, though its components are well known: policies that address Europe’s internal imbalances and Germany’s huge external surplus, which now is on par with China’s (and more than twice as high relative to GDP).
Concretely, that means wage increases in Germany and industrial policies that promote exports and productivity in Europe’s peripheral economies.
What will not work, at least for most eurozone countries, is internal devaluation – that is, forcing down wages and prices – as this would increase the debt burden for households, firms, and governments (which overwhelmingly hold euro-denominated debts).
And, with adjustments in different sectors occurring at different speeds, deflation would fuel massive distortions in the economy.
If internal devaluation were the solution, the gold standard would not have been a problem in the Great Depression.
Internal devaluation, combined with austerity and the single-market principle (which facilitates capital flight and the hemorrhaging of banking systems) is a toxic combination.
The European project was, and is, a great political idea.
It has the potential to promote both prosperity and peace.
But, rather than enhancing solidarity within Europe, it is sowing seeds of discord within and between countries.
Europe’s leaders repeatedly vow to do everything necessary to save the euro.
European Central Bank President Mario Draghi’s promise to do “whatever it takes” has succeeded in providing a temporary calm.
But Germany has consistently rejected every policy that would provide a long-term solution.
The Germans, it seems, will do everything except what is needed.
Of course, the Germans have reluctantly come to accept the necessity of a banking union that includes common deposit insurance.
But the pace with which they accede to such reforms is out of kilter with the markets.
Banking systems in several countries are already on life support.
How many more will be in intensive care before a banking union becomes a reality?
Yes, Europe needs structural reform, as austerity advocates insist.
But it is structural reform of the eurozone’s institutional arrangements, not reforms within individual countries, that will have the greatest impact.
Unless Europe is willing to make those reforms, it may have to let the euro die to save itself.
The EU’s Economic and Monetary Union was a means to an end, not an end in itself.
The European electorate seems to have recognized that, under current arrangements, the euro is undermining the very purposes for which it was supposedly created.
That is the simple truth that Europe’s leaders have yet to grasp.
Listen to Me!
SAN FRANCISCO – Last week, I wrote a 140-character hotel review on Twitter: “Galleria Park Hotel SF rejects noise complaint from ill-trained guest: ‘Next time, ask for an interior room, not just a quiet room.’”
I was frustrated because the hotel management was not listening to me when I asked for a quiet room – or later, when I complained.
Instead of training their employees to listen, they were telling me that I hadn’t made the right request.
And the hotel managers probably were not listening to me later via Twitter, either.
Of course, it used to be difficult to listen to customers; as a company, you could not station people everywhere to pick up random comments, and few customers cared enough to write actual letters – positive or negative.
Service companies such as airlines could ask employees to collect feedback, but it was overly complicated.   
Nowadays, however, customers are commenting everywhere, and all a company has to do is listen – electronically and humanly.
Nonetheless, most companies still think of all the new technologies that I write about primarily as message-sending devices – ways to promote their brand, create an image, and sell their product.
Companies spend a lot of time watching customers, trying to figure them out, but so little time listening to them.
Indeed, there are lots of depressing statistics about how poorly companies listen.
They don’t respond effectively to feedback or to questions submitted through their Web sites.
Many simply don’t reply at all. Others send bland emails – “Thank you for writing to us” – without responding to the particular question or comment.  
And then they spend thousands or even millions of dollars trying to figure out what these same customers really want.  
What all companies really need to do to improve their performance is to get better at listening to the conversations that are already out there on the Internet.
They can listen for many purposes – from figuring out what products or services to offer and understanding which customer wants what, to repairing the damage done when something goes wrong.
There are two modes of listening.
There’s the listening you do to learn, which ideally can be somewhat automated.
You can use sentiment-sensing tools – everything from tools that measure the prevalence of negative or positive words about your offering on Twitter and Facebook, to customer surveys that produce precise, structured data.
You can find out, for example, that last month 56% of your users would recommend your product to a friend, versus 79% the same time last year.
Oops!
Better do some more listening!
Then there are the more subtle signals to listen to statistically – whether they are feedback direct to your Web site, emails, press mentions, or Twitter and Facebook feeds.
What features – positive or negative – are mentioned most often?
Which competitors are highlighted?
What other companies or products are most often discussed along with yours?
Could they be possible marketing partners?
All of that is important, but then there’s the listening you do so that your customers can feel listened to.
That’s something a computer cannot do. It requires a person.  
You can reduce the burden to some extent by creating a community of your customers (and prospects) so that they can listen to one another.
Take a site I just visited this morning, for Fitbit, a self-monitoring tool that lets you measure your physical motion, and by implication your exercise, calorie consumption, sleep time, and other factors.  
If that’s unclear to you, just visit the site and ask questions; other users will answer most of them, and sometimes the staff (identified with a red badge under their names; occasionally it’s the CEO) will chime in with “official” information.
Fitbit is not unique; it’s one of many start-ups that are using their own customers to help them achieve greater scale in listening.
(Yes, the chatter was encouraging enough that I just ordered one!)
But most important is listening well enough to say, “We’re sorry” in a convincing way.   Not, “We’re sorry you didn’t appreciate our wonderful service,” but, “We’re sorry we screwed up and gave you a noisy room.”
In other words, you need to reply with enough detail to show that you listened.
Refunding a customer’s money – or giving them a free complementary breakfast – is easy.
But how can you make up for the headache they had all day from lack of sleep?
You can’t – but showing that you noticed their unhappiness with you counts for a lot.
That’s the thinking behind one of my favorite customer-care proposals: that lost luggage should get its own air miles – thus making the customer feel that the airline acknowledges the error and is suffering along with the customer.
In the end, listening carefully is the best way to show respect for anyone, customer or partner, friend or boss.
Even though companies do it for business purposes, they have to do it with human sincerity.
One of my favorite cartoons – from The New Yorker – shows a retail salesman standing next to a display case labeled “Communication technology.”   Inside the case?
Human ears.
Little Big Men
CAMBRIDGE – History is often written in terms of military heroes, but the enormous potential of human leadership ranges from Attila the Hun to Mother Teresa.
Most everyday leaders remain unheralded.
The role of heroic leadership in war leads to overemphasis of command and control and hard military power.
In America today, the presidential debate is between Senator John McCain, a war hero, and Senator Barack Obama, a former community organizer.
The image of the warrior leader lingers in modern times.
The writer Robert Kaplan points to the birth of a new “warrior class as cruel as ever and better armed” ranging from Russian Mafiosi and Latin American drug kingpins to terrorists who glorify violence just as ancient Greeks did in the sacking of Troy.
Kaplan argues that modern leaders must respond in kind, and that modern leadership will demand a pagan ethos rooted in the past.
Smart warriors, however, know how to lead with more than just the use of force.
Soldiers sometimes joke that their job description is simple: “kill people and break things.”
But, as the United States discovered in Iraq, hearts and minds also matter, and smart warriors need the soft power of attraction as well as the hard power of coercion.
Indeed, an oversimplified image of warrior-style leadership in President George W. Bush’s first term caused costly setbacks for America’s role in the world.
It is not a manly modern Achilles who makes the best warrior leader in today’s communication age. Military leadership today requires political and managerial skills.
Many autocratic rulers – in Zimbabwe, Myanmar, Belarus, and elsewhere – still lead the old-fashioned way.
They combine fear with corruption to maintain kleptocracies dominated by “the big man” and his coterie.
A good portion of the world is ruled this way.
Some theorists try to explain this with an “alpha male theory of leadership.”
The psychiatrist Arnold M. Ludwig, for example, argues that just as male monkeys, chimps, or apes automatically begin to assume more responsibility for their particular community once they attain the dominant status of alpha male, human rulers do so as well.         
But such socio-biological explanations of leadership are of only limited value.
Thus far, no leadership gene has been identified, and studies of identical and fraternal male twins find that only a third of their difference in occupying formal leadership roles can be explained by genetic factors.
While this suggests that inbred characteristics influence the extent to which people play particular roles, it leaves a lot of room for learned behavior to influence outcomes.
Even so, one effect of the traditional heroic warrior approach to leadership has been to support the belief that leaders are born rather than made, and that nature is more important than nurture.
The search for the essential traits of a leader dominated the field of leadership studies until the late 1940’s, and remains common in popular discourse today.
A tall handsome person enters a room, draws attention, and “looks like a leader.”
Various studies show that tall men are often favored, and that corporate CEOs are taller than average.
But some of the most powerful leaders in history, such as Napoleon, Stalin, and Deng Xiaoping were little over five feet tall.
The traits-centered approach has not vanished from studies of leadership, but it has been broadened and made more flexible.
Traits have come to be seen as consistent patterns of personality rather than inherited characteristics.
This definition mixes nature and nurture, and means that “traits” can to some extent be learned rather than merely inherited.
We talk about leaders being more energetic, more risk-taking, more optimistic, more persuasive, and more empathetic than other people.
These traits, however, are affected partly by a leader’s genetic makeup and partly by the environments in which the traits were learned and developed.
A persuasive experiment recently demonstrated the interaction between nature and nurture.
A group of employers was asked to hire workers who had been ranked by their looks.
If the employers saw only the resumés, beauty had no impact on hiring.
Surprisingly, however, when telephone interviews were included in the process, beautiful people did better, even though they were unseen by the employers.
A lifetime of social reinforcement based on their genetically given looks may have encoded into their voice patterns a tone of confidence that could be projected over the phone.
Nature and nurture became thoroughly intertwined.
Genetics and biology matter in human leadership, but they do not determine it in the way that the traditional heroic warrior approach to leadership suggests.
The “big man” type of leader works in societies based on networks of tribal cultures that rely on personal and family honor and loyalty.
But such social structures are not well adapted for coping with today’s complex information-based world.
In modern societies, institutional constraints such as constitutions and impersonal legal systems circumscribe such heroic figures.
Societies that rely on heroic leaders are slow to develop the civil society and broad social capital that are necessary for leading in a modern networked world.
Modern leadership turns out to be less about who you are or how you were born than about what you have learned and what you do as part of a group.
Nature and nurture intertwine, but nurture is much more important in the modern world than the heroic paradigm acknowledges.
Modern information societies require us to go beyond the “big man” approach to leadership.
It will be interesting to see how these classical stereotypes play out in the American presidential competition this year.
Little England and Not-so-Great Britain
AMSTERDAM – As an Anglo-Dutchman – British mother, Dutch father – I cannot help but take Brexit rather personally.
I’m not a wholehearted Euro-enthusiast, but a European Union without Britain feels like losing a limb in a terrible accident.
Not all my fellow citizens are unhappy.
The Dutch anti-EU, anti-Muslim demagogue Geert Wilders tweeted: “Hurrah for the British!
Now it is our turn.”
This kind of sentiment is more alarming, and more ominous, than Brexit’s implications for the future of the British economy.
The urge to destroy can be contagious.
The United Kingdom’s image has changed literally overnight.
For more than 200 years, Britain represented a certain ideal of liberty and tolerance (at least for many Europeans; Indians might have taken a somewhat different view).
Anglophiles admired Britain for many reasons, including its relative openness to refugees from illiberal continental regimes.
It was a place where a man of Sephardic Jewish origin, Benjamin Disraeli, could become Prime Minister.
And it stood up to Hitler virtually alone in 1940.
The Hungarian-born writer Arthur Koestler, a former Communist who knew all about European political catastrophes, and was almost executed by Spanish fascists, escaped to Britain in 1940.
Having a British mother filled me with a naive and undeserved sense of pride.
For me, despite its industrial decline, shrinking global influence, and increasingly inept football, something about Britain always remained best.
There were, of course, many reasons why 52% of those who voted backed the “Leave” campaign.
There are reasonable grounds for victims of industrial decline to feel aggrieved.
Neither the left nor the right looked after the interests of the old working class in busted mining towns, rusting ports, and decaying smokestack cities.
When those left behind by globalization and London’s Big Bang complained that immigrants were making it even harder to find jobs, they were too easily dismissed as racists.
But this cannot excuse an ugly strain of English nationalism, whipped up by Nigel Farage’s UK Independence Party and cynically exploited by the Conservative Party’s Brexiteers, led by former London Mayor Boris Johnson and Michael Gove, the justice secretary in Prime Minister David Cameron’s cabinet.
English xenophobia has thrived especially in areas where foreigners are rarely seen.
London, where most foreigners live, voted to remain in the EU by a wide margin.
Rural Cornwall, which benefits hugely from EU subsidies, voted to leave.
The most sickening irony for a European of my age and disposition lies in the way narrow-minded and dispiriting nationalism is so often expressed.
Bigotry against immigrants is cloaked in the very symbols of freedom that we grew up admiring, including film clips of Spitfires and references to Churchill’s finest hour.
The wilder Brexiteers – shaven heads, national flag tattoos – resemble the English football hooligans infesting European stadiums with their particular brand of violence.
But the genteel ladies and gentlemen in the shires of Little England, cheering the lies of Farage and Johnson with the kind of ecstasy once reserved for British rock stars abroad, are no less disquieting.
Many Brexiteers will say that there is no contradiction.
The wartime symbols were not misplaced at all.
To them, the argument for leaving the EU is no less about freedom than World War II was.
“Brussels,” after all, is a dictatorship, they say, and the British – or, rather, the English – are standing up for democracy.
Millions of Europeans, we are told, agree with them.
It is indeed true that many Europeans take this view.
But most are followers of Marine Le Pen, Geert Wilders, and other populist rabble-rousers, who promote plebiscites to undermine elected governments and abuse popular fears and resentments to clear their own paths to power.
The EU is not a democracy; nor does it pretend to be one.
But European decisions are still made by sovereign – and, more important, elected – national governments after endless deliberation.
This process is often opaque and leaves much to be desired.
But the liberties of Europeans will not be better served by blowing up the institutions that were carefully constructed in the ruins of the last calamitous European war.
If Brexit triggers a Europe-wide revolt against liberal elites, it would be the first time in history that Britain leads a wave of illiberalism in Europe.
This would be a great tragedy – for Britain, for Europe, and for a world in which most of the major powers already are turning toward increasingly illiberal politics.
The final irony is that the last hope for turning this tide and preserving the freedoms for which so much blood was shed probably now lies with Germany, the country that my generation grew up hating as the symbol of bloody tyranny.
But, so far at least, the Germans appear to have learned the lessons of history better than a disturbing number of Brits.
Live Long and Prosper
Living a long time is one of our deepest wishes, and medical and economic progress offers the hope that it will be fulfilled.
Some scientists say that the average human lifespan could reach 90 years or more by mid-century.
But what if our wish is granted?
What good is a longer life if we cannot maintain our standard of living?
The fundamental difficulty in planning for enhanced longevity is that we do not know whether it will really happen.
Life expectancy might well be only 80 years by mid-century – about where it is now in advanced countries – if medical progress is disappointing or is offset by new threats or hazards.
If we make provisions for long lives that are cut short, we will have wasted huge amounts of precious economic resources.
But if we fail to make provisions for lives that are longer, many elderly people will be condemned to poverty.
The whole direction of any country’s economy depends on longevity.
A huge number of elderly people would mean a lot of people wanting to live in certain locations, seeking certain kinds of living quarters, and consuming certain kinds of services.
The types of corporations that will succeed, the buildings that are constructed, and the research and development that will be needed all depend on the demographics of demand.
This is true of the global economy as well.
In his 2005 book The Future for Investors , Jeremy Siegel argues that differences across countries in longevity will interact with differences in wealth levels to form a fundamental determinant of economic relations among countries.
Trade flows may be driven substantially by longevity: countries expecting a relatively large number of elderly in the future should be running trade surpluses now and deficits later.
Retired people need life annuities – contracts that offer a stable income stream for as long as they live – to insure against the risk of outliving their wealth.
If there were no longevity risk – that is, if the probability of dying at each age in the future were reliably known – then pension funds could easily offer life annuities to large numbers of people by investing their assets in bonds of various maturities in order to pay out just the right amount each year.
But pension funds cannot do this, because they risk running out of money if, on average, people turn out to live longer than expected.
For people retiring at age 60, the difference between living to 80 and living to 90 is enormous: in the latter case, their pensions would have to pay benefits for 50% longer.
As a result, private companies do not offer life annuities at attractive rates, because they cannot be reasonably sure that they can fulfill their promises unless they are significantly overcapitalized.
Fortunately, financial markets are beginning to address longevity risk.
In November 2004, the European Investment Bank (EIB), working with the private bank BNP Paribas, announced that it would issue the world’s first long-term longevity bond.
The bonds, with a maturity of 25 years, pay out an annual sum of £50 million multiplied by the percentage of the English and Welsh male population aged 65 in 2003 that is still alive in a given year (subject to a slight data lag).
For example, if 80% of the men are still alive ten years after issuance, the bonds will pay out £40 million.
If only 40% of the men are still alive after twenty years, the bonds will pay out £20 million.
BNP Paribas hoped to place the bonds with UK pension funds, but so far the issue has not been fully subscribed.
Most of the likely buyers are slow to make up their minds, since trustees, fund managers, consultants, and employer sponsors must all become comfortable that the new concept is consistent with their fiduciary obligations.
Moreover, it is not clear that the EIB can get further help from reinsurers in managing the risks it assumes by issuing such bonds because reinsurers do not yet see how they can fully hedge the risks involved.
The slow launch of longevity bonds ultimately reflects a fundamental question: can we genuinely reduce the impact of longevity risk?
If everyone is affected by longevity risk in the same way, then no matter what the price of a longevity bond, everyone should logically want to be on the same side of the contracts – all buyers at one price, all issuers at another.
No difference means no market.
But, in fact, we are not all affected by longevity risk in the same way.
Life insurance companies, drug firms, businesses providing services for the elderly, and investors in retirement real estate would all benefit from increased longevity, while defined-benefit pension plans and annuity providers would lose.
Less affluent individuals are also more threatened by longevity than those for whom living longer mainly means leaving a smaller inheritance to their children.
Indeed, countries with higher birth rates are less exposed to longevity risk in the next half-century or so than countries with low birth rates.
We thus need a large and liquid market for longevity risk so that these different groups can creatively share their risks with each other.
In fact, creating such a market is the most important step we can take to address longevity risk, for we could then discover its true price, allowing myriad business decisions involving longevity to be made more efficiently.
There is virtually no history of the price behavior of longevity bonds, so discovering their buyers and sellers, and the prices that clear the market, will take some time.
But longevity bonds, while only experimental today, will eventually become vitally important to the world economy.
Living in History
LONDON – I recently took part in a public debate with Paul Keating, Australia’s former prime minister.
He is an interesting man, a genuine intellectual driven by his inner demons both to flay those who pay insufficient credit to his transformational role in Australian politics and to expose what he regards as waffle and myths.
This regularly engulfs him in controversy, but it can serve an educational purpose.
Recently, for example, he denounced the idea that Australian sacrifices in the Gallipoli campaign of 1916 during World War I had somehow made and redeemed his nation.
For him, Australian came of age later, at Kokoda, often called Australia’s Thermopylae, when a small group of young soldiers resisted the advance of Japanese army divisions that seemed set to take Port Moresby in Papua New Guinea and threaten the Australian continent.
Keating believed that the fighting at Kokoda represented the real birth pains of an independent Australia, not some colonial appendage of Britain created to serve imperial purposes in the Far East.
I would not dare to challenge the sensitivities of Australians about their own history.
I like their country too much for that.
But Keating’s remarks raise a general question about history that goes to the heart of the sense of identity that binds every community.
Most countries fabricate at least some of their history; or they simply whitewash the bits that do not match their heroic idea of themselves.
My own country, for example, invented much of what it means to be British in order to accommodate Scotland in the eighteenth century to the idea of rule from England, and to persuade the whole of the United Kingdom that it should not object to being ruled by German kings.
For my entire adult life, Britain’s sense of its place in the world has been largely defined by Winston Churchill’s leadership during World War II and his views of our role in the world when that war was over.
He and other political leaders were keen on a united Europe.
But it was meant for others.
Britain was not to be part of it.
History had written a different role for us – sovereign, independent, detached from continental entanglements, and, if not an equal of America, then at least a senior, faithful adjutant.
A little more sharp-eyed honesty about Britain’s real weight in the post-war world might have enabled us British to play a more central role in Europe’s affairs, molding the emerging European Union more closely to our own national interests.
So, when you get history wrong, it can skew your own strategic choices.
But, worse than that, blindness to what really happened in the past can distort the development of your society.
Sooner or later, the healthiest societies face up to what they have been – good and bad – and grow in decency and self-confidence as a result.
Germany has done that admirably.
In the last couple of years, I have seen two painfully honest German films – “Downfall,” about the last days of Hitler, and “The Lives of Others,” about the operations of the former East Germany’s secret police (the Stasi).
Since those dark days, Germany has developed as a healthy vibrant democracy.
Others still have trouble confronting their own history.
Russia stumbles over Stalin and his legacy of evil.
China turns away from a reappraisal of Mao or an honest account of what happened at Tiananmen in 1989.
Some Japanese still want to write or believe fairy tales about their pre-war and wartime history, which has hugely complicated Japan’s efforts to find a confident and lasting reconciliation with China.
By contrast, consider the way France and Germany have buried the hatchet and learned to live in peace and trust.
It is this extraordinary, historic act that made possible the reconstruction and successful development of Europe over the last half-century.
There are at least three lessons to draw from these musings of a one-time university history student.
First, history teaches you about today as well as yesterday.
The English writer G.K. Chesterton once wrote, “The disadvantage of men not knowing the past is that they do not know the present.”
Second, in order to understand how to cope with the problems that plague us – from terrorism to nuclear proliferation – it is sensible to know how and whence they emerged.
Why are we faced today with worldwide economic blizzards?
How do today’s problems compare with the 1929 financial crash and the depression that followed it?
What does history tell us about the consequences of the protectionist response to those events?
Finally, while nation states remain the basic building blocs in international affairs, and loyalty to your nation – patriotism – is a fine thing, crude nationalism can be deeply destructive.
“My country right or wrong” is the parent of much misery.
Rigorous historical enquiry can save us from blindness about who we are and what we can do.
Historical debate is a sign of a healthy society.
So three cheers for Keating, right or wrong.
Living on a Volcano
As I write this, violent clashes with the police have been going on for nearly two weeks in the suburbs of Paris and other French cities, with cars being set on fire at a rate of nearly 1,000 per night.
Why is this happening?
How far can it go?
The existence of thousands of unemployed young people, without income or roots, idle and knowing only violence to express their quest for recognition, is not particularly French.
Everyone remembers the Watts, Newark, and Detroit riots in the United States in the 1960’s, and the riots in Liverpool in the UK in the early 1980’s, as well as in Bradford, Oldham, and Burnley in recent years.
Likewise, France witnessed riots in Vaux-en-Velin, near Lyon, 20 years ago.
So it is important to distinguish what is common to many developed countries and what is specific to France.
All the developed economies have undergone profound changes over the last 30 years.
We have gone from managerial to stockowner capitalism, from economies with large doses of state direction to far more deregulated markets, from the active and expansive social policies of the 1960s’ and 1970’s to a world in which such spending is constantly shrinking.
Although wealth has been growing constantly – GDP has more than doubled in the last 50 years – the share of wages in the total has diminished by 10%, even while millions of the rich have become much richer.
Everywhere, this has meant massive pauperization of the least favored part of the population. In rich countries, mass poverty, which seemed to have been eliminated around 1980, has reappeared.
Access to good education, and even more so to the labor market, is increasingly restricted for many young people, especially those who come from poor or single-parent families or from minority ethnic backgrounds, languages, or religions.
These people feel rejected and unrecognized.
“Because they want to break us, we will break everything” is the motto that best expresses their mood.
There are untold reservoirs of social violence in all of our lands.
As rates of economic growth have declined, this has meant growing unemployment.
Then there is geography: France’s massive urban concentration around the capital – Paris and its suburbs contain nearly 20% of the population – is unique in Europe.
The sheer number of confused and disoriented young people has overwhelmed the French system’s capacity to integrate them – even though its capacity in this regard is, in fact, impressive.
Indeed, France has opened its public educational system to an extraordinary degree, refusing all group rights to minorities, but vigorously affirming personal rights, including full access to all social services, regardless of language, religion, or skin color.
The system is cracking, but only because of the limits of its absorptive capacity, not because of its core principles.
In these circumstances, every French politician has known for the last 20 years that France has been living with a growing risk that isolated incidents might coalesce into a critical mass of violence.
The task of social workers and police, therefore, is to try to resolve – quickly and discreetly – each particular incident, in order to dampen the revolt.
What needs to be done also has been well known since 20 years ago, when a nonpartisan report by a cross-party group of big-city mayors unanimously agreed on measures to be taken: efficient repression, highly developed social prevention, a permanent local police presence, and a renewed effort at reintegrating delinquents.
The difficulty with implementing this policy has been that its preventive aspects – social support and reintegration of delinquents – appear to the frightened population living in the affected areas as being “soft on crime” and overly generous.
But for the past three years, France has had a government that no longer believes that a socially oriented urban policy works.
It believes only in repression and says so openly.
As a result, local police forces have been reduced from 20,000 to 11,000, while the national riot police (CRS) have been reinforced.
France is now experiencing a practical demonstration of this insane and totally inefficient policy, with the Minister of the Interior, Nicolas Sarkozy, providing a telling illustration of the new orientation when he described the rebellious young as “scum.”
It was the proverbial match thrown by a careless smoker into a parched forest.
The young responded with a vengeance to Sarkozy’s provocation.
The main risk now is that events in the suburbs of large French cities will serve as an example to other young people, whether in the less urban areas of France or in other European countries, who feel socially excluded and are, perhaps, just as prone to violent outbursts.
Solving the problems underlying the French revolt will require time, discretion, mutual respect, community-based social and police work – rather than a centralized, repressive approach – and a lot of money.
But France is by no means the only country that should be worried.
Anti-Semitism From the Left
NEW YORK – The former London mayor and left-wing Labour politician Ken Livingstone has been suspended from his party for claiming that Hitler was a Zionist in the early 1930s.
According to Livingstone, “before he went mad and ended up killing six million Jews,” Hitler had merely wanted to expel them from their own countries to Palestine.
And that, supposedly, made him a Zionist.
Historically, this is nonsense: Hitler never promoted Palestine as a Jewish state.
And the implication that the Führer’s hatred of the Jews put him on the same side as Jews who wished to build their own state to escape from violent anti-Semitism is offensive, to say the least.
But Livingstone was probably being sincere when he said in his defense that “a real anti-Semite doesn’t just hate the Jews in Israel, they hate their Jewish neighbor...It’s a physical loathing.”
Hating Jews in Israel is fine, then, because they are “Zionists,” and the sentiment isn’t visceral.
Jeremy Corbyn, the left-wing leader of Livingstone's party, was no doubt equally sincere when he said that anti-Semitism could not possibly be a problem on the left, because Labour has always been “anti-racist.”
It is a common conceit among leftists in Europe that racial prejudice, including anti-Semitism, is a uniquely right-wing phenomenon.
This probably goes back to the Dreyfus affair of the late nineteenth century.
When the French army captain Alfred Dreyfus was falsely accused of treason in a rigged trial in 1894, French society was divided between mostly conservative anti-Dreyfusards and liberal defenders of the Jewish officer.
The conservatives were often staunch Roman Catholics, who felt deeply uncomfortable with the secular French Republic, which they associated with liberals and Jews.
Reactionary French anti-Semitism, however, reflected a wider trend in twentieth-century Europe.
Blood-and-soil nationalists, right-wing Christians, fanatical anti-Bolshevists, and authoritarians obsessed with social order were often anti-Semitic.
Jews fared best under leftist governments.
This makes it easy to forget that a streak of anti-Semitism has always tainted the left as well.
Stalin was of course notorious for persecuting Jews, or “rootless cosmopolitans” as he called them, whom he regarded as natural agents of capitalism and traitors to the Soviet Union.
But well before Stalin, Karl Marx himself, although Jewish by birth, set the tone for a vicious type of anti-Semitism that infected the left, especially in France.
It was Marx who wrote, “Money is the jealous God of Israel,” and that Hebrew was “the muse of stock exchange quotations.”
Marx was not oblivious to the dangers of anti-Semitism.
He simply thought they would go away once the worker’s paradise had been established.
In this, he was clearly mistaken.
When the state of Israel was founded in 1948, the Soviet Union and leftists in general were quite sympathetic.
For several decades, socialists of Russian and Polish extraction dominated Israeli politics.
Zionism was not yet regarded as a noxious form of racism, along with apartheid in South Africa.
There was no need to “hate the Jews in Israel.”
Things began to change in the early 1970s, after the occupation of the West Bank and other Arab territories.
Two intifadas later, the Israeli left finally lost its grip, and the right took over.
Israel became increasingly associated with the very things leftists had always opposed: colonialism, oppression of a minority, militarism, and chauvinism.
For some people, it was perhaps a relief that they could hate Jews again, this time under the guise of high-minded principles.
At the same time, and for much the same reasons, Israel became popular on the right.
People who might have been fervent anti-Semites not so long ago are now great champions of Israel.
They applaud the Israeli government’s tough line with the Palestinians.
Israel, in a common right-wing view, is a bastion of “Judeo-Christian civilization” in the “war against Islam.”
As the Dutch demagogue Geert Wilders once put it: “When the flag of Israel no longer flies over the walls of Jerusalem, the West will no longer be free.”
It is remarkable how often the old anti-Semitic tropes turn up in the rhetoric of these cheerleaders for Israel.
But this time it is Muslims, not Jews, who are the target.
Muslims in the West, we are repeatedly told, can never be loyal citizens.
They always stick to their own kind.
They will lie to people outside their faith.
They are naturally treacherous, a fifth column, bent on world domination.
Their religion is incompatible with Western values.
And so forth.
The genuine threats coming from a violent revolutionary movement within the Islamic world can make such assertions seem plausible to many people.
But, in most cases, they should be recognized for what they are: tired old prejudices meant to exclude an unpopular minority from mainstream society.
Islamist violence only helps to boost the politics of hatred and fear.
Many Western warriors in the so-called war against Islam are nothing but our modern-day anti-Dreyfusards.
None of this excuses the vile language of Livingstone and others like him.
Left-wing anti-Semitism is as toxic as the right-wing variety.
But the role of Israel in Western political debate shows how prejudices can shift from one group to another, while the underlying sentiments remain exactly the same.
Greening the New Industrial Revolution
VIENNA – Manufacturing industries present society with a dilemma.
A healthy manufacturing sector helps an economy to grow, thereby raising living standards – an especially important goal for developing countries.
But, as factories try to meet ever-growing consumer demand, they deplete the world’s natural resources and pollute the environment.
For some, the world now faces a stark choice between rising prosperity and a cleaner, more sustainable environment.
In fact, with new technology and fresh thinking, policymakers can strike a durable balance between these competing interests.
In developed countries, consumers are increasingly recognizing that, while their material well-being may be higher than ever, their quality of life suffers if the environment is damaged.
For poorer countries, such concerns are dismissed as a rich-world luxury.
Industrial expansion is the best way to eradicate poverty, and must surely trump environmental concerns.
No government, rich or poor, can ignore the imperative to encourage economic growth.
The manufacturing sector creates jobs, makes affordable products for cash-strapped consumers, produces vital tax revenue that can be used to support social goals, and brings in foreign currency in the form of export revenue.
In short, a well-run manufacturing sector spreads wealth across society.
However, trying to satisfy the seemingly endless material demands of consumers at all levels of the economic pyramid has placed an unmanageable burden on the natural world.
Resources are being consumed more quickly than the planet can replace them.