Ahmadinejad stands for a policy of confrontation and partial isolation; Moussavi stands for more openness.
A policy of opening the country would therefore quickly put the regime’s existence at risk.
If Ahmadinejad prevails, the dilemma for the West will be that it will have to deal with a regime discredited by election fraud, but still indispensable for resolving almost all of the Middle East’s important problems: Iran’s own nuclear program and the conflicts in Afghanistan, Pakistan, Iraq, Lebanon, and Palestine.
Iran is also a key player in cooling the hot spots in the Caucasus and Central Asia.
A regime in Tehran that must demonstrate external strength to survive its shattered legitimacy at home would therefore make the comprehensive, negotiated settlement that the West seeks much more difficult and risky, if not impossible, to achieve.
Things have also started to move in a third area: the conflict between Israel and the Palestinians.
Obama wants a two-state solution, but, unlike Presidents Bill Clinton and George W. Bush, he hasn’t postponed tackling the Israeli-Palestinian conflict until the end of his second term in office.
Instead, Obama has energetically confronted the issue from the start.
He also doesn’t shy away from a limited conflict with Israel’s government concerning the West Bank settlements.
The conditions for serious negotiations in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, however, are anything but good, owing to a lack of partners on both sides.
Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu has now committed himself to a Palestinian state, and the Hamas leadership, which rejects Israel’s right to exist, has agreed to a Palestinian state within the borders prior to June 5, 1967.
But the provisos that each side would demand of the other put into question the sincerity of their commitment to a two-state solution.
Yet only a government of the Israeli right can end the expansion of the settlements, and only Hamas can stop the violence against Israel.
These two questions – settlements and security – will have to be simultaneously resolved in a practical manner if the peace process is to be restarted.
If Obama wants to make serious progress in this conflict, he will have to get the Netanyahu government and Hamas to negotiate.
This may seem impossible from today’s perspective, but appearances can deceive.
Such negotiations will be possible if and when both sides – Israel and the Palestinians – form governments of national unity.
Today’s flux in the Middle East is a highly ambivalent affair, because the situation can improve or (more likely) deteriorate.
But one thing is certain: if the present impasse continues, the situation will only get worse.
So it is right to take the risks that change requires.
The Middle East’s Five Crises
The region between Egypt and Pakistan is a cauldron of five discrete, explosive components: Iraq’s civil strife, Afghanistan’s insurgency, Iran’s nuclear ambitions, the longstanding Israel-Arab conflict, and the risk of clashes between extremist groups and corrupt, repressive governments.
A comprehensive policy is needed, yet the threats are so diverse and complex that separate approaches have to be applied simultaneously.
In Iraq, America’s policy of building a semi-federal state of Shiites, Sunnis, and Kurds runs a high risk of failure because of Shiite domination, Sunni and Shiite terrorism, Kurdish separatism, and meddling by Iran.
The cost in lives is already unbearably high.
The United States cannot sustain the current rate of casualties (either American or Iraqi), or the expense.
To create the conditions for long-term stability, a negotiated separation may be needed, comparable to the Dayton Peace Agreement that ended the war in former Yugoslavia.
Separating Iraq’s populations would be painful.
The United Nations High Commission for Refugees (UNHCR) and the US-led coalition forces should help people who want to move to other parts of the country.
One may object that to facilitate internal relocation is to collaborate with “ethnic or religious cleansing”; but the toll of prolonged war in Iraq, which could lead to its dismemberment anyway, is much worse.
The principle of pluralism is valuable, but curbing bloodshed deserves priority.
A Dayton-like agreement can be achieved only if the UN Security Council backs it.
It would be in the long-term interest of the permanent members to do so.
Russia and China would, however, be helpful only if America changes the current Bush administration’s approach.
Such an initiative would need to be supported strongly by the European Union.
Perhaps tri-partite mediation, backed by the US, the EU, and Russia would increase the chances.
The Arab League and the Conference of Islamic States should be consulted and involved.
The US and other coalition forces would have to withdraw gradually, beginning from the south of Iraq.
Foreign forces would still be needed to help protect the Sunni population west of Baghdad and in the middle of Iraq against the Shiite south, as well as in the Kurdish north to keep Turkey from intervening.
A peaceful separation agreement would require international peacekeepers with contributions from many powers, including Islamic states, India, China, and Japan.
As stability in the Middle East is essential to them, this is a matter of enlightened self-interest.
Those of Iraq’s neighbors that are potential spoilers would need to be restrained by a Security Council mandate for such a Dayton-type settlement.
In Afghanistan, NATO-led military operations against the neo-Taliban and other opponents of state-building offer only a partial and temporary solution.
The influx of insurgents from Pakistan will not stop.
The population sees little improvement in living conditions and expects Western forces to leave after a few years.
Most Afghans will then be ruled again by tribal leaders, Islamists, drug barons, and warlords.
The Western aim of building Afghanistan up as a stable and more or less democratic state is extremely ambitious; it may be wiser to help stabilize Kabul and the relatively quiet northern part of the country.
The difficult south will sooner or later return to Pashtun politics.
The outside world’s chief interest is to curb heroin production and destroy terrorist training camps.
But destroying poppy crops has been turning Afghan farmers against NATO.
So it is smarter to go after the heroin bosses and their foreign networks, and in the meantime buy the poppy crop from farmers to destroy it.
Encouraging a shift to legal cash crops and food requires time and heavy investment.
This will only work where there is security for the local population.
Meanwhile, international sanctions are unlikely to dissuade Iran’s government from pursuing nuclear weapons, while a preventive strike by Israel – which would not sit idly by when Iranian nuclear forces become operational – or by the US, would encourage terrorist attacks against their populations.
The most promising approach might be sanctions against leading personalities, and against transfers of technology and funding, as well as covert operations, to delay Iran’s nuclear weapons program.
In the meantime, Iran’s youthful population may become more politically active and demand democratization and improved living conditions.
It is uncertain how long the old clerical leadership and the country’s nationalist politicians can hold on to power, although high oil and gas prices have been shielding them so far.
Gaining time before a disastrous confrontation between Israel and Iran becomes inevitable would be smarter than taking an aggressive approach now.
As for Israel and its neighbors, an agreement on the Golan Heights has already been prepared, but needs external mediation and pressure if it is to be signed.
State-building in Lebanon will require strong UN and EU support, and the courage to curb Hezbollah’s influence.
The Israeli government and Palestinian political leaders are locked in a ruinous struggle, which merely aids extremists on both sides.
The mutual struggle will therefore continue until there is strong enough external pressure to accept a peace agreement.
Israel will have to vacate a large number of Jewish settlements on Palestinian territory, and accept joint international administration or division of Jerusalem.
Israel will never agree to this unless forced by the US.
A US-brokered peace agreement would need to be supported by the UN Security Council and implemented by peacekeeping troops with large contributions from many members of the UN.
Of course, it is unlikely that the Bush administration would bring this about.
The EU is still too slow and fragmented.
So the new American president will have to take the lead in 2009.
In the meantime, the EU should get its act together and take clear decisions on a joint Middle East policy.
The Middle East’s Hair Trigger
TEL AVIV – Across the Middle East, a fatalistic conventional wisdom is taking hold: war is unavoidable.
Some see war as a way of resolving an increasingly deadlocked situation, shaking up a dysfunctional regional order whose main actors are not only at loggerheads, but are also incapable of resolving the legitimacy deficits of their respective regimes.
A volley of incendiary remarks between Israel and both Syria and Hezbollah has fueled anxieties about the possibility of war on Israel’s northern border.
The level of sensitivity is such that the latest tension was initiated by the Syrians, who misinterpreted as a threat Israeli Defense Minister Ehud Barak’s call to start peace negotiations precisely in order to prevent “an all-out regional war.”
Hezbollah’s leader, Hassan Nasrallah, for the first time explicitly warned the Israelis that a new round of conflict would no longer be confined to an Israeli-Lebanese showdown, but would involve the entire regional “axis of confrontation” – Syria, Iran, Hezbollah, and Hamas.
This would also be the case if Israel unleashed its Air Force against Iran’s nuclear installations.
Moreover, Nasrallah made it clear that Israel’s “Dahyia Doctrine” of total devastation of Lebanon in case of war would be answered in kind.
The prospect of a Middle East conflagration has prompted an airlift of senior American officials to Israel to warn of the devastating consequences that an Israeli attack on Iran might have.
Indeed, the Obama administration’s main challenge these days is not peacemaking, but regional conflict management and preemption.
CIA Director Leon Panetta and Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Adm. Mike Mullen have already come and gone, with Vice President Joe Biden and a high-level delegation of the State Department and the National Security Council due in Jerusalem in early March.
But preventing war will not be easy, because Barack Obama’s mystique has worn off in the Arab world.
The expectation that he would allow the Arabs, particularly the Syrians and the Palestinians, to recover their land without resorting to arms has been proved, by his own admission, to be unrealistic.
Nor has he been able to rein in Iran’s relentless drive for regional hegemony, or convince it to abandon its quest for nuclear arms.
Israel will most likely listen to America’s advice and consider a preemptive attack on Iran only after all diplomatic means have been exhausted, and after whatever sanctions are agreed upon fail to cut short Iran’s march toward possessing the bomb.
No matter how unjustified Israel’s traditional military behavior seems in the eyes of its enemies and critics, it has always aspired to base its military actions on grounds that can be justified.
This would seem to be particularly true when it comes to an attack on Iran’s nuclear installations.
Israel would not like to be seen as the spoiler of a diplomatic solution to a dispute that in any case cannot be resolved by military means alone.
Wars in the Middle East, it should be recalled, have started even when the parties did not really want them.
The 1967 war is one example.
Today’s anxieties, too, are fed by perceptions and fears, by real and imagined concerns.
The Iranian challenge to Israel’s strategic hegemony is presented as a Holocaust-style existential threat, and Israel’s other enemies – Hezbollah, which believes that it can bring about “the end of the Zionist entity,” and Syria, which publicly boasts of its ballistic missiles’ capacity to destroy Israel’s main urban centers – are similarly viewed as irrational actors.
A covert war between Israel and Iran has been going on for some time now.
The assassinations – allegedly by Israel – of Imad Mughniyah, Hezbollah’s military chief and Iran’s closest ally in the organization, two years ago, and more recently of Mahmoud al-Mahbouh, Hamas’s liaison officer with the Al-Quds force of Iran’s Revolutionary Guards, suggest that an unplanned chain of events could trigger a real war.
The Lebanese front may ignite if Hezbollah seeks to avenge Mughniyah’s death, or simply as a result of a knee-jerk reaction to a provocation, as in 2006.
If Iran and Syria then decide to back Hezbollah, a direct Israeli-Iranian showdown could follow.
What Israel planned as a preemptive attack on Iran might then be presented as an act of self-defense .
General James Jones, President Obama's national security adviser, recently put forward a different, albeit equally ominous, prediction.
Iran's response to the mounting international pressure might be, he said, to launch an attack on Israel through its proxies, Hezbollah and Hamas.
Such attacks might trigger a wider regional conflagration.
War threats in the Middle East should never be dismissed as hollow. Prophecies of war, moreover, have too frequently proven themselves to be self-fulfilling.
But America’s extraordinary efforts to rein in Israel might not be enough to avert a calamity.
The days of Pax Americana in the region are over, which means that avoiding a regional explosion will require mobilizing the major international actors that favor diplomatic solutions for the Arab-Israeli conflict and for Iran’s quest to become a legitimate partner in a new regional system.  
The Middle East’s Military Delusions
The paradox of the current violence in Israel, Gaza, and Lebanon is that the solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict is not hard to see.
A large majority of Israelis and Palestinians favor a two-state solution essentially along the pre-1967 boundaries.
The major Arab states, including Egypt, Saudi Arabia, and others, share that view.
The problem lies not in seeing the solution, but in getting to it, because powerful and often violent minorities on both sides oppose the majority-backed solution.
Perhaps three-quarters of Israelis and Palestinians are eager for peace and compromise, while a quarter on each side – often fueled by extreme religious zeal – wants a complete victory over the other.
Radical Palestinians want to destroy Israel, while radical Israelis demand control over the entire West Bank, through either continued occupation or even (according to a tiny minority) a forcible removal of the Palestinian population.
When peace appears to be close at hand, radicals on one side of the conflict or the other provoke an explosion to derail it.
Sometimes this involves overt conflict between moderates and radicals within one side, such as when an Israeli religious zealot assassinated Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin when peace negotiations were making progress.
Sometimes this involves a terrorist attack by radical Palestinians against Israeli civilians, in the hope of provoking an exaggerated violent response from Israel that breaks the process of trust building among moderates on both sides.
The moderates are in a daily battle with their own extremists, who claim that compromise is impossible.
Israeli extremists insist that all Palestinians are intent on destroying the state of Israel itself.
They take the Palestinian suicide bombings and kidnappings as proof that peace with the other side is impossible.
“There are no partners for peace,” goes the refrain.
Palestinian extremists insist that Israel is simply plotting to maintain its occupation over all of Palestine and that withdrawal from Gaza or announced plans to withdraw partly from the West Bank are merely tactical, without giving up real control over land, transport, water, defense, and other attributes of sovereignty.
The extremists have been able to block peace because any attack from one side has systematically provoked a violent counterattack from the other.
Moderates are repeatedly made to look weak, naïve, and idealistic.
The extremists also peddle the appealing fantasy that total victory is somehow possible, often by personalizing the battle.
Israeli forces regularly try to “decapitate” the violent opposition by killing Palestinian leaders, as if the problem were a few individuals rather than ongoing political stalemate.
Violent Palestinians, for their part, propagandize that Israel will lose its nerve in the face of another terrorist attack.
In an environment as deadly as this, the details and symbolism of a possible settlement are bound to loom very large.
Israelis and Palestinians came close to agreement on “land for peace” in the context of the Oslo peace process.
Both sides endorsed something like the pre-1967 borders, yet the deal was not quite struck, with each side claiming intransigence by the other on one or another point.
Such a deal can be struck now, but only by avoiding the useless debate over who blocked peace in the past.
An insight of Nobel Prize-winning game theorist Tom Schelling is especially useful in this context.
Schelling identified the practical importance of a bargaining “focal point” as the way forward for negotiators who are in range of an agreement.
The pre-1967 boundaries are the inevitable focal point in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
Both sides should agree to the pre-1967 boundaries in principle, and then swap small land parcels and definitions of control (especially regarding Jerusalem) in slight and mutually convenient deviations from the 1967 boundaries.
In other words, quibbling over details should come after both sides agree on the principle of respect for the pre-1967 borders, which are recognized by key countries throughout the region and around the world, and are enshrined in numerous UN resolutions.
Today’s tragedy is that we are receding from this possible agreement.
Israel is rightly aggrieved by the abduction of its soldiers by Hamas-backed insurgents in Gaza and Hezbollah forces in Southern Lebanon, but Israel’s massive and disproportionate military response plays into the hands of the extremists.
Indeed, each side says that the other struck first.
Israel refused even to negotiate with the Hamas-led Palestinian government, trying to squeeze it financially and make it capitulate.
Hamas refused to acknowledge a two-state solution except obliquely, and then under considerable pressure.
Yet broad Palestinian public opinion is on the side of compromise.
Blame is easy enough to assign, but misses the point.
Compromise based on the pre-1967 borders is the way to peace.
Nor is the United States playing a stabilizing role.
It, too, is playing into the hands of extremists by fighting terrorism with military rather than political means.
Just as the war in Iraq was a mistaken response to the threat of al-Qaeda, the Bush administration’s green light to Israel’s military assaults in Gaza and Lebanon offers no real solution.
The US and other powerful outside parties should be pressing both sides to the focal point solution, not sitting on their hands as the violence spirals out of control.
The most powerful ideology in the world today is self-determination.
Until there is a Palestinian state and an Iraq free of US occupation, Islamic extremists will win recruits.
Military reprisals will swell their ranks still further, and, until political grievances are addressed, the spread of democracy will not change that equation, because the extremists will win at the ballot box.
In short, specific terrorist threats should be fought through narrowly targeted counter-terrorist operations, while moderates should undercut extremism through the politics of compromise rather than the false and dangerous delusions of military victory.
The Problem is Authoritarianism, Not Islam
PRINCETON – Is Islam fundamentally incompatible with democracy?
Time and again events compel us to ask this question.
And yet it is a question that obscures more than it illuminates.
Turkey, Egypt, and Tunisia are very different countries, but one thing that they share are Islamist governments (at least until recently in Egypt’s case).
To varying degrees, these governments have undermined their democratic credentials by failing to protect civil and human rights and employing heavy-handed tactics against their opponents.
Despite repeated assurances, Islamist leaders have shown little interest in democracy beyond winning at the ballot box.
So those who believe that the removal of Egyptian President Mohamed Morsi’s government was justified have a point.
As the Muslim Brotherhood’s rule became increasingly authoritarian, it trampled on the ideals and aspirations of the Tahrir Square revolution that toppled former President Hosni Mubarak in 2011.
Nonetheless, the support that the military coup received from many Egyptian liberals is difficult to fathom.
Clever word games cannot hide the essence of what happened: a government that came to power in a fair election was overthrown by the army.
Some believe that military interventions can serve as a useful course correction.
US Secretary of State John Kerry said that the Egyptian army was “restoring democracy.”
And the former US ambassador James Jeffrey drew on Turkey’s experience, and the 1980 coup in particular, to argue that the military could help in “moderating Islamist movements.”
The notion that a politically transcendent impartial arbiter can step in to prevent abuse of power and reinvigorate democracy is an attractive one.
But it is belied by Turkey’s own history.
True, the Turkish military was not interested in governing directly, and handed power back to civilian governments after its coups.
Even so, its repeated interventions greatly harmed the development of a democratic political culture.
Ultimately, democracy relies on an implicit quid pro quo among contending groups, according to which each agrees to protect the others’ rights in exchange for recognition of its entitlement to govern should it win an election.
Constitutional provisions alone cannot ensure such an outcome, for those in power can easily override them.
Instead, norms of proper political behavior must become embodied in the polity’s enduring institutions – its political parties, parliaments, and courts – in order to prevent abuse of power.
What sustains these norms is the knowledge that undermining them will have consequences that are damaging to all.
If I do not protect your rights while in power today, you will have little reason to respect mine when you come to power tomorrow.
When an outside force such as the military interrupts this game, either directly or because one of the parties can rely on its intervention, the dynamics of political behavior change irrevocably.
The loss of continuity in political parties, parliamentary procedures, and judicial processes encourages short-term calculation and spawns illiberal practices.
This is exactly the malady of young democracies.
It is also the problem that plagues Turkish democracy, despite its longer track record.
When Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdoğan’s Justice and Development Party (AKP) came to power in 2002, it not only lacked a democratic culture, but also had much to fear about how the secularist-military old guard might react.
So it behaved exactly according to its fear, launching a series of show trials targeting senior military officials and other perceived opponents.
When Erdoğan’s government eventually lost the support of liberals who had initially supported it, it cracked down on the media and freedom of expression.
Given this backdrop of repression and punctuated democracy, the failure of Islamists in Egypt and Turkey tells us less about Islam’s compatibility with democracy than we might think.
Did Morsi and Erdoğan behave as they did because of their religious ideologies, or would most political leaders seeking to retain power have acted in similar ways in their position?
Latin America, where Islam plays no political role, has no shortage of populist strongmen who routinely violate civil liberties and political rights.
None of this is to condone the abuse of power by Islamist leaders.
But, just as the Turkish military’s repeated interventions against a perceived Islamist threat have impeded democracy, so the Egyptian military’s toppling of Morsi will not help to restore it.
An entity that is authoritarian and hierarchical in nature cannot be relied on to protect and promote a democratic transition.
A case can be made for military intervention when a country finds itself on the edge of civil war, as Turkey was in 1980 (and as Egypt arguably was in July); but one should not confuse restoring order with restoring democracy.
While the battle for democracy must be won or lost at home, outsiders do have a role to play.
International actors such as human-rights organizations can usefully document and publicize rights violations and other abuses of power.
Democratic countries – particularly the United States and members of the European Union – can denounce authoritarian practices with a clear voice and resist the temptation of cozying up to regional bullies for short-term strategic advantage.
Given economic globalization and global communications, autocratic rulers derive almost as much strength from their international standing as they do from their control of domestic institutions.
What does not help – and in fact backfires – is for outsiders to view the political crisis of Middle Eastern societies as the result of an Islamist-secularist divide.
This perspective plays directly into the hands of authoritarian rulers like Erdoğan, who can leverage the perceived Islamophobia of foreign powers to mobilize their political base.
Human-rights abuses and violations of the rule of law should be denounced for what they are – without linking them to culture or religion.
Arab States of Uncertainty
MADRID – The revolutions that swept the Arab world during the last two years have exposed the extraordinary fragility of key Arab states.
With the exception of historical countries such as Egypt or Morocco, most Arab states are artificial constructs of European colonialism, which combined disparate tribes and ethnicities into unitary states that could be held together only by authoritarian rule and a common enemy – Zionism and its Western patrons.
Today’s turmoil, however, is no longer driven by anger at foreign forces; instead, it marks a second phase of the de-colonization process: the assertion of the right of self-determination by peoples and tribes united only by a dictator’s yoke.
Indeed, it is not entirely farfetched to anticipate the emergence of new Arab states from the debris of the old, artificial ones.
The American invasion of Iraq set the pattern, for it broke the central government’s power and empowered ethnic and religious enclaves.
What happened in Yugoslavia, an ill-conceived product of Wilsonian diplomacy, could happen in the more cynical imperial creations in the Middle East.
What Sigmund Freud defined as “the narcissism of minor differences” caused Yugoslavia to split into seven small states (including Kosovo), following the bloodiest fighting in Europe since World War II.
Can the Arab states avoid a similar fate?
Democratization in the Arab world is not only about toppling dictators; it is also about redressing the politico-ethnic map of the region, which has kept too many minority groups dissatisfied.
Consider the Kurds, who were split among Iraq, Turkey, Syria, and Iran.
But the Kurds are hardly alone.
Libya was created out of three former Italian colonies, Tripolitania, Cyrenaica, and Fezzan, each essentially comprising different tribal confederations (the Sa’adi in Cyrenaica, the Saff al-Bahar in Tripolitania, and the Tuareg in Fezzan).
The fall of Muammar el-Qaddafi opened a Pandora’s box of old rivalries, with Cyrenaica developing into a semi-autonomous region known as Barqa.
Likewise, long-standing tensions between Bahrain’s ruling Sunni minority and Shia majority have worsened since the country’s Shia-led pro-democracy movement was crushed in 2011.
As for Jordan, the precarious balance between the Palestinian majority and the Bedouin minority was difficult enough to maintain in stable times; it is a far more precarious undertaking now.
Other states in the region have been teetering on the brink of failure from the outset.
Yemen emerged in 1990 from the reunification of South Yemen and North Yemen, which fought bitter wars in 1972 and 1979.
But its leaders have never been able to integrate the tribes, the primary units of Yemen’s social structure, into the political system in a manner that generates their unequivocal acceptance of the sovereign state.
Syria powerfully demonstrates how a fight against a dictator can soon turn into a sectarian struggle for survival or mastery.
Notwithstanding the worldwide legitimacy now enjoyed by the National Coalition of Syrian Revolutionary and Opposition Forces, a disorderly collapse of the regime might yet lead to the country’s division into autonomous ethnic enclaves.
The rebels, mostly Sunnis assisted by jihadi groups such as the Nusra Front, an offshoot of Al Qaeda in Iraq, have never truly attempted to reach out to the country’s minorities – Christians, Shia, Druze, and Kurds – which have repudiated the National Coalition as being “obedient to Turkey and Qatar.”
The Kurds, under the yoke of Arabs, Turks, and Iranians, saw in the demise of Saddam Hussein’s regime in Iraq – and now see in the dismemberment of other Arab autocracies – an opportunity to join the new Great Middle Eastern Game. That means realizing the dream of uniting their dispersed nation in an independent Kurdish state.
The Kurdish militias in northern Syria, which sought to stay out of the civil war while preparing their own autonomous enclave should Bashar al-Assad’s regime be toppled, are now being drawn into the fighting; the Iraqi Kurds, who have been training their Syrian kin, may well follow.
Turkey inevitably views Kurdish activism in northern Syria – led by the Democratic Union party, an offshoot of the insurgent Kurdistan Workers Party in Turkey – as a direct threat to its stability, and will do its utmost to prevent it from sparking rebellion among Turkey’s own restive Kurdish minority.
Lebanon is yet another ethnic tapestry that cannot be immune to events in Syria.
Already, signs of spillover effects can be seen in clashes between Sunni and Alawite militias.
However hegemonic Hezbollah may now seem, its power in Lebanon depends heavily on the support of the Assad regime.
Should Assad fall, and the Sunni-led opposition rise to power, the ensuing balance of power in Syria is bound to reshape the balance of power in Lebanon.
Might South Sudan, the mostly Christian state that seceded in 2011 from the Muslim Arab North after a long civil war, become the new paradigm for non-historical Arab states riven by ethnic and tribal rivalries?
As former Prime Minister of China Zhou Enlai supposedly said of the impact of the French Revolution, “It is too early to tell.”
But there can be no doubt that the post-colonial status quo in the Middle East is crumbling.
A multifaceted region has yet to crystallize into more definitive political constructions.
The Middle East’s Springtime of Democracy
Election results around the Middle East mark a new trend: Islamist political parties – those that base their platforms on Islamic law – are highly popular.
Where elections are held, Islamists do well: Hamas among Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza; the religiously-oriented Shi’ite coalition in Iraq; a parliamentary faction in Morocco and, most significantly, the ruling Justice and Development Party (AKP) in Turkey.
Democracy movements in Lebanon, Egypt, and elsewhere in the region must face the challenge of incorporating Islamist parties into democratic systems.
But can the Islamists be trusted?
If they rise to power, will they respect the rights of minorities and women and leave office when voted out?
Will they tolerate dissent?
Or will such elections be based on “one man, one vote, one time?”
As a sociologist, I have been studying these issues for 30 years.
As an inmate of an Egyptian prison, I discussed them with my fellow prisoners, many of whom were imprisoned as supporters of Egypt’s Islamic movement.
My conclusion?
Islamist parties are changing.
These parties understand the social transformations underway in the Middle East that are leading toward democracy, and they want to take part.
In my view, we may be witnessing the emergence of Muslim democratic parties, much like the rise of Christian Democratic parties in Europe in the years after World War II.
The Islamists’ popularity is not difficult to understand.
Since autocratic regimes in the Middle East left little room for free expression, the mosque emerged as the only place where people could freely congregate.
Religious groups responded to this opportunity, emerging first as social welfare agencies, and then becoming the equivalent of local politicians.
In the process, they gained credibility as trustworthy advocates of the people – a real distinction from repressive and corrupt governments.
In principle, it would be hypocritical to advocate democracy and at the same time the exclusion of Islamists from peaceful political participation.
But the practice of electoral politics also gives us reason for optimism.
By my count, some two-thirds of the 1.4 billion Muslims in the world now live under elected governments in which Islamist parties are players.
When Islamist groups are denied access to electoral politics, their cause takes on a mythic aura.
Their principles remain untested ideals, never forced to confront the practical realities of governance.
The late King Hussein took up this challenge in 1989, after bread riots in the southern Jordanian city of Ma’an.
The King brought all the political forces together to draft a national charter for political participation.
The Islamists signed on, pledging their respect for the rules of the game.
In the years since, Islamists have participated in four Jordanian elections.
The first time, they gained a governing plurality, put their slogans into practice, and failed to maintain their popular support.
In the four ministries the Islamists ran, they imposed restrictions on female staff members, triggering widespread protests that ultimately forced the four ministers to resign.
The role of external actors in promoting democracy in the Middle East is also critical.
Much has been said of President George W. Bush’s American-led “crusade” to bring democracy to the Muslim world.
Wars in Afghanistan and Iraq were predicated, at least in part, on spreading freedom; similarly, the Middle East Partnership Initiative is supposed to make democracy the centerpiece of American assistance in the region.
It is important to remember, though, that democracy was on the international agenda before the United States was attacked in September 2001.
Under the Barcelona Accord of 1995, the European Union offered aid and trade to several Arab countries, in exchange for progress on democratic reform.
The trade improvements have been delivered, but little has been accomplished on Arab domestic reform.
In the 1970’s, the Helsinki Accord helped bring down the Soviet Empire.
We need a comparable formula for the Middle East.
Whatever one thinks of American military intervention, one must concede that it has altered the region’s dynamics.
Domestic opposition forces, while distancing themselves from the US, have been markedly emboldened in Lebanon, Egypt, Saudi Arabia, and elsewhere.
We are all watching for signs of opening among our neighbors.
I know that stirrings of democracy have been crushed before: in Budapest in 1956, Prague in 1968, and in Tiananmen Square in 1989.
Yet something about the last few months feels new and irreversible.
Too many people in too many places are defying their oppressors and taking risks for freedom.
To a long-time activist, today’s climate feels like spring.
The Mind’s New Eye
CAMBRIDGE
 – Modern physics and cosmology suggest that basic truths about how nature operates, and how our universe arose, are visible only to those who can see events that occur faster than the time it takes for light to cross a proton, and whose vision can resolve sub-nuclear distances.
Fortunately, that does not rule out humans, for we can augment the eyes we were born with.
The Large Hadron Collider (LHC) rises to the opportunity.
By smashing protons together with unprecedented energy, monitoring the many particles that emerge from the collisions, and reconstructing the primary events that produced them, physicists will in effect have constructed the fastest, highest-resolution microscope ever, with each proton taking a snapshot of the other’s interior.
The LHC is a magnificent engineering project, whose many “gee-whiz’’ features have been widely reported.
I will forego all that, and skip to the chase: what can we hope to see?
We 
 will
 see what the universe was like when it was a thousandth of a second old, in the earliest moments of the Big Bang.
The primary events at the LHC are in effect Little Bangs, tiny fireballs that reproduce Big Bang conditions, albeit over very small volumes.
This re-creation of the early universe opens up an exciting possibility.
We know that the universe today contains a form of matter, the so-called dark matter, that is different from anything we have ever observed.
The dark matter is actually not dark in the usual sense, but utterly transparent.
It neither emits nor absorbs light significantly, which is why astronomers failed to notice it for millennia, even though dark matter contributes five times as much to the total mass of the universe as normal matter.
It was only in the late twentieth century that careful study of the motion of normal, visible matter revealed the gravitational influence of lots of otherwise invisible stuff.
Because the original Big Bang produced dark matter, the LHC’s Little Bangs might produce some more.
So experimenters will be looking for new particles with the right properties to provide the astronomical dark matter: very long-lived and very feebly interacting with ordinary matter or light.
There is a good chance, then, that we will learn what that ubiquitous, abundant, yet elusive substance is.
Imagine a race of intelligent fish that start to think deeply about the world.
We have observed the effects of the “water” that we use to simplify our equations – it slows down particles, and makes them heavy – but we do not know what it is made out of.
The LHC will allow us to discern the microscopic structure of the universal medium.
The simplest idea is that it is made out of one new kind of particle, the so-called “Higgs particle,” but I suspect that there is more to it.
(One gets prettier equations with five new particles, and there might be even more.)
In the 1860’s, James Clerk Maxwell assembled the equations for electricity and magnetism, as they were then known, and discovered an inconsistency.
He repaired the inconsistency by adding new terms to the equations.
The augmented equations, today known as the Maxwell equations, described a unified theory of electricity and magnetism.
The new equations showed that light is a moving, self-renewing disturbance in electrical and magnetic fields, and they predicted that new kinds of disturbances are possible.
Today we call those disturbances radio waves, microwaves, infrared and ultraviolet radiation, x-rays, and gamma rays.
We use them to communicate, cook, and diagnose and cure disease.
The unified theory of electromagnetism has led to profound advances across all physical science, from atomic physics (where lasers and masers are essential tools) to cosmology (where the microwave background radiation is our window on the Big Bang).
Our current understanding of physics is powerful and accurate, as far as it goes, but it is not as beautiful and coherent as it should be.
We have separate equations for four forces: strong, weak, electromagnetic, and gravitational.
This jumble recalls the piecemeal equations of electricity and magnetism before Maxwell.
Some of us have proposed expanded equations that unify the different forces.
These expanded equations, which incorporate an idea called supersymmetry, predict many new effects.
Such are my hopes and expectations for the LHC.
Other speculations for what might be seen abound; they include extra dimensions of space, strings instead of particles, and mini-black holes.
Very likely, reality will outrun apprehension.
Europe’s Youth Unemployment Non-Problem
BRUSSELS – European policymakers have decided that they must be seen to be “doing something” about youth unemployment.
A special summit of Europe’s heads of state has been called, and a “Youth Employment Initiative,” proposed at the EU Council of Ministers’ meeting in February, aims to “reinforce and accelerate” measures that were recommended in a “Youth Employment Package” in December 2012.
This activism comes mainly in response to the latest alarming figures on youth unemployment in southern Europe, with sky-high rates of joblessness widely regarded as politically unacceptable.
But there are several reasons to doubt that youth unemployment is a discrete problem meriting special treatment.
Indeed, official youth unemployment statistics are misleading on two counts.
First, the data refer to those from 15 to 24 years old.
But this age group consists of two sub-groups with very different characteristics.
The “teenagers” (15-19 years old) should mostly still be in school; if not, they are likely to be very low skilled – and thus to have difficulty finding a full-time job even in good times.
Fortunately, this group is rather small (and has been declining in size over time).
Unemployment among those aged 20-24 should be more troubling.
Members of this cohort who are seeking full-time employment have typically completed upper secondary education, but have decided not to pursue university education (or have completed their university studies early).
Second, the data on youth unemployment are based on active labor-market participants.
But labor-market participation averages just 10% among teenagers in Europe.
(Teenage activity rates come close to 50% only in countries like the Netherlands and the United Kingdom, where having a part-time job while in school is very common.)
Labor-market experts thus consider the unemployment rate a potentially misleading indicator, because a youth unemployment rate of 50% does not mean that half of the young population is unemployed.
That is why one should look at the unemployment ratio – the percentage of the unemployed in the reference population – rather than at the unemployment rate.
Indeed, this indicator paints a somewhat less alarming picture than that created by the headline youth-unemployment rate of more than 50% in Spain, or even the 62.5% rate recently reached in Greece.
The youth-unemployment rate in Greece does not mean that close to two-thirds of young Greeks are unemployed.
Only 9% of Greek teenagers are labor-market participants; two-thirds of that number cannot find a job.
The unemployment ratio among teenagers in Greece is thus less than 6%.
But this figure is not reported widely because it is much less alarming.
Among those in the 20-24 age group, the difference between the reported unemployment rate and the percentage of youth without a job and looking for one (the unemployment ratio) is less stark.
But, even among this age group, one finds that the unemployment ratio is often about one-half of the widely reported unemployment rate.
Moreover, one must ask how much youth unemployment contributes to total unemployment.
Looking at the problem this way reveals a completely different picture from the one usually presented.
In those countries where the problem makes the biggest headlines (the eurozone’s south, with Greece and Spain supposedly the worst cases), youth unemployment accounts for less than a quarter of overall unemployment.
By contrast, youth unemployment contributes relatively much more (about 40%) to overall unemployment in countries like Sweden and the UK.
One could argue that the latter two should worry about their youth unemployment more than Spain or Greece should.
The fact that youth unemployment is just a part of a larger problem leads to the real policy question: Why should officials spend limited time, energy, and public funding specifically on unemployed young people, rather than on all of the unemployed?
Does a teenager’s unemployment represent a greater loss to society than that of a single mother or an older worker, who might have been providing an entire family’s only income?
The loss of the value added produced by a teenager is probably much lower.
In purely economic terms, one could thus argue that youth unemployment (especially teenage part-time unemployment) is much less important than unemployment among those who are in their prime earning years.
Moreover, young people have the option of continuing their education, thus adding to future earnings power, whereas continuing education is a much less viable alternative for their elders.
Europe has a general macroeconomic problem, owing to demand factors that interact with a rigid labor market, rather than a specific youth-unemployment problem.
This implies that there is no need for ad hoc measures for young people, which merely risk overloading welfare systems with even more exemptions and special rules.
The Mirage of Youth Unemployment
PARIS – Economists worldwide need better ways to measure economic activity.
Relying on GDP growth rates to assess economic health, almost all of them missed the warning signs of the 2008 financial crisis, including an $8 trillion real-estate bubble in the United States, as well as property bubbles in Spain, Ireland, and the United Kingdom.
Together with households, financial institutions, investors, and governments, economists were swept up in the financial euphoria that led to excessive risk-taking and severe over-leveraging of banks and households. Even the eurozone’s macroeconomic imbalances largely went unnoticed.
Unemployment estimates also are surprisingly misleading – a serious problem, considering that, together with GDP indicators, unemployment drives so much economic-policy debate.
Outrageously high youth unemployment – supposedly near 50% in Spain and Greece, and more than 20% in the eurozone as a whole – makes headlines daily.
But these numbers result from flawed methodology, making the situation appear far worse than it is.
The problem stems from how unemployment is measured: The adult unemployment rate is calculated by dividing the number of unemployed individuals by all individuals in the labor force.
So if the labor force comprises 200 workers, and 20 are unemployed, the unemployment rate is 10%.
But the millions of young people who attend university or vocational training programs are not considered part of the labor force, because they are neither working nor looking for a job.
In calculating youth unemployment, therefore, the same number of unemployed individuals is divided by a much smaller number, to reflect the smaller labor force, which makes the unemployment rate look a lot higher.
In the example above, let us say that 150 of the 200 workers become full-time university students.
Only 50 individuals remain in the labor force.
Although the number of unemployed people remains at 20, the unemployment rate quadruples, to 40%.
So the perverse result of this way of counting the unemployed is that the more young people who pursue additional education or training, the higher the youth unemployment rate rises.
While standard measures exaggerate youth unemployment, they likely understate adult unemployment, because those who have given up their job search are not counted among the unemployed.
As the Great Recession drives up the number of such “discouraged workers,” adult unemployment rates appear to fall – presenting a distorted picture of reality.
Fortunately, there is a better methodology: The youth unemployment ratio – the number of unemployed youth relative to the total population aged 16-24 – is a far more meaningful indicator than the youth unemployment rate.
Eurostat, the European Union’s statistical agency, calculates youth unemployment using both methodologies, but only the flawed indicator is widely reported, despite major discrepancies.
For example, Spain’s 48.9% youth unemployment rate implies significantly worse conditions for young people than its 19% youth unemployment ratio.
During the 2006 French student protests, France’s 22% youth unemployment rate appeared to compare unfavorably to rates of 11%, 12%, and 13% in the United Kingdom, the US, and Germany, respectively.
But the Financial Times showed that only 7.8% of French under-25’s were unemployed – about the same ratio as in the other three countries.
France simply had a higher percentage of young people who were full-time students.
Failing to account for the millions of young people either attending university or in vocational training programs undermines the unemployment rate’s credibility.
And, while some young people use higher education to escape a rocky job market, their choice to build new skills should not negatively impact perceptions of their country’s economic health.
Policymakers do, of course, need to address the problem of youth unemployment; but they must also acknowledge that the problem is not as serious as the headlines indicate.
Unfortunately, these distorted results have become conventional wisdom – even for respected economists like the Nobel laureate Paul Krugman, who recently invoked the flawed “50% youth unemployment” figure.
Thus, four years after the crisis erupted, methods for measuring and assessing economic health remain alarmingly inadequate.
As any pilot knows, flying without radar or accurate weather forecasts is likely to end in a crash.
The Misconduct of Science?
WOLLERAU, SWITZERLAND – Scientific fraud, plagiarism, and ghost writing are increasingly being reported in the news media, creating the impression that misconduct has become a widespread and omnipresent evil in scientific research.
But these reports are more an example of sensationalist media latching on to a hot topic than a true account of the deterioration of scientific values.
Far from being the norm in scientific research, fraud and cheating are rare exceptions, and are usually quickly identified by other scientists.
And the public seems to understand this.
Indeed, trust and confidence in scientific research have not been seriously undermined by reports of misconduct.
Nor have these rare incidents curtailed scientific progress, which is so valuable to humankind.
To be sure, even a few cases of scientific misconduct are too many.
Scientists are expected to be beacons of hope in the search for knowledge – and clever enough not to try to get away with cheating.
Preventive mechanisms are in place to hold responsible the few who take the gamble.
But, while the scientific community – including academic and professional institutions, agency heads, managers, and editors – is often reluctant to handle cases of misconduct rigorously, the reputation of science as a whole is at stake, not just that of a person, institution, journal, or national science entity.
Ironically, those who are caught often blame their misconduct on competition, pressure to publish, and recognition and prizes – the very practices and incentives that the scientific community introduced and fostered.
Indeed, while the menace of misconduct has been exaggerated, we have to rethink how we conduct science – its values, virtues, and shortcomings.
Scientists must follow a path that is not scientifically predefined, and that requires decisions at every step.
Whether they are right or wrong becomes clear in retrospect, which is why errors are unavoidable (though they should not be left uncorrected for long).
Science means constantly walking a tightrope between blind faith and curiosity; between expertise and creativity; between bias and openness; between experience and epiphany; between ambition and passion; and between arrogance and conviction – in short, between an old today and a new tomorrow.
But, nowadays, research increasingly is misdirected toward lucrative prizes, professional recognition, and financial gains – rewards that are suffocating the creativity and passion that scientific progress demands.
As T.S. Eliot put it, “Where is the wisdom we have lost in knowledge?
Where is the knowledge we have lost in information?”
In the “hard” sciences, such as mathematics and physics, the truth can be established more transparently, making these fields less prone to scientific misconduct.
But branches like medicine, humanities, philosophy, economics, and other social sciences, which rely more heavily on openness and imagination, can be manipulated more easily to suit the goals of bureaucrats.
Indeed, today, too many areas that are being called ��science” – for example, collecting biased statistics in order to make a politician’s (or corporation’s) point, or publishing a variation of existing knowledge – fall far short of scientific standards of originality and the quest for basic insight.
And yet, while bureaucratization of science has fueled concerns about its attractiveness to talented thinkers, we should not be overly pessimistic.
To be sure, many people have lamented the loss of brilliant minds to the financial sector over the past few decades.
But perhaps we should consider it a stroke of luck that these geniuses created their mess somewhere else.
Moreover, we underestimate the younger generation of scientists.
Like the previous generation, many gifted young researchers know that they must work hard to meet monumental challenges and make valuable contributions to society.
But we must be careful not to corrupt their work with the questionable practices that the scientific community has adopted in recent years.
The new generation of researchers must be given the skills and values – not just scientific ideals, but also awareness of human weaknesses – that will enable it to correct its forebears’ mistakes.
Misreading the Global Economy
PRINCETON – In April 2010, the International Monetary Fund’s World Economic Outlook offered an optimistic assessment of the global economy, describing a multi-speed recovery strong enough to support roughly 4.5% annual GDP growth for the foreseeable future – a higher pace than during the bubble years of 2000-2007.
But, since then, the IMF has steadily pared its economic projections.
Indeed, this year’s expected GDP growth rate of 3.3% – which was revised downward in the most recent WEO – will probably not be met.
Persistent optimism reflects a serious misdiagnosis of the global economy’s troubles.
Most notably, economic projections have vastly underestimated the severity of the eurozone crisis, as well as its impact on the rest of the world.
And recovery prospects continue to depend on the emerging economies, even as they experience a sharp slowdown.
The WEO’s prediction of a strengthening recovery this year continues the misdiagnosis.
European Central Bank President Mario Draghi’s announcement last summer that the ECB would do “whatever it takes” to preserve the euro reassured financial markets.
But, as pressure from financial markets has eased, so has European leaders’ incentive to address problems with the eurozone’s underlying economic and political dynamics.
Easy ECB liquidity is now sustaining a vast swath of Europe’s banking system.
The eurozone is operating under the pretense that public and private debts will, at some point, be repaid, although, in many countries, the distress now is greater than it was at the start of the crisis almost five years ago.
As a result, banks, borrowers, and governments are dragging each other into a vicious downward spiral.
Politicians have exacerbated the situation by doubling down on fiscal austerity, which has undermined GDP growth while failing to shrink government debt/GDP ratios.
And no decisive policy action aimed at healing private balance sheets appears imminent.
Moreover, Europe’s problems are no longer its own.
Europe’s extensive regional and global trade networks mean that its internal problems are impeding world trade and, in turn, global economic growth.
In 2012, world trade expanded by only 2.5%, while global GDP grew at a disappointing 3.2% rate.
Periods in which trade grows at a slower pace than output are rare, and reflect severe strain on the global economy’s health.
While the trauma is no longer acute, as it was in 2009, wounds remain – and they are breeding new pathologies.
Unfortunately, the damage is occurring quietly, enabling political interests to overshadow any sense of urgency about the need to redress the global economy’s intensifying problems.
Against this bleak background, it is easy to celebrate the success of emerging markets.
After all, emerging and developing economies are growing much faster than the advanced countries.
But even the world’s most dynamic emerging markets – including China, Brazil, and India – are experiencing a sharp deceleration that cannot be ignored.
Consider India, where growth is now running at an annualized rate of 4.5%, down from 7.7% annual growth in 2011.
To be sure, the IMF projects that India’s economy will rebound later in 2013, but the basis for this optimism is unclear, given that all indicators so far suggest another dismal year.
The emerging economies’ supposed resilience, which has buoyed economic forecasts in recent years, needs to be reassessed.
Like the advanced economies, emerging economies experienced a boom in 2000-2007.
But, unlike the advanced economies, they maintained high GDP growth rates and relative stability even at the height of the crisis.
This was viewed as powerful evidence of their new economic might.
In fact, it was largely a result of massive fiscal stimulus and credit expansion.
Indeed, as the effects of stimulus programs wear off, new weaknesses are emerging, such as persistent inflation in India and credit misallocation in China.
Given this, the notion that emerging economies will recapture the growth levels of the bubble years seems farfetched.
Economic forecasts rest on the assumption that economies ultimately heal themselves.
But economies’ powerful self-healing capabilities work slowly.
More problematic, a misdiagnosis can lead to treatments that impair the healing process.
Overly optimistic economic projections based on mistaken assessments of the global economy’s ailments thus threaten recovery prospects – with potentially far-reaching consequences.
In Europe, the banks’ wounds must be closed – weak banks must be shut down or merged with stronger banks – before recovery can begin.
This will require an extensive swap of private debts for equity.
For the global economy, the malaise reflected in anemic trade growth calls for coordinated fiscal stimulus by the world’s major economies.
Otherwise, the risk of another global recession will continue to rise.
The Mixed Blessing of Genetic Choice
The advance of knowledge is often a mixed blessing.
Over the past 60 years, nuclear physics has been one obvious example of this truth. Over the next 60 years, genetics may be another.
Today, enterprising firms offer, for a fee, to tell you about your genes.
They claim that this knowledge will help you live longer and better.
You might, for example, have extra checkups to detect early signs of the diseases that you are most at risk of contracting, or you could alter your diet to reduce that risk.
If your chances of a long lifespan are not good, you might buy more life insurance, or even retire early to have enough time to do what you always wanted to do.
Defenders of privacy have worked, with some success, to prevent insurance companies from requiring genetic testing before issuing life insurance.
But if individuals can do tests from which insurance companies are barred, and if those who receive adverse genetic information then buy additional life insurance without disclosing the tests that they have taken, they are cheating other holders of life insurance.
Premiums will have to increase to cover the losses, and those with a good genetic prognosis may opt out of life insurance to avoid subsidizing the cheats, driving premiums higher still.
We need not become too alarmed yet.
The United States Government Accountability Office sent identical genetic samples to several of the testing companies, and got widely varying, and mostly useless, advice.
But as the science improves, the insurance problem will have to be faced.
Selecting our children raises more profound ethical problems.
This is not new.
In developed countries, the routine testing of older pregnant women, combined with the availability of abortion, has significantly reduced the incidence of conditions like Down syndrome.
In some regions of India and China where couples are anxious to have a son, selective abortion has been the ultimate form of sexism, and has been practiced to such an extent that a generation is coming of age in which males face a shortage of female partners.
Selection of children need not involve abortion.
For several years, some couples at risk of passing a genetic disease on to their children have used in vitro fertilization, producing several embryos that can be tested for the faulty gene and implanting in the woman’s uterus only those without it.
Now couples are using this technique to avoid passing on genes that imply a significantly elevated risk of developing certain forms of cancer.
Since everyone carries some adverse genes, there is no clear line between selecting against a child with above-average risks of contracting a disease and selecting for a child with unusually rosy health prospects.
Thus, genetic selection will inevitably move towards genetic enhancement.
For many parents, nothing is more important than giving their child the best possible start in life.
They buy expensive toys to maximize their child’s learning potential and spend much more on private schools or after school tutoring in the hope that he or she will excel on the tests that determine entry to elite universities.
It may not be long before we can identify genes that improve the odds of success in this quest.
Many will condemn this as a resurgence of “eugenics,” the view, especially popular in the early twentieth century, that hereditary traits should be improved through active intervention.
So it is, in a way, and in the hands of authoritarian regimes, genetic selection could resemble the evils of earlier forms of eugenics, with their advocacy of odious, pseudoscientific official policies, particularly concerning “racial hygiene.”
In liberal, market driven societies, however, eugenics will not be coercively imposed by the state for the collective good. Instead, it will be the outcome of parental choice and the workings of the free market.
If it leads to healthier, smarter people with better problem-solving abilities, that will be a good thing.
But even if parents make choices that are good for their children, there could be perils as well as blessings.
In the case of sex selection, it is easy to see that couples who independently choose the best for their own child can produce an outcome that makes all their children worse off than they would have been if no one could select the sex of their child.
Something similar could happen with other forms of genetic selection.
Since above-average height correlates with above-average income, and there is a clearly a genetic component to height, it is not fanciful to imagine couples choosing to have taller children. The outcome could be a genetic “arms race” that leads to taller and taller children, with significant environmental costs in the additional consumption required to fuel larger human beings.
The most alarming implication of this mode of genetic selection, however, is that only the rich will be able to afford it.
The gap between rich and poor, already a challenge to our ideas of social justice, will become a chasm that mere equality of opportunity will be powerless to bridge.
That is not a future that any of us should approve.
But avoiding this outcome will not be easy, for it will require that selection for genetic enhancement is either available to no one or accessible to everyone.
The first option would require coercion, and – since countries will not accept that others should gain a competitive edge – an international agreement to forego the benefits that genetic enhancement can bring.
The second option, universal access, would require an unprecedented level of social assistance for the poor, and extraordinarily difficult decisions about what to subsidize.
The Morality of Capital Punishment
The US is often criticized for its refusal to abolish capital punishment.
Many now claim that abolition of capital punishment is a precondition of a civilized criminal-law system.
Nobel laureate Gary Becker disagrees.
European governments are adamantly opposed to capital punishment – the European Union bans it outright – and some Europeans consider its use in the United States barbaric.
Indeed, many European intellectuals argue that not just capital punishment, but punishment in general, does not deter criminals.
But, whereas Europeans, with crime rates well below American rates for the past half-century, could long afford to be relatively “soft” on most crimes, they have seen their crime rates increase sharply during the past twenty years.
By contrast, American rates have fallen, in part because of greater use of punishment.
This includes capital punishment.
I support executing some people convicted of murder because – and only because – I believe that it deters other murders.
If I did not believe that, I would oppose capital punishment, because revenge and other possible motives should not be a basis for public policy.
Serious empirical research on capital punishment in the US began with a pioneering study by Isaac Ehrlich, published in 1975 in the American Economic Review.
Some subsequent studies have sometimes found a much weaker deterrent effect, while others have found a much stronger effect.
The available data are quite limited, however, so one should not base any conclusions solely on the econometric evidence.
Of course, public policy on any punishment cannot wait until the evidence is perfect.
But, even with the limited quantitative evidence available, there are good reasons to believe that capital punishment deters.
Most people, and murderers in particular, fear death, especially when it follows swiftly and with considerable certainty following the commission of a murder.
As David Hume put it in discussing suicide, “no man ever threw away life, while it was worth living.