But ordinary Europeans have begun looking at maps, and the geography that they see cannot be denied: 95% of Turkey’s territory and 80% of its population is in Asia.
As a result, the fierce and lively debate – in Turkey and much more emphatically in the EU – about whether Turkey really belongs to Europe has continued, despite the start of negotiations.
Of course, the question of Turkey’s European identity cannot be answered with geography lessons.
At least half of the body of Greek theater and philosophy was produced in Asia Minor.
The first Christian evangelization trips of Saint Peter and Saint Paul were to Turkey.
Later, Ottoman Turkey was for centuries considered a part of the “concert of Europe,” proving indispensable in defining and securing the strategic balance among the European continent’s Great Powers.
Yet this historical evidence is not enough to unite European sentiment in favor of Turkey’s EU membership.
On the contrary, “the Turkish Question” will be resolved on the basis of the current political preoccupations and concerns for the future.
Fortunately, that choice was not settled prematurely and peremptorily: the process that will lead to a final decision was merely allowed to start with the opening of negotiations.
Membership talks can’t help but be long and arduous, if only because adopting the acquis communautaire (the body of EU law) requires that Turkey integrate around 10,000 pages of texts into its legislation.
However, all this now seems to have a serious chance of succeeding.
And yet Turkey scares countless Europeans.
With 67 million people today, and a population that will reach 80 million in 20 years and 100 million in 2050, Turkey is bound to become the most populous of all European nations.
It is also a very poor Muslim country.
To be sure, a few countries in Europe, mainly Germany and Austria, have welcomed strong inflows of Turkish immigration.
But the immigrants have been mostly poor peasants from Anatolia, whose integration has proven to be difficult.
By contrast, Turkey’s large, secular intellectual community, whose cultural background is European, and from which the Turkish state recruits most of its executives, has remained in Istanbul and Ankara.
Europe, then, is frightened by the prospect of more immigration by Turks who find it almost impossible to assimilate.
For the moment, such immigration has almost stopped, owing to rapid economic growth – indeed, the fastest in Europe – in recent years, which is absorbing the country’s available labor and has thus stemmed the flow of emigrants.
Yet the fear remains that membership in the Union will unleash a new human tide.
Economic fears are not the only concern for EU citizens.
Turkey was the theater of exceptional violence in the twentieth century: its participation in WWI fueled hatred and gigantic massacres, with the genocide of the Armenians the last vicious spasm of the Ottoman Empire’s brutal demise.
Moreover, while Kemal Ataturk restored Turkish national pride by creating the secular Turkish republic, his legacy is mixed, for it includes both Turkey’s strong attraction to the West and a militarization of public life.
The latter explains much of the repressive attitude towards free speech and independent opinion that has characterized much of Turkish public life – a straitjacket that has left little room for real negotiations with Turkey’s restless Kurds or for resolving the division of Cyprus.
But Turkey’s EU aspirations mean that it is now being forced to demilitarize its democracy and to find negotiated and peaceful agreements with all its neighbors and future partners – Armenians, Kurds, and Cypriots.
Thus, if Europe manages to overcome its fears and hesitations and open itself to a powerful Muslim state, it will consolidate peace in one of the world’s most dangerous regions.
Indeed, by integrating Turkey, Europe would show that it is not a Christian club, that the supposed “clash of civilizations” need not be fatal, and that the European project, born out of a desire for reconciliation and the need to promote development, can spread its benefits far beyond the Western half of Europe.
In opening itself to Turkey, the EU would finally begin to play its proper role in confronting today’s most daunting political challenges.
For Whom America’s Bell Tolls
These days the Chairman of President Bush’s Council of Economic Advisers, Ben Bernanke, likes to talk about a “global savings glut” that has produced astonishingly low real interest rates around the world.
But that is the wrong way to look at it.
America certainly does not have a savings glut.
Its savings rate has been distressingly low for decades.
Then the Bush administration’s reckless fiscal policy pushed it lower.
Falling interest rates in recent years pushed up real estate prices and allowed America’s upper middle class to treat their houses as enormous ATM’s, lowering savings still more.
America has a savings deficiency, not a glut.
And the rest of the world?
A global savings glut would suggest that rebalancing the world economy requires policies to boost America’s savings rate and to increase non-US households’ consumption.
But what the world economy is facing is not a savings glut, but an investment deficiency.
Divide the world into three zones: the United States, China, and all the rest.
Since the mid-1990’s, the net current-account surplus of “all the rest” has risen by an amount that one Federal Reserve Bank economist has put at $450 billion a year, not because savings rates have increased, but because investment rates have fallen.
Declining investment rates in Japan, the newly-industrializing Asian economies, and Latin America, in that order of importance, have fueled the flood of savings into US government bonds, US mortgage-backed securities, and US equity-backed loans – the capital-account equivalent of America’s enormous trade deficit.
The investment deficiency in Asia relative to rates of a decade ago amounts to an annual shortfall of $400 billion a year, with the decline in investment in Japan – a consequence of more than a decade of economic stagnation ­– accounting for more than half of the total.
Moreover, investment rates in the newly industrialized economies of Asia have never recovered to their pre-1997-8 crisis levels, and investment rates in the rest of Asia outside China have fallen off as well.
This would seem to call for a very different set of policies to rebalance the world economy.
Yes, the US needs tax increases to move the federal budget into surplus and policies to boost private savings.
But the world also needs policies to boost investment in Asia, Latin America, the Middle East, and Africa.
And here we face a difficulty.
People like me who have been cheerleaders for international integration in trade and finance, as well as for reductions in tariffs and other barriers, have cited three benefits:
· Maximizing economic – and also social and cultural – contact between rich and poor nations is the best way we can think of to aid the flow of knowledge about technology and organization, which is the last best hope for rapid world development.
· Lower trade barriers will make locating production in the poor low-wage parts of the world irresistible to those who have access to finance.
· Freer capital flows will give poor countries precisely this access, as the greed of investors in rich country leads them to venture into poor regions where capital is scarce.
The first reason still holds true.
Maximizing economic, social, and cultural contact between rich and poor remains both the best way to aid the flow of knowledge and the last best hope for rapid world development.
But the second and third reasons look shaky.
Those with access to finance appear to be capable of resisting the urge to locate production in poor low-wage parts of the world (China aside).
Rather than leading rich-country savers to invest their money in poor countries out of greed, liberalization of capital flows has led poor-country savers to park their money in rich countries out of fear – fear of political instability, macreconomic disturbances, and deficient institutions (especially those that protect the rights of bondholders and minority shareholders).
Something may well happen in the next several years to radically boost America’s savings rate by making US households feel suddenly poor: tax increases, a real estate crash, rapidly-rising import prices caused by a plummeting dollar, a deep recession, or more than one of the above.
It would be nice to believe that when the tide of dollar-denominated securities ebbs, the flows of finance currently directed at America will smoothly shift course and boost investment in Asia.
But don’t count on it, especially considering the share of marginal investment in Asia that is aimed, one way or another, at exporting to the American market.
Those outside America, especially in Asia, should regard the unstable state of the US macro-economy with grave concern.
As the seventeenth-century poet John Donne put it, “Ask not for whom the bell tolls – it tolls for thee.”
For Whom Syria Tolls
PARIS – With every passing week, the Syrian conflict increasingly resembles the Spanish Civil War.
The images of warplanes bombing civilians and destroying cities have turned Aleppo into a latter-day version of Guernica, immortalized in Picasso’s masterpiece.
But the real similarities between the two conflicts are to be found in the behavior of the international community’s main actors, which have again taken opposite sides.
On one side stand Russia and Iran, cynically determined to buttress President Bashar al-Assad’s regime.
On the other side stand the established democracies, hesitant and ambivalent in their support of the rebels.
In 1930’s Spain, of course, Nazi Germany and Fascist Italy fully supported General Francisco Franco’s rebellion, while the democracies reluctantly offered scant help to the Spanish Republic.
There are even deeper similarities.
Many argued at the time that support for republican Spain meant helping the far more dangerous anarchists and Communists at a time when the Soviet threat in Europe was growing.
In that sense, yesterday’s Reds have become today’s “fundamentalist Muslims.”
Indeed, for many nowadays, helping the Syrian rebels is too risky, and might even jeopardize the Middle East’s Christian minorities.
While the Syrian regime is odious, they argue, the choice is between a hypothetical hope of democracy in the Muslim world and the real risk of endangering Christians’ lives.
Unfortunately, therefore, one must choose the status quo.
Of course, Western vacillation reflects deeper strategic and diplomatic factors as well.
Indeed, by shooting down a Turkish warplane that wandered into Syrian airspace, Assad’s regime intended to deliver a clear message to the international community: “Stay out of Syria’s domestic affairs.”
Syria is not Libya, and the political context has changed significantly, with America’s presidential election approaching and a deepening economic crisis in Europe.
Rightly or wrongly, Russia and China believe that the time has come to take their revenge over an arrogant West that deceived them about the true purpose of “humanitarian intervention” in Libya.
This time, they hold the better cards.
At a time when US President Barack Obama is basing his campaign partly on his withdrawal of American troops from Iraq and his plan to do the same in Afghanistan, he cannot take the risk of intervening in Syria.
Meanwhile, the European Union is fighting for its survival, and cannot devote its energies to an uncertain battle.
For the West, the timing of the Syrian rebels’ uprising could not have been worse.
But, despite deep divisions among the rebels, the cost of Western indifference is probably higher than the risk of intervention.
The international community can no longer hide behind the pretense of ignorance.
It lost its innocence decades ago.
When faced with the slaughter of civilians, it can no longer pretend that it does not know.
But, beyond ethics, there are geopolitical considerations.
With the Arab world in the midst of upheaval, what message does the West want to send?
And, with global power in flux, what message is the West sending to the authoritarian regimes that are backing Assad?
These regimes can only read the West’s dithering as a green light for their cynical agendas.
This is particularly problematic in the case of Iran.
The less determination the West demonstrates in Syria, the more the Iranians become convinced that they can play with the international community’s nerves and patience indefinitely.
As Russia and Iran continue to send money and weapons, if not military advisers, to Syria, it is impossible to persist with hypocritical language that can be interpreted only as a formula for inaction.
Threatening the Syrian regime with “terrible consequences” if it were to use chemical weapons means only one thing: “Bomb your civilians at will, but use only conventional munitions.”
The time has come to supply the rebels with what they desperately need: anti-tank and surface-to-air missiles.
Of course, such a choice carries risks.
Do we know the people we would be helping?
After all, such weapons could be turned against the West one day, as they have been in Afghanistan.
And, by involving ourselves militarily in the conflict, even if only by supplying the rebels, we might give a propaganda boost to terrorist groups that are already willing to strike in the West.
Nevertheless, the risks of passivity, indecision, and incoherence are even greater.
The more the West waits, the more radicalized the rebels will become, weakening the standing and influence of moderate forces.
The logic of intervention goes through cycles.
In the aftermath of the Rwandan genocide and the subsequent refugee crisis and war in the Great Lakes region of Central Africa in the 1990’s, a combination of guilt, economic prosperity, and America’s unique international status led to interventions in Kosovo, Afghanistan, and, unfortunately, Iraq. Today, we are in a completely different cycle, dominated by the ghosts of Iraq, the global economic crisis, and the (relative) decline of the West.
When it comes to intervention nowadays, respect for legality has overcome the concern for legitimacy that prevailed a decade ago.
We have gone from one extreme to the other, whereas a middle road would be wiser.
But, above all, let us not forget the lessons of the Spanish Civil War.
It is always dangerous to give the impression of being the first to blink when facing authoritarian regimes.
Irasionalitas Bahan Bakar Fosil
BERLIN – Jika negara-negara di dunia ingin terhindar dari bencana iklim, mereka harus rela hidup tanpa membakar hampir 90% cadangan batubara terbukti, ditambah sepertiga minyak dan setengah cadangan gas alam.
Alih-alih menerapkan kebijakan yang bertujuan mewujudkan tujuan tersebut, justru pemerintah terus mensubsidi industri bahan bakar fosil, dan bahkan menggunakan sumber daya publik yang terbatas untuk mencari cadangan baru.
Praktik ini harus diubah – dan dilakukan segera.
Dalam upaya untuk membantu percepatan perubahan itu, Heinrich Böll Foundation dan Friends of the Earth International telah mengumpulkan data utama mengenai industri batubara dalam Coal Atlas yang diterbitkan baru-baru ini.
Statistik yang termuat di dalamnya sangat mengejutkan.
Menurut International Monetary Fund (Dana Moneter Internasional), post-tax subsidies atas batubara (termasuk kerusakan lingkungan hidup) mencapai 3,9 % dari PDB global tahun ini.
Pemerintah negara-negara G-20 diperkirakan mengeluarkan $88 miliar per tahun untuk subsidi eksplorasi sumber bahan bakar fosil baru.
Selain itu, menurut laporan terbaru yang diterbitkan oleh Natural Resources Defense Council, Oil Change International, dan World Wide Fund for Nature mengungkapkan bahwa sejak tahun 2007 hingga 2014, banyak negara menyalurkan dana publik sebesar lebih dari $73 miliar – atau lebih dari $9 miliar per tahun – dalam proyek-proyek batubara.
Dana terbesar dikeluarkan oleh Jepang ($20 miliar), Tiongkok (sekitar $15 miliar), Korea Selatan ($7 miliar), dan Jerman ($6,8 miliar).
Investasi publik ini menambah dana komersial yang sudah cukup besar yang dialokasikan ke sektor batubara.
Pada tahun 2013, 92 bank-bank terkemuka memberikan setidaknya €66 miliar ($71 miliar) – empat kali lipat lebih besar dibandingkan jumlah pada tahun 2005.
Semua dana ini dikeluarkan untuk menguatkan industri yang menghasilkan emisi global dalam jumlah besar – dan nampaknya bertekad untuk tetap melakukan hal yang sama.
Sejak tahun 1988, hanya 35 produsen batubara, baik swasta maupun milik negara, telah menyumbangkan sepertiga dari total emisi karbon dioksida.
Kerusakan yang diakibatkan oleh produk mereka bukan lagi rahasia.
Namun tetap saja perusahaan batubara dan produsen bahan bakar fosil lainnya menolak untuk memperbaiki model bisnis mereka.
Sebaliknya, perusahaan-perusahaan ini bekerja aktif untuk menghambat upaya mitigasi perubahan iklim di tingkat nasional dan internasional, termasuk membiayai para penyangkal perubahan iklim (climate-change deniers) dan melobi demi menentang target-target dan perangkat energi terbarukan yang berhasil seperti feed-in tariff.
Sementara itu, industri batubara berpendapat bahwa mereka memiliki peran yang sangat diperlukan dalam menanggulangi “kemiskinan energi” – yaitu kurangnya akses kepada sumber energi modern bebas polusi, khususnya listrik.
Benar bahwa kemiskinan energi adalah masalah besar yang dialami oleh 1,2 miliar penduduk di dunia.
Bagi petani, yang bergantung pada air untuk mengairi tanaman, hal ini berarti semakin rendahnya efisiensi dan produktivitas.
Bagi rumah tangga, yang harus membakar kayu bakar, kotoran sapi, dan minyak tanah, hal ini berarti polusi udara indoor yang bisa menyebabkan penyakit pada sistem pernafasan.
Bagi anak-anak usia sekolah, pencahayaan buruk di malam hari berarti hilangnya kesempatan belajar.
Tetapi batubara bukanlah solusi.
Konsekuensi kesehatan akibat produksi batubara dan pembakaran sungguh mengejutkan.
Pada tahun 2013, penyakit pneumoconiosis (“penyakit paru-paru hitam) di kalangan pekerja batubara mengakibatkan 25.000 kematian secara global.
Di Uni Eropa, pembakaran batubara bertanggung jawab atas 18.200 kematian dini dan 8.5000 kasus baru bronchitis akut per tahun.
Di Tiongkok, diperkirakan 250.000 orang mati sebelum waktunya karena pembakaran batubara.
Korban fisik menimbulkan biaya ekonomi yang besar juga, mulai dari kehilangan jam kerja hingga tekanan pada sistem kesehatan.
Perubahan iklim juga akan menyebabkan kerugian besar, bahkan jika upaya-upaya mitigasi dan adaptasi yang kuat mampu diterapkan.
Bagi 48 negara miskin/kurang berkembang, kerugian akibat akan mencapai sekitar $50 miliar per tahun.
Bukannya menerima subsidi, industri bahan bakar fosil justru harusnya membayar perubahan iklim.
Lagipula, tahun lalu saja kedua perusahaan bahan bakar fosil terbesar – Chevron dan Exxon Mobil – menghasilkan profit lebih dari $50 miliar.
Jika negara-negara di dunia ingin membatasai kenaikan suhu global sekitar 2° Celsius dibandingkan era pra-industri, tanpa paksaan untuk menggunakan teknologi berbahaya dan berisiko seperti Carbon Dioxide Capture and Storage atau geo-engineering, maka sistem energi dunia harus diubah.
Pertama dan terpenting, para pemimpin dunia harus berkomitmen untuk menghapuskan secara bertahap penggunaan bahan bakar fosil, dengan tujuan yang tegas untuk menghentikan pembakaran 90% cadangan batubara terbukti, sepertiga cadangan minyak, dan setengah cadangan gas.
Mereka juga harus menghapuskan subsidi pemerintah untuk batubara sesegera mungkin, dalam beberapa tahun, sembari menjamin agar penduduk miskin dan rentan tidak merugi akibat kenaikan harga energi,
Selain itu, pemerintah negara-negara di dunia harus meminta pertanggungjawaban dari produsen batubara dan bahan bakar fosil lainnya atas kerusakan yang diakibatkan, termasuk memungut iuran atas ekstraksi bahan bakar fosil untuk mendanai Mekanisme Warsawa tentang Kerugian dan Kerusakan berdasarkan Konvensi Kerangka Kerja Perubahan Iklim PBB (UNFCCC).
Hukum internasional yang berlaku – khususnya prinsip pencemar membayar (polluters pay), prinsip tidak merugikan (no harm), dan hak menuntut ganti rugi (right to compensation) – menunjang sistem tersebut.
Pada akhirnya, untuk mengatasi kemiskinan energi, para pemimpin dunia harus meningkatkan dana desentralisasi proyek-proyek energi terbarukan, termasuk melalui feed-in tariff yang didanai secara global untuk membangun mini-grid energi terbarukan di negara-negara berkembang.
Keberhasilan industri bahan bakar fosil dalam mempertahankan kepentingannya sendiri telah mengorbankan kesehatan planet bumi dan penduduknya.
Sekarang tiba waktunya untuk mereformasi sistem energi global kita yang buruk – dimulai dengan kesepakatan untuk menghapuskan batubara dan bahan bakar fosil lainnya.
Financing Climate Safety
NEW YORK – The purpose of the global financial system is to allocate the world’s savings to their most productive uses.
When the system works properly, these savings are channeled into investments that raise living standards; when it malfunctions, as in recent years, savings are channeled into real-estate bubbles and environmentally harmful projects, including those that exacerbate human-induced climate change.
The year 2015 will be a turning point in the effort to create a global financial system that contributes to climate safety rather than climate ruin.
In July, the world’s governments will meet in Addis Ababa to hammer out a new framework for global finance.
The meeting’s goal will be to facilitate a financial system that supports sustainable development, meaning economic growth that is socially inclusive and environmentally sound.
Five months later, in Paris, the world’s governments will sign a new global agreement to control human-induced climate change and channel funds toward climate-safe energy, building on the progress achieved earlier this month in negotiations in Lima, Peru.
There, too, finance will loom large.
The basics are clear.
Climate safety requires that all countries shift their energy systems away from coal, oil, and gas, toward wind, solar, geothermal, and other low-carbon sources.
We should also test the feasibility of large-scale carbon capture and sequestration (CCS), which might enable the safe, long-term use of at least some fossil fuels.
Instead, the global financial system has continued to pump hundreds of billions of dollars per year into exploring and developing new fossil-fuel reserves, while directing very little toward CCS.
Many investments in new fossil-fuel reserves will lose money – lots of it – owing to the recent fall in world oil prices.
And many of the fossil-fuel reserves that companies are currently developing will eventually be “stranded” (left in the ground) as part of new global climate policies.
The simple fact is that the world has far more fossil-fuel resources than can be safely burned, given the realities of human-induced climate change.
Though market signals are not yet very clear, this year’s more successful investors were those who sold their fossil-fuel holdings, thereby avoiding the oil-price crash.
Perhaps they were just lucky this year, but their divestment decision makes long-term sense, because it correctly anticipates the future policy shift away from fossil fuels and toward low-carbon energy.
Several major pension funds and foundations in the United States and Europe have recently made the move.
They have wisely heeded the words of the former CEO of oil giant BP, Lord Browne, who recently noted that climate change poses an “existential threat” to the oil industry.
More governments around the world are now introducing carbon pricing to reflect the high social costs inherent in the continued use of fossil fuels.
Every ton of carbon dioxide that is emitted into the atmosphere by burning coal, oil, or gas adds to long-term global warming, and therefore to the long-term costs that society will incur through droughts, floods, heat waves, extreme storms, and rising sea levels.
While these future costs cannot be predicted with precision, recent estimates put the current social cost of each added ton of atmospheric CO2 at $10-100, with the US government using a middle-range estimate of about $40 per ton to guide energy regulation.
Some countries, like Norway and Sweden, long ago introduced a tax on CO2 emissions to reflect a social cost of $100 per ton, or even higher.
Many private companies, including major oil firms, have also recently introduced an internal accounting cost of carbon emissions to guide their decisions regarding fossil-fuel investments.
Doing so enables companies to anticipate the financial consequences of future government regulations and taxation.
As more countries and companies introduce carbon pricing, the internal accounting cost of carbon emissions will rise, investments in fossil fuels will become less attractive, and investments in low-carbon energy systems will become more appealing.
The market signals of CO2 taxation (or the cost of CO2 emission permits) will help investors and money managers steer clear of new fossil-fuel investments.
Carbon taxes also offer governments a crucial source of revenue for future investment in low-carbon energy.
With international oil prices dropping – by a whopping $40 per barrel since the summer – this is an ideal moment for governments to introduce carbon pricing.
Rather than let the consumer price of oil fall by that amount, governments should put a carbon tax in place.
Consumers would still come out ahead.
Because each barrel of oil emits roughly 0.3 tons of CO2, a carbon tax of, say, $40 per ton of CO2 implies an oil tax of just $12 per barrel.
And, because oil prices have declined by more than triple the tax, consumers would continue to pay much less than they did just a few months ago.
Moreover, new revenues from carbon taxes would be a boon for governments.
High-income countries have promised to help low-income countries invest in climate safety, both in terms of low-carbon energy and resilience against climate shocks.
Specifically, they have promised $100 billion in climate-related financing per year, starting in 2020, up from around $25-30 billion this year.
New revenues from a CO2 tax would provide an ideal way to honor that pledge.
The math is simple.
High-income countries emitted around 18 billion tons of CO2 this year – roughly half of all global emissions.
If these countries earmarked just $2 per ton of CO2 for global financing organizations like the new Green Climate Fund and the regional development banks, they would transfer around $36 billion per year.
By using part of that money to mobilize private-sector financing, the full $100 billion of climate financing could be reached.
Both Big Oil and Big Finance have made major mistakes in recent years, channeling funds into socially destructive investments.
In 2015, these two powerful industries, and the world as a whole, can start to put things right.
We have within our reach the makings of a new global financial system that directs savings where they are urgently needed: sustainable development and climate safety, for ourselves and for future generations.
The Responsible Investor’s Guide to Climate Change
NEW YORK – Around the world, institutional investors – including pension funds, insurance companies, philanthropic endowments, and universities – are grappling with the question of whether to divest from oil, gas, and coal companies.
The reason, of course, is climate change: unless fossil-fuel consumption is cut sharply – and phased out entirely by around 2070, in favor of zero-carbon energy such as solar power – the world will suffer unacceptable risks from human-induced global warming.
How should responsible investors behave in the face of these unprecedented risks?
Divestment is indeed one answer, for several reasons.
One is simple self-interest: the fossil-fuel industry will be a bad investment in a world that is shifting decisively to renewables.
(Though there will be exceptions; for example, fossil-fuel development in the poorest countries will continue even after cutbacks are demanded in the rich countries, in order to advance poverty reduction.)
Moreover, divestment would help accelerate that shift, by starving the industry of investment capital – or at least raising the cost of capital to firms that are carrying out irresponsible oil, gas, and coal exploration and development, despite the urgent need to cut back.
Though no single institutional investor can make a significant difference, hundreds of large investors holding trillions of dollars of assets certainly can.
Indeed, divestment by leading investors sends a powerful message to the world that climate change is far too dangerous to accept further delays in the transition to a low-carbon future.
Divestment is not the only way to send such a message, but it is a potentially powerful one.
Finally, investors may divest for moral reasons.
Many investors do not want to be associated with an industry responsible for potential global calamity, and especially with companies that throw their money and influence against meaningful action to combat climate change.
For similar reasons, many investors do not want handgun manufacturers or tobacco companies in their portfolios.
Yet there is also an ethically responsible and practical alternative to divestment that can help steer fossil-fuel companies toward the low-carbon future.
As active, engaged shareholders, institutional investors can use their ownership (and, in the case of large investors, their public voice) to help persuade companies to adopt climate-safe policies.
American universities are on the front line of this debate, pushed by their students, who are young enough to face the brunt of climate change in the coming decades.
The students are right to be frustrated that most university endowments have so far been passive on the issue, neither divesting nor engaging as active investors.
For example, Harvard University President Drew Gilpin Faust sharply rejected divestment in 2013; the purpose of Harvard’s endowment, she argued, is to finance the university’s academic activities.
Though she did say that Harvard would be an active and responsible shareholder, she offered no details about what such engagement might look like.
Harvard and many other universities (including our own, Columbia University) have long been committed to acting as responsible investors.
Several have committees that advise university trustees on environmental, social, and governance (ESG) issues in their portfolio, most commonly when proxy votes in support of ESG proposals are to be held.
Yet few so far have applied the ESG principles to their endowment’s fossil-fuel holdings.
Despite Faust’s rejection of divestment, Harvard and other universities have long accepted the principle that divestment is the correct choice in certain circumstances.
In 1990, Harvard divested completely from tobacco companies.
Harvard’s president at the time, Derek Bok, said that the university’s decision “was motivated by a desire not to be associated as a shareholder with companies engaged in significant sales of products that create a substantial and unjustified risk of harm to other human beings.”
Many other universities, including Columbia, have done the same.
Today’s students make cogent arguments that the case for fossil-fuel divestment looks similar to the case for tobacco divestment.
Both represent massive risks to human wellbeing.
Before divesting from tobacco companies, Harvard wrote to them, requesting that they address the ethical issues involved in selling tobacco and their adherence to World Health Organization guidelines.
The companies either were unresponsive or challenged the evidence that smoking was linked to disease.
Similarly, in deciding whether to divest, responsible investors like universities should ask four key questions of the oil, gas, and coal companies in their portfolio:
•&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Has the company publicly and clearly subscribed to the internationally agreed goal of limiting global warming to 2º Celsius above pre-industrial levels, and to the limits on global carbon-dioxide emissions needed to meet that goal?
•&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Will the company pledge to leave business groups that lobby against effective climate policies to achieve the 2º limit?
Of course, the need for climate action does not stop with investors; sustainable consumption and production practices by businesses and individuals must be part of the solution as well.
The transition to a safe, low-carbon future requires all parts of society to act responsibly and with foresight.
As leaders in education, research, and problem solving, universities have a unique responsibility and opportunity to lead, including as responsible and ethical investors.
The Foundations of Greece’s Failed Economy
NEW YORK – Too many politicians and economists blame austerity – urged by Greece’s creditors – for the collapse of the Greek economy.
But the data show neither marked austerity by historical standards nor government cutbacks severe enough to explain the huge job losses.
What the data do show are economic ills rooted in the values and beliefs of Greek society.
Italy came in second at 42%, with France third, at 41%.
(Germany’s share is 39%; the United States’, 35%; and the United Kingdom’s, 32%.)
Insiders receive subsidies and contracts, and outsiders find it hard to break in.
Astoundingly, young Greek entrepreneurs reportedly fear to incorporate their firms in Greece, lest others use false documents to take away their companies.
According to the World Bank, Greece is one of the hardest places in Europe to start a business.
The result is that competition for market share is weak and there are few firms with new ideas.
This stunted system springs from Greece’s corporatist values, which emphasize social protection, solidarity instead of competition, and discomfort with uncontrolled change.
These values may well be beneficial for family life; but, even with the best of intentions, they are a recipe for a static economy and stultified careers.
Indeed, Greece’s labor productivity (GDP per worker) is only 72% of the level in the UK and Italy, and a mere 57.7% of that in Germany.
And surveys indicate that mean life satisfaction in Greece is far below that found in the wealthiest EU countries (the EU15).
One is an abundance of entrepreneurs engaged in detecting and exploiting new economic opportunities.
Without them, Greece does a poor job of adjusting to changing circumstances (an imperative emphasized by Friedrich Hayek).
Greece’s much-lauded shipowners, for example, were too slow to adapt to containerization, and thus lost their market share.
The other source of broad prosperity is an abundance of business people engaged in conceiving and creating new products and processes – often termed “indigenous innovation.”
Here, Greece lacks the necessary dynamism: venture capital investment flows are smaller, relative to GDP, in Greece than in any other EU country.
So Greece’s economy has scant ability to create sustained productivity growth and high human satisfaction.
Some economists believe that these structural considerations have nothing to do with Greece’s current crisis.
In fact, a structuralist perspective illuminates what went wrong – and why.
For several years, Greece drew on the EU’s aptly named “structural funds” and on loans from German and French banks to finance a wide array of highly labor-intensive projects.
Employment and incomes soared, and savings piled up.
When that capital inflow stopped, asset prices in Greece fell, and so did demand for labor in the capital-goods sector.
Moreover, with household wealth having far outstripped wage rates, the supply of labor diminished.
Thus, Greece went from boom to outright slump.
The structuralist perspective also explains why recovery has been slow.
With competition weak, entrepreneurs did not rush to hire the unemployed.
When recovery began, political unrest last fall nipped confidence in the bud.
The truth is that Greece needs more than just debt restructuring or even debt relief.
If young Greeks are to have a future in their own country, they and their elders need to develop the attitudes and institutions that constitute an inclusive modern economy – which means shedding their corporatist values.
Europe, for its part, must think beyond the necessary reforms of Greece’s pension system, tax regime, and collective-bargaining arrangements.
While Greece has reached the heights of corporatism, Italy and France are not far behind – and not far behind them is Germany.
All of Europe, not just Greece, must rethink its economic philosophy.
The Winning International NGO
MELBOURNE – It has long been clear that many non-state actors have more influence on international policymaking than a great many sovereign states.
No one doubts the impact that major multinational corporations and terrorist organizations can have, for better or worse.
But the role of a number of international non-governmental organizations (INGOs) has been more significant than is generally recognized, and what makes the best of them tick is worth exploring.
According to current estimates, there are some 40,000 NGOs operating internationally, with the overwhelming majority focusing primarily on health, education, welfare, economics, industry, energy, the environment, human rights, social policy, and governance- and development-related issues.
A much smaller number – a few hundred at best – work primarily on peace and security issues, though some primarily human rights-focused organizations like Human Rights Watch and Amnesty International are influential here.
Those that seek to influence foreign-policy outcomes can be typecast, perhaps unkindly, as “thinkers,” “talkers,” or “doers.”
In other words, they tend to be pure think tanks, research institutions, or policy forums (like London’s Chatham House, the Council on Foreign Relations in New York, or the Brookings Institution in Washington, DC); overwhelmingly campaign-focused advocacy organizations (like Human Rights Watch, Enough, Kony 2012, or Global Zero); or field-based, on-the-ground operational organizations engaged in activities like mediation, capacity-building, and confidence-building (like Search for Common Ground, the Community of Sant’Egidio, or Independent Diplomat).
The organization with which I was longest and most closely associated, the International Crisis Group (ICG), is an unusual combination of all three categories.
It is field-based in a way that most operational organizations are, but that think tanks and advocacy organizations are not.
It focuses, as policy-oriented think tanks do, on analyzing complex conflicts and potential conflicts around the world and identifying workable solutions.
It campaigns for the adoption of these solutions, but less at the grassroots and more by direct access to high-level policymakers.
Measuring INGOs’ impact on policy outcomes is more an art than a science.
The most successful, like Human Rights Watch, Amnesty International, and the ICG, have high visibility among policymakers, and produce analysis and argument that – whether publicly acknowledged or not – regularly becomes part of the currency of debate.
Their perceived ability to make a difference is usually reflected in their capacity to raise funds, whether from governments or the private sector.
What does it take for organizations like these to become and remain successful?
My own experience, as both a government insider and INGO outsider, has been mostly in the area of peace and security, but I think the lessons are generalizable.
Four criteria seem to be essential:
First, INGOs must add value, meeting a need that is not currently being met well or at all.
The primary unmet need seen by the founders of the ICG, for example, was to compensate for governments’ growing incapacity, for both security and budgetary reasons, to develop an accurate picture of what was happening on the ground in conflict zones.
Open-source reporting and commentary by the media were not doing much to fill the gaps, because resource shortages, particularly in the quality print media, have long been dumbing down international coverage of sensitive and difficult situations.
Second, successful INGOs are marked by the clarity of their mission.
The most successful tend to be those that find a clear niche and stick to it.
When Amnesty International broadened its focus from traditional political and civil rights to the whole range of economic, social, and cultural rights, it seemed for quite some time to lose direction and impact.
The most insidious temptation to muddy an INGO’s mission occurs when money is potentially available for some project that is not part of its core business, and for which it does not have readily available internal expertise.
In such cases, diversion and dilution of resources and loss of focus is the inevitable result.
Third, INGOs require real independence.
Any INGO in the business of giving advice must be scrupulous about being – and being perceived as – immune from influence by vested interests.
Some organizations, like Human Rights Watch, solve the problem by refusing to accept any government funding.
The ICG doesn’t do that, but it has always been absolutely insistent on saying whatever has needed to be said, and in practice governments have been remarkably tolerant of specific criticism, provided it is well-supported and well-argued.
The final criterion that a successful INGO must meet in order to be taken seriously, at least by government policymakers, is total professionalism.
If you want to meet governments on their home ground, you have to provide a product that, in terms of the depth and accuracy of its research and the style of its presentation, the best of them are accustomed to and demand.
And your management – of finance, personnel, and governance – has to be sustained at the level of global best practices.
The best INGOs develop strong reputations quickly, sustain them indefinitely, and exercise real influence on policymaking.
But they operate in a highly competitive environment, and will be on a fast track to losing their way if they come to be seen as no longer meeting real needs, remaining sharply focused, or being uncompromising in maintaining their independence and professionalism.
Shaping the Fourth Industrial Revolution
GENEVA – Of the myriad challenges the world faces today, perhaps the most overwhelming is how to shape the Fourth Industrial Revolution that began at the turn of the century.
New technologies and approaches are merging the physical, digital, and biological worlds in ways that will fundamentally transform humankind.
The extent to which that transformation is positive will depend on how we navigate the risks and opportunities that arise along the way.
The Fourth Industrial Revolution builds on the Third Industrial Revolution, also known as the Digital Revolution, which entailed the proliferation of computers and the automation of record keeping; but the new wave of transformation differs from its predecessors in a few key ways.
First, innovations can be developed and diffused faster than ever.
Second, falling marginal production costs and the rise of platforms that aggregate and concentrate activity in multiple sectors augment returns to scale.
Third, this global revolution will affect – and be shaped by – all countries, and have a systems-level impact in many areas.
The Fourth Industrial Revolution has the potential to empower individuals and communities, as it creates new opportunities for economic, social, and personal development.
But it also could lead to the marginalization of some groups, exacerbate inequality, create new security risks, and undermine human relationships.
If we are to seize the opportunities, and avoid the pitfalls, of the Fourth Industrial Revolution, we must consider carefully the questions that it raises.
We must rethink our ideas about economic and social development, value creation, privacy and ownership, and even individual identity.
We must address, individually and collectively, moral and ethical issues raised by cutting-edge research in artificial intelligence and biotechnology, which will enable significant life extension, designer babies, and memory extraction.
And we must adapt to new approaches to meeting people and nurturing relationships.
The scale of the challenge should not be underestimated.
The Fourth Industrial Revolution could lead to forms of human augmentation that cause us to question the very nature of human existence – and even sooner than one might imagine.
Consider the impact that mobile technology has already made on our lives and relationships.
As the novelty of wearable tech gives way to necessity – and, later, as wearable tech becomes embedded tech – will we be deprived of the chance to pause, reflect, and engage in meaningful, substantive conversations?
How will our inner lives and ties to those around us change?
These are weighty questions, about which debate will probably intensify in the coming years.
Of course, technology is not an exogenous force over which humans have no control.
We are not constrained by a binary choice between acceptance and rejection.
Rather, the decisions we make every day as citizens, consumers, and investors guide technological progress.
The more we think about those decisions, the more we examine ourselves and the social models on which we depend, the better our chances are of shaping the revolution in a way that advances our common objectives and upholds our values.
In this effort, new forms of collaboration and governance, accompanied by a positive shared narrative, will be essential.
To this end, three key steps are needed.
First, we must continue to raise awareness and understanding of the issues at stake.
Decision-making cannot occur in isolation.
We need an inclusive approach that brings together top minds from all over the world, from both the public and private sectors.
Second, we must develop comprehensive, constructive narratives about how the Fourth Industrial Revolution should develop.
For example, we should ensure that values and ethics are at the heart of our individual and collective behaviors, including in capital and financial markets.
We must move beyond tolerance and respect to genuine care and compassion, with empowerment and inclusiveness becoming guiding principles of our actions.
Third, we must move to restructure our economic, social, and political systems.
It is clear that our current governance structures and dominant models of wealth creation are not equipped to meet current or, more important, future needs.
What is needed now is not small-scale adjustments or marginal reforms, but comprehensive and innovative systemic transformation.
How the Fourth Industrial Revolution progresses will come down to people, culture, and values.
New technologies, however remarkable they might seem, are fundamentally just tools made by people for people.
We must keep this in mind, and ensure that innovation and technology continue to put people first, propelling us toward sustainable and inclusive development.
Once we get there, we can go even further.
I firmly believe that the new technology age, if shaped in a responsive and responsible way, could catalyze a new cultural renaissance that will create the sense that we are part of something much larger than ourselves – a true global civilization.
The Fourth Industrial Revolution can compromise humanity’s traditional sources of meaning – work, community, family, and identity – or it can lift humanity into a new collective and moral consciousness based on a sense of shared destiny.
The choice is ours.
Mastering the Fourth Industrial Revolution
LONDON – Technological innovation has long triggered diametrically opposed reactions: awe of new possibilities for some; for others, fear of disruptive change.
But most of us don’t even realize what is happening.
We take change for granted.
Human ingenuity is far too little recognized or appreciated, particularly in financial markets.
Investors obsess about more pedestrian concerns: fears about a hard landing in China, the repercussions of falling oil prices, and the risk that some shock could tip a fragile world economy into renewed recession or deflation.
Obviously, worries about global demand conditions are not unfounded – surely the last thing the world economy needs now is renewed stress.
Yet, for all our angst about excessive debt and policy inadequacy, nothing is as important as human ingenuity for delivering improved living standards and investment opportunities.
Indeed, the advent of new technologies holds out the promise of a Fourth Industrial Revolution, the theme of this year’s World Economic Forum meeting in Davos.
The First Industrial Revolution was based on the steam engine. James Watt’s invention, introduced around 1775, powered the nineteenth-century expansion of industry from its origins in England to Europe and the United States.
The Second Industrial Revolution, from the last third of the nineteenth century to the outbreak of World War I, was powered by developments in electricity, transportation, chemicals, steel, and (especially) mass production and consumption.
Industrialization spread even further – to Japan after the Meiji Restoration and deep into Russia, which was booming at the outset of World War I. The Third Industrial Revolution arrived at the end of the last century with the manufacture and diffusion of information technology.
The promise of a Fourth Industrial Revolution consists in advances in robotics, the Internet of Things, big data, mobile telephony, and 3D printing.
According to one estimate, the successful adoption of these new technologies could boost global productivity by as much as the personal computer and the Internet did during the late 1990s.
For investors, the fourth revolution offers opportunities for vast profits, akin to those delivered by its predecessors.
Already, early movers in fourth-generation technologies command eye-popping valuations.
New eras of rising investment, productivity, and living standards are not just possible; they are probable, recurring with increasing frequency.
And they are the result of human ingenuity.
But new eras require more than basic science or garage-based entrepreneurial wizardry.
To be transformative, technology must be adopted and diffused into everyday life.
This is easier said than done.
At the very outset of industrialization, Watt struggled financially and did not successfully commercialize his steam engine until he formed a partnership with the English manufacturer Matthew Boulton.
More important, history suggests that enthusiasm – in macro and market terms – can run ahead of reality.
One does not have to be a “productivity pessimist” (arguing, for example, that the indoor toilet was the last great human invention) to acknowledge that many new technologies deliver less than promised or reward investors only with long lags.
It is worth remembering that early steam power predated Boulton and Watt by nearly a century, and that it took more than a half-century for their invention to overtake conventional water-mill power as the mainstay of nineteenth-century industrial production.
Volta first discovered electricity cells in 1800, but it took another eight decades to introduce direct current as a means of power transmission.
Likewise, ENIAC, the first electronic computer, was developed in secret during World War II.
Computing power and usage grew exponentially over the ensuing decades of the twentieth century; but even as late as the 1980s, the Nobel laureate economist Robert Solow could quip that the computer age was “everywhere but in the productivity statistics.”
For investors, this consideration holds important implications – among them, the need to be patient and to resist the temptation to overpay early.
Initially, identifying losers (who remembers Wang Computers?) may be as important as picking winners.
It is also important to understand how technology can transform seemingly unrelated industries.
The advent of computing power enabled “big box” retailers in the US – Walmart, Staples, Home Depot, and others – to supplant both mom-and-pop stores and the established retail chains of the 1950s and 1960s.
Computational power, together with advances in the logistics of transportation, storage, and delivery, enabled retailing on hitherto unimaginable economies of scale.
Yet today, these same big-box giants are under siege from online retailing, which promises even greater economies of scale and logistical efficiencies, undercutting even the most efficient brick-and-mortar operations.
Ingenuity it is.
But, to paraphrase Joseph Schumpeter, it is also destructive.
In today’s parlance, we speak of “disruptive technologies.”
But no-one should be gulled by jargon: New ways of producing things often kill off old industries and jobs before the full benefits of the successor mode of production are realized.
A certain degree of violence inevitably accompanies human progress.
That is why the executives gathering in Davos this month are discussing how to “master” the Fourth Industrial Revolution.
For all the awe-inspiring promises of technological advance, theirs is an apt concern.
Mengarahkan Masa Depan
SAN FRANCISCO – Berbagai teknologi baru berkembang sebegitu cepatnya sampai-sampai kita kesulitan mengendalikan dampaknya terhadap masyarakat.
Mulai dari dampak terhadap cara kita melakukan pekerjaan hingga makna kehidupan individual dan bermasyarakat, perubahan-perubahan teknologi bisa membuat kewalahan jika kita tidak bekerja sama untuk memahami dan mengendalikannya.
Keseluruhan industri tengah disusun ulang dan dibuat dari nol, berkat perkembangan-perkembangan revolusioner di bidang kecerdasan buatan (artificial intelligence), robotika, the Internet of Things, kendaraan swakemudi/otonom (autonomous vehicles), percetakan 3D (3D printing), nanoteknologi, bioteknologi, ilmu/teknik material (materials science), penyimpanan energi (energy storage), dan komputasi kuantum (quantum computing).
Kami di World Economic Forum menyebut gelombang inovasi ini sebagai “Fourth Industrial Revolution” atau Revolusi Industri Keempat, sebab penemuan tersebut mengubah hidup, cara kerja, dan sikap kita terhadap orang lain secara fundamental.
Teknologi-teknologi baru seperti mesin uap dan cotton mill menandai munculnya Revolusi Industri Pertama, yang didampingi dengan perkembangan sosial-politik yang monumental seperti urbanisasi, pendidikan massal, dan mekanisasi pertanian.
Berkat elektrifikasi dan produksi massal, Revolusi Industri Kedua memperkenalkan jenis-jenis pekerjaan baru.
Kemudian, melalui kemunculan teknologi digital dan telekomunikasi cepat, Revolusi Industri Ketiga yang berlangsung dalam lima dekade terakhir, sukses menghubungkan individu dan kelompok dan menghilangkan ruang dan waktu.
Revolusi Industri Keempat pun akan menggugah perubahan: teknologi semata pasti berpengaruh, tapi perubahan-perubahan dalam sistem ekonomi dan sosial akan lebih berdampak pada kehidupan kita di masa depan.
Pada tahap ini, belum ada konsensus atas isu-isu mendasar seperti kepemilikan data pribadi, keamanan infrastruktur, serta hak dan tanggung jawab perusahaan-perusahaan yang mendobrak.
Disini kita memerlukan kerangka kerja konseptual untuk memudahkan perusahaan, pemerintah, dan individu menyikapi pergeseran radikal yang dimotori teknologi – dalam hal business models, etika, dan isu-isu sosial – yang makin dekat.
Untuk menjamin kesejahteraan di masa depan, kita perlu mengkaji apakah teknologi-teknologi baru tersebut dirancang untuk memenuhi kebutuhan sosial, atau hanya menghadirkan hal baru.
Selain itu, kita harus fokus tidak sekadar pada kemajuan teknologi dan produktivitas ekonomi semata, tapi juga bagaimana kekuatan tersebut berdampak pada individu, kelompok, dan lingkungan.
Seiring berlangsungnya Revolusi Industri Keempat, ada prinsip yang bisa memandu kebijakan dan pelaksanaannya.
Pertama, fokus pada sistem, bukan teknologi tersendiri; dengan mencermati bagaimana berbagai kekuatan teknologi, sosial, dan ekonomi saling berinteraksi, kita bisa menentukan dan memperkirakan perubahan yang dialami perusahaan, masyarakat, dan perekonomian.
Kedua, kita harus menolak persepsi umum yang cenderung pasrah bahwa progres ibarat kodrat.
Masyarakat dan individu perlu diedukasi dan diberdayakan agar mampu menguasai teknologi untuk tujuan produktif, bukan justru dikuasai oleh teknologi dan dimanfaatkan untuk kepentingan orang lain.
Apabila kita gagal memanfaatkan teknologi-teknologi baru, berarti kita menyerahkan kendali pribadi dan kelompok, ibarat patah arang.
Ketiga, kita harus merancang teknologi-teknologi dan sistem-sistem baru dengan memiliki proyeksi ke depan, alih-alih menerima begitu saja dan pasrah atas perubahan yang ada.
Upaya mengintegrasikan teknologi transformatif ke dalam sistem ekonomi dan sosial memerlukan kolaborasi erat antar pemangku kepentingan di kalangan pemerintahan, industri, dan organisasi masyarakat sipil.
Jika tidak, masa depan kita akan ditentukan oleh kondisi bawaan, bukan hasil keputusan sendiri.
Terakhir, pertimbangan sosial dan etika bukanlah kerikil yang harus disingkirkan; nilai-nilai bersama harus menjamin unsur pokok dalam setiap teknologi baru.
Apabila teknologi digunakan dalam cara-cara yang memperburuk kemiskinan, diskriminasi, atau pengrusakan lingkungan hidup, berarti tidak dipakai untuk membangun masa depan yang didambakan.
Investasi pada teknologi-teknologi baru dibenarkan jika berkontribusi pada perkembangan dunia yang lebih aman dan terintegrasi.
Bergerak sendirian, tidak ada satu pihak pun yang sanggup mengatasi tantangan-tantangan sosial dan ekonomi dalam Revolusi Industri Keempat.
Dunia usaha pun harus menciptakan kondisi yang mana teknologi dibuat dan disebarluaskan dengan aman dan memperhatikan pertimbangan-pertimbangan sosial.
Tidak hanya itu, pemerintah juga harus aktif terlibat dalam pemberlakuan teknologi di tengah masyarakat.
Pembuat kebijakan harus bekerja sama erat dengan penemu teknologi dan pengusaha yang memimpin revolusi, jangan sampai tertinggal.
Kita semua, sebagai individu, harus melek informasi agar paham dan mampu menyikapi isu-isu baru yang muncul dari interaksi multi-dimensional antara teknologi dan masyarakat.
Revolusi Industri Keempat akan menghadirkan perubahan-perubahan sistemis yang memuntut keterlibatan kolaboratif, dan kita perlu mempertimbangkan cara-cara kerja sama baru, baik di ruang publik maupun swasta.
Laju perubahan akan terus bertambah cepat, kita perlu menjaga transparansi bagi semua pemangku kepentingan agar mereka bisa menilai risiko dan keuntungan setiap perkembangan baru.
Kita hidup di era kompleksitas, dan kepemimpinan yang kuat menuntut pergeseran besar-besaran dalam hal menyusun keterlibatan kolaboratif untuk masa depan.
Apabila kita ingin menghindari hasil distopia, bersama kita harus merancang visi masa depan yang diidam-idamkan.
Four Ways Out
BERKELEY – When an economy falls into a depression, governments can try four things to return employment to its normal level and production to its “potential” level.
Call them fiscal policy, credit policy, monetary policy, and inflation.
Inflation is the most straightforward to explain: the government prints up lots of banknotes, and spends them.
The extra cash in the economy raises prices.
As prices rise, people don’t want to hold cash in their pockets or their bank accounts – its value is melting away every day – so they step up the pace at which they spend, trying to get their wealth out of depreciating cash and into real assets that are worth something.
This spending pulls people out of unemployment and into jobs, and pushes capacity utilization up to normal and production up to “potential” levels.
But sane people would rather avoid inflation.
It is a very dangerous expedient, one that undermines standards of value, renders economic calculation virtually impossible, and redistributes wealth at random.
As John Maynard Keynes put it, “there is no subtler, no surer means of overturning the existing basis of society than to debauch the currency.
The process engages all the hidden forces of economic law on the side of destruction, and does it in a manner which not one man in a million is able to diagnose…” But governments will resort to inflation before they will allow another Great Depression – we just would very much rather not go there, if there is any alternative way to restore employment and production.
The standard way to fight incipient depressions is through monetary policy.
When employment and output threaten to decline, the central bank buys up government bonds for immediate cash, thus shortening the duration of the safe assets that investors hold.
With fewer safe, money-yielding assets in the financial market, the price of safe wealth rises.
This makes it more worthwhile for businesses to invest in expanding their capacity, thus trading away cash they could distribute to their shareholders today for a better market position that will allow them to reward their shareholders in the future.
This boost in future-oriented spending today pulls people out of unemployment and pushes up capacity utilization.
The problem with monetary policy is that, in responding to today’s crisis, the world’s central banks have bought so many safe government bonds for so much cash that the price of safe wealth in the near future is absolutely flat – the nominal interest rate on government securities is zero.
Monetary policy cannot make safe wealth in the future any more valuable.
And this is too bad, for if we could prevent a depression with monetary policy alone, we would do so, as it is the policy tool for macroeconomic stabilization that we know best and that carries the least risk of disruptive side effects.
The third tool is credit policy.
We would like to boost spending immediately by getting businesses to invest not only in projects that trade safe cash now for safe profits in the future, but also in those that are risky or uncertain.
But few businesses are currently able to raise money to do so.
Risky projects are at a steep discount today, because the private-sector financial market’s risk tolerance has collapsed.
No one is willing to buy assets and take on additional uncertainty, because everyone fears that somebody else knows more than they do – namely, that anyone would be a fool to buy.
Although the world’s central banks and finance ministries have been devising many ingenious and innovative policies to stimulate credit, so far they have not had much success.
This brings us to the fourth tool: fiscal policy.
Have the government borrow and spend, thereby pulling people out of unemployment and pushing up capacity utilization to normal levels.
There are drawbacks: the subsequent deadweight loss of financing all the extra government debt that has been incurred, and the fear that too rapid a run-up in debt may discourage private investors from building physical assets, which form the tax base for the future governments that will have to amortize the extra debt.
But when you have only two tools left, neither of which is perfect for the job, the rational thing is to try both – credit policy and fiscal policy – at the same time.
That is what the Obama administration is attempting to do right now.
Françafrique at 50
DAKAR – This month, Africa’s Francophone countries will mark the 50th anniversary of their independence, and of the ties they maintain with France.
But is there much to celebrate?
Even before French President Charles de Gaulle took office in 1958, he foresaw the wave of revolutionary nationalism that would soon sweep across Africa, Asia, Latin America, and the Middle East.
As French president, he sought to circumvent that tide by proposing to the leaders of France’s African colonies a negotiated settlement for independence.
To accept de Gaulle’s offer, these leaders had to agree, among other things, to allow the stationing of French troops on their territory, provide France with a steady supply of raw materials at pre-determined prices, assume all colonial-era debts incurred by France, maintain the CFA Franc as their common currency, and grant the French Treasury veto authority over their sub-regional central banks.
De Gaulle got most of what he wanted, and granted independence.
Francophone Africa has been paying for independence ever since.
French troops have repeatedly intervened in Chad, Gabon, Zaire, Central Africa, Togo, and Côte d’Ivoire to prop up and protect complacent, corrupt, undemocratic, and incompetent leaders, remove recalcitrant ones, or curb civil unrest.
In Rwanda, France has yet to live down its perceived role in enabling the 1994 genocide.
On the monetary front, the CFA Franc Zone’s member countries dismantled the federal structure that united them during French occupation and erected trade barriers instead.
The CFA franc issued by two sub-regional central banks (BCEAO and BEAC) are not interchangeable.
As a result, regional trade and economic integration have been stifled.
The ensuing economic difficulties were exacerbated under President François Mitterrand, whose prime minister, Pierre Bérégovoy, pursued a strong French franc – a policy that ultimately led to a massive 100% devaluation of the CFA franc in 1994.
And the euro’s appreciation against the dollar from 2002 until very recently meant that the shift in the CFA franc’s exchange-rate peg from the French franc to the euro caused a repeat of that scenario.
With the bulk of their exports denominated in US dollars and their imports priced mainly in euros, chronic structural deficits have wrecked the Franc Zone economies, and the prospect of a second devaluation looms larger by the day.
More appalling is the fact that France guarantees the CFA franc’s free convertibility into hard currency, originally on the condition that all 15 Franc Zone countries surrender 100% of their foreign reserves to the French Treasury.
The amount was reduced to 65%, and then 50%, in 2005, but France still deducts its share directly from these countries’ export earnings.
Moreover, the mandatory 20% foreign exchange cover stipulated in the convention signed with France in 1962 now stands at 110%.
And a foreign-exchange control enacted in 1993 ensures that only France benefits from this capital drain by limiting the free flow of capital to France alone.
The ensuing massive capital flight has bled the region’s economies and eroded their competitiveness.
This is a shame, because the economic situation elsewhere in Africa has been improving in recent years – mostly in Eastern and Southern Africa, where economic integration is proceeding within the Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa (COMESA) and the Southern Africa Development Community (SADC).
Unfortunately, West Africa’s regional grouping, the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), is not as effective.
With the establishment of ECOWAS, the Franc Zone countries created two sub-regional groupings, WAEMU and CEMAC, in a bid to curb British, American, and Nigerian influence.
As a result, West African countries are mostly missing out on Africa’s current revival – and the prospect of a prolonged period of stagnation in the eurozone certainly won’t help.
The imbalanced relationship between France and its former African colonies would beggar belief if the psychology of Africa’s “liberators” 50 years ago were overlooked.
Senegal’s first president, Léopold Sédar Senghor, was a strong believer in white supremacy who once wrote that “reason is Helennic; emotion is Negro.”
Leon Mba, the first Gabonese president, was such a Francophile that he bequeathed his personal fortune to France in order to finance the construction of a hospital in Paris.
Similarly, the founder of Côte d’Ivoire, Félix Houphouët-Boigny, coined the word “Françafrique” to underline the total osmosis between France and its former colonies.
Houphouët-Boigny’s support for France’s African policy led him to establish diplomatic ties with South Africa’s apartheid regime and make his country a supply-transit route for the Biafra secessionists.
These leaders were unlikely ever to dispute France’s Diktat, and the same applies to their heirs.
Indicted French child abductors were freed by Chad at France’s request.
In Mali, several suspected terrorists – members of a local branch of Al Qaeda – were set free in exchange for a lone French hostage.
Senegalese President Abdoulaye Wade once labeled the CFA franc a colonial relic – but that was when he was an opposition leader.
Now he considers it the best currency in the world.
This economic and psychological status quo ensures that, after 50 years of independence, true emancipation for Françafrique will remain a distant prospect.
If there is something to celebrate, it is that the balance of global economic power is shifting to emerging countries, and that new role models and a new generation raised in a globalized world are becoming ready to assume the mantle of leadership.&nbsp;
France and Germany Must Act in Iraq
Next week, President Bush, President Chirac, and Chancellor Schroeder will meet on the cliffs of Normandy to mark the 60th anniversary of the D-Day invasions that led to the liberation of Europe.
They should also seize the moment to liberate themselves from the bitterness that has divided the Atlantic Alliance over the Iraq War, argue Pierre Lellouche and Christoph Bertram.
When the United States launched the war against Saddam Hussein's Iraq, France and Germany rightly warned that the invasion could well end up worsening instability in the Middle East and increase the threat of radical Islamic terror.
But now that America and its coalition have proven themselves to be incapable of bringing stability to Iraq on their own, the French and German governments can no longer rest and smugly say, "I told you so," as the situation deteriorates even further.
Both governments must now become seriously and fully engaged in what must now be a united Western effort.
Of course, it would be best for everyone - France and Germany included - if the current US-led coalition were to succeed and Iraq could turn into a pillar of Middle East stability and modernization.
Yet, however desirable this outcome, it is no longer likely (if it ever was).
Internal stability and economic recovery continue to be elusive, with the specter of civil war hovering ever closer.
A divided Iraq at war with itself would be a disaster for the region, for America's international credibility and authority, and for transatlantic relations.
In an already fragile region, a major Arab country like Iraq would most likely prompt interventions by its nervous neighbors - of which there is no shortage - if it turns into a failed state.
Instead of the rule of law, there would be the law of the mafia, of terrorist groups, and of tribal militias.
Many of them are already in place.
Instead of moving toward modernization and development, the region would be confirmed as a cockpit for conflict, a threat to itself and to the world beyond.
Were the US forced to withdraw in failure, Islamic terrorist groups would claim a historic victory, promising more bloodshed for the West.
Moreover, America might also once again retreat bitterly into isolationism, blaming her failure on the UN and on disloyal European allies.
So the stakes are high in Iraq, for Europeans no less than for Americans.
That is why it is time that even those who have been most skeptical about US policy in Iraq start to do something about it.