First, these are new states whose sovereignty was often contested at their birth in 1991, and that have remained weak.
Their independence was a result of the USSR’s collapse, and, while some had national revolutions, in most Soviet elites and political culture remained entrenched.
Corruption is rife, state capture by powerful vested interests is the norm, and institutional effectiveness and capacity for reform are weak.
Second, they have the economies of weak states.
With the crucial exception of energy-rich Azerbaijan, they have few natural resources or high-value manufactures, and have large agricultural sectors.
They also depend on economic rents or Russian derivatives rather than adding value themselves – Ukraine makes profits from gas transit, Belarus from oil refining.
Many sell raw materials or base products – Ukrainian steel, for example – where export competitiveness depends less on product quality than on global commodity prices.
The two economies in the region that appear most successful – Belarus and Azerbaijan – are the furthest from the EU model. Their good fortune is not due to their domestic policies, but to hydrocarbons in Azerbaijan’s case and, in Belarus, to Russian subsidies.
The emulation effect that spurred Central European reform in the 1990’s is not working farther east.
Unlike the EU accession candidates of the 1990’s, the states of Eastern Europe and the Caucasus have little incentive or capacity to adopt the Union’s body of law, the acquis communautaire, and move up the value chain.
Third, although they would no doubt protest loudly at such a description, states like Ukraine are better thought of as balancers rather than joiners.
Playing a game of balance between Russia and the West allows the elite to remain in power, and to preserve the oligarchical economy in an otherwise harmful equilibrium of semi-reform.
Indeed, local leaders are modern-day Titos, unable or unwilling to join either Europe or Russia.
But both Russia and the West are sufficiently interested that they feed the game of balance with enough resources to enable local leaders to fend off rivals and excuse their own lack of reform.
Some are reluctant balancers.
Moldova’s current government, the Alliance for European Integration, might be a lot more pro-European if it had not seen how Russia treated supposedly pro-Western governments in Georgia and Ukraine before it.
Some play the game with relish – ironically, Belarus’s President Aleksander Lukashenka is suddenly something of a regional role model in this regard.
The increasing role of other powers in the region – Iran and Turkey, but China above all – gives local leaders even more wriggle room, particularly because, as Lukashenka said in characteristically unguarded fashion during a visit to Beijing, “China’s investment has never had any political strings attached.”
Fourth, elements of the “Beijing Consensus” are increasingly entering the region by the back door.
As Yanukovych’s Ukraine rolls back democratic reforms, Foreign Minister Kostiantyn Gryshchenko says that Ukraine should “use all that is best from China’s experience,” particularly “the ability to think and act strategically” – which is, of course, easier in countries where the government faces no opposition.
The EU can continue muddle along with its one-size-fits-all policy of “enlargement-lite” in the region.
Or it can work harder to turn balancers into joiners.
There are genuine prospects for changing the incentive structure in small states like Moldova, particularly if the EU can help build up long-term institutional capacities.
But, elsewhere in the region, the Union should recognize the reality of each individual game of balance, and work within the limits of what is possible in order to promote EU interests.
First, the EU should work to Finlandize Ukraine, whose foreign policy, like Tito’s, is now officially “non-aligned.”
NATO expansion is off the table.
Yanukovych has leaned towards Russia in the short term, but has already reached the point that he needs other powers to balance Russia.
The EU can accept Ukraine’s foreign-policy constraints, while concentrating on helping it transform its economic and social structures, and preserving its democracy.
A second strategy is to Serbianize Georgia.
Like Serbia and Kosovo, Georgia should be encouraged, if not to forget about its rebel provinces, then to abandon the kind of manifest-destiny politics that subordinates everything to the recovery of sacred lands, leaving the country free to concentrate on internal reform.
Finally, the EU should work to Francoize Belarus.
Like Spain in the dictator’s final years, a political opening is unlikely.
But the Belarusian economic model cannot survive, with the trade deficit forecast to exceed $7 billion (14% of GDP) this year.
Belarus cannot borrow enough to cover this.
As with Spain under Franco, Belarus’s economy will change before Lukashenka does, laying the basis for rapid development once he is gone.
East Timor’s Example
MANILA &#45;&#45; East Timor, now known as Timor-Leste, is the world’s newest democracy.
It may have a population of less than one million, but it has a proud, heroic history and a rich culture built up over centuries of diverse ethnic and colonial influences.
The island attracted Chinese and Malay traders in the fifteenth century.
The Portuguese arrived not long after, and stayed 400 years.
Now it is attracting attention as an example of United Nations-led nation-building.
The UN Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT), headed by Atul Khare, consists of a civilian staff of 1,568, of which 334 are volunteers, and a police commissioner, Rodolfo Tor, with 1,623 police personnel from 39 countries.
UNMIT’s main job is a difficult one: bringing about national reconciliation.
While peaceful parliamentary elections were held on June 30, an atmosphere of apprehension has prevailed ever since.
Neither the former ruling party, Fretilin, nor the newly formed CNRT, led by Xanana Gusmão, the hero of the resistance to Indonesia’s occupation, won an outright majority.
At first, the UN, like many Timorese, including José Ramos-Horta, the country’s Nobel Laureate president who won election last May, had hoped that a national unity government could be formed.
But a month-long attempt to broker an inclusive government failed.
So, in August, Ramos-Horta ended the deadlock by swearing in Gusmão, a long-term political ally and former president, as prime minister.
Gusmão had forged a coalition with three other centre-left parties.
Together they won a narrow 51% majority of the popular vote, giving them 37 of the 65 seats in parliament.
Gusmão’s main rival, Mari Alkatiri, Fretilin’s leader and a former prime minister, denounced Ramos-Horta’s decision.
Fretilin, he said, would not cooperate with an “illegal and unconstitutional” government.
The constitution is open to interpretation, and he argues that Fretilin, which won the largest share of the vote (29%), should have been asked first to form a government – even a minority one.
Fretilin at first sought to fight the decision through non-violent means.
But some of its supporters began venting their anger on the streets.
Groups of angry marauding young men armed with stones and slingshots ran amok, setting up roadblocks and torching buildings.
But this did not last long, thanks to both the UN and the democratic processes it is helping to nurture.
Of course, Timor Leste has been in something of a political limbo since last year, when clashes between rival factions in the security forces led to a brief breakdown of law and order.
But with security now mainly in the hands of UN police and Australian and New Zealand peacekeepers, the political process is being given a chance to work itself out.
Gusmão will now need to prove himself at the head of an inexperienced government.
One big test will be whether the estimated 100,000 displaced people, amounting to 10% of the population, many living in tent camps, feel safe enough to return home.
If Fretilin persists in its decision to obstruct the government, instability will persist.
This is where the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) can help.
At the top of the agenda at ASEAN’s Leaders Summit in Singapore this month is the adoption of a Charter to embody its “One Vision, One identity, One Community” concept for Southeast Asia.
Timor-Leste is still only an observer in the ASEAN family, but it appears able to grasp – far better than Myanmar, an ASEAN member state – the need for a rules-based ASEAN that stands for democratic governance even in the most difficult of circumstances.
Indeed, the Timorese people have consistently shown that what they want from their government is openness, dialogue, and majority voting under the rule of law.
Myanmar’s people want the same, but their country is being pushed towards collapse by years of political and economic crisis, and might well become ASEAN’s pariah, like Africa’s Zimbabwe.
That should stand as a warning to Timor Leste’s clashing factions, lest any of them conclude that repression and dictatorship are the best solution.
Dying to Live
FREETOWN, SIERRA LEONE – I was a young medical officer working at the Emergency Unit of the Ola During Children’s Hospital in Sierra Leone when I advised the mother of a child with severe malaria to tell a blatant lie.
Her daughter Mariama needed a life-saving blood transfusion.
But her mother had no money to pay for the screening tests and to compensate the blood donor.
I had seen many children die while their parents frantically sought the necessary funds.
Determined to save Mariama’s life, I told her mother to go home and announce the death of her daughter.
I knew this would provoke the sympathy of her relatives, and they would scrape together their meager resources to ensure a proper funeral.
The mother agreed, and when she returned six hours later, she threw enough money on the table to cover all of Mariama’s care: a blood transfusion and treatment for malaria and worm infestation.
A few days later, I discharged the still weak but recovering four-year-old from the hospital.
Though Mariama’s illness did not move her relatives to action, her death did.
The same thing happened, on a much larger scale, during the Ebola epidemic in West Africa.
It is believed that the epidemic first took hold in the forested regions of Guinea in December 2013, then gradually spread into Sierra Leone and Liberia.
The international community watched as the disease ravaged the three countries, decimating villages, wiping out entire families, and bringing economies to a standstill.
But, at the start, it attracted little attention.
The international community was content to ignore the truth, until the epidemic had become so widespread that they no longer could.
By then, however, it was too late to avert a major catastrophe.
We are still learning the full extent of the Ebola disaster in West Africa.
For fear of catching the disease, schools were closed, with students and teachers staying at home.
Indeed, many workers stayed home as well, causing restaurants, bars, and hotels to cease functioning and the economy to grind to a halt.
Half of all private-sector jobs were lost.
Farmers’ self-isolation led to a 30% drop in agricultural output.
People’s social lives stalled as well.
A curfew was imposed in many districts, and long-distance travel was discouraged.
In several towns, accepting a visitor into your home meant the risk of a heavy fine.
Nonetheless, the disease spread into urban areas and, like a wildfire, engulfed the three countries and spilled into others.
To date, more than 8,500 infections and 3,500 deaths have been reported just in Sierra Leone.
The health sector has perhaps been the hardest hit.
The death of more than 220 health-care workers left only 3.4 skilled health personnel for every 10,000 citizens.
As fear of Ebola mounted, many citizens stopped using health services, reflected in a 23% drop in births in hospitals or clinics, a 21% drop in children receiving basic immunization, and a 39% drop in children treated for malaria.
As a result, these countries experienced a resurgence in vaccine-preventable diseases, malaria, maternal and child deaths, and acute malnutrition.
In this sense, the worst may be yet to come.
But Sierra Leone is picking up the pieces, and has embarked on a two-year recovery plan.
The first priority is to get the number of Ebola cases to zero and keep it there.
This means changing the conditions that allowed it to spread so rapidly in the first place.
The first step is to rebuild the health-care system.
The plan demands the restoration of health-care services in 40 hospitals and 1,300 primary health-care facilities across the country, so that children and mothers can receive free essential care, vaccinations, and treatment for diseases like tuberculosis, HIV/AIDS, and malaria.
Moreover, in order to bolster safety – and restore confidence – in the health-care system, the plan calls for better infection-control practices and training for a new cadre of skilled workers.
And it includes closer cooperation with community groups, which should be engaged in disease surveillance and response.
The post-Ebola recovery will not be quick, easy, or cheap.
In Sierra Leone alone, it is expected to cost $1.3 billion – $896.2 million of which has yet to be procured.
To close that gap, we need help from our African partners and the broader international community.
Many years ago, without the help of a lie, Mariama would have died.
Today, we do not need lies.
We need genuine engagement, open communication, and mutual accountability, at the local, national, regional, and global levels.
We have already seen how a lack of essential health-care services can devastate a country, taking thousands of lives and shattering many more.
We came together as a country to beat Ebola, and we are committed to prevent future epidemics.
With ongoing international support, we will do just that.
Ebola and Innovation
BOSTON – Lives are not all that have been lost in the ongoing Ebola crisis.
In recent discussions about how to combat the virus, the methodical rigor of science and medicine has given way to hyperbolic politics and public hysteria.
To be sure, informed, data-driven public policy to manage the current outbreak must remain a top priority.
But it is equally important to take stock of the epidemic’s lessons and to ensure that we are prepared for the emergence of other diseases.
Two major lessons should be learned from the current Ebola outbreak.
First, the fight against a single disease must not come at the expense of strengthening an entire health-care system.
Countries with fragile health systems may be able to tackle a given ailment with the help of NGOs and foreign governments, but they are likely to be dangerously unprepared when confronted with unexpected outbreaks of new diseases.
In Liberia, for example, the prevalence of malaria in children under the age of five declined from 66% in 2005 to below 32% in 2011.
Nonetheless, when the Ebola virus entered Liberia from neighboring Guinea earlier this year, the country’s health-care infrastructure was quickly overwhelmed.
More than 2,000 Liberians have died of the disease, and the virus remains rampant.
Similarly, unless they strengthen the health-care system as a whole, other countries that have performed well in some areas – say, the fight against Ebola – could still face large death tolls and long-term economic turmoil.
The second lesson that the Ebola epidemic holds concerns major gaps in our ability to develop new methods and technologies to fight the virus and other diseases like it.
Our policies and approaches have too often been reactive, not proactive.
As a result, affordable and easy-to-use protective equipment for frontline health-care workers and point-of-care tests that are quick, reliable, robust, and cost-effective have been hard to find.
The public and non-profit sectors should support innovations that are not only focused on solving immediate problems, but that also address potential future challenges.
The United States Agency for International Development, the White House Office of Science and Technology, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, and the Department of Defense have declared Ebola a “Grand Challenge for Development” and have launched an effort to sponsor practical, cost-effective innovations to treat and prevent it.
This is an important step in the right direction, but such efforts need to start well before an outbreak if they are to have a significant impact.
New technologies require time to be tested before they can be deployed in the field, and scaling up to large-scale production is a major challenge for any new invention.
The Ebola crisis has shown that we need to think about developing our ability to innovate at the most basic level.
Just as health-care systems in the developing world need to be strengthened, we also need to build up our capacity to develop new solutions for similar challenges when they arise.
Engineering schools often fail to provide students with knowledge or understanding of the challenges faced by those outside of the developed world. Medical students and public-health professionals sometimes study or do internships in places where the disease burden is high; but a minuscule number of similar opportunities are available to engineers and technologists.
As a result, talented scientists and engineers are often grossly unaware of problems that need to be solved, and even those that might be motivated to do so are unlikely to apply their training to address new and emerging threats.
Developing technology takes time and commitment.
In addition to promoting awareness of global challenges in science and engineering schools, and providing opportunities for students to start addressing them in the field, we need to establish mechanisms that will foster and sustain the ideas that this process brings forward.
By creating research grants that do not expire as soon as an outbreak is under control, we would substantially increase our portfolio of solutions to manage the next epidemic better.
When faced with the next Ebola-like challenge, our ability to meet it will depend on the strength of local institutions and our ability to develop the right tools with which to fight it.
There is no telling how many lives may depend on the steps we take now.
Ebola and Inequality
NEW YORK – The Ebola crisis reminds us, once again, of the downside of globalization.
Not only good things – like principles of social justice and gender equality – cross borders more easily than ever before; so do malign influences like environmental problems and disease.
The crisis also reminds us of the importance of government and civil society.
We do not turn to the private sector to control the spread of a disease like Ebola.
Rather, we turn to institutions – the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) in the United States, the World Health Organization (WHO), and Médecins Sans Frontières, the remarkable group of doctors and nurses who risk their lives to save those of others in poor countries around the world.
Even right-wing fanatics who want to dismantle government institutions turn to them when facing a crisis like that caused by Ebola.
Governments may not do a perfect job in addressing such crises, but one of the reasons that they have not done as well as we would hope is that we have underfunded the relevant agencies at the national and global level.
The Ebola episode holds further lessons.
One reason that the disease spread so rapidly in Liberia and Sierra Leone is that both are war-ravaged countries, where a large proportion of the population is malnourished and the health-care system has been devastated.
Moreover, where the private sector does play an essential role – vaccine development – it has little incentive to devote resources to diseases that afflict the poor or poor countries.
It is only when advanced countries are threatened that there is sufficient impetus to invest in vaccines to confront diseases like Ebola.
This is not so much a criticism of the private sector; after all, drug companies are not in business out of the goodness of their hearts, and there is no money in preventing or curing the diseases of the poor.
Rather, what the Ebola crisis calls into question is our reliance on the private sector to do the things that governments perform best.
Indeed, it appears that with more public funding, an Ebola vaccine could have been developed years ago.
America’s failures in this regard have drawn particular attention – so much so that some African countries are treating visitors from the US with special precautions.
But this just echoes a more fundamental problem: America’s largely private health-care system is failing.
True, at the top end, the US has some of the world’s leading hospitals, research universities, and advanced medical centers.
But, though the US spends more per capita and as a percentage of its GDP on medical care than any other country, its health outcomes are truly disappointing.
American male life expectancy at birth is the worst of 17 high-income countries – almost four years shorter than in Switzerland, Australia, and Japan.
And it is the second worst for women, more than five years below life expectancy in Japan.
Other health metrics are equally disappointing, with data indicating poorer health outcomes for Americans throughout their lives.
And, for at least three decades, matters have been getting worse.
Many factors contribute to America’s health lag, with lessons that are relevant for other countries as well.
For starters, access to medicine matters.
With the US among the few advanced countries that does not recognize access as a basic human right, and more reliant than others on the private sector, it is no surprise that many Americans do not&nbsp;get the medicines they need.
Though the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (Obamacare) has improved matters, health-insurance coverage remains weak, with almost half of the 50 US states refusing to expand Medicaid, the health-care financing program for America’s poor.
Moreover, the US has one of the highest rates of childhood poverty among the advanced countries (which was especially true before austerity policies dramatically increased poverty in several European countries), and lack of nutrition and health care in childhood has lifelong effects.
Meanwhile, America’s gun laws contribute to the highest incidence of violent deaths among advanced countries, and its dependence on the automobile underpins a high rate of highway fatalities.
America’s outsize inequality, too, is a critical factor in its health lag, especially combined with the factors mentioned above.
With more poverty, more childhood poverty, more people without access to health care, decent housing, and education, and more people facing food insecurity (often consuming cheap foods that contribute to obesity), it is no surprise that US health outcomes are bad.
But health outcomes are also worse in the US than elsewhere for those with higher incomes and insurance coverage.
Perhaps this, too, is related to higher inequality than in other advanced countries.
Health, we know, is related to stress.
Those striving to climb the ladder of success know the consequences of failure.
In the US, the rungs of the ladder are farther apart than elsewhere, and the distance from the top to the bottom is greater.
That means more anxiety, which translates into poorer health.
Good health is a blessing.
But how countries structure their health-care system – and their society – makes a huge difference in terms of outcomes.
America and the world pay a high price for excessive reliance on market forces and an insufficient attention to broader values, including equality and social justice.
Ebola in America
NEW YORK – Until Thomas Eric Duncan brought Ebola into the United States, the disease was largely dismissed as an exotic pestilence of concern mainly to impoverished West Africa, and those who dared to volunteer there.
And its transmission to two nurses responsible for Duncan’s care – likely resulting from several breaches of medical protocol – has focused intense scrutiny on US preparedness for a possible outbreak.
President Barack Obama even announced last week the appointment of an “Ebola Czar” to manage the detection, isolation, and control of the virus in the US.
Medical and public health experts had been assuring the public that there was little cause for fear.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and other health agencies were working behind the scenes, painstakingly tracing anyone who may have come into contact with Duncan and quarantining those who might transmit the disease.
Transmission in the US was nearly impossible, owing to the strength of the US health system, it was thought.
But, as recent events have illustrated, robust health agencies should not be taken for granted.
In fact, over the past decade, the government has slashed budgets at several top health agencies, including the CDC, the National Institutes of Health (NIH), and state and local health departments.
Between 2005 and 2012, for example, the CDC&nbsp;lost 17% of its funding, and officials recently reported that funding allocated for Ebola-type health emergencies is $1 billion less than it was in 2003.
The challenges faced at the state and local levels may be even greater.
Some 23% of local health departments reported that public health preparedness programs were reduced or even eliminated in 2011, while a further 15% reported similar cuts in 2012.
In 2014 alone, the Hospital Preparedness Program, which links regional hospitals with local health departments to prepare for potential public health emergencies, suffered $100 million in budget cuts.
These reductions have already left their mark.
The Hospital Preparedness Program was designed specifically to train health personnel on disease containment in the setting of unforeseen epidemics, such as Ebola.
Had it been adequately funded, perhaps the two nurses now infected would still be healthy.
The NIH, which funds important advances in our understanding and treatment of diseases like Ebola, has also suffered cutbacks.
Its budget has stagnated for most of the past decade, except for years when it was dramatically reduced, such as in 2013.
This has forced productive research laboratories to close, putting potentially life-saving research – like that on an Ebola vaccine – on the back burner.
One explanation for the drastic budget cuts of recent years is that public health institutions usually operate with little fanfare and out of the public eye.
At their best, they prevent disease without a trace, leaving little visible evidence of their crucial function.
Hence, funding for public health has been a tough sell in good economic times, and is one of the first targets for retrenchment.
But global health emergencies like the current Ebola epidemic highlight the folly of these fiscal priorities.
Though we may not lean too heavily on our health infrastructure typically, its importance becomes all too apparent when disease and death come knocking at our door.
Indeed, though the threat of a serious Ebola outbreak in the US remains minimal, that is no reason for complacency.
As the number of cases in West Africa rises, so does the potential for outbreaks outside of that context.
And when members of the international community cannot contain the epidemic, the richest and most powerful actor, namely the US, has an obligation to step in and try to do so.
But budget cuts have damaged America’s ability to fulfill this obligation, and thus may cost more than policymakers bargained for.
In late September, Obama committed $88 million and 3,000 troops to support the fight against Ebola in Liberia.
But his decision came only after the epidemic had been smoldering for many months, with 6,000 Ebola cases confirmed and many more believed to be undetected.
Had CDC funding been at an appropriate level, US support – in the form of highly trained public health professionals, rather than ground troops – might have been deployed much earlier and been more effective.
Ironically, the CDC and its leadership have come under intense scrutiny over the mishandling of Duncan’s care and the Ebola transmissions that resulted from it.
However, had the same lawmakers who are now deriding the CDC listened to pleas for more support and warnings of the consequences of poor funding over the past several years, perhaps the US would not be in the situation in which it finds itself today.
The guiding principle of public health is to prevent disease before it strikes, and this requires long-term investment in institutions that can protect us.
Our collective health and wellbeing are evidence of such institutions’ effectiveness.
Fortunately, the Ebola outbreak is unlikely to expose Americans fully to the poor fiscal choices of the past decade.
But the disease’s sudden appearance on the global scene serves as a stark reminder of what can happen if we do not remain vigilant.
The next epidemic could be just around the corner.
We must ensure that we are fully prepared.
Fighting Ebola on All Fronts
PARIS – Judging by the media coverage in the United States and Europe of the Ebola outbreak in West Africa, one might conclude that conditions in the affected countries are gradually improving.
But, though the epidemic is no longer a front-page story, the virus is far from being contained.
On the contrary, it remains a serious global health threat.
I recently traveled to Conakry, the capital of Guinea, together with French President François Hollande, and then visited Macenta, a rural district in the country’s forest region, close to where the outbreak began.
In both places, I witnessed firsthand the virus’s devastating impact: suffering, fear, despair, and, ultimately, death.
Even the trivial has become weighted with meaning: no one shook hands.
The truth is that the Ebola virus continues to spread – and quickly.
Granted, it has been contained in Liberia, but only in Liberia, and even there, there is no way to ensure that another outbreak will not occur.
Ebola is spreading in ways that differ from what we have previously seen.
The virus does not spread as rapidly as many others, such as influenza, which in the past limited the scale of epidemics, particularly because outbreaks were confined to rural areas.
But this time, the virus has entered cities and towns, making it especially dangerous.
High population density provides fertile ground for any virus, let alone Ebola.
West Africa’s treacherous combination of widespread poverty, scarce medical resources, and crowded urban areas can be devastatingly deadly.
Nearly 7,500 people are reported to have died from Ebola this year. More than 16,000 are reported to have been infected.
These are ballpark figures, and while they provide important information about the trajectory of the epidemic and the effectiveness of response efforts, officials warn that the real numbers are probably far higher.
Health is a global public good.
In most countries, the right to health is enshrined in the constitution or legislation.
The right, according to the World Health Organization (WHO), includes “access to timely, acceptable, and affordable health care of appropriate quality.”
But, in the case of viruses like Ebola, few states, if any, can issue such guarantees.
From a moral point of view, it is incumbent upon the international community, with its institutions, authorities, resourceful businesses, and individuals – as well as its knowledge and wealth – to deploy the necessary means to stop the spread of Ebola.
The imperative is equally strong from a purely self-interested point of view.
If the virus is not quickly contained, everyone – every country – will be at risk.
The good news is that Ebola can be contained.
Eventually, it can be eradicated.
If we are to achieve this, however, the virus must be understood and diagnosed.
Its spread must be prevented, and treatment must be offered.
Though there is no clinically proven vaccine against Ebola, this could soon change.
Since the outbreak of the virus in March, the Institut Pasteur, an independent, non-profit research organization, has worked to understand how the virus can be contained and what treatment can be offered.
Our researchers are tracking the spread of the virus to understand how epidemics evolve, and we are working to empower local scientific and medical personnel.
We expect to have two vaccine agents ready for clinical trials in 2015.
The Institut Pasteur’s Ebola Task Force is fighting the virus on the ground in West Africa and in the laboratory in France, studying the virus and how it spreads, and leaving no stone unturned to find a medical solution that will stop this outbreak and prevent new ones.
Together with the WHO and non-governmental organizations including Médecins Sans Frontières and the Red Cross and Red Crescent, the Institut Pasteur is committed to fighting the virus and its causes.
Countries around the world have pledged support, financial and otherwise, to tackle the most immediate concerns: helping affected people and communities.
Many countries already contribute to research into the causes, spread, and treatment of the Ebola virus.
An international “coalition of the willing” has been established, and we call on all states, relevant organizations, interested businesses, and qualified individuals to join it.
Together, we can and will see the end of Ebola.
Ebola and Beyond
WASHINGTON, DC – The United States and Europe have grossly overreacted to a few isolated cases of the Ebola virus within their borders.
These panicked responses are not just futile.
By violating basic scientific principles, they defy the fundamental ethical criterion for compulsory public-health action.
And when it comes to protecting citizens from Ebola – not to mention preventing similar global health crises from emerging in the future – these responses may well be counterproductive.
The most egregious examples of overreach have occurred in the US, where the initial response entailed enhanced screening of travelers from Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone.
More problematic, several states instituted mandatory 21-day quarantines for volunteer health workers returning to the US from Ebola-stricken countries.
Fortunately, the political backlash against the quarantine orders quickly prompted some state governors to ease them.
It is time for developed countries to recognize that the best way to protect their citizens from Ebola is to help stop the spread of the virus in West Africa.
This requires, first and foremost, a sustained “surge response” to Ebola in the three most affected countries.
Such a response must be underpinned by adequate (and considerable) funding; well-trained doctors, nurses, and community health workers; and improved local capacity for diagnosis, treatment, contact tracing, and the isolation of infected individuals.
There is no time to waste.
Indeed, the dearth of bold leadership has already delayed an effective international response to the current Ebola outbreak for far too long, drastically increasing the costs of the crisis.
Beyond stemming the spread of Ebola, the international community must apply the lessons of the current crisis to future potential health hazards, by developing a credible response that emphasizes early, robust, and evidence-based action.
To this end, three key initiatives should be launched.
First, the World Health Organization should commit to an emergency contingency fund that it could deploy for surge capacity as soon as it declares a “public health emergency of international concern.”
Had such funding been available to mount a robust initial response when Ebola emerged, the WHO would have had a strong incentive to declare an international emergency in a timely manner.
In fact, a WHO review committee recommended just such a fund, amounting to at least $100 million, in 2011.
Though that would have been eminently affordable, representing less than 0.5% of international health assistance, the WHO failed to establish it.
The folly of this decision is now painfully obvious, as is the fact that the contingency fund should be significantly larger – up to $500 million.
The second pillar of an effective crisis-response strategy is an emergency reserve workforce – established by the WHO, in cooperation with national governments – comprising well-trained health professionals who are prepared for rapid deployment in low-resource settings.
This would provide countries with weak health-care systems – which are particularly susceptible to disease outbreaks – with the human resources they need to bring health crises quickly under control.
Of course, such measures do not diminish countries’ responsibility for strengthening their health-care systems and safeguarding their populations.
That is why the last and most important step toward preventing future global health crises is the creation of an international health system fund to support national efforts to acquire the capacity both to respond effectively in emergencies and to deliver comprehensive health services in normal times.
Such a fund would fit into the International Health Regulations framework that was agreed to in 2005, and advance the cause of universal health care, based on the principle that all people have a right to health.
Governments would also be expected to allocate adequate domestic funds to achieve these goals, with, for example, African heads of state fulfilling the 2001 Abuja Declaration’s pledge to allocate at least 15% of national budgets to the health sector.
But, for lower-income countries, significant progress toward establishing strong health-care systems would be virtually impossible without support from a sustainable international fund.
Given that creating such a fund would entail a massive multi-billion dollar investment in lower-income countries, social mobilization is the key to generating the necessary political support.
In this sense, the global response to AIDS – spurred by the US President’s Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief and the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis, and Malaria – could serve as a useful model.
Beyond establishing strong health-care infrastructure, national governments will need to develop systems of accountability to deliver health services to their populations.
This includes fair and transparent stewardship of resources, anti-corruption safeguards, tools for monitoring progress, civil-society engagement, and accountability for failures.
To advance these objectives, an international coalition is pushing for a Framework Convention on Global Health, aimed at fostering good governance for health at the local, national, and global levels.
The treaty, based on the principle of a right to health, would provide clear guidelines for the allocation of funding and other responsibilities.
The West African Ebola epidemic should inspire a course correction on international health policy, reinforcing the need for rapid-response tools and strong health-care infrastructure.
Establishing frameworks to provide scalable, sustainable funding to achieve these goals is a wise and affordable investment – one that is in everyone’s interest.
This is one humanitarian response that would provide vast benefits worldwide, now and in the future.
Development for the People
NEW YORK – The Ebola epidemic in West Africa is destroying lives, decimating communities, and orphaning children at a rate not seen since the region’s brutal civil wars ended more than a decade ago.
In Liberia, 60% of markets are now closed; in Sierra Leone, only one-fifth of the 10,000 HIV patients who are on anti-retroviral treatments are still receiving them; and Guinea’s government is reporting a $220 million financing gap because of the crisis.
If the outbreak is not contained soon, most of the economic and social gains achieved since peace was restored in Liberia and Sierra Leone, and since Guinea’s democratic transition began, could be reversed.
All three countries remain fragile, divided, and, as the current crisis highlights, uniquely prone to shocks.
More broadly, the region’s current crisis should inspire reflection about how the world supports and advances development.
One important reason for these countries’ vulnerability is the consistent lack of investment in their populations, which has prevented ordinary citizens from reaping the benefits of economic growth.
Indeed, while the economies of Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone grew rapidly in the ten years prior to the Ebola outbreak – at average annual rates of 2.8%, 10%, and 8%, respectively – their populations have seen little improvement in their daily lives.
More than 65% of foreign direct investment has gone toward mining and logging, which are notorious for generating little employment and concentrating wealth in the hands of a few.
Likewise, though health services in Liberia and Sierra Leone improved after their civil wars ended, quality and coverage have remained well below West African standards.
When Ebola struck, Liberia had only 120 doctors for its four million citizens.
Add to that sprawling urban slums – semi-governed, overcrowded, and poorly sanitized – and it is not surprising that these countries have struggled to contain the epidemic.
The threat that Ebola poses in all three countries extends beyond health care.
Throughout the region, a history of conflict and a legacy of poor governance have fueled a deep distrust of governments and state institutions, as indicated in a 2012 Afrobarometer survey.
Indeed, these countries’ lack of an established social contract has been the main obstacle to establishing political authority and effective governance.
Moreover, this environment has created fertile conditions for the spread of wild theories including that the government and aid workers are conspiring to infect citizens.
Many people deny that the Ebola virus exists at all, claiming that their governments have invented it to raise additional funds – which they will never see – from the international community.
Such doubts and fears are leading families to hide their dead and conduct funerals at night, with some communities going so far as to attack health workers.
All of this is making it extremely difficult to halt the spread of the disease.
With a highly contagious and lethal virus devastating poor and fragmented societies that distrust their leaders, business as usual is not enough.
The only way to halt the current Ebola outbreak, and prevent similar epidemics, is to address the fundamental social and political vulnerabilities that have allowed the virus to flourish.
The key is to place people at the center of development efforts, by increasing investments in health care, education, and other public services.
At the same time, a strong effort must be made to bolster job creation.
With a reliable support structure and adequate economic opportunity, households – and, in turn, countries – become more resilient.
Those at the forefront of the fight against Ebola – including the United Nations Development Program – have been mobilizing communities against the disease, supporting medical teams, and helping survivors and families of the infected cope with the tragedy.
While these efforts could not be more important, they must be backed by a longer-term strategy to strengthen these fragile countries’ defenses.
Ebola will be defeated, but the vulnerabilities that this outbreak has exposed should spur a fundamental shift in focus among policymakers.
The development approach that dominates global thinking today emphasizes economic growth and state-building over social progress.
But the only way to boost a society’s resilience and ability to trust impersonal institutions is to give the people who comprise it the tools – and confidence – they need to prosper.
Diseases Without Borders
DAVOS – Today’s world seems more risk-laden than ever.
The increasingly visible effects of climate change, rising geopolitical tensions, state crisis and collapse, inadequate or unequal economic opportunities, and the spread of infectious diseases – to name just some of the highest-profile threats – have created an environment of great uncertainty.
Will 2015 be the year when these risks come to a head, or the moment when world leaders come together to develop real strategies for mitigating them?
This week, I am joining leaders from the worlds of business, government, politics, the arts, and academia at the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland, to discuss the risks that the world faces.
Of course, determining which challenges merit the most attention will not be easy.
That is where the WEF’s annual Global Risks reports can help.
Drawing on the perspectives of roughly 900 experts and decision-makers from around the world who participate in the WEF’s global risks-perception survey, this year’s report found that, for the first time in its ten-year history, economic risks are taking a backseat to environmental and geopolitical concerns.
Specifically, participants rated interstate conflict with regional consequences as the top risk, in terms of likelihood, facing the world in 2015, with extreme weather events coming in second.
The top risks in terms of impact were water crises and the spread of infectious diseases.
The point, of course, is not simply to highlight how much danger the world currently faces.
By illuminating experts’ top-rated risks, the report highlights important opportunities for action.
According to WEF founder Klaus Schwab, 2015 can be a “year of destiny for humankind.”
Indeed, if global leaders – from multilateral organizations, governments, the private sector, and civil-society groups – seize opportunities for closer cooperation, long-simmering risks can be cooled before they boil over.
One area where concerted, collaborative action can make a major difference is the spread of infectious diseases.
During the meeting in Davos, officials will discuss the creation of a new global pandemic emergency facility that would enable countries to respond quickly to crises within their borders by providing them with the needed funds.
To understand how badly the world needs this capacity, one need look no further than the ongoing Ebola pandemic, which has ravaged West African societies, claiming thousands of lives and upending many more.
A rapid and determined response could have done much to contain the virus.
But the international response was delayed and inadequate.
Indeed, six months into the crisis, just 30 medical-response teams were treating and caring for patients on the ground in Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone.
The shortage of health workers, facilities, and supplies prevented many people from receiving treatment, allowing the virus to spread further.
Fear of the disease’s seemingly inexorable spread hampered trade, business activity, and travel in the affected countries.
In December, the World Bank downgraded its growth estimates for the formerly fast-growing economies of Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone, which are now expected to lose $1.6 billion in income in 2015.
In order to become better prepared to tackle future pandemics, the world must invest now in strengthening public-health systems, bolstering developing countries’ disease-prevention capacity, and establishing new and flexible financing instruments.
A global pandemic emergency facility could mobilize public and private resources and frontload financing, so that when a global health emergency arises, funding is in place to support an immediate response at scale.
As the Ebola crisis has demonstrated, passing the hat once a pandemic has taken hold is far too time-consuming and carries huge economic and, more important, human costs.
Such a global resource could underpin the development of a comprehensive strategy to address the next outbreak, including a plan for putting health workers and supplies on the ground quickly.
It could even provide a market signal for producers of vaccines and drugs.
The WEF’s Global Risks report emphasizes the need for robust plans to face the threat of pandemics.
This is especially urgent in light of the rapid growth of cities and informal settlements – where infectious diseases can spread more easily – in developing countries. We need to start creating those plans now.
After all, we do not know when the next pandemic will strike.
We cannot eliminate global risk.
We can, however, make our economies and societies more resilient and thus better equipped to minimize the impact of the threats we face.
In this sense, forward-thinking initiatives like the global pandemic emergency facility are crucial to making the world a safer place for all of us.
Three Global Health Threats
SAN FRANCISCO – The tragic Ebola outbreak in West Africa has underscored the imperative of strengthening health systems at both the national and global level.
But, though Ebola has focused the world’s attention on systemic shortcomings, the goal must be to combat the abiding epidemics that are quietly inflicting suffering and death on populations worldwide.
Ebola has undoubtedly wrought tremendous agony.
But it is not the first – or the most devastating – pandemic the world has faced.
In fact, smallpox is the deadliest disease known to humanity; until Edward Jenner developed the vaccine in 1796, it was the leading cause of death in Europe.
Before its eradication in 1980, it killed an estimated 300-500 million people.
The Bubonic plague of the fourteenth century killed 75-100 million people – more than half of Europe’s population.
Nearly 75 million people, or 3-5% of the world’s population, died in just a few months during the 1918 influenza pandemic – more than twice the number of people killed in World War I.
The world continues to grapple with HIV/AIDS, which has already caused more than 40 million deaths and infects a similar number of people today, with 95% of the epidemic’s victims living in developing countries. Only when HIV/AIDS began to gain traction in advanced countries were highly effective anti-retroviral therapies developed – therapy that most of the poor people suffering from the disease could not access or afford.
Similarly, the failure of governments, multilateral organizations, and NGOs to respond quickly enough to the Ebola outbreak reflects the fact that the disease has ravaged poor countries.
But, at a time of unprecedented global interconnectedness, everyone has a stake in ensuring that adequate health-care systems and structures are in place to address such a pandemic.
Achieving this requires providing the needed investment; after all, effective national health systems and agile surveillance are the first lines of defense against outbreaks of disease.
At this point, Ebola is not only a health crisis, but also a humanitarian, economic, and political crisis.
To be sure, some progress has been made.
The United Nations Mission for Ebola Emergency Response’s “70/70/60” plan – to isolate 70% of Ebola patients and ensure that 70% of burials are conducted safely within 60 days – has largely been implemented, reducing the number of new cases considerably.
But people are still suffering and dying – often owing to a lack of access to credible information or adequate treatment.
Of course, when it comes to safeguarding the health of populations, there is a fine line between protecting the public and impinging on individual rights.
That is why all public-health interventions must focus first and foremost on scientific facts, and avoid emotional or panicked responses.
In this context, the imposition of mandatory quarantines on travelers from Ebola-affected countries was an obvious policy failure – just as they were when authorities tried to contain the Black Death of 1350 in Europe or the Plague of London in 1665.
Instead of wasting time on fear-based strategies, the international community must leverage human and financial resources to ensure fact-based, concerted, collective action.
Such a united approach is possible; indeed, it has happened before.
At the turn of the century, the establishment of institutions like the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis, and Malaria, the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, and GAVI, the Vaccine Alliance,&nbsp;coincided with a renewed effort to improve global health.
The UN’s commitment to the Millennium Development Goals – which included four health-related targets, covering nutrition, maternal and child health, and infectious diseases – reflected a political consensus to improve health worldwide.
This institutional architecture has facilitated considerable progress in many of these areas; for example, the under-five mortality rate has&nbsp;plummeted by 49% since 1990.
But there is far more to be done.
In regions like Southeast Asia and Sub-Saharan Africa, maternal and child health and infectious diseases remain priorities.
In fact, the ten countries with the highest child mortality rates are all located in Sub-Saharan Africa; a baby born in West Africa is 30 times likelier to die before the age of five than one born in Western Europe.
Even within countries, massive inequalities remain.
For example, there is a ten-fold difference in infant mortality between municipalities in the Mexican states of Guerrero and Nuevo León.
Moreover, silent epidemics have taken hold, particularly in lower-income countries, as the combination of mega-trends like urbanization, population aging, obesity, sedentary lifestyles, smoking, and alcohol consumption has spurred the rise of chronic non-communicable diseases (NCDs).
For adults in most countries, cancer, diabetes, and cardiovascular disease have become leading causes of disability and death.
Emerging infectious diseases like Ebola may be more compelling, but the health impact of chronic NCDs, not to mention their high and growing social and economic costs, is substantially larger.
There is no time to waste.
Policymakers must pursue aggressive action to curb the spread of risk factors like the&nbsp;consumption of tobacco, alcohol, and obesogenic foods.
The world is facing a three-prong health challenge: We must build sustainable national and global health systems that can respond quickly and effectively to crises like Ebola; eliminate or control infectious diseases; and address the quietly rising epidemic of chronic NCDs.
To succeed on all three fronts, we need sustained investment in health infrastructure, management, and personnel.
Equality is key.
This means improving access to health care and education.
But it also means addressing the deeper social inequities that extend beyond the public-health agenda.
In formulating the post-2015 development goals, world leaders must remember that health is a fundamental human right.
The Ethics of Fighting Ebola
PRINCETON – It may, in the end, turn out to be fortunate that a handful of people in developed countries – four in the United States and one in Spain – have contracted Ebola.
Tragic as this was for Thomas Duncan, the only one of these patients who has died, if all of the more than 13,000 cases and nearly 5,000 deaths had occurred in Africa, Ebola would never have aroused nearly as much attention in rich countries.
In this respect, Ebola is – or, rather, was – an example of what is sometimes referred to as the 90/10 rule: 90% of medical research is directed toward illnesses that comprise only 10% of the global burden of disease.
The world has known about the deadly nature of the Ebola virus since 1976; but, because its victims were poor, pharmaceutical companies had no incentive to develop a vaccine.
Indeed, pharmaceutical companies could expect to earn more from a cure for male baldness.
Government research funds in affluent countries are also disproportionately targeted toward the diseases that kill these countries’ citizens, rather than toward diseases like malaria and diarrhea that are responsible for much greater loss of life.
But the tiny number of Ebola cases in rich countries – and the ensuing panic-inducing headlines and quarantine measures – have brought home the global nature of infectious disease today. Mass travel has made effective containment of epidemics extremely difficult.
The best defense against an infectious disease is to fight it where it originates, and that requires good health services.
Ebola appears to have been eradicated from Nigeria, in no small part because that country had a Gates Foundation-supported hospital with personnel trained and equipped to control infectious diseases.
If, over the past decade or two, affluent countries had done more to assist Liberia, Sierra Leone, and Guinea, the current Ebola outbreak could have been minimized, if not prevented.
But now it is too late for that, and scientists are rushing to find both a vaccine and an effective treatment for Ebola.
What ethical considerations should guide them in their search?
The standard way to judge the efficacy of a vaccine is to conduct a trial in which those who could benefit are randomly assigned to two groups, one of which receives the potentially beneficial vaccine, while the other receives a substance with no active ingredients, known as a placebo.
To avoid possible confounding factors, such as greater risk-taking by those who know they have been vaccinated, or the desire of those conducting the trial to show that the vaccine works, the study is “double blind”: Neither the subjects nor those administering the trial and collecting the data know who got the vaccine and who got the placebo.
Only an independent group examining the data sent in from the field has that information.
Without such a trial, the appearance of efficacy may be an illusion, because other factors would have led to a lower rate of infection anyway.
Yet if a promising vaccine is available – and if safety trials in healthy human volunteers who are not at risk of infection demonstrate that it does no harm – to deny it to those who are tending to the sick and dying, at great risk to their own health, seems unethical.
That question will soon need to be answered, because both the pharmaceutical giant GlaxoSmithKline (in conjunction with the US National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases) and the Public Health Agency of Canada have candidate vaccines in development.
At a recent World Health Organization meeting in Geneva, Ripley Ballou, the head of GlaxoSmithKline’s program to develop a vaccine, argued that a randomized controlled trial comparing a potential Ebola vaccine with a vaccine that protects against another virus would be the most ethical way to assess efficacy.
Depending on the outcome, results could be available within three months, allowing production and distribution to go ahead with greater confidence.
Representatives of Médecins Sans Frontières (Doctors without Borders), which has more than 3,000 staff members combating Ebola in the most affected countries, strongly opposed giving placebos to anyone at high risk of contracting the disease.
But Ballou appears to have persuaded many of the participants at the meeting that his proposal will save more lives in the long run.
If that is true, a randomized controlled trial could be the most ethical option.
When it comes to treatment, the situation is different.
In a letter published last month in The Lancet,&nbsp;doctors, scientists, and bioethicists from a wide range of countries – including Guinea, Ghana, Nigeria, and Senegal, as well as Britain, France, Hong Kong, and the United States – argued that a randomized trial is justified only when there is “equipoise,” or balance, between the two options offered.
This can happen when doctors do not know whether a proposed treatment will do more harm than good, or when they are in doubt about which of two treatments is more likely to cure the patient.
But, when facing a disease that kills up to 70% of those who are infected, and no accepted treatment yet exists, patients could reasonably refuse consent to a trial in which they might receive a placebo, rather than an experimental treatment that offers some hope of recovery.
In such cases, it might be more ethical to monitor carefully the outcomes of different treatment centers now, before experimental treatments become available, and then compare these outcomes with those achieved by the same centers after experimental treatments are introduced.
Unlike in a randomized trial, no one would receive a placebo, and it should still be possible to detect which treatments are effective.
Turning the Page on Ebola
WASHINGTON, DC – The Ebola outbreak that began last year in Guinea, Sierra Leone, and Liberia, three of the four countries of the Mano River Union, is the most severe on record since the disease was first diagnosed in Central Africa in 1976.
The impact of the epidemic has been devastating, calling into question our three countries’ significant socioeconomic progress in the aftermath of decades of conflict and instability.
The region has so far registered a total of 25,791 cases and 10,689 deaths – almost ten times the number of deaths from all other Ebola epidemics combined.
For 2014, the projected growth rates for our three countries were 4.5%-11.3%.
These projections have now been reduced to 2.2% at best.
In the absence of mitigation measures, a recession cannot be ruled out.
The uncontrolled spread of the disease exposed the shortcomings of our national health care systems, as well as regional and global institutions’ weak capacity for coordination and effective response.
Simply put, we were ill prepared to cope with, much less prevent, an outbreak on this scale.
We bear a collective responsibility for the thousands of lives lost to Ebola and the tens of thousands affected by the disease.
And, today, thanks to institutional improvement and adaptation, we are closer to winning the fight against Ebola.
Although the disease has not been contained and eradicated throughout the region, its spread has slowed; now we have to start planning our recovery, which must include strengthening the national, regional, and international systems that protect our people’s lives and futures.
We, the presidents of the three affected countries, met in Conakry, Guinea, in February, joined by Côte d’Ivoire, to adopt a common strategy to end the epidemic and guide post-Ebola socioeconomic recovery.
This meeting was followed by a donors meeting in Brussels at the beginning of March, and a meeting in Freetown, Sierra Leone, two weeks later to coordinate our technical committees.
We will continue to build on these efforts in Washington, DC, at the spring meetings of the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank.
We are determined to eradicate Ebola by exchanging information, sharing technical expertise, creating innovative and accessible community health systems, and intensifying public education strategies, including steps that can be shared in families, such as applied water, sanitation, and hygiene (WASH) standards.
Only then can investment by the private sector – the engine of employment and stable livelihoods – begin to recover.
The spread of the Ebola virus has been facilitated by our countries’ shared history and culture, which has enabled the disease to cross borders easily and move quickly from remote rural areas to urban centers.
Unfortunately, the epidemic forced us to close some of our borders, preventing access to relatives and care.
We want our infrastructure, health policies, and economic strengths to benefit people across borders through links – community support systems and development corridors – that encourage collaboration and job creation.
And we ask our international partners to support a common economic stimulus plan, with an emphasis on practical solutions that can enhance growth and increase employment.
Four elements are essential to our recovery effort.
The first component is the creation of resilient public health systems, which requires trained community health workers in order to expand coverage in rural areas.
It also requires nationwide water and sanitation programs and well-equipped centers for the control of infectious diseases in each country.
Second, we need to focus on infrastructure, particularly roads and electricity and telecommunication networks.
We ask the African Development Bank to take the initiative in creating an infrastructure fund, an extension of the Mano River Initiative, launched in 2013, with the objective of furthering regional integration.
And we ask our partners to recognize that programs originally planned on a ten-year time horizon, must be implemented urgently.
Third, we need to support economic recovery by encouraging confidence within the private sector, which has been hit by rising costs in the region.
Specifically, the region would benefit from grants to local entrepreneurs, concessional financing and loans to foreign investors, and budgetary support from the government.
Finally, in line with the recommendation of the Commission for Africa, the United Nations, and the African Union, we ask for a total cancellation of our foreign debt.
This would allow us to recover the fiscal flexibility we need to enable us to co-finance the reconstruction of our health systems.
We urge our international partners to support our economic recovery in the same spirit of cooperation, and with the same sense of urgency, that helped us fight the Ebola virus.
Together, we can build health care systems, infrastructure, and regional institutions that will be stronger than before the start of the epidemic.
Together, we can build a lasting legacy of health and progress for our peoples.
Helping the ECB Cross the Rubicon
PARIS – Eurozone monetary officials are expected to make history when they gather for the European Central Bank’s next policy-setting meeting on January 22.
Observers anticipate that ECB President Mario Draghi and his colleagues will finally cross the Rubicon and announce the launch of a large-scale program of quantitative easing (QE) – in other words, high-volume purchases of government bonds.
Though the ECB has resisted QE for more than five years, even as other major central banks embraced it, Executive Board member Benoît Coeuré has already called it the “baseline option.”
On the face of it, the ECB has many reasons to launch QE.
For two years, inflation has consistently failed to reach the 2% target.
In November, the annual price growth was just 0.3%, while the recent collapse in oil prices will generate further downward pressure in the coming months.
Even more important, inflation expectations have started to de-anchor: forecasters and investors expect the undershooting of the target to persist over the medium term.
Low inflation is already a serious obstacle to economic recovery and rebalancing within the eurozone.
Outright deflation would be an even more dangerous threat.
Moreover, financial markets consider QE so likely that the largest part of its bond-rate and exchange-rate consequences have already been priced in.
Should the ECB disappoint expectations, bond and foreign-exchange markets would confront an abrupt and damaging unwinding of positions: long-term interest rates would rise, stock markets would sink, and the exchange rate would appreciate.
That is not what Europe needs as it struggles to achieve in a year the growth that the United States has already recorded in a single quarter.
Yet hesitations are palpable.
Jens Weidmann, the president of the German Bundesbank, remains openly skeptical.
Though Weidmann does not deny the risk of deflation, he argues that the consequences of recent price data may be less serious than believed, while those of full-fledged QE could be more serious than assumed.
Several of his colleagues share his reservations.
It is important to understand why there is still no agreement in Frankfurt on the best possible course of action.
At a time when the US data seem to validate the Federal Reserve’s strategy, why is the ECB hesitating?
Contrary to conventional wisdom, the issue is not one of pure doctrine.
Yes, the Bundesbank fiercely opposed the ECB’s conditional support of debt-distressed eurozone members and backed legal challenges to Draghi’s innovation, the outright monetary transactions (OMT) scheme.
But German officials do not dispute the legitimacy of wholesale bond purchases for monetary-policy purposes, and that there can be circumstances that require QE.
Orthodoxy rules out providing ECB support to a particular country, because this would violate the separation between monetary and fiscal policy: The authority to commit public resources to the benefit of a particular country belongs exclusively to parliaments, not the central bank.
But a wholesale purchase of government bonds does not raise similar concerns.
Unlike in 2012, when the OMT was announced, the objective of QE is not to help governments keep market access.
In principle, QE has nothing to do with sovereign solvency.
It is a monetary instrument that the central bank must rely on when its policy interest rate has hit the zero lower bound and thus cannot be pushed lower.
The debt level of the government is irrelevant to the decision to use it.
But, by lowering long-term interest rates, central-bank purchases of government debt can help contain government debt service.
In this way, QE can keep solvent a government that otherwise would be insolvent – a nightmare scenario for a central bank.
Japan is a case in point.
The Bank of Japan already holds government securities worth 40% of GDP, and it is committed to annual purchases worth 16% of GDP within the framework of Prime Minister Shinzo Abe’s economic revitalization agenda.
The mammoth size of the BOJ program implies that it has taken full control of the market for government paper.
With annual purchases amounting to twice the deficit, it has become hard to speak of a “market” for government debt.
In fact, the BOJ sets the price.
Such a situation can make the central bank hostage to the government’s behavior.
The BOJ’s action is predicated on Abe’s commitment to restoring the sustainability of public finances once deflation has been defeated and the economy has returned to growth.