But defend it we must, with leaders explaining effectively why rules are necessary, including by educating the public on why the system operates the way it does.
At the same time, policymakers must take a deeper look at the system, and make vital changes.
Specifically, they must adjust how rules are made, to ensure that what results is fit for the modern world.
At a time when change happens at lightning speed, there is a perception that formal rule-making is too slow to keep up.
But the predictable rules that formal processes produce remain critical to reinforce the stability required for sustained prosperity.
What is needed is an updated approach that supports the evolution of law in a constantly evolving environment, thereby ensuring that law is more responsive to the needs of citizens.
The final item on the agenda for reviving the rules-based order, and defeating the world’s destructive Dionysuses, is the most challenging: we must reinforce rules-based communities.
Dislocated by modernity, the West has seen a turn towards identities of the past – nationalism, tribalism, sectarianism – whose allure rests in their familiarity and certainty.
But identity politics, it is well known, can be very destructive.
That is why it is critical that rules-based communities, such as the modern state, become a hook that people overwhelmed by change can grasp.
This means moving beyond pure reason to establish an emotional connection with and among citizens.
This may seem counterintuitive.
Law is supposed to be impartial and rational; that is its core strength.
But if the rules-based order is to survive, it must resonate in people’s hearts, as well as their heads.
It is not yet clear precisely how to approach this process.
What is clear is that it will require a foundation of common values, and leaders who work actively and consistently to build credibility and earn a skeptical public’s trust.
Otherwise, we will see the shift toward an unruly world, one shaped by passion and power grabs, gain momentum.
The growing appeal of irrationality should be a wake-up call to rational leaders everywhere.
If we want to prevent our societies from being lured onto the rocks by the siren song of charisma and nostalgia, we must make a strong case for the rule of law, while rejecting rigidity.
Failure to do so is, after all, what got Pentheus killed.
Rebalancing the Eurozone
WASHINGTON, DC – The eurozone crisis unfolded primarily as a sovereign-debt crisis mostly on its southern periphery, with interest rates on sovereign bonds at times reaching 6-7% for Italy and Spain, and even higher for other countries.
And, because eurozone banks hold a substantial part of their assets in the form of eurozone sovereign bonds, the sovereign-debt crisis became a potential banking crisis, worsened by banks’ other losses, owing, for example, to the collapse of housing prices in Spain.
So a key challenge in resolving the eurozone crisis is to reduce the southern countries’ debt burdens.
The change in a country’s debt burden reflects the size of its primary budget balance (the balance minus interest payments) as a share of GDP, as well as the difference between its borrowing costs and its GDP growth rate.
When the difference between borrowing costs and growth becomes too large, the primary budget surpluses required to stop debt from increasing become impossible to achieve.
Indeed, growth in southern Europe is expected to be close to zero or negative for the next two years, and is not expected to exceed 2-3% even in the longer term.
While not always evident from the headlines, an underlying cause of the eurozone crisis – and now an obstacle for growth in the south – has been the divergence in production costs that developed between the peripheral countries, notably the “south” (specifically, Greece, Spain, Italy, and Portugal) and the “north” (for simplicity, Germany) during the first decade after the introduction of the euro.
Unit labor costs in the four southern countries increased by 36%, 28%, 30%, and 25%, respectively, from 2000 to 2010, compared to less than 5% in Germany, resulting in an end-2010 cumulative divergence above 30% in Greece and more than 20% in Portugal, Italy, and Spain.
Unit labor costs reflect compensation levels and productivity: gains in productivity can offset the effect of wage growth.
Productivity performance did not vary dramatically between northern and southern European countries from 2000 to 2010 – in fact, average annual productivity growth was faster in Greece than in Germany (1% versus 0.7%).
But labor costs increased much faster in the south, resulting in differential cost increases that cannot be addressed by devaluation as long as the monetary union endures.
As long as this internal divergence persists, the euro crisis cannot be fully resolved, because current-account deficits and/or slow growth will continue to stalk the southern European countries, perpetuating worries about sovereign debt and commercial banks.
In this context, productivity growth �� whether through technical progress, better allocation of resources, or productive investment – is as important a variable for the southern economies as wage restraint is.
Indeed, excessive wage deflation is likely to have negative effects on productivity.
Skilled labor is likely to emigrate faster, and extreme austerity, falling prices, and high unemployment – and the resulting likelihood of social tension – are not exactly conducive to investment, innovation, or labor mobility.
Likewise, while reducing employment is one way to boost productivity, it implies high macroeconomic costs in terms of lost revenues and higher social spending.
Perhaps even more importantly, economic policy should not break a society’s confidence in itself; what economists call “animal spirits” must be able to reflect hope for the future.
For all of these reasons, excessive austerity and deflation could defeat its own purpose and make the “reforms” to improve the southern European countries’ competitiveness impossible to implement.
The right approach must combine reasonable wage restraint and low (but not negative) inflation with microeconomic policy measures aimed at encouraging productivity increases.
Moreover, it is clear that northern European countries could help to close the competitiveness gap more rapidly by encouraging faster wage growth.
Indeed, Western policy-makers’ strong focus on persuading the Chinese authorities to permit greater appreciation of their currency is puzzling when one considers that Germany’s current-account surplus, as a share of GDP, is now much larger than China’s.
But it would not require falling wages or significant price deflation: annual wage growth of 1.7% and productivity growth of 2% would be compatible with inflation close to zero.
Productivity growth at the historical rate of 0.7% in Germany, with wage growth of 4%, would be compatible with an inflation rate a little above 3%.
In short, internal adjustment in the eurozone is achievable without serious deflation in the south, provided that productivity growth there accelerates, and that the north does its part by encouraging modestly faster wage gains.
The smaller current-account surplus in northern Europe that might result from this should itself be welcome.
If the north insists on maintaining the low wage growth of the 2000-2010 period, internal adjustment would require significant unemployment and deflation in the south, making it more difficult and perhaps politically impossible to achieve. &nbsp;
Rebalancing the US-China Economic Relationship
CAMBRIDGE – As the global economy stabilizes, there is a growing danger that the United States and China will slip back into their pre-crisis economic patterns, placing themselves and the rest of the world at risk.
Despite Chinese official rhetoric about the need for a new global currency to replace the dollar, and US lawmakers’ flirtation with “Buy American” clauses (which scares everyone, not just the Chinese), no one will want to rock a boat that has almost capsized.
So China continues to run a giant trade surplus, and the US continues to spend and borrow.
Short-run stability certainly seems attractive right now.
But if the US-China trade and debt relationship merely picks up where it left off, what will prevent recurrence of the same unsustainable dynamic that we just witnessed?
After all, huge US foreign borrowing was clearly a key factor in creating the recent financial mess, while China’s excessive reliance on export-driven growth has made it extraordinarily vulnerable to a sudden drop in global demand.
A giant fiscal stimulus in both countries has helped prevent further damage temporarily, but where is the needed change?
Wouldn’t it be better to accept more adjustment now in the form of slower post-crisis growth than to set ourselves up for an even bigger crash?
True, both the US administration and China’s leadership have made some sensible proposals for change.
But is their heart in it?
US Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner has floated a far-reaching overhaul of the financial system, and China’s leaders are starting to take steps towards improving the country’s social safety net.
Both of these measures should help a lot in bringing the US and Chinese trade balances toward more sustainable levels.
Greater financial regulation in the US means consumers will not be able to borrow so easily to rack up huge mortgage and credit card debt.
Chinese consumers, on the other hand, might actually start spending more of their income if they can worry a bit less about saving for health care, their children’s education, and their old-age retirement.
Nevertheless, there is cause for concern.
As the world seems to emerge from its horrific financial crisis, it is human nature for complacency to set it, and the domestic politics of the US-China trade and financial relationship is deeply rooted.
One shudders to think what lessons the US financial sector will draw if, after the multi-trillion dollar bailout, there are only superficial, toothless reforms.
And will China’s coastal export interests again prevail in exchange rate policy decisions, at the expense of poor inland consumers?
Another reason to worry is that the global recovery is still fragile.
US and Chinese leaders have fought the crisis with not only massive fiscal stimulus, but also deep intervention into credit markets.
Such extraordinary fiscal largesse, all at taxpayers’ expense, cannot continue indefinitely.
World Bank President Robert Zoellick has rightly warned that all this massive temporary fiscal stimulus is a “sugar high” that will ultimately pass without deeper reforms.
As I have argued before, the endgame to the financial bailouts and fiscal expansion will almost certainly mean higher interest rates, higher taxes, and, quite possibly, inflation.
For better or for worse, it may not be possible to turn back the clock.
The US consumer, whose gluttony helped fuel growth throughout the world for more than a decade, seems finally set to go on a diet. In addition to tighter credit, falling home prices and high unemployment will continue to put a crimp on US consumer spending. 
Frankly, higher US personal saving rates would not be a bad thing. It would almost certainly help reduce the risk of an early repeat of the financial crisis.
The obvious candidates to replace them are Chinese and other Asian consumers, whose combined economies are more than equal to that of the US.
But are Asian governments prepared to abandon their mercantilist paradigm?
Outside Japan, Asia policymakers certainly don’t seem amenable to exchange-rate appreciation
Since the beginning of this decade, at least a few economists (including me) have warned that the global trade and current-account imbalances needed to be reined in to reduce the chance of a severe financial crisis.
The US and China are not solely responsible for these imbalances, but their relationship is certainly at the center of it.
Prior to the crisis, there was plenty of talk, including high-level meetings brokered by the International Monetary Fund, but only minimal action.
Now, the risks have spilled out to the entire world.
Let’s hope that this time there is more than talk.  If US and Chinese policymakers instead surrender to the temptation of slipping back to the pre-crisis imbalances, the roots of the next crisis will grow like bamboo.  And that would not be good news for the US and China, or anyone else.
Re-Booting DDT
PALO ALTO – Microsoft co-founder Bill Gates is fascinating.
So is the 19-page annual letter that describes the work of the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, the world’s largest philanthropy.
But for someone as smart as Gates, who can afford to hire experts on any subject under the sun, some of his foundation’s strategies are baffling.
Consider his foundation’s approach to malaria, which focuses on bed nets, a low-tech, only modestly effective intervention, and on the development of a vaccine, a high-tech solution that has eluded intensive efforts for decades.
This approach dismisses an old, cheap, and safe way to control the vector – the Anopheles mosquito – that spreads the disease: the chemical DDT.
Malaria is a scourge, particularly for inhabitants of poor tropical countries.
Forty-one percent of the world's population live in areas where malaria is transmitted, with 350-500 million cases each year.
The disease imposes substantial costs on individuals, families, and governments.
Costs to individuals and their families include drugs, travel to and treatment at clinics, lost time at work and school, and expenses for preventive measures.
Costs to governments include maintenance of health facilities, purchases of drugs and supplies, public-health interventions such as spraying insecticide or distributing insecticide-treated bed nets, and lost revenue from taxes and tourism.
Such costs are a huge economic burden on malaria-prone countries and impede their development.
It has been estimated that annual economic growth in countries with a high incidence of malaria is 1.3 percentage points lower than that of other countries.
Drugs called artemisinins are safe and exhibit potent, rapid anti-malarial activity.
In combination with other anti-malarials, they have been used effectively for several years to treat multiple-drug-resistant malaria.
But resistance has arisen and will surely increase, so that in the absence of a vaccine, elimination of the mosquitoes that spread the disease is the key to preventing epidemics.
Unfortunately, flawed public policy limits the available options.
In 1972, on the basis of data on toxicity to fish and migrating birds (but not to humans), the United States Environmental Protection Agency banned virtually all uses of DDT, an inexpensive and effective pesticide once widely deployed to kill disease-carrying insects.
DDT was subsequently banned for agricultural use worldwide under the 2001 Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants, which stigmatized the chemical and effectively constituted a prohibition.
A basic principle of toxicology is that the dose makes the poison.
Although DDT is a (modestly) toxic substance, there is a world of difference between applying large amounts of it in the environment – as farmers did before it was banned – and using it carefully and sparingly to fight mosquitoes and other disease-carrying insects. (When it is used at all now, it is now sprayed indoors in small amounts to prevent mosquitoes from nesting.)
The regulators who banned DDT also failed to take into consideration the inadequacy of alternatives.
Because it persists after spraying, DDT works far better than many pesticides now in use, some of which are toxic to fish and other aquatic organisms.
With DDT unavailable, many mosquito-control authorities are depleting their budgets by repeated spraying with short-acting, marginally effective insecticides.
Moreover, even if mosquitoes become resistant to the killing effects of DDT, they are still repelled by it.
In 2006, after roughly 50 million preventable deaths, the United Nations’ World Health Organization reversed course and endorsed the use of DDT to kill and repel Anopheles mosquitoes.
Arata Kochi, the WHO official in charge of malaria said, “We must take a position based on the science and the data.
One of the best tools we have against malaria is indoor residual spraying.
Of the dozen or so insecticides WHO has approved as safe for house spraying, the most effective is DDT.”
But policies based on science and data have a short half-life at the UN.
With a notable absence of fanfare, in May 2009 the WHO, together with the UN Environment Program, reverted to endorsing less effective methods for preventing malaria, announcing that their goal is “to achieve a 30% cut in the application of DDT worldwide by 2014 and its total phase-out by the early 2020s, if not sooner.”
In the absence of effective vaccines or new anti-malarial drugs – and the funding and infrastructure to deliver them – this decision is tantamount to mass murder, a triumph of radical environmental politics over public health.
How can we drain the public-policy swamp?
First, governments should re-evaluate the voluminous data on DDT that have been compiled since the 1970’s, and they should make DDT available immediately for mosquito control indoors.
Second, governments should oppose international restrictions on DDT and withhold all funding from UN agencies that oppose the use of the “best available technology” (including DDT) to control mosquito-borne diseases.
Third, public-health officials should embark on a campaign to educate local authorities and citizens about the DDT.
People now hear only the reflexively anti-pesticide drumbeat of the environmental movement, the lamentable legacy of the benighted Rachel Carson and her acolytes.
And oh, yes, it would be helpful if the world’s greatest philanthropist were to throw his weight behind removing the stigma on DDT.
Re-Booting NATO-Russia Relations
MOSCOW – The crisis in Georgia last August tested Europe’s security system, and the system failed to fulfill its core task of ensuring common security for the continent as a whole.
As a result, Europe must re-examine its current security arrangements, analyze what happened, and take this analysis into account in reforming those arrangements.
Even before the Georgia crisis, Russia already saw a need to revisit the mechanisms of European security, including its international and regional institutions and their functions.
We suggested a new, legally binding treaty system of mutual security guarantees to ensure equal security throughout Europe.
The European Union believes that the Russian initiative is well grounded and has shown interest in launching such a project.
There are leaders in the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) who are also willing to take part.
NATO, however, has stood aside.
I was supposed to put forward Russian proposals on the new security concept to the NATO-Russia Council (NRC) last September.
But the Alliance refused to hold the scheduled meeting following the Georgia crisis.
When the NRC was created in 2002, it was devised as a mechanism for dialogue, cooperation, and joint decision-making on issues of mutual interest, including non-proliferation and arms control, the fight against terrorism, civil emergency planning, and military-to-military cooperation.
The NRC also was supposed to act as a forum for “holding prompt consultations” in crisis situations and to prevent such crises by “early identification of emerging problems.”
Unfortunately, the Georgian crisis demonstrated that Russia’s dialogue with NATO was less substantial than it should have been.
Yet NATO-Russia cooperation is of the outmost importance to global security.
We need NATO and NATO needs us in order to face common threats and challenges.
On the other hand, Russia will not go cap in hand to NATO.
We are not interested in the illusion of partnership.
Indeed, Russia’s foremost foreign-policy goal is a real, strategic partnership with the West in which we work together to solve the multitude of modern security problems.
I don’t have a crystal ball, but I’m certain that several years from now we should be able to look back at the Georgian crisis as a turning point.
Already we can name three “growth factors” that will help the new security system to mature – the development of the European Security and Defense Policy, the transformation of NATO, and Russia’s return to its rightful position on the world stage.
Russia is not becoming assertive, aggressive, or imperial, as many observers claim.
We are only claiming what is rightfully ours – a place in the front row of international relations.
The world will have to get used to the fact that Russia is no longer a feeble country.
Is it so incomprehensible that we have strategic interests and national security concerns?
Russia has tried for years to get away from Cold War thinking and to persuade our partners to drop their stereotypes.
After the terror attacks of September 11, 2001, Russia quickly extended a helping hand to the Americans.
But the West did not appreciate this gesture.
Military bases have been impetuously established along Russia’s perimeter.
The United States plans to establish part of its global missile defense system in the Czech Republic and Poland.
The Warsaw Pact ceased to exist 20 years ago, but NATO still proceeds eastward, adding new member states for reasons other than enhancing security and democracy.
Russia is not interested in confrontation; we want to focus on our own development, prosperity, and stability.
But successful development is possible only in the context of transparent and equal international relations, together with stability and security in our neighborhood.
Thus, we are interested in a strong and independent Europe.
And the development of EU military capacities and EU security policy is an important factor in European and global security.
It is time for Europe to stop acting like an occupied continent and start displaying its own political will.
The action taken by the EU in the course of the Georgian crisis proved that Europeans have such an aspiration and are willing to fulfill their role as a global player, which will become increasingly apparent in the coming years.
As for NATO, we in Russia think it should adapt and transform itself to suit the new environment.
During this transformation, NATO must keep in mind that the primary responsibility for global peace and security lies with the United Nations.
For the moment, though, NATO and its leaders have no clear answer to the question: where do we go from here?
The Alliance’s strategic concept is outdated, yet it cannot even agree on when to start preparing a new one.
Its forces are overstretched in Afghanistan, and its members are using it to advance their own goals.
A real, working NATO-Russia relationship could provide the Alliance with solutions to problems that it cannot tackle on its own.
It would also give new impetus to the European security system.
This is what we want to see in the future – and it is a future that is not possible without Russia.
To see why, simply compare the importance of combating international terrorism with the value of nurturing Georgian President Mikheil Saakashvili’s personal ambitions; things soon fall into place.
Europe needs an integrated, solid, and indivisible system of comprehensive security.
We are not calling for abolishing everything and starting from scratch.
On the contrary, we must build on existing institutions.
In short, we need to retain the hardware, but update the software.
Russia’s initiative for a pan-European security treaty should be the new operating system.
Libyans say the Council’s chairman, Mustafa Abdel-Jalil, favors dissidents who spent time in Qaddafi’s prisons over those with the training and skills needed to rebuild the country. If the NTC does not address these concerns, it is difficult to see how it will manage the complex challenges ahead.
The war’s costs extend far beyond repairing oil installations and turning on the electricity. Cities such as Misurata have been ravaged by the fighting and will have to be rebuilt. But Libya lacks the technical capacity to tackle these problems. Short on skilled experts, a post-Qaddafi Libya risks becoming dependent on foreign assistance, much like the Palestinians, who live largely from international aid rather than from their own economic activity.
The fall of Qaddafi and his authoritarian regime holds great promise for a people bereft of freedom for 42 years. But, with the NTC having stumbled so far, it will have to redouble its efforts to ensure that it wins the peace that it fought so hard to secure.
Barak Barfi is a research fellow at the New America Foundation.
Rebuilding the Asylum System
NEW YORK – The European Union needs to accept responsibility for the lack of a common asylum policy, which has transformed this year’s growing influx of refugees from a manageable problem into yet another political crisis.
Each member state has selfishly focused on its own interests, often acting against the interests of others.
This precipitated panic among asylum seekers, the general public, and the authorities responsible for law and order. Asylum seekers have been the main victims.
The EU needs a comprehensive plan to respond to the crisis, one that reasserts effective governance over the flows of asylum-seekers so that they take place in a safe, orderly way, and at a pace that reflects Europe’s capacity to absorb them.
To be comprehensive, the plan has to extend beyond the borders of Europe.
It is less disruptive and much less expensive to maintain potential asylum-seekers in or close to their present location.
As the origin of the current crisis is Syria, the fate of the Syrian population has to be the first priority.
But other asylum seekers and migrants must not be forgotten.
Similarly, a European plan must be accompanied by a global response, under the authority of the United Nations and involving its member states.
This would distribute the burden of the Syrian crisis over a larger number of states, while also establishing global standards for dealing with the problems of forced migration more generally.
Here are the six components of a comprehensive plan.
First, the EU has to accept at least a million asylum-seekers annually for the foreseeable future.
And, to do that, it must share the burden fairly – a principle that a qualified majority finally established at last Wednesday’s summit.
Adequate financing is critical.
The EU should provide €15,000 ($16,800) per asylum-seeker for each of the first two years to help cover housing, health care, and education costs – and to make accepting refugees more appealing to member states.
It can raise these funds by issuing long-term bonds using its largely untapped AAA borrowing capacity, which will have the added benefit of providing a justified fiscal stimulus to the European economy.
It is equally important to allow both states and asylum-seekers to express their preferences, using the least possible coercion.
Placing refugees where they want to go – and where they are wanted – is a sine qua non of success.
Second, the EU must lead the global effort to provide adequate funding to Lebanon, Jordan, and Turkey to support the four million refugees currently living in those countries.
Thus far, only a fraction of the funding needed for even basic care has been raised.
If education, training, and other essential needs are included, the annual costs are at least €5,000 per refugee, or €20 billion.
EU aid today to Turkey, though doubled last week, still amounts to just €1 billion.
In addition, the EU also should help create special economic zones with preferred trade status in the region, including in Tunisia and Morocco, to attract investment and generate jobs for both locals and refugees.
The EU would need to make an annual commitment to frontline countries of at least €8-10 billion, with the balance coming from the United States and the rest of the world.
This could be added to the amount of long-term bonds issued to support asylum-seekers in Europe.
Third, the EU must immediately start building a single EU Asylum and Migration Agency and eventually a single EU Border Guard.
The current patchwork of 28 separate asylum systems does not work: it is expensive, inefficient, and produces wildly inconsistent results in determining who qualifies for asylum.
The new agency would gradually streamline procedures; establish common rules for employment and entrepreneurship, as well as consistent benefits; and develop an effective, rights-respecting return policy for migrants who do not qualify for asylum.
Fourth, safe channels must be established for asylum-seekers, starting with getting them from Greece and Italy to their destination countries.
This is very urgent in order to calm the panic.
The next logical step is to extend safe avenues to the frontline region, thereby reducing the number of migrants who make the dangerous Mediterranean crossing.
If asylum-seekers have a reasonable chance of ultimately reaching Europe, they are far more likely to stay where they are.
This will require negotiating with frontline countries, in cooperation with the UN Refugee Agency, to establish processing centers there – with Turkey as the priority.
The operational and financial arrangements developed by the EU should be used to establish global standards for the treatment of asylum-seekers and migrants.
This is the fifth piece of the comprehensive plan.
Finally, to absorb and integrate more than a million asylum seekers and migrants a year, the EU needs to mobilize the private sector – NGOs, church groups, and businesses – to act as sponsors.
This will require not only sufficient funding, but also the human and IT capacity to match migrants and sponsors.
The exodus from war-torn Syria should never have become a crisis.
It was long in the making, easy to foresee, and eminently manageable by Europe and the international community.
Hungarian Prime Minister Viktor Orbán has now also produced a six-point plan to address the crisis.
But his plan, which subordinates the human rights of asylum-seekers and migrants to the security of borders, threatens to divide and destroy the EU by renouncing the values on which it was built and violating the laws that are supposed to govern it.
The EU must respond with a genuinely European asylum policy that will put an end to the panic and the unnecessary human suffering.
Rebuilding the Brain
For many years, it was thought that all of our brain cells (neurons) are produced before birth, or exceptionally, up to one or two years after birth, but then the process supposedly stopped.
From then on, most brain scientists believed, brain circuits could only be modified by altering the synapses, or contacts between existing cells.
In this view, the total complement of cells, anatomically organized by function and forming major pathways, constituted the brain’s “hardware.”
The detailed nature of the relation between cells, the modifiable synapses, was the software.
Starting in the 1960s, evidence suggested that new neurons might be added beyond this early period and even in adulthood.
This evidence became compelling in the 1980s, based on observations made while studying parts of the songbird brain involved in the acquisition and production of learned song.
The original observations were met with skepticism, but the birdsong data proved compelling.
How does one prove that a neuron was born at a particular time?
Each cell in the body contains DNA, which is responsible for producing the proteins that are necessary for a cell’s functioning.
Though all cells in the body have the same DNA, only a subset of the genes encoded by the DNA is expressed in each cell type, thus accounting for the difference between, say, a skin cell, a liver cell, and a brain cell.
When a cell is about to divide, as happens when tissue grows, the DNA in the mother cell has to be doubled, that is, new DNA is synthesized.
It is possible to supply the cell with one of the building blocks of the new DNA, and to put a little radioactive tag on that building block.
Later, scanning through the brain, every time we find a tagged cell we know that it was born at the time we furnished the DNA.
When we gave adult canaries the tagged DNA building block and then looked for tagged neurons that would have been born one or two days earlier, we found none.
But if we waited longer – for example, 1-3 weeks, depending on part of brain – we found quite a few tagged neurons.
This told us that the new neurons were not born by division of existing neurons, but were born elsewhere in the brain and went through a migratory stage during which they were not recognized as neurons.
It took at least a week for the first new neurons to reach their destination and acquire the looks of an adult neuron.
We then learned how to identify the future neurons during their migratory journey.
They were, at that stage, much smaller and had an elongated shape that allowed them to slip between other cells.
It came as a great surprise when we discovered that the cells giving birth to the new neurons were a type called radial glia, which were thought not to occur in adulthood and were not known to give birth to neurons.
One of the paradoxes of this process is that in adult birds and mammals the total number of brain cells remains remarkably constant.
The new neurons replace older ones of the same kind that die – a process of natural rejuvenation.
There are no hospitals in nature.
The sudden loss of many brain cells as a result of strokes or injuries must have serious effects on an animal’s survival.
It seems likely that the replacement of neurons in the adult brain did not evolve to make up losses due to illness or lesion, but as a process of constant renewal, a few cells being replaced every day. 
This idea is so novel that it needs further elaboration.
In the adult songbird brain, we can find at any moment many little migrating neurons ready to replace cells that have died.
Laboratories around the world are trying to develop ways to bring this knowledge to clinical situations.
The trick will be to induce the brain to produce and deliver to the correct destination any kind of neuron that might be needed, so that regardless of cell class, new cells of the required kind can replace others of the same type that have died.
This goal is not near.
Rebuilding the Ruins of Qaddafi
TRIPOLI – With the creation of a new government, Libya’s leaders should finally be able to focus on organizing the transition from the authoritarian state that they inherited to the more pluralistic one they envisage.
But are they really able and willing to achieve that goal?
In the United States, the debate on Libya has focused on what steps its government should take next.
Senator Robert Menendez argues it “must move quickly to embrace democratic reform,” while international development specialists, such as Manal Omar of the US Institute for Peace, believe that success lies in the cultivation of a vibrant civil society.
These views, however, overlook Libya’s unique history, and treat Libya as though it were just another Third World country in need of generic solutions.
In fact, remedying the country’s ills requires building strong state institutions.
Since Libya achieved independence in 1951, it has been a fractured state.
Rulers relied on loyal tribes and narrow cliques to prop up their regimes.
Under a monarchy that led the country from 1951-1969, King Idris’s relatives and inner circle ran roughshod over fledgling state institutions.
More interested in reigning than in governing, state institutions withered under Idris’s neglect.&nbsp;
These trends were exacerbated after Muammar el-Qaddafi overthrew the king in 1969.
Frustrated with a bureaucracy reluctant to implement his political vision, Qaddafi bypassed traditional institutions and claimed a direct dialogue with the country’s population.
The new Libyan leader created an intricate hierarchy of political organizations that were advertised as empowering citizens, but which in reality only reinforced their subservience to his autocratic regime.
As Libyans tired of Qaddafi’s revolutionary rhetoric, he decided that a new organization was needed to stir popular support.
In 1977, he established committees that he dubbed the “watchdogs of the revolution.”
The committees formed their own courts, assumed sweeping arrest powers, took over the media, and purged officials who resisted Qaddafi’s will.
This led to a split between the state’s official institutions and Qaddafi’s shadow revolutionary apparatus.
Qaddafi clearly preferred the latter.
In 1979, he resigned from his official posts to assume the vague role of “Commander of the Revolution,” explaining that “the revolution must be separated from the authority of the state.”
This led to what the scholar Moncef Djaziri described as a division of formal and informal authority.
Qaddafi’s strategy stunted the growth of state institutions, because, like Mao Zedong’s Cultural Revolution in China, it implied subordinating their development to the needs of an all-embracing vision of transformation.
Economic planning reflected his populist policies and foreign adventures, rather than any focus on stability and sustainable growth.
Instead of relying on state structures to govern, he leaned on a small coterie of minions and members of his tribe.
As a result, state institutions decayed.
Beginning in 1986, the Libyan Central Bank ceased publishing the annual statistical reports that economists and specialists need to formulate coherent policies.
Frustrated by his population’s political apathy, Qaddafi frequently announced his intention to dissolve all government ministries and transfer their responsibilities to municipalities.
Today, Libya’s state institutions exist merely to extract the country’s vast oil wealth and distribute it via subsidies.
In a state that embodied the whim of its leader for 42 years, the rule of law does not exist.
Explaining why he helped spearhead a 1993 military coup attempt, Air Force officer Muhammad Bashir Salah said, “We have neither a state, nor laws, nor a constitution.”
Indeed, even the military, which in many Third World countries is the strongest state institution, was marginalized under Qaddafi.
The revolutionary committees’ attacked it for being “a traditional fascist institution.”
Qaddafi declared his desire to disband the army on several occasions, and its role was so insignificant that it played almost no part in defending the regime during the eight months of fighting that overthrew him.
American diplomatic cables released by WikiLeaks noted that Libya has “few formal decision-making structures,” and called it an “opaque regime in which lines of authority are deliberately blurred to obscure power structures and mitigate accountability.”
Today, Qaddafi’s successors on the National Transitional Council (NTC) are perpetuating the dualistic authority that he created.
Politically inexperienced and lacking strong leadership, they have proved unable to impose discipline on the myriad militias that sprang up during the revolution.
These rogue units have exacted vengeance on Qaddafi supporters and alienated significant segments of society.
If the NTC cannot assert its authority, the council risks the emergence of a movement nostalgic for Qaddafi and the security that his regime provided.
Unlike their neighbors in Egypt, Libyans are not clamoring for the elections deemed by many Westerners to be of paramount importance.
Instead, they have drawn on a patience rooted in their traditional political apathy.
Few political parties have emerged, and there is little popular demand for them.
Activists have instead focused on drafting a new constitution that would empower state institutions.&nbsp;
Libyans understand that the NTC needs time to build a new country on the ruins of the one that Qaddafi destroyed.
That daunting task begins by developing the state institutions required to respond to Libyans’ needs.
Re-Capturing the Friedmans
BERKELEY – On my desk right now are reporter Timothy Noah’s new book The Great Divergence: America’s Growing Inequality Crisis and What We Can Do about It and Milton and Rose Director Friedman’s classic Free to Choose: A Personal Statement.
Considering them together, my overwhelming thought is that the Friedmans would find their task of justifying and advocating small-government libertarianism much harder today than they did in 1979.
Back then, the Friedmans made three powerful factual claims about how the world works – claims that seemed true or maybe true or at least arguably true at the time, but that now seem to be pretty clearly false.
Their case for small-government libertarianism rested largely on those claims, and has now largely crumbled, because the world, it turned out, disagreed with them about how it works.
The first claim was that macroeconomic distress is caused by the government, not by the unstable private market, or, rather, that the form of macroeconomic regulation required to produce economic stability is straightforward and easily achieved.
The Friedmans almost always made the claim in its first form: they said that the government had “caused” the Great Depression.
But when you dug into their argument, it turned out that what they really meant was the second: whenever private-market instability threatened to cause a depression, the government could avert it or produce a rapid recovery simply by purchasing enough bonds for cash to flood the economy with liquidity.
In other words, the strategic government intervention needed to ensure macroeconomic stability was not only straightforward, but also minimal: the authorities need only manage a steady rate of money-supply growth.
The aggressive and comprehensive intervention that Keynesians claimed was needed to manage aggregate demand, and that Minskyites claimed was needed to manage financial risk, was entirely unwarranted.
Real libertarians never bought the Friedmans’ claim that they were as advocating a free-market, “neutral” monetary regime: Ludwig von Mises famously called Milton Friedman and his monetarist followers a bunch of socialists.
But, whatever its packaging, the belief that macroeconomic stability requires only minimal government intervention is simply wrong.
In the United States, Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke has executed the Friedmanite playbook flawlessly in the current downturn, and it has not been enough to preserve or rapidly restore full employment.
The second claim was that externalities were relatively small, or at least that they were better dealt with via contract and tort law than through government regulation, because the disadvantages of government regulation outweighed the harm done by those externalities that the legal system could not properly address.
Here, too, reality does not seem to have endorsed Free to Choose.
In the US, this is most apparent in changing attitudes toward medical-malpractice lawsuits, with libertarians no longer viewing the court system as the preferred arena to deal with medical risk and error.
The third, and most important, claim is the subject of Noah’s The Great Divergence.
In 1979, the Friedmans could confidently claim that, in the absence of government-mandated discrimination (for example, the South’s segregationist Jim Crow laws), the market economy would produce a sufficiently egalitarian distribution of income.
After all, it had appeared to do so – at least for those who did not suffer from legal discrimination or its legacies – for the entire post-WWII era.
So the Friedmans argued that a minimal safety net for those whom bad luck or a lack of prudence had rendered destitute, and elimination of all legal barriers to equality of opportunity, would lead to the most equitable outcomes possible.
Profit-seeking employers, using and promoting human talents, would bring us as close to a free society of associated producers as is attainable in this fallen sublunary sphere.
Here, too, the Friedmans’ hopes have been disappointed.
The end of American preeminence in education, the collapse of private-sector unions, the emergence of a winner-take-all information-age economy, and the return of Gilded Age-style high finance have produced an extraordinarily unequal pre-tax distribution of income, which will burden the next generation and make a mockery of equality of opportunity.
It would have been nice if the political program laid out a generation ago in Free to Choose had lived up to the Friedmans’ billing.
It would have been nice if a relatively equal and prosperous society with full employment and equal opportunity had followed from a government that stood back from the economy and provided nothing but a minimal safety net, courts, and a constantly growing money supply.
Alas, that did not happen. And it did not happen because the world described by the Friedmans is not the world in which we live.
Recession Geopolitics
FLORENCE – The news that China has overtaken Japan as the world’s second largest economy did not come as a surprise.
This is the major geo-political outcome of the Great Recession of the early twenty-first century – one that carries both economic hope and political fear.
First, the good news: the economic side of the case.China’s response of to the world economic crisis is the central reason why the financial turbulence that emanated from the US sub-prime debacle did not completely destroy the world economy and lead to a repeat of the 1930’s Great Depression.
In a famous analysis of the Great Depression, the economic historian Charles Kindleberger argued that it arose from a failure of world leadership.
Great Britain had been the hegemonic power of the nineteenth century, but its creditor status had been severely eroded by the cost of fighting World War I.
The United States had emerged from the war as the world’s largest creditor, but it had a double vulnerability.
Its financial system was unstable and prone to panics, and its political system was immature and prone to populism and nativism.
In the Depression, according to Kindleberger, the US should have provided an open market to foreign goods. Instead, the Smoot-Hawley Tariff Act closed off American markets and provoked other countries into a spiral of retaliatory trade measures.
US financial institutions should have continued to lend to distressed borrowers, in order to prevent a spiral in which credit rationing forced price reductions and intensified world deflation.
Instead, US banks, widely blamed for the international lending boom that preceded the bust, were so intimidated and weakened that the flow of American credit stopped.
After World War II, as a leading figure in developing the Marshall Plan, Kindleberger set about applying these lessons: the US should keep its markets and its flow of funds open to support other countries.
How different the twenty-first century looks!
It is as if China’s leaders were the star pupils in one of Kindleberger’s courses.
Throughout the crisis, the Chinese economy continued to grow at an amazing pace, in part as a consequence of massive fiscal stimulus.
When anyone wants an example of how effective a Keynesian counter-cyclical strategy can be, internationally as well as domestically, they need look no further than China’s four-trillion-renminbi stimulus of 2008-2009.
Apart from a six-month period after the September 2008 collapse of Lehman Brothers, in which trade finance stopped and the world did look as if it was close to Great Depression circumstances, China and other emerging markets helped those export-oriented industrial economies to recover.
The surprising strength of the German economy, with more vigorous growth than at any time in the past 15 years, is due to the dynamism of emerging-market – particularly Chinese – demand, not only for investment goods, engineering products, and machine tools, but also for luxury consumer products.
Germany’s high-end automobile producers are now operating at full capacity.
China also followed Kindleberger’s financial lessons. For a moment, it looked as if a contagious crisis, driven by fears of government over-indebtedness, would destroy the politically fragile compromise that European countries had carefully constructed over a 50-year period.
The turning point in this spring’s euro panic came when big holders of reserve currencies signaled that they saw the need for the euro as an alternative to the increasingly problematic dollar and the equally vulnerable yen.
China started to buy European Union governments’ bonds, and a high-profile Chinese team even went to Greece to buy under-priced real assets.
It was not just Europe that benefited from China’s willingness to take on the mantle of “lender of last resort.”
The new-found dynamism of African economies is a consequence of the Chinese drive to build up and secure sources of raw materials.
But there is a problem with Kindleberger’s argument.
Kindleberger, a kind and well-meaning man, could never see that the world is never entirely grateful to the country that saves it.
Being a hegemon is a thankless task.
The beneficent effects of China’s engagement in the world economy are felt much more powerfully farther away from China.
In that sense, too, there is a parallel with the story of the US, whose leadership was felt much more positively in Europe than it was in Canada, Mexico, or Central America.
It is not surprising that the greatest and strongest ideological opponent of the American way of life was not in distant Europe or Asia, but in Cuba, just 90 miles off the Florida coast.
Since the early twentieth century, Mexicans have felt worried and threatened by American strength.
And, in the same way, Taiwan and Vietnam feel that they will be the Chinese giant’s first victims.
The global hegemon has never been loved by its neighbors.
But the US gradually, if imperfectly, built up trust through multilateral institutions.
Europeans did much better at reconciliation with their neighbors after WWII, in part because the malign and evil conditions of Nazi rule made it necessary to talk about the past in terms of moral categories rather than power politics.
In contrast to America’s engagement in multilateralism, or Europe’s search for reconciliation through a plethora of common institutions, power politics is much more a part of Asia’s twentieth-century legacy.
The real challenge for China’s leaders will be to develop a coherent view of the world that does not scare the people just across the border.
Recession Insurance
NEW HAVEN – The Chief Economist of the International Monetary Fund, Olivier Blanchard, and several IMF economists have proposed in a recent paper that governments should offer what they call “recession insurance.”
Companies and/or individuals would buy insurance policies, pay a regular premium for them, and receive a benefit if some measure of the economy, such as GDP growth, dropped below a specified level.
Such insurance, they argue, would help firms and people deal with the “extreme uncertainty” of the current economic environment.
Recession insurance might, indeed, help alleviate the economic crisis by reducing uncertainty.
After all, the real problem that we are currently facing is one of paralysis: uncertainty has placed many spending decisions – by businesses (on higher output) and by consumers (on the items that businesses produce) – on hold.
Reducing uncertainty might augment, or even be superior to, fiscal stimulus programs, for it would address the root cause of the unwillingness to spend.
Moreover, recession insurance might, in contrast to fiscal policy, impose no costs on the government, for if it stimulates confidence, then the risk being insured against is prevented.
The government’s ability to offer such insurance on a scale sufficient to make it costless is one reason to favor a public scheme over private insurers.
Blanchard and his colleagues point out that banks might condition loans to firms on their purchase of recession insurance, which might help credit markets function better, addressing a serious problem underlying the current crisis.
Tantalizingly, they say that doing this would create “a market-based view of future output and the likelihood of severe shocks,” although they do not explain how this market would be structured.
Indeed, there is no market for other kinds of recession-related insurance provided by the government, such as unemployment insurance, old age insurance, or disability insurance.
Instead, the government merely sets an insurance premium and forces everyone to pay it.
The IMF authors are not saying that governments should do this with recession insurance, so perhaps they mean that governments would auction off the policies, which would create a market price.
But the market price would depend especially on how much insurance a government decided to auction off, because the supply would influence the price both directly and through the insurance’s effect on the underlying recession risks.
Governments are in a good position to create new risk-management policies, and they can then set an example for private insurers to follow.
But, as an alternative to the IMF proposal, there could be purely private recession insurance.
Such insurance already exists on a small scale in the form of credit insurance against unemployment.
A New York-based firm, the Assura Group, has been working for four years on a plan to launch privately issued supplemental unemployment insurance to anyone.
Their policies would piggyback on US state unemployment insurance programs, allowing Assura to avoid getting into the monitoring business.
One problem with market-based policies is strategic adoption and cancellation.
GDP risk is a long-term risk.
The price of the insurance would have to be adjusted regularly to adjust for varying public knowledge of the likelihood of a recession, and people could not be allowed to cancel their policies, and stop making payments, whenever the economic outlook became rosier.
The Assura Group had to get permission from the New York State Department of Insurance to have a dynamic rate filing, meaning that they will set prices by a formula, rather than using a fixed rate, so that their prices vary in rapid response to changing economic conditions.
In a recent paper, Mark Kamstra and I proposed that governments issue shares in their GDP, with each share amounting to a trillionth of GDP.
These “trills” would help individual countries manage their GDP risks.
We thought that the issuers of such securities would have, in effect, a form of recession insurance.
Another way to create a market price for recession risk is to offer the MacroShares that my firm MacroMarkets pioneered.
Our first MacroShares have been for oil price risk, but plans for GDP risk are on the drawing board.
These securities are offered in pairs –one long and one short – and, unlike in a government-run scheme, in whatever quantity the market demands.
Once we have a market price for recession insurance or similar products, the question then arises: will it be so high that few people want to buy?
We know that we are probably in a recession right now, and may be for some time, so the expected losses currently are enormous.
As a result, people may balk at the price and not want to buy the insurance.
The only insurance that people might think they can afford could carry a large deductible, and if the deductible is very large, people might not feel so reassured by this insurance. 
There are uncertainties with any really new proposal.
But the proposal from the IMF is an important step, because it deals with the essential problem that we are confronting right now: fears about the future of the economy become a self-fulfilling prophesy.
We should not look askance at such a policy because of its potential shortfalls.
The current global economic crisis is an opportunity for some new experimentation that might not only lead to its resolution, but might also set in place institutions that help to prevent future crises.
Recession insurance is one such idea.
Reconciliation’s New Frontier
In France, May 10 is a day to commemorate the abolition of slavery.
January 27 is the day we remember the Holocaust, through the commemoration of the liberation of Auschwitz.
In a few days, there will be ceremonies to celebrate the 100th anniversary of the revision of Captain Alfred Dreyfus’s conviction on charges of espionage in a trial that tore the country apart.
France in particular, but also Europe in general, seems to be in a mood for remembering and repenting.
It all looks as if the need to integrate communities within nations, to reconcile them with their past in order to unite them around a common identity and therefore a common project for the future, has replaced Europe’s now-completed mission of reconciling old enemies like Germany and France.
For decades, “reconciliation” and its most remarkable achievement – the Franco-German rapprochement – was the trademark of the project to create an ever closer union in Europe.
Reconciliation may seem far off for, say, the peoples of Japan, China, and South Korea, but it is taken for granted by today’s Europeans.
Except for the Balkans, most European nations are at peace with each other.
The genes of war now express themselves on the soccer field; competition for land has been replaced by competition for medals and titles.
The first Franco-German history book was released recently, and, according to its team of writers, it was not the past and the Nazi years that constitute a source of contention between French and German historians, but the present and in particular relations with the United States.
So, if the mission of reconciliation has any life left, its focus has shifted.
If European nation-states are reconciled with each other, they are not yet fully reconciled with themselves, with their dark or grey spots, and in particular their treatment of minorities.
Historians of Europe will probably one day conclude that it is the Holocaust and Europe’s relations with its Jews that paved the way for the opening of this process of repentance.
In the words of the Polish historian and statesman Bronislaw Geremek, the liberation of Auschwitz on January 27, 1945, has to be seen as one of the founding moments of today’s Europe.
The silence that surrounded Holocaust survivors during the immediate postwar reconstruction of Europe has been replaced by gestures of contrition and reparation.
Responsibility for passivity as well as active crimes has been recognized.
Pious lies have been uncovered.
In France half a century ago, as the Cold War loomed, Charles de Gaulle easily convinced the French that they were heroic during World War II because he was heroic.
Francois Mitterrand, by contrast, managed to assure the French only that they were not so bad, because he, Mitterrand, had served in the collaborationist Vichy regime of Marshal Pétain before joining the resistance.
In the eyes of historians, President Jacques Chirac’s redeeming value will most probably remain his courageous attempt to reconcile France’s wounded minorities with their past and the French nation through a national process of repentance.
It started with the Jews and acknowledgement that the Vichy regime did indeed incarnate the French state.
Thus “France” itself was an accomplice to the crimes of the Nazi regime.
Today, France’s black minority is trying to organize itself along the lines of the Jewish minority.
It has created a central authority serving as an umbrella for diverse organizations.
And it has concluded that centuries of slavery amount to the equivalent of the Holocaust.
European recognition of crimes against the Jews, they argue, must be followed by an admission of guilt towards the Continent’s black minorities.
It is likely that the violence that erupted in the fall of 2005 in many French cities and suburbs, in which young and unemployed black people played a large part, has accelerated the willingness of French officials to come to terms with this historical legacy.
To face the challenge of integration, France must face its past.
But it must also behave in a modern, rather than a neo-colonial, way in many places in its former African empire.
If reconciliation with the past is vital to building a harmonious future, France has much to do concerning another minority for whom history seems to remain largely frozen.
It is with the French of Algerian descent, not to mention Algeria itself, that reconciliation seems most difficult to achieve.
It will take more than a few role models, such as Zinedine Zidane, France’s greatest soccer star, to appease the frustrations and to curb the resentments.
But is acknowledging past guilt only a way to facilitate the integration of minorities?
Or is it also part of a process of closing the doors of our European “paradise” to all those who still want to join us?
Reconciliation between nations is probably easier than reconciliation within nations.
This is the challenge facing much of the democratic world today, not only in France and Europe at large, but also in the US.
Reconciling Hamas and Fatah
GAZA/JERUSALEM – As representatives of Hamas and Fatah meet for the fourth round of national unity talks in Cairo, not only Palestinians but also Americans and Europeans will be watching closely.
The top-level talks, hosted by Egyptian intelligence chief Omar Suleiman, will be crucial to ending nearly two years of bloody confrontation between Hamas-ruled Gaza and the Fatah-ruled West Bank, governed by Western-backed Mahmoud Abbas.
Given previous failures, this round of talks might prove to be the final chance to re-establish Palestinian unity.
The continuing internal schism between the more moderate and secular Fatah and the Islamist Hamas has not only left the Palestinian leadership in disarray, but has also made meaningful peace negotiations with Israel next to impossible.
Moreover, continued internal disunity continues to thwart reconstruction efforts in Gaza, which are urgently needed in the aftermath of Israel’s military offensive earlier this year.
Thus, the outcome of the negotiations in Cairo will have repercussions for Palestinians and Israelis – and, indeed, for anyone with a stake in the Middle East peace process.
In previous rounds, the different factions agreed in principle on forming a united government for the West Bank and Gaza, and on holding legislative and presidential elections in the Palestinian Territories by January 2010.
But Fatah and Hamas still differ fundamentally on how to form a government tasked to prepare elections.
Discussions also center on the control of the security services – a field in which neither Fatah nor Hamas have much room to maneuver.
Moreover, disagreement prevails on the type of electoral system to be used.
Whereas Fatah favors a clear majority voting system, Hamas calls for a more personalized approach.
Furthermore, the question of including Hamas in the Palestine Liberation Organization is crucial.
Contrary to common perception, the PLO has always been the only official negotiating partner with Israel and does not include Hamas.
In a rather obscure linguistic debate, Hamas has in previous negotiation rounds refused to “commit’ itself to past PLO agreements with Israel, but has instead offered to “respect” them.
Negotiators in Cairo will thus have to discuss if such an indirect recognition of Israel’s right to exist will be acceptable.
Underneath this clear-cut quid pro quo of political bargaining, the representatives from Fatah and Hamas are charged with finding the means to reconcile Hamas’s tremendously popular political ideology with Fatah’s traditional secular aspirations.
This is not merely an internal Palestinian affair, for it reflects a conflict raging across the entire Middle East.
Until now, no Arab society has managed to harmonize these opposing trends.
Instead, most governments have opted for a more or less confrontational approach of suppression and exclusion, banning Islamists from participating in elections or bullying them into semi-legality.
The case of the Palestinian Territories, however, is different.
In the absence of a strong central authority, the predominant divide between secular nationalism and politicized religion has led to the actual geographic disintegration of the Palestinian Territories into two distinct parts.
Given the difficulties that even major players in the region face when dealing with the challenge of political Islam, it becomes clear that for the Abbas-led Palestinian Authority, only compromise and dialogue is a feasible way to heal the rift.
Unsurprisingly, the fate of the Cairo talks is anything but certain.
Failure to come up with a unified Palestinian position would undoubtedly play into the hands of the newly elected Israeli government of Benjamin Netanyahu.
After all, the Israeli Prime Minister has made it clear that he favors continued conflict management in terms of “economic peace” over far-reaching political processes based on mutual respect and cooperation.
Faced with continued internal division, pressing for a meaningful peace process is very difficult for the Palestinians.
As a consequence, Israel’s willy-nilly expansion of West Bank settlements might finally bury comprehensive peace efforts for good.
But success in Cairo might prove even more challenging.
If the negotiations lead to the establishment of a Palestinian government supported by both Fatah and Hamas, there will be a tough choice to make – not primarily for Palestinians, but first and foremost for Western decision makers.
Will the West continue its policy of boycotting Hamas politically and financially, or will it adopt an alternative approach?
Given Hamas’s belligerent ideology, any change in the West’s approach towards Hamas in the aftermath of successful Palestinian dialogue in Cairo would be difficult.
But a modified and more pragmatic stance that focuses on Hamas’s behavior on the ground, rather than on abstract conditions, would not only be demanding for Western decision makers; it would pose a major political challenge for Hamas as well.
The Price of Peace
MADRID – The relationship between peace and justice has long been the subject of polarizing debates.
Some argue that the pursuit of justice impedes conflict-resolution efforts, while others – including International Criminal Court (ICC) Chief Prosecutor Fatou Bensouda – contend that justice is a prerequisite for peace.
As President Juan Manuel Santos leads Colombia through the most promising peace talks in five decades of brutal conflict with the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC), he will have to consider this question carefully.
The Nuremberg trials, which followed Nazi Germany’s unconditional surrender in World War II, provide an ideal model for post-conflict justice.
But, in conflicts in which no side has been defeated, the peacemaker’s job becomes more challenging.
Given what is at stake, a trade-off between reconciliation and accountability may well be inescapable.
Since 1945, more than 500 cases of amnesty in post-conflict transitions have been recorded; since the 1970’s, at least 14 states – including Spain, Mozambique, and Brazil – have given amnesty to regimes guilty of serious human-rights violations.
In South Africa, amnesty was a key feature of the “truth and reconciliation” process that facilitated the peaceful transition from more than four decades of white-minority rule to democracy.
Similarly, in 2003, Nigeria’s president offered asylum to his Liberian counterpart, Charles Taylor, on the condition that Taylor retire from politics, thereby helping to end the rebellion against him.
(In this case, justice was later served; in 2012, the Special Court for Sierra Leone convicted Taylor of 11 counts of aiding and abetting war crimes in Sierra Leone, making him the first former head of state to be convicted for such crimes by an international tribunal since Nuremberg.)
Although it may be painful to offer a safe exit to war criminals and human-rights abusers, the prospect of ending the suffering of civilians can take priority over a principled stand for justice.
Who today would oppose amnesty for Syrian President Bashar al-Assad if it ended the brutal civil war that has led to more than 100,000 deaths and created nearly two million refugees (including more than a million children) in just two years?
This is precisely the dilemma that Santos now faces.
Given the innumerable atrocities that the FARC have committed, the prospect of suspending punishment is difficult to accept.
But prolonging a conflict that has already led to more than 200,000 deaths and displaced roughly five million people is in no one’s interest.
With Colombia’s recent accord on agrarian reform having resolved the conflict’s root cause, the question of transitional justice has become the determining factor in whether the peace process will succeed.
If impunity for perpetrators of crimes against humanity, however morally repugnant, could protect potential future victims by ending the conflict, accepting such an outcome may well be worth sacrificing a full measure of justice for past victims.
Rather than launching an uncompromising campaign to defeat the insurgents, Santos has pursued the more politically challenging course: a negotiated settlement.
This suggests a willingness to do whatever it takes to protect long-suffering rural communities from continued violence.
Santos would certainly not be the first head of state to go silent on accountability.
In 2003, the United States and the European Union acquiesced to an accord that formally ended the Democratic Republic of the Congo’s civil war, which had claimed nearly four million lives, though the agreement lacked provisions to hold war criminals accountable.
The same is true for Sudan’s 2005 Comprehensive Peace Agreement, which ended a 22-year civil war in which more than two million died.
In these cases – as in Colombia today – a fundamentalist approach to transitional justice was not feasible.
Rather, justice had to be applied according to the specific political conditions that brought about the transition.
After all, transitional justice is essentially a political solution, a historic contract of national reconciliation – not a strictly judicial matter.
For Santos, reconciling peace and justice in a complicated domestic political context may require alternative formulas, such as reduced sentences, community penalties, conditional verdicts, or asylum in third countries.
But none of these options, let alone amnesty, should be allowed unless the demobilized insurgents cooperate fully with the courts, including by disclosing all of their crimes.
Following this logic, FARC leader Pablo Catatumbo has acknowledged the “pain and acts of cruelty” that the guerillas have committed and has requested a collective pardon that would cover human-rights violations committed by both the FARC and state security forces.
He has also insisted on the identification and compensation of victims as a prerequisite for peace and national reconciliation.
When conflict-resolution efforts are on the line, a single-minded quest for retribution often is the wrong option.
Archbishop Desmond Tutu, a leader of South Africa’s democratic transition, has described an alternative – restorative justice – that focuses on “the healing of breaches, the redressing of imbalances, [and] the restoration of broken relationships.”
With this constructive, forward-looking understanding of justice in mind, Santos, too, can succeed, thereby securing the peaceful, secure future that Colombians deserve.
Reconciling with Sykes-Picot
NEW YORK – This month marks the centenary of the Sykes-Picot Agreement, the secret British-French accord that launched a decade-long series of adjustments to the borders of the post-Ottoman Middle East.
Most commentary on the anniversary has been negative, suggesting that the agreement bears considerable blame for the frequency and durability of the region’s conflicts.