This job creation was not evenly spread across Europe, but it happened.
That means that the EU now has successful employment models that can be emulated.
There is also solid evidence that Europe’s big companies have been competing relatively well globally.
The number of Fortune 500 companies headquartered in the EU has grown over the last decade, while the number of those based in the US has fallen.
Moreover, big European companies’ profits have grown 50% more rapidly than those of their American counterparts.
Few deny the need for fiscal consolidation in many EU countries, especially in the south (and including France).
But fiscal adjustment must be accompanied by structural reform.
It is clear that the labor-market reforms undertaken by Germany a decade ago, painful as they were, have put the German economy in a far stronger position to compete globally.
Similar reforms are urgently needed in countries like Italy and Spain.
Service-sector reform is vital as well.
Manufacturing productivity per hour in Europe compares quite well with the US, but Europeans work significantly fewer hours per year, which explains the annual per capita difference.
But European countries lag badly in services, where restrictive practices, protectionism, and inefficiency hold them back.
Spanish Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy and Italian Prime Minister Mario Monti seem to understand these points, but the reform programs that they have unveiled are not adequate to the challenge.
Although Italian employers have dismissed the proposed employment-law reform as far too modest, Monti’s government has retreated in the face of trade-union opposition and protests from assorted interest groups (like taxi drivers) eager to defend their privileges.
Governments are inhibited by the knowledge that labor-market reform may well result in a short-term increase in unemployment (and thus further fiscal deterioration), because employers will find it cheaper to fire personnel.
The hope is that greater flexibility would also translate into a greater willingness to hire in an economic upturn.
For EU politicians, however, the long term will be reached only after a series of short-term electoral challenges, so pro-reform governments may well not survive to reap the benefits.
As Luxembourg’s Prime Minister Jean-Claude Juncker remarked, all EU governments know what must be done; what they don’t know is how to get re-elected once they have done it.
Is there a way out of this dilemma?
Countries like Germany are adamantly opposed to a fiscal union, with a central EU budget for responding to asymmetric shocks, because they would be the chief contributors.
But a variant that might elicit greater support would link fiscal support to labor-market reform.
If Italy or Spain introduced changes that led to a short-term increase in joblessness, the fiscal costs would be met from a central EU budget to ease the pain.
This “investment” by wealthier countries should pay off if it leads to more flexible labor markets and higher productivity in the recipient countries.
Another proposal is a central-budget subsidy to reduce employment taxes in the EU’s most economically challenged countries.
The logic is that a country like Greece needs devaluation to enhance its competitiveness, but that leaving the euro would pose major problems.
The alternative would be to cut nominal wages (“internal” devaluation), which is hard to do (though it has been achieved in Latvia and Ireland).
Reducing taxes on labor, perhaps for a defined period, would have a similar effect.
That would be costly for governments in the short term, though an increase in output and employment might well justify the “tax expenditure” involved; here, too, an EU subsidy might be a worthwhile investment.
If Europe wants to revive sustainable growth and high employment, it must replicate what has worked in those countries that have performed successfully.
Doing so will cost money.
Governments must be prepared to persuade their electorates that it would be money well spent.
Making Globalization Work for All
We are now in a one-year countdown to establish a new approach to globalization.
In September 2005, world leaders will meet at the UN to review the progress made since the Millennium Assembly in September 2000, when they pledged to support a set of ambitious objectives - the Millennium Development Goals ­- to help the world's poorest people escape poverty, hunger, disease, and illiteracy.
Setting goals was the easy part.
When they return next fall, world leaders must decide on how to achieve them.
Fortunately, a proposal by UK Chancellor Gordon Brown might provide the needed global breakthrough.
Here is the problem: globalization offers people everywhere the chance to escape extreme poverty, but it is not working in many parts of the developing world.
While China and India grow rapidly, most of Africa is stagnating.
Similarly, large parts of Latin America and Central Asia are experiencing rising, not falling, rates of poverty.
In most cases, geography plays an important role in success or failure.
The big development success stories are places like Shanghai, port cities with ready access to world markets.
The biggest development failures tend to be in rural areas far from the coast.
Communities living in mountainous areas, such as in the Andes, or Central Asia, or the highlands of East Africa, are especially isolated.
Geographical isolation is even more extreme if the country is landlocked, like Bolivia, Afghanistan, Ethiopia, or Burkina Faso.
In addition to isolation, other problems include droughts in Africa, where farmers depend on rainfall rather than irrigation, and high disease burdens in tropical countries suffering from malaria, dengue fever, and other killer diseases.
All of these problems are solvable, but they are not being solved in many places.
Instead of hearing more lectures from the IMF about cutting budgets, poor countries need larger budgets to pay for the required investments - roads, power supplies, ports, schools, and health clinics - to jump-start economic growth.
The IMF should spend less time telling the poorest of the poor to cut their spending, and more time telling rich countries to give more money to help the poor meet their investment needs.
Rich countries have promised more help for years, but continue to renege.
Thirty-five years ago, they promised to give 0.7% of their GNP to poor countries as development aid.
Instead they give 0.25% - a shortfall that amounts to $120 billion per year.
The United States causes half the total shortfall.
If the US lived up to its pledge of 0.7% of GNP in donor aid, it would be giving $75 billion per year. Instead, it gives around $15 billion.
The US could easily afford to do more.
The Bush administration gave $250 billion per year in tax cuts to the richest Americans, raised military spending by $150 billion per year, and then turned to the poorest people of the world and told them that there is no money available to meet America's promise.
None of this makes sense for global security, or even for the financial interests of donor countries.
The failures of economic development in the Andes, Central Asia, and Africa contribute to global instability, local insurrections and violence, drug trafficking, and bases for terrorism.
Military approaches alone will not work, because the root of the problem is the vulnerability of poor, hungry people to the prophets of hate.
If donors keep giving only a little bit of help, but not enough to solve the problems of the poorest countries, these countries will never escape poverty's grip.
By financing a much higher level of investment in the next few years, rich countries would give poor countries the chance to achieve economic growth - promising an eventual end to further aid.
Chancellor Brown's proposal - an initiative called the International Finance Facility (IFF) - does precisely this.
The idea of the IFF is to guarantee that donor countries double their aid levels during the next decade, so that well-governed poor countries can make the investments they need to achieve the Millennium Development Goals.
Brown is exactly right: let's put Africa and other impoverished regions on a path of sustained economic growth by frontloading the aid during the period until 2015.
Great Britain has made the Millennium Development Goals, and hence the IFF, the centerpiece of the G-8 Summit, which will be held in Scotland next July.
French President Jacques Chirac has joined Blair and Brown in a bold call for rich countries to honor their promises to the poor.
The richest countries - the US, Germany, and Japan - must join this vital initiative.
Building a more peaceful and prosperous world is in everyone's best interest.
Making Globalization Work
I have written repeatedly about the problems of globalization: an unfair global trade regime that impedes development; an unstable global financial system that results in recurrent crises, with poor countries repeatedly finding themselves burdened with unsustainable debt; and a global intellectual property regime that denies access to affordable life-saving drugs, even as AIDS ravages the developing world.
I have also written about globalization’s anomalies: money should flow from rich to poor countries, but in recent years it has been going in the opposite direction.
While the rich are better able to bear the risks of currency and interest-rate fluctuations, it is the poor who bear the brunt of this volatility.
Indeed, I have complained so loudly and vociferously about the problems of globalization that many have wrongly concluded that I belong to the anti-globalization movement.
But I believe that globalization has enormous potential – as long as it is properly managed.
Some 70 years ago, during the Great Depression, John Maynard Keynes formulated his theory of unemployment, which described how government action could help restore full employment.
While conservatives vilified him, Keynes actually did more to save the capitalist system than all the pro-market financiers put together.
Had the conservatives been followed, the Great Depression would have been even worse and the demand for an alternative to capitalism would have grown stronger.
By the same token, unless we recognize and address the problems of globalization, it will be difficult to sustain.
Globalization is not inevitable: there have been setbacks before, and there can be setbacks again.
Globalization’s advocates are right that it has the potential to raise everyone’s living standards.
But it has not done that.
The questions posed by young French workers, who wonder how globalization will make them better off if it means accepting lower wages and weaker job protection, can no longer be ignored.
Nor can such questions be answered with the wistful hope that everyone will someday benefit.
As Keynes pointed out, in the long run, we are all dead.
Growing inequality in the advanced industrial countries was a long-predicted but seldom advertised consequence of globalization.
Full economic integration implies the equalization of unskilled wages everywhere in the world, and, though we are nowhere near attaining this “goal,” the downward pressure on those at the bottom is evident.
To the extent that changes in technology have contributed to the near stagnation of real wages for low-skilled workers in the United States and elsewhere for the past three decades, there is little that citizens can do.
But they can do something about globalization.
Economic theory does not say that everyone will win from globalization, but only that the net gains will be positive, and that the winners can therefore compensate the losers and still come out ahead.
But conservatives have argued that in order to remain competitive in a global world, taxes must be cut and the welfare state reduced.
This has been done in the US, where taxes have become less progressive, with tax cuts given to the winners – those who benefit from both globalization and technological changes.
As a result, the US and others following its example are becoming rich countries with poor people.
But the Scandinavian countries have shown that there is another way.
Of course, government, like the private sector, must strive for efficiency.
But investments in education and research, together with a strong social safety net, can lead to a more productive and competitive economy, with more security and higher living standards for all.
A strong safety net and an economy close to full employment provides a conducive environment for all stakeholders – workers, investors, and entrepreneurs – to engage in the risk-taking that new investments and firms require.
The problem is that economic globalization has outpaced the globalization of politics and mindsets.
We have become more interdependent, increasing the need to act together, but we do not have the institutional frameworks for doing this effectively and democratically.
Never has the need for international organizations like the IMF, the World Bank, and the World Trade Organization been greater, and seldom has confidence in these institutions been lower.
The world’s lone superpower, the US, has demonstrated its disdain for supranational institutions and worked assiduously to undermine them.
The looming failure of the Development Round of trade talks and the long delay in the United Nations Security Council’s demand for a ceasefire in Lebanon are but the latest examples of America’s contempt for multilateral initiatives.
Enhancing our understanding of globalization’s problems will help us to formulate remedies – some small, some large – aimed at both providing symptomatic relief and addressing the underlying causes.
There is a broad array of policies that can benefit people in both developing and developed countries, thereby providing globalization with the popular legitimacy that it currently lacks.
In other words, globalization can be changed; indeed, it is clear that it will be changed.
The question is whether change will be forced upon us by a crisis or result from careful, democratic deliberation and debate.
Crisis-driven change risks producing a backlash against globalization, or a haphazard reshaping of it, thus merely setting the stage for more problems later on.
By contrast, taking control of the process holds out the possibility of remaking globalization, so that it at last lives up to its potential and its promise: higher living standards for everyone in the world.
Making Growth Green
When the world's leaders met at the Millennium Summit four years ago, they agreed on a set of goals aimed at cutting global poverty in half by 2015.
They also set targets for the environment, because they understood its centrality to long-term economic growth, human development, and the stability of the planet.
The problem is that today, ten years shy of when the 2015 goals are to be met, progress on the environment is alarmingly slow.
So much more is possible.
The phase-out of ozone depleting substances through the Montreal Protocol, for instance, shows what can be done when the international community works together.
Thanks to the protocol, it is estimated that up to 20 million cases of skin cancer, and 130 million eye cataracts, will be avoided.
This kind of success should encourage us.
But now we need to match our action with the scale of the challenge.
Our world is not only unbalanced, but endangered.
Deforestation is increasing, with almost 100 million hectares lost in the last decade alone - much of it due to millions of poor farmers in Africa and Latin America being forced to cut down trees because they have no other access to land or energy sources.
At the same time, carbon dioxide emissions are rising: the European Union's target is to cut greenhouse gas emissions by 8% by 2010; but with current policies, only 0.5% will be achieved.
Of the world's species, 12% of birds, 24% of mammals, and 30% of fish are either vulnerable or in immediate danger of extinction.
The environmental challenge is even more stark in developing countries, where five billion of the earth's six billion people live.
In these nations, the environment is linked directly to human development - and to poverty.
More than a billion people in developing countries lack access to clean water; more than two billion have no access to basic sanitation.
Five to six million people, mostly children, die every year due to waterborne diseases, such as diarrhea, and air pollution.
On current trends, the millennium targets for the environment will not be met.
What needs to be done?
As a starting point, we must recognize the fundamental imbalance in the global environmental equation.
Richer countries do much of the environmental damage.
Accounting for only 15% of the world's population, they cause 50% of global carbon dioxide emissions - with all their implications for climate change.
But the poorer countries pay much of the "costs" - losing up to 8% of their GDP per year due to environmental degradation, as well as suffering devastating effects on health and human welfare.
Rich countries' larger contribution to environmental damage means that they must shoulder greater responsibility for fixing the problem.
That means changing the way they produce and consume energy - reducing subsidies, ensuring appropriate pricing, and adequately taxing environmentally damaging products.
It also means providing more resources to developing countries for environmental conservation.
Between 1990 and 2000, financing for environmental concerns followed roughly the same path as overall development assistance flows: it stagnated.
Aid for the environment averaged about $2 billion per year - far short of what the international community, first at the Rio Summit in 1992 and then at the Johannesburg Summit ten years later, said was needed.
In terms of global priorities, this figure compares with the $900 billion that the world currently commits to military expenditures each year.
If the war on environmental degradation is to be won, we need a major turnaround.
Three areas can help speed progress:
· Developed countries must set the example by moving toward environmentally friendly production and consumption patterns, including more control of greenhouse gas emissions and use of innovative mechanisms such as Carbon Funds to buy offsets (reductions in greenhouse gases) from developing countries.
Richer countries must also increase bilateral and multilateral aid commitments.
Reversing the declining trend in contributions to the Global Environment Facility would be a good start.
Since its inception in 1991, GEF funding has declined by almost 10 % as a share of the combined GDP of the 38 contributing nations;
· Developing countries must improve their policies governing the critical sectors of water, energy, transport and trade, including pricing policies.
This would help reduce consumption of scarce natural resources.
Beyond this, environmental concerns must be integrated more fully into development policymaking.
· The international community must make a much more serious commitment to renewable energy, efficiency, and other environmentally friendly energy sources.
A business-as-usual approach would mean that by 2030 carbon dioxide emissions would be 70 % higher than today, and renewable energy would account for a mere 4% of total energy usage, up from 2% now.
We need the kind of common effort launched a generation ago in agriculture that led to the Green Revolution.
Another two billion people will be added to global population over the next 25 years - the vast majority in poorer nations - with huge demands for energy and economic growth.
If that growth is not achieved in an environmentally sustainable way, its effects on poverty and human well-being will be disastrous.
It will be too late 25 years from now to make the right choices.
For the sake of our children and our children's children, we must act now.
Making Old Age Less Safe
It is almost an optical illusion: looming on Japan’s horizon, and on Europe’s and on America’s, is a pensions crisis.
The problem is real, though exaggerated.
The illusion is in some of the plans being devised to deal with it.
The main question is whether privatizing pension systems, as President George W. Bush has proposed for Social Security in the United States, would solve the problem or merely make matters worse.
With many countries pondering whether to adopt variants of the Bush plan, the question requires careful examination.
By itself, privatization is clearly not the solution.
America’s troubled private pension system – now several hundred billion dollars in debt – already appears headed for a government bailout.
There was a time when privatization – allowing individuals to set up individual savings accounts – seemed better than Social Security, which invests in lower-yielding Treasury bills.
Advocates of privatization argued that funds would do much better if invested in stocks, predicting a return of 9%.
But the stock market does not guarantee returns; it does not even guarantee that the stock values will keep up with inflation – and there have been periods in which they have not.
America’s Social Security system insulates individuals against the vagaries of the market and inflation, providing a form of insurance that the private market does not offer.
It does so with remarkable efficiency.
The costs of managing the Social Security system are far smaller than those likely to be associated with privatized accounts.
This is understandable: private investment firms spend an enormous amount on marketing and salaries.
It is possible that to reduce these transactions costs, Bush will propose restricting choice, which was the main argument for privatization in the first place.
But these limited kinds of choices – for example, a T-bill fund with 90% in T-bills and 10% in an indexed stock fund – could easily be introduced into the public social security system.
Bush says that reform is urgently needed, because the system will be insolvent in about a quarter-century.
But the problem depends on America’s growth rate: if the growth rates of the late 1990’s return, there is no problem.
Even if there is a problem, it can easily be fixed; spending a fraction of the money that went into Bush’s two tax cuts would have fixed Social Security for 75 years; slight benefit cuts, adjusting the age of retirement, or minor adjustments in the level of contributions could fix the system permanently.
Moreover, Bush’s proposals won’t fix social security – unless they are accompanied by drastic benefit cuts.
For how could they?
He proposes diverting almost a third of the Social Security tax to private accounts.
That means less money coming in.
If benefits are not reduced, the gap between receipts and expenditures will increase.
One doesn’t need a Nobel Prize to figure that out.
So privatization would not protect retirees against the Social Security system’s insolvency; it would merely add enormously to today’s fiscal deficit, because partial privatization entails diverting money to private funds that would have been used to close the gap between government expenditures and revenue.
The anticipated increase in the fiscal deficit is striking: the central plan discussed by Bush’s Council of Economic Advisers would – according to the Council’s own estimates – increase America’s fiscal deficit by $2 trillion over the next decade.
Advocates of privatization claim to believe in markets, but they are proposing budget gimmickry that would move those losses off the books, as if markets could be easily fooled.
America and the world should remember: Argentina’s privatization of its pension system was at the center of its recent fiscal woes.
Had Argentina not privatized, its budget would have been roughly in balance.
The US is starting on its privatization venture with a fiscal deficit of 4% of GDP.
Privatization advocates insist, however, that investments in stocks would yield sufficiently higher returns to provide individuals the same retirement income as before, with the surplus used to fill the gap.
But if markets are working well, then returns will be higher only because risk is higher.
There is still no free lunch in economics.
With higher risk, there is a chance that, 40 years from now, many individuals will find themselves with less than they need to retire.
But if one really thinks that free lunches exist, there is still no reason to privatize: government could get the additional returns by investing in the stock market itself.
Indeed, President Clinton proposed doing just that.
With increased transaction costs, worsening solvency for the system, increased budget deficits, and decreasing benefits and security for retirees, why the drive for privatization?
One reason is the interest financial markets have in grabbing a piece of all those transactions costs.
A second is the Bush administration’s ideological hostility to the modest amount of wealth redistribution implied by the public system.
America’s Social Security program has been so successful in reducing poverty because the poor get back a little more than they contribute, and the rich get back a little less.
Even with Social Security’s mildly redistributive effect, poverty and inequality in America are increasing. Privatization will only make matters worse.
Bush has tried to scare America about the magnitude of the problem, and he has tried to fool America about how privatization would solve it.
The Social Security deficit pales by comparison with the deficits created by Bush’s huge tax cuts for upper-income Americans or in comparison with the deficit in Medicare, which provides health care for the aged.
Why has he ignored these problems?
Is there another agenda?
Making Sense of the Climate Impasse
NEW YORK – All signs suggest that the planet is still hurtling headlong toward climatic disaster.
The United States’ National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration has issued its “State of the Climate Report” covering January-May.
The first five months of this year were the warmest on record going back to 1880. May was the warmest month ever.
Intense heat waves are currently hitting many parts of the world.
Yet still we fail to act.
There are several reasons for this, and we should understand them in order to break today’s deadlock.
First, the economic challenge of controlling human-induced climate change is truly complex.
Human-induced climate change stems from two principal sources of emissions of greenhouse gases (mainly carbon dioxide, methane, and nitrous oxide): fossil-fuel use for energy and agriculture (including deforestation to create new farmland and pastureland).
Changing the world’s energy and agricultural systems is no small matter.
It is not enough to just wave our hands and declare that climate change is an emergency.
We need a practical strategy for overhauling two economic sectors that stand at the center of the global economy and involve the entire world’s population.
The second major challenge in addressing climate change is the complexity of the science itself.
Today’s understanding of Earth’s climate and the human-induced component of climate change is the result of extremely difficult scientific work involving many thousands of scientists in all parts of the world.
This scientific understanding is incomplete, and there remain significant uncertainties about the precise magnitudes, timing, and dangers of climate change.
The general public naturally has a hard time grappling with this complexity and uncertainty, especially since the changes in climate are occurring over a timetable of decades and centuries, rather than months and years.
Moreover, year-to-year and even decade-to-decade natural variations in climate are intermixed with human-induced climate change, making it even more difficult to target damaging behavior.
This has given rise to a third problem in addressing climate change, which stems from a combination of the economic implications of the issue and the uncertainty that surrounds it.
This is reflected in the brutal, destructive campaign against climate science by powerful vested interests and ideologues, apparently aimed at creating an atmosphere of ignorance and confusion.
The Wall Street Journal, for example, America’s leading business newspaper, has run an aggressive editorial campaign against climate science for decades.
The individuals involved in this campaign are not only scientifically uninformed, but show absolutely no interest in becoming better informed.
They have turned down repeated offers by climate scientists to meet and conduct serious discussions about the issues.
Major oil companies and other big corporate interests also are playing this game, and have financed disreputable public-relations campaigns against climate science.
Their general approach is to exaggerate the uncertainties of climate science and to leave the impression that climate scientists are engaged in some kind of conspiracy to frighten the public.
It is an absurd charge, but absurd charges can curry public support if presented in a slick, well-funded format.
If we add up these three factors – the enormous economic challenge of reducing greenhouse gases, the complexity of climate science, and deliberate campaigns to confuse the public and discredit the science – we arrive at the fourth and over-arching problem: US politicians’ unwillingness or inability to formulate a sensible climate-change policy.
The US bears disproportionate responsibility for inaction on climate change, because it was long the world’s largest emitter of greenhouse gases, until last year, when China overtook it.
Even today, per capita US emissions are more than four times higher than China’s.
Yet, despite America’s central role in global emissions, the US Senate has done nothing about climate change since ratifying the United Nations climate change treaty 16 years ago.
When Barack Obama was elected US president, there was hope for progress.
Yet, while it is clear that Obama would like to move forward on the issue, so far he has pursued a failed strategy of negotiating with senators and key industries to try to forge an agreement.
Yet the special interest groups have dominated the process, and Obama has failed to make any headway.
The Obama administration should have tried – and should still try – an alternative approach.
Instead of negotiating with vested interests in the backrooms of the White House and Congress, Obama should present a coherent plan to the American people.
He should propose a sound strategy over the next 20 years for reducing America’s dependence on fossil fuels, converting to electric vehicles, and expanding non-carbon energy sources such as solar and wind power.
He could then present an estimated price tag for phasing in these changes over time, and demonstrate that the costs would be modest compared to the enormous benefits.
Strangely, despite being a candidate of change, Obama has not taken the approach of presenting real plans of action for change.
His administration is trapped more and more in the paralyzing grip of special-interest groups.
Whether this is an intended outcome, so that Obama and his party can continue to mobilize large campaign contributions, or the result of poor decision-making is difficult to determine – and may reflect a bit of both.
What is clear is that we are courting disaster as a result.
Nature doesn’t care about our political machinations.
And nature is telling us that our current economic model is dangerous and self-defeating.
Unless we find some real global leadership in the next few years, we will learn that lesson in the hardest ways possible.
Making the Euro Whole
NEW YORK – The architects of the euro knew that it was incomplete when they designed it.
The euro had a common central bank but no common treasury.
This was unavoidable, because the Maastricht Treaty was meant to bring about a monetary union without a political union.
European authorities were confident, however, that if and when the euro ran into a crisis, they would be able to overcome it.
After all, that is how the European Union was created, taking one step at a time, knowing full well that additional steps would be required.
With hindsight, one can identify other deficiencies in the euro of which its architects were unaware.
The euro was supposed to bring about economic convergence, but it produced divergences instead, because its architects did not realize that imbalances may emerge not only in the public sector, but in the private sector as well.
After the euro came into force, commercial banks could refinance their holdings of government bonds at the discount window of the European Central Bank, and regulators treated government bonds as riskless.
This caused interest-rate differentials between various countries to shrink, which generated real-estate booms in the weaker economies and reduced their competitiveness.
At the same time, Germany, suffering from the after-effects of reunification, had to tighten its belt.
Trade unions agreed to concessions on wages and working conditions in exchange for job security.
That is how the divergences emerged.
Yet the banks continued to load up on the government bonds of the weaker countries in order to benefit from the minuscule interest-rate differentials that still remained.
The consequences of the lack of a common treasury first became apparent after the bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers in 2008, when governments, in order to prevent financial markets from collapsing, had to guarantee that no other systemically important financial institution would be allowed to fail.
At that time, Angela Merkel rejected a Europe-wide guarantee, insisting that each country should guarantee its own institutions.
Interestingly, interest-rate differentials widened only in 2010, when the newly elected Greek government announced that the previous government had vastly understated the true fiscal deficit.
That was the start of the euro crisis.
The lack of a common treasury is now in the process of being remedied, first by a rescue package for Greece, then by creating a temporary emergency facility, and – the financial authorities being a little bit pregnant – eventually by establishing some permanent institution.
Unfortunately, it is equally certain that the new arrangements will also be flawed.
Besides the lack of a common treasury, the euro suffers from other shortcomings, which the authorities do not seem to have fully understood.
This complicates matters enormously.
The authorities are confronted by not only a currency crisis, but also a banking crisis and a crisis in macroeconomic theory.
The authorities are committing at least two mistakes.
One is that the bondholders of insolvent banks are being protected at the expense of taxpayers for fear of provoking a financial crisis.
This is politically unacceptable.
The Irish government elected next spring is bound to repudiate the current arrangements. Markets recognize this, which is why the Irish rescue brought no relief.
Second, high interest rates charged on rescue packages make it impossible for weaker countries to improve their competitiveness vis-à-vis stronger ones. Divergences will continue to widen, and weaker countries will continue to weaken indefinitely.
Mutual resentment between creditors and debtors is liable to grow, and there is a real danger that the euro may destroy the EU’s political and social cohesion.
Both mistakes can be corrected.
With regard to the first, emergency funds ought to be used to recapitalize the banking systems, as well as to provide loans to sovereign states.
The former would be a more efficient use of funds than the latter. Properly capitalizing the banking system would leave countries with smaller deficits, enabling them to regain access to capital markets sooner.
It is better to inject equity into the banks now rather than later, and it is better to do it on a Europe-wide basis than leave each country to act on its own.
This would create a European regulatory regime.
Europe-wide regulation of banks encroaches on national sovereignty less than European control over fiscal policy. And European control over banks is less amenable to political abuse than national control.
With regard to the second problem, the interest rate on rescue packages should be reduced to the rate at which the EU itself can borrow on the market.
This would have the advantage of developing an active Eurobond market.
These two structural changes may not be sufficient to provide the eurozone countries in need of rescue an escape route from their predicament.
Additional measures, such as “haircuts” for holders of sovereign debt, may be needed.
Having been properly recapitalized, banks could absorb this, and two obvious mistakes that condemn the EU to a bleak future would be remedied.
Making the IMF and World Bank Work for the Poor
The World Bank has long proclaimed its dream of “a world free from poverty.”
Likewise, the International Monetary Fund may arguably desire “a world free from financial crisis.”
These are crucial and daunting objectives, but they are too narrow for the twenty-first century.
To remain relevant, the Bretton Woods institutions must fully adapt to the needs of the world’s rapidly emerging countries, and they can begin that process at this spring’s IMF-World Bank meetings in Washington.
As many now acknowledge, the IMF should look beyond managing financial crises and start addressing non-cooperative economic behaviors – notably in the monetary field.
The international community would gain from the IMF’s becoming a center of joint-monitoring and permanent dialogue among the world’s rich, poor and emerging nations.
But for that to happen, the latter two need a greater say.
Fortunately, such reform is at last on the agenda.
Last autumn’s IMF-World Bank meetings approved an increase in voting quotas for some of the most under-represented emerging economies: China, Mexico, South Korea, and Turkey.
A second round of adjustment will need to involve other fast-paced economies without crushing the voice of the poorest.
As for the World Bank, it does not need to “reposition” itself so much as to root itself in emerging countries, as does the development aid industry in general.
The international community must resist shortsighted calls to withdraw from middle-income nations on the ground that they could now “go it alone.”
When it comes to global governance, communicable diseases, climate change, or threats to biodiversity, these countries’ importance speaks for itself.
They account for 44% of people living with HIV/AIDS, 47% of global CO2 emissions, and 52% of the planet’s protected natural areas.
The international community simply cannot leave them to their own devices on such crucial issues without jeopardizing its own future.
Fighting poverty is a non-negotiable objective.
But it cannot be the sole purpose of international aid, nor of the World Bank.
In fact, a genuine commitment to poverty reduction implies working with these countries.
They are home to 70% of the population that lives on less than $2 a day, facing massive unemployment, gross inequalities, lack of infrastructure, regional imbalances, and a litany of other challenges.
Some critics argue that lending public money to middle-income countries is no longer necessary, due to their access to financial markets.
True, private capital flows have surged in the wake of global liberalization and these countries’ privatization schemes.
But private capital flows have proven to be volatile and prone to sudden interruptions, as exemplified by the Asian and Russian financial crises of the late 1990’s, or more recently by investors pulling out from infrastructure sectors.
Another line of suspicion against public lending is that it crowds out private investment.
However, an increasing body of evidence documents the positive impact of public investment on productivity and economic growth.
It suggests complementarity rather than substitutability between private and public funds.
Detractors ultimately fall back on the argument that multilateral lending to middle-income countries is waning along with demand.
But, while loan volumes have decreased by a third since the last financial crisis, this is only a return to normalcy.
After an all-time high due to emergency aid to countries like South Korea or Argentina, lending is back to its trend line of around $25 billion a year.
While lending by the World Bank did fall below its mid-1990’s level, it is growing again, reflecting the expansion of regional multilateral banks and a policy pendulum that is swinging back to publicly-financed infrastructure projects.
This does not mean that business as usual should be good enough for the World Bank.
Its products need to be adapted.
With decentralization taking place in many emerging economies, sub-national authorities are taking on more responsibilities.
The Bank should be able to work with them in the absence of sovereign guarantees, and increase its loan offerings in local currencies, since these partners cannot afford currency risk.
To further “crowd in ” the private sector, insurance and guarantees can help.
Beyond this, more financial engineering is needed to draw upon the creativity of financial markets.
Finally, as David de Ferranti, a former World Bank vice-president, has pointed out, the Bank should expand its intellectual partnerships and engage with the highly trained professionals, consulting firms, and research institutions that emerging countries now boast.
The Bank must be open to local invention if it is to be accepted by and relevant to middle-income nations.
In terms of purchasing power parity, per capita income in middle-income countries is still about 15% of that of developed nations.
The time has not yet come to shake hands and part company.
Convergence is on the way, but minimizing its global costs requires redesigning the Bretton Woods institutions to meet the challenges faced by emerging countries.
Reinvigorating the US-Japan Alliance
NEW YORK – Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe’s current visit to the United States provides an ideal opportunity to reinvigorate the long-standing US-Japan bilateral alliance in the face of an increasingly aggressive China and persistent tensions on the Korean Peninsula.
For a half-century, the US-Japan alliance has been a cornerstone of Asian and global peace, security, and stability – and Japan has been an outstanding global citizen.
Japan developed the economic-growth model that other Asian countries later emulated so successfully; actively contributed to global economic development; participated in the United Nations and other multilateral institutions (including paying a disproportionately high percentage of UN costs); and has helped to set a global standard for environmental protection and sustainable development.
As Abe arrives in Washington, DC, Japan and the US are both facing significant internal and external challenges, including rising tensions in Asia.
In recent months, Chinese aircraft have repeatedly violated Japanese airspace over the East China Sea, and a Chinese naval vessel locked its weapons-targeting radar on a Japanese destroyer and helicopter.
Likewise, a Chinese military intelligence unit in Shanghai has reportedly hacked – and stolen from – a multitude of US businesses.
And North Korea conducted its third nuclear test earlier this month, sending shock waves through the region.
Tackling these challenges will require strong US-Japanese cooperation.
But, to enhance the alliance’s impact, both countries must first focus on reinvigorating their own societies and economies.
For the US, that requires overcoming a political culture characterized by polarization and crisis in order to develop effective policies aimed at boosting economic competitiveness.
In some ways, Japan’s domestic challenges are even more daunting, given that its political system has produced six prime ministers in as many years, none of whom managed to address effectively Japan’s stagnant economy, decade-long deflation, and shrinking workforce.
Japan should move to join the Trans-Pacific Partnership negotiations – aimed at creating a free-trade zone in the Asia-Pacific region – which could help to open up Japan’s overprotected and under-competitive economy, just as accession to the World Trade Organization did for China.
To stem the contraction of its workforce, Japan should launch a major initiative to enhance female employment –&#160;and women’s role at all levels of the economy and society.
By implementing measures to improve citizens’ proficiency in English and promoting study abroad, Japan’s leaders can tackle the rising insularity, cultural isolation, and inadequate foreign-language skills that are stifling its social and economic development.
Beyond strengthening the economy and bolstering its partnership with the US, Japan must address the enduring suspicions of countries that were brutalized by Japan’s occupation before and during World War II.
Although previous Japanese governments have issued apologies for the country’s past behavior, Japan, unlike Germany, has not fully faced its history.
During his election campaign, Abe, a self-declared nationalist, expressed a desire to revise Japan’s 1995 apology for its occupation and war record.
But he did so while visiting – and voicing his wish to return to – Tokyo’s Yasukuni Shrine, a nationalist pilgrimage site that commemorates, among others, 14 Class A and more than 1,000 Class B and C war criminals.
With Japan’s security in jeopardy, its leaders can no longer afford to be vague about the country’s past.
Rather, Abe should reaffirm the country’s 1995 statement; apologize again, even more firmly; and revise or close the Yūshūkanmilitary and war museum at Yasukuni, which glorifies Japan’s militarist past while ignoring its concomitant atrocities.
Japan should also reach out to South Korea, America’s other ally in the region, and demonstrate greater flexibility in an effort to resolve the two countries’ long-standing maritime border dispute.
The US and Japan must make clear that China’s provocative behavior in the East China Sea over the last six months is unacceptable, while highlighting China’s obligation to help to rein in North Korea’s nuclear program.
If this demonstration of shared values and resolve does not alter China’s behavior, a wider conversation would inevitably begin in Japan about the potential revision of Article 9 of the 1947 Constitution, which essentially denies Japan the ability to maintain armed forces like most other “normal” countries.
This week, US President Barack Obama and Abe should reinvigorate the bilateral alliance, reaffirming the principles on which it is based and committing to ever-closer military and strategic collaboration.
If the two countries work to tackle problems in their own societies, and to strengthen the alliance that binds them, the partnership could be as significant in the future as it has ever been in the past.
What to Do with Doing Business?
CAMBRIDGE – Under pressure from China and other governments, the World Bank is considering discontinuing its Doing Business report.
It has asked Trevor Manuel, a long-time South African cabinet minister, to lead a commission to look into the matter.
Doing Business – the brainchild of, among others, my Harvard colleague Andrei Shleifer and Simeon Djankov, a World Bank staffer who later became Bulgaria’s finance minister – measures such indicators as the time and cost required to register a business, pay taxes, trade across borders, obtain a loan, get a construction license, or enforce a contract.
The data are provided by law firms, which complete a questionnaire about the legal and administrative requirements of performing these tasks.
The project emerged from a research question that goes to the heart of the debate on the proper role and actual motivations of the state in regulating markets: Does regulation exist to achieve some laudable social goal or mainly to extract rents?
This question has long divided economists along a right-left axis, at least since University of Chicago economists George Stigler and Milton Friedman argued that many, if not most, regulations were motivated by rent-seeking among bureaucrats and business incumbents.
The Doing Business project calculates dozens of separate indicators that are then averaged into a single number.
As with all numerical indicators that try to express a very complex reality, there is always room for improvement.
I, for one, find the underlying indicators more informative than the average.
Averaging the numbers assumes that all components are substitutes: if you cannot improve on one, you can compensate by improving on another.
But I think of them as complements: if you cannot build your plant, you do not benefit from more accommodating trade rules.
A single problem can be fatal, even if other indicators are strong.
Moreover, Doing Business measures the burden of compliance with regulations, not their effectiveness.
The indicators do not penalize a country that cheaply and expeditiously authorizes shoddy construction projects, dangerous imports, or abusive labor practices.
Nevertheless, the burdens in some countries are so obvious that they could hardly be explained as the consequence of anything other than ineptitude or predation.
By making visible some government inefficiencies, the report has galvanized pressure to streamline procedures, with many countries adopting policies to reduce the burden that their regulations place on their citizens.
The indices name and shame poor performers, so it is no surprise that these countries – like China, which is ranked 91st – object to Doing Business.
This should be reason enough to continue the report; indeed, the fact that China has the world’s highest investment rate suggests that, despite the Doing Business indicators, it is possible to do business there.
The idea of creating and publishing an index with country rankings is a strategy adopted by many organizations and social movements to raise awareness about issues such as corruption, governance, freedom, gender equality, competitiveness, productive knowhow, and the investment climate, among others.
The main problem with these indices is not so much how they are calculated as how they are used.
In general, such indices work best as a catalyst for debate about an issue.
By contrast, they work very badly when viewed as a policy framework.
It is common – but almost never wise – to think that the goal of policy should be to improve countries’ rankings.
For example, in a recent paper, Shleifer and his co-authors measured government effectiveness by mailing letters to non-existent business addresses in 159 countries and measuring how long it took for the letters to be returned – or whether they were returned at all.
They found that this indicator correlated very well with many other governance indicators.
Typically, countries that are bad at running a post office are also bad at running other organizations.
But it does not follow that if a country wants to improve government effectiveness it should focus on returning wrongly addressed letters promptly.
This point applies to the Doing Business report.
For example, to measure the difficulty of dealing with licenses, Doing Business’s indicators examine the burden of obtaining a permit to build a warehouse.
But firms must deal with licenses in many areas – such as medical devices and drugs, radio stations, mines, bars, banks, insurance companies, airlines, and taxis –&#160;that are not included in the report’s indicators, even though they may be major obstacles to doing business.
Countries that regard raising their ranking as a policy goal have no incentive to improve licensing procedures in any of these other areas.
Moreover, in the Atlas of Economic Complexity, my co-authors and I show that these indicators are weakly related, if at all, to economic growth.
Improving on them does not foretell more economic dynamism.
Many countries – including Colombia, Liberia, Mexico, and Saudi Arabia – have at some point made improvement in the Doing Business ranking, or that of the World Economic Forum’s Global Competitiveness Report, a policy goal.
This distracted them from focusing on what is important rather than on what was included in the index.
Countries should, instead, focus on the ultimate goal: generating a rapid increase in the number of productive jobs.
The challenge consists in finding ways to get there, and is best addressed through rich and deep interactions between government and society.
International benchmarks may be useful for getting an idea of achievable performance in a particular area; the more, the better.
But the key is to improve on the areas that matter, regardless of whether existing global indicators cover them.
Kemunculan Kembali Penyakit Malaria yang Ganas
SINGAPURA – Penurunan drastis angka kematian akibat malaria sejak awal abad ini merupakan salah satu kisah sukses terbaik di bidang kesehatan masyarakat dalam beberapa tahun terakhir.
Berkat investasi gabungan dalam pencegahan, diagnosis, dan pengobatan, angka kematian akibat penyakit ini berkurang 60% setiap tahunnya sejak tahun 2000 dan telah menyelamatkan lebih dari enam juta jiwa.
Meskipun impian mencapai penghapusan malaria nampaknya hampir menjadi kenyatan, tingginya penolakan terhadap obat-obatan kini mengancam kesuksesan besar ini.
Penolakan terhadap obat anti malaria yang paling efektif yaitu artemisinin mulai hangat di Kamboja dan meluas ke kawasan Sungai Mekong.
Tanpa tindakan cepat dan efektif, bentuk baru penolakan terhadap malaria akan meluas – sebuah pola yang muncul dua kali pada beberapa jenis obat malaria yang terdahulu.
Pemerintah, lembaga internasional, organisasi masyarakat sipil, dan industri harus menerapkan langkah-langkah urgen demi mencegah epidemi akibat resistensi malaria dan menghentikan timbulnya kejadian mematikan lainnya.
Guna menunda penyebaran resistensi untuk memungkinkan produksi obat-obatan baru, perlu ditetapkan sasaran jangka pendek yang bersifat urgen: mencegah timbulnya efek resistensi di Asia Selatan dan Asia Tenggara dan menghambat penyebarannya di kawasan lain.
Berdasarkan pengalaman sejarah, resistensi terhadap artemisinin dapat bergeser ke India dan berlanjut ke Afrika Sub-Sahara dan mungkin seluruh dunia, sehingga membahayakan jutaan jiwa dan merusak kemajuan yang sudah dicapai selama beberapa dekade terakhir.
Pada tahun 1950-an, resistensi terhadap salah satu obat yang disebut klorokuin bermunculan di sekitar perbatasan Thailand-Kamboja.
Peristiwa yang sama terulang lagi pada tahun 1970-an terhadap sulfadoksin-pirimetamin (SP).
Dimulai dari Asia Tenggara resistensi terhadap klorokuin dan SP menyebar ke India lalu ke Afrika dan kawasan lain.
Jutaan orang meninggal dunia sebagai akibatnya dan sebagian besar diantaranya adalah anak-anak di benua Afrika.
Konsekuensi dari meluasnya resistensi terhadap artemisinin juga sama buruknya.
Bahkan kelompok yang paling kolot pun sudah memperkirakan kenyataan suram.
Sebuah studi menemukan bahwa penyebarannya dapat menyebabkan tambahan angka kematian sebanyak 116.000 jiwa per tahun serta pengeluaran medis terkait dan kerugian produktivitas sebanyak $417 juta – di luar biaya $12 miliar akibat hilangnya produktivitas karena malaria yang menimpa Afrika Sub-Sahara setiap tahunnya.
Meskipun terdapat kekhawatiran secara umum dalam 8 tahun terakhir, resistensi terhadap artemisinin belum dapat dikendalikan.
Sebaliknya, justru resistensi serupa terdeteksi di Kamboja, Vietnam, Laos, Thailand, dan Myanmar, di perbatasan timur India.
Terdapat kenaikan bantuan donor, terutama the Regional Artemisinin-resistance Initiative, yang didanai oleh hibah sejumlah $100 juta dari The Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis, and Malaria.
Namun lambannya penguatan atas intervensi pengendalian yang konvensional belum terbukti mampu mengalahkan penyebaran resistensi.
Untuk mengakhiri malaria, perlu ada gerakan global secara terpadu melawan faktor pemicu resistensi.
Selain dari upaya menanggulangi resistensi terhadap artemisinin di kawasan Mekong, perlu ada tindakan lain di luar itu.
Menurut Organisasi Kesehatan Dunia (WHO), hingga November 2015, otoritas nasional di sektor kesehatan di enam negara Afrika dan Kolombia belum mencabut izin pemasaran yang dikeluarkan bagi penggunaan oral artemisinin secara monoterapi – sebagai salah satu pendorong utama resistensi.
Komitmen yang lebih kuat dari sektor swasta juga diperlukan.
Hingga bulan Desember 2015, 21 produsen obat-obatan yang dihubungi WHO belum sepakat untuk menghentikan produksi monoterapi artemisinin per oral.
Lebih dari dua-pertiga industri ini beroperasi di Asia.
Perusahaan-perusahaan farmasi berbasiskan riset juga harus berinvestasi pada obat-obat anti malaria generasi terbaru.
Walapun pengobatan berbasiskan artemisinin masih efektif, pada akhirnya obat ini harus digantikan – jika tidak akan berisiko menjadi bagian dari permasalahan.
Melalui kemitraan publik-swasta dengan Singapore Economic Development Board, Novartis Institute for Tropical Diseases memimpin pembentukan konsorsium riset untuk menjawab kebutuhan ini.
Upaya ini telah menghasilkan dua calon obat anti malaria baru yang menjanjikan dan saat ini menjalani uji klinis Tahap 2 – tipe senyawa baru yang bisa menyembuhkan malaria melalui cara-cara yang berbeda dari terapi yang ada sekarang sehingga berpotensi memerangi kemunculan resistensi obat.
Lebih lanjutnya, skema kerja sama pengembangan produk, seperti Drugs for Neglected Diseases initiative dan Medicines for Malaria Venture, tengah menyatukan akademisi, perusahaan farmasi, dan lembaga donor untuk menghasilkan pengobatan potensial terbaru untuk penyakit-penyakit yang diabaikan.
Kolaborasi ini bisa mempercepat supaya senyawa-senyawa menjanjikan lainnya bisa segera melewati proses pengembangan dan persetujuan obat yang panjang dan mahal.
Dua senyawa anti malaria lainnya pada uji klinis Tahap 2 kini tengah dikembangkan melalui dukungan dari Medicines for Malaria Venture – satu diantaranya oleh Takeda Pharmaceuticals dan US National Institutes of Health dan lainnya bersama perusahaan farmasi asal Perancis yaitu Sanofi.
Mungkin kita telah memenangkan banyak perang melawan malaria, tapi tanda-tanda peringatan yang lazim mengindikasikan bahwa kita bisa saja kalah.
Penyebaran resistensi artemisinin di Asia saat ini mengancam kehidupan anak-anak di Afrika di masa depan.
Itu sebabnya kita memerlukan tindakan efektif untuk mencegah penyebaran resistensi artemisinin, termasuk investasi sesegera mungkin pada pengobatan anti malaria generasi terbaru.
Jika kita tidak mengindahkan sejarah penyakit malaria, kita akan tertimpa nasib buruk itu lagi.
Malaya and Sri Lanka: Communal Politics or Communal War?
Sri Lanka's bitter war of terror - one that practically invented the infamy of the suicide bomber - had been showing signs of abating of late.
But a bitter power struggle between Sri Lanka's President Chandrika Kumaratunga and Prime Minister Ranil Wickremesinghe, and a schism among the rebel Tamil tigers, now threatens to reignite the violence.
Their political duel was aggravated recently when the President, wary that her prime ministerial rival was "too soft" in dealing with the rebel Tamil Tigers, sacked three ministers and took over their portfolios.
Now she has dissolved parliament and set new elections for April, three years before they are due.
Having lived through the Malayan war of 1947-1960, I often wonder why Sri Lanka's war has been so much more difficult to end.
On the surface, much about those two wars seem similar.
In Malaya, ethnic Chinese fought British and Malay regiments and police, which is roughly comparable to the Tamils' fight against the Sinhalese in Sri Lanka.
Like the Tamil Tigers, the Malayan Communists were also damned as terrorists, but the casualties they inflicted were small compared to the mass killings caused by both sides in Sri Lanka's war.
Back then, Malaysia's ethnic tensions produced communal riots in which both Chinese and Malays were killed.
These, however, were never allowed to degenerate into the outright communal slaughter that the war in Sri Lanka has often produced.
Could Sri Lanka have learned anything from the Malayan experience?
Could the Malayan military strategy to contain the rebellion have been imported?
British experts from the Malayan emergency tried to help the Americans in Vietnam - obviously without success.
Of course, one reason for that failure is that the South Vietnamese were not different enough from the North Vietnamese for the Malayan formula of identifying and isolating rebel communities by race to work.
But Sri Lanka's war, with its ethnic origins, is closer to the Malayan experience and so this strategy could, perhaps, have been tested.
A second similarity comes from the fact that the British were the imperial power in both countries.
At independence, national leaders in both countries inherited similar sets of laws and administrative practices.
Indeed, at the time Ceylon (now Sri Lanka) achieved independence, it was far more committed to democracy and the common-law legal system than Malaya.
So why did multi-communal politics ultimately work in Malaya, and then in both Malaysia and Singapore, and fail so badly in Ceylon?
One key reason must be the historical experience of the Sinhalese.
For two thousand years, they had to defend themselves against attacks by expansionist Tamil kingdoms from the Indian mainland.
As I traveled around the island admiring its ancient capitals, notably the ones sacked by Tamil kings, and Buddhist shrines set up to counter the impact of Hinduism, I began to understand the traumas endured by the Sinhalese.
Sadly, the Tamils now living in the Jaffna districts in the northern and eastern parts of the island are probably descended from Tamils who were also victims of the same external attacks.
Another factor arose from the fact that Tamils, on the whole, had been open to a succession of Portuguese, Dutch, and British administrations from the 16th century onwards, while most Sinhalese lived under their own king in the Kandyan kingdom until the 19th century.
In particular, the Buddhist priests, who are the guardians of the faith and have wielded much influence in Sri Lanka politics since the mid-1950's, were the least touched by foreign rule.
They are determined to limit Hindu Tamil power in Sri Lankan affairs and encourage the country's leaders to make few concessions to Tamil autonomy.
Furthermore, the degree of rigidity in inter-ethnic negotiations since the rise to power of the Bandaranaike family (of which the current President is a member) was accompanied by a series of ideological struggles among Sinhalese politicians, not least those led by various socialist and communist parties.
This ongoing disunity among the Sinhalese contributed to making Sri Lanka's governments much more fragile than those that succeeded the British in Kuala Lumpur and Singapore.
What was decisively different between Ceylon and Malaya, however, is found in the fact that, in Ceylon, both major communities consider themselves to be natives, having both lived on the land they hold for over twenty centuries.
In contrast, the Malay Peninsula, including the island of Singapore, was the land of the Malays (Tanah Melayu) before the first Chinese and Indian immigrants came and settled there.
The British, who did not depose the Malay rulers as they did the Singhalese king in Kandy, made sure that the native position of the Malays was constitutionally secure from the start.
Once the Chinese recognized their place as newcomers, they had to accept that becoming full nationals of the new nation state was a status that needed to be earned.
Although most Chinese in Malaysia now feel that they deserve the full rights of citizenship, they have not insisted on absolute equality.
In any case, they never claim to be indigenous to any particular locale, not even in Singapore, where ethnic Chinese make up three-quarters of the population.
Sri Lanka's tragedy reminds us how many things can go wrong when old Asian polities seek to establish modern nation states.
It becomes even more difficult when the complex historical baggage calls for sensitivity and tolerance while the protagonists are determined to see every concession as surrender.
Malaysia’s Opposition Reborn
In Malaysia’s recent elections, opposition parties managed their strongest showing since the country gained its independence from Britain in 1957, cutting the ruling coalition’s parliamentary majority to below two-thirds.
Where the country’s newly invigorated democracy goes from here rests with one man, Anwar Ibrahim, the deputy prime minister sacked by former premier Mahathir Mohamad and later jailed.
Anwar can finally make the opposition a credible check on the National Front ruling coalition, but knows that he will never become prime minister this way.  No one, after all, expects the opposition to win enough seats to form a government in the conceivable future.
He can allow himself to be wooed back by his former party, the United Malays National Organization (UMNO), the National Front’s leading member.
UMNO is widely believed to have held talks with Anwar before.
Now, more than ever, it needs Anwar to reestablish its credibility.
And, to become prime minister, Anwar needs UMNO.
Arguably, being inside UMNO and the government would allow Anwar to better institute the reforms he has so ardently advocated.
But, before all that, Anwar needs to get himself elected to parliament again.
Because of his prison term, Anwar was not able to run in the latest election.
Instead, he acted as the de facto leader of a loose alliance between the three leading opposition forces – the Democratic Action Party (DAP), the Justice Party, and the Islamist PAS.
Political restrictions on Anwar, however, end next month, and an MP from his Justice Party – probably his wife – is expected to step aside to allow him to run in a by-election.
If Anwar were to marry his leadership and charisma to the opposition’s newfound heft in the federal legislature – 82 MPs, compared with 20 in the last parliament – serious policy alternatives to the government’s might be expected.
Until now, the opposition has chiefly acted as an irritant, and voters viewed debates as entertainment, rather than as exchanges that informed policy.
For the same reason, policy platforms have never been important for the opposition in elections.
Many who voted for the DAP on Saturday, for example, are unlikely to have known or cared about what the party stood for.
Traditionally, people voted for the DAP or the Justice Party to show their displeasure with the National Front.
Indeed, if ideas were important, a leftist party like the DAP would have found it difficult to cooperate with the PAS.
But cooperate they did.
All this changes now that the National Front no longer has a two-thirds majority – which had allowed it to amend the constitution 40 times in 50 years.
Parliament now will have to pay attention to any serious policy that the opposition proposes.
But serious opposition will require serious leadership.
Strong leadership also is needed to protect the interests of the five states in which the opposition has now won control for the first time.
Because the federal government disburses fiscal allocations to Malaysia’s 13 states, the government will be tempted to squeeze opposition-held states.
Thus, they will need strong advocacy at the federal level to ensure they receive their fair due.
What makes the National Front’s loss particularly dramatic has been its defeat in the state legislatures of Penang, Selangor, Perak, and Kedah – large states with important industrial bases.
(Kelantan state, however, was always expected to continue to be held by PAS.)
Urban and middle-class voters such as those in Penang – a predominantly Chinese state with strong opposition sentiment – had always voted to keep the state legislature under the National Front in order to ensure continued funding, while sending opposition candidates to parliament to “pester” the National Front there.
This calculation has been abandoned, reflecting deep dissatisfaction with Prime Minister Abdullah Badawi’s administration and impatience for change.
Malaysia is now at a crossroads.
For five decades, its democracy has not been premised on a daily test of ideas – whether between political parties or through grassroots engagement – that is then confirmed at the ballot box.
There is still a newfound opportunity to improve governance, but only Anwar has the experience to provide that direction, because no one else in the opposition has worked in government at such a senior level as he has.
That said, it is also likely that the UMNO, in its hour of crisis, will try to recruit Anwar.
Arguably, the best legacy Anwar might eventually leave Malaysia would not be what he can achieve for the UMNO and the National Front, but what role he might play in entrenching a contest of ideas into Malaysian politics – a project he has shown himself keen to promote.
Mali and the Islamic Reformation
PARIS – Mali is a landlocked West African country of 15 million people, covering 1,240,000 square kilometers (478,800 square miles), three-quarters of it desert.