It supports the military dictatorship in Pakistan.
None of these military actions addresses the problems that led to conflict in the first place.
On the contrary, American policies typically inflame the situation rather than solve it.
Time and again, this military approach comes back to haunt the US.
The US embraced the Shah of Iran by sending massive armaments, which fell into the hands of Iran’s Revolutionary Government after 1979.
The US then backed Saddam Hussein in his attack on Iran, until the US ended up attacking Saddam himself.
The US backed Osama bin Laden in Afghanistan against the Soviets, until the US ended up fighting bin Laden.
Since 2001 the US has supported Pervez Musharraf in Pakistan with more than $10 billion in aid, and now faces an unstable regime that just barely survives.
US foreign policy is so ineffective because it has been taken over by the military.
Even postwar reconstruction in Iraq under the US-led occupation was run by the Pentagon rather than by civilian agencies.
The US military budget dominates everything about foreign policy.
Adding up the budgets of the Pentagon, the Iraq and Afghanistan wars, the Department of Homeland Security, nuclear weapons programs, and the State Department’s military assistance operations, the US will spend around $800 billion this year on security, compared with less than $20 billion for economic development.
In a stunning article on aid to Pakistan during the Bush administration, Craig Cohen and Derek Chollet demonstrated the disastrous nature of this militarized approach – even before the tottering Musharraf regime’s latest crackdown.
They show that even though Pakistan faces huge problems of poverty, population, and environment, 75% of the $10 billion in US aid has gone to the Pakistani military, ostensibly to reimburse Pakistan for its contribution to the “war on terror,” and to help it buy F-16s and other weapons systems.
Another 16% went straight to the Pakistani budget, no questions asked.
That left less than 10% for development and humanitarian assistance.
Annual US aid for education in Pakistan has amounted to just $64 million, or $1.16 per school-aged child.
The authors note that “the strategic direction for Pakistan was set early by a narrow circle at the top of the Bush administration and has been largely focused on the war effort rather than on Pakistan’s internal situation.”
They also emphasize that “US engagement with Pakistan is highly militarized and centralized, with very little reaching the vast majority of Pakistanis.”
They quote George Bush as saying, “When [Musharraf] looks me in the eye and says…there won’t be a Taliban and won’t be al-Qaeda, I believe him, you know?”
This militarized approach is leading the world into a downward spiral of violence and conflict.
Each new US weapons system “sold” or given to the region increases the chances of expanded war and further military coups, and to the chance that the arms will be turned on the US itself.
None of it helps to address the underlying problems of poverty, child mortality, water scarcity, and lack of livelihoods in places like Pakistan’s Northwest Frontier Province, Sudan’s Darfur region, or Somalia.
These places are bulging with people facing a tightening squeeze of insufficient rainfall and degraded pasturelands.
Naturally, many join radical causes.
The Bush administration fails to recognize these fundamental demographic and environmental challenges, that $800 billion of security spending won’t bring irrigation to Afghanistan, Pakistan, Sudan, and Somalia, and therefore won’t bring peace.
Instead of seeing real people in crisis, they see caricatures, a terrorist around every corner.
A more peaceful world will be possible only when Americans and others begin to see things through the eyes of their supposed enemies, and realize that today’s conflicts, having resulted from desperation and despair, can be solved through economic development rather than war.
We will have peace when we heed the words of President John F. Kennedy, who said, a few months before his death, “For, in the final analysis, our most basic common link is that we all inhabit this small planet.
We all breathe the same air.
We all cherish our children’s future.
And we are all mortal.”
America’s Financial Leviathan
BERKELEY – In 1950, finance and insurance in the United States accounted for 2.8% of GDP, according to US Department of Commerce estimates.
By 1960, that share had grown to 3.8% of GDP, and reached 6% of GDP in 1990.
Today, it is 8.4% of GDP, and it is not shrinking.
The Wall Street Journal’s Justin Lahart reports that the 2010 share was higher than the previous peak share in 2006.
Lahart goes on to say that growth in the finance-and-insurance share of the economy has “not, by and large, been a bad thing....Deploying capital to the places where it can be best used helps the economy grow...”
But if the US were getting good value from the extra 5.6% of GDP that it is now spending on finance and insurance – the extra $750 billion diverted annually from paying people who make directly useful goods and provide directly useful services – it would be obvious in the statistics.
At a typical 5% annual real interest rate for risky cash flows, diverting that large a share of resources away from goods and services directly useful this year is a good bargain only if it boosts overall annual economic growth by 0.3% – or 6% per 25-year generation.
There have been many shocks to the US economy over the past couple of generations, and many factors have added to or subtracted from economic growth.
But it is not obvious that the US economy today would be 6% less productive if it had had the finance-insurance system of 1950 rather than the one that prevailed during the past 20 years.
There are five ways that an economy gains from a well-functioning finance-insurance system.
First, people are no longer as vulnerable to the effects of fires, floods, medical disasters, unemployment, business collapses, sectoral shifts, and so forth, because a well-working finance-insurance system diversifies and thus dissipates some risks, and deals with others by matching those who fear risk with those who can comfortably bear it.
While it might be true that America’s current finance-insurance system better distributes risk in some sense, it is hard to see how that could be the case, given the experience of investors in equities and housing over the past two decades.
Second, well-functioning financial systems match large, illiquid investment projects with the relatively small pools of money contributed by individual savers who value liquidity highly.
There has been one important innovation over the past two generations: businesses can now issue high-yield bonds.
But, given the costs of the bankruptcy process, it has never been clear why a business would rather issue high-yield bonds (besides gaming the tax system), or why investors would rather buy them than take an equity stake.
Third, improved opportunities to borrow allow one to spend more now, when one is poor, and save more later, when one is rich.
Households are certainly much more able to borrow, thanks to home-equity loans, credit-card balances, and payday loans.
But what are they really buying?
Many are not buying the ability to spend when they are poor and save when they are rich, but instead appear to be buying postponement of the “unpleasant financial retrenchment” talk with the other members of their household.
And that is not something you want to buy.
Fourth, we have seen major improvements in the ease of transactions.
But, while electronic transactions have made a great deal of financial life much easier, this should have been accompanied by a decrease, not an increase, in the finance share of GDP, just as automated switching in telecommunications led to a decrease in the number of telephone switchboard operators per phone call.
Indeed, the operations of those parts of the financial system most closely related to technological improvements have slimmed down markedly: consider what has happened to the checking operations of the regional Federal Reserve Banks.
Finally, better finance should mean better corporate governance.
Since shareholder democracy does not provide effective control over entrenched, runaway, self-indulgent management, finance has a potentially powerful role to play in ensuring that corporate managers work in the interest of shareholders.
And a substantial change has indeed occurred over the past two generations: CEOs focus much more attention than they used to on pleasing the stock market, and this is likely to be a good thing.
Overall, however, it remains disturbing that we do not see the obvious large benefits, at either the micro or macro level, in the US economy’s efficiency that would justify spending an extra 5.6% of GDP every year on finance and insurance.
Lahart cites the conclusion of New York University’s Thomas Philippon that today’s US financial sector is outsized by two percentage points of GDP.
And it is very possible that Philippon’s estimate of the size of the US financial sector’s hypertrophy is too small.
Why has the devotion of a great deal of skill and enterprise to finance and insurance sector not paid obvious economic dividends?
There are two sustainable ways to make money in finance: find people with risks that need to be carried and match them with people with unused risk-bearing capacity, or find people with such risks and match them with people who are clueless but who have money.
Are we sure that most of the growth in finance stems from a rising share of financial professionals who undertake the former rather than the latter?
America’s Fiscal Isolationism
DENVER – Patience might be a virtue, but not necessarily when it comes to American foreign policy.
Consider “the long war,” a bold concept embraced a few years ago to describe the continuing struggle against terrorism, the grudging progress that could realistically be achieved, and the enormous financial burden that it would impose for years to come.
It was also a realpolitik acknowledgement of the setbacks to be expected along the way (the “slog,” as then Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld put it).
Above all, the term was an effort to communicate to Americans, accustomed to waging war with speed and decisiveness (and insistent on it since Vietnam), the long-term sacrifice and commitment needed to win a war of survival.
Its proponents also understood that the war would not be limited to weapons, but would need to be a sustained effort, involving, as they put it, the “whole of government,” with civilian agencies marshaled behind military – or paramilitary – objectives.
Daunting as the effort would be, its advocates assumed a sustainable political consensus to support it.
After all, the United States had been attacked.
Today, that consensus is unraveling as America’s politicians wrestle with a federal budget that is itself turning into a long war – one with its own casualties.
The battle lines in this struggle suggest that there is little accord among political elites for any spending, let alone for a long war with far-flung commitments.
As a result, basic assumptions are being questioned at every turn.
Indeed, the current budget war seems to be reopening old divisions about America’s view of itself and the world.
The outcome is far from certain, but even isolationism, a perennial American malady, seems to be making a comeback.
Isolationism is a familiar refrain in US foreign policy among those elements of the right that consider the US too good for the world, as well as among those on the left who consider America a destructive global force.
But this time, as perhaps never before, a bipartisan isolationist impulse is being driven by the budget.
America’s fiscal crisis is profound, and it is not just about numbers.
As the emotions in Washington today suggest, the aversion to tax increases runs far deeper than concern about their effect on current economic performance and job growth.
In part, it represents a fundamental – some would say fundamentalist – view that taxes are to government what a bottle of whisky is to an alcoholic.
Government, as Ronald Reagan told us, is the problem, not the solution.
That message is bad news for American diplomacy.
The linkage between politicians’ unwillingness to fund domestic programs and the imperiled commitment to “the long war” might elude those in US foreign-policy circles, but it is not lost on the rest of the country.
Opinion surveys suggest that Americans want to maintain many of the “discretionary” domestic programs – schools, hospitals, transportation infrastructure, recreational parks, etc. – that are now on the chopping block in budget negotiations.
In places like rural El Paso County, on the eastern plains of Colorado, far from the federal budget debate’s epicenter, spending cuts are the order of the day.
School districts are increasing class sizes as they shed teachers, as well as deferring maintenance projects and curtailing the school-bus service.
These cuts are having a very real and immediate impact on El Paso County’s residents.
Can they, and other Americans who are losing vital services, really be expected to rise above it all and support funding to build new schools in Afghanistan?
Not only are America’s public schools starting to look second-rate, but so is its infrastructure, which had long been a source of national pride.
How many travelers nowadays can fail to note the difference between Asia’s new, efficient airports and the aging, clogged antiques in some major US cities?
The budget war is not producing any consensus on fixing America’s infrastructure, but it is beginning to produce a view that Afghanistan and Pakistan are far from being core US national interests.
Why, people ask, are schools and roads in Afghanistan and Iraq more important than those in Colorado or California?
At one point in 2008, the US military picked up the cost of transporting a tiger for the Baghdad zoo.
When was the last time the US government did that for a US zoo (outside of Washington, of course)?
How this debate sorts itself out will have profound consequences for how America conducts itself in the world.
But it might also take a toll on how the world reacts to America’s fastest-growing export: unsolicited advice.
Countries take others’ advice for many reasons.
Sometimes they respect the adviser’s wisdom and insights (fairly rare in diplomacy).
Or they might fear the consequences of not taking the advice (an offer one cannot refuse, so to speak).
Or, as is true of many of America’s diplomatic transactions, accepting advice could open the way to a better relationship and to additional assistance.
In short, diplomacy – and US diplomacy, in particular – often involves money.
But what if there is no money to offer?
What if Americans, tired of the budget cuts in their neighborhoods, refuse to support funds even for “the long war”?
At that point, senior US officials might well arrive in a country, offer advice, and find that nobody is bothering to listen.
Obama’s Underachieving Foreign Policy
PARIS – To evaluate an American president’s foreign-policy performance after one term is challenging, given the complex diplomatic and strategic environment and significant domestic constraints that confront every US president.
Nevertheless, in advance of November’s presidential election, it is important to distinguish the forces that have shaped Barack Obama’s foreign policy, and to assess his handling of them.
Obama kept his promise to withdraw American forces from Iraq during his first term.
But the move proved to be a strategic defeat, given that it significantly diminished the United States’ political influence in Iraq.
Indeed, Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki’s government is becoming increasingly allied with Iran.
Obama, who opposed the Iraq war, should not be blamed for current circumstances there.
But he was unable to improve the situation or help Iraq’s Shias and Sunnis reach a political compromise.
In contrast, Obama expanded the war in Afghanistan – which he considered to be a war of necessity – and put the Taliban on the defensive.
But the US will begin to withdraw troops after 2014, without having defined a political solution in line with its interests.
Meanwhile, America’s strategic partnership with Pakistan, where Obama won a significant symbolic victory by eliminating Osama bin Laden, is in tatters.
US-Pakistan relations have regressed to their level before September 11, 2001, with mutual distrust minimizing cooperation.
In fact, in all of the strategic challenges to US security that Obama inherited – Iran, North Korea, Iraq, Afghanistan, Pakistan, and the Israeli-Palestinian conflict – he has made virtually no significant political gains.
Notwithstanding Obama’s skillful response to the Arab Spring – the only strategic surprise that he has faced as president – his credibility in the Muslim world has steadily declined.
He has failed to deliver on the key promise of his Cairo speech in 2009: “to seek a new beginning between the United States and Muslims around the world.”
Moreover, Obama’s efforts to improve relations with Russia – embodied in the Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty (START) – did not lead to a genuine “reset” in bilateral ties, largely because an increasingly Soviet-style Russian leadership distrusts a US establishment that still regards Russia as a foe.
And the US-China relationship has deteriorated, with America seeking to manage China’s rise strategically – for example, through regional trade agreements and an enhanced military presence in Asia.
On multilateral issues, Obama’s performance is equally unimpressive.
After committing to a 17% reduction of greenhouse-gas emissions by 2020 – and despite his declaration that he would not tolerate inaction in this area – he simply stopped raising the issue after the Republicans’ sweeping victory in the November 2010 mid-term elections.
Likewise, domestic pressure has caused Obama to neglect trade issues.
The US is largely responsible for the failure of the Doha Round of global trade talks.
Obama’s one significant foreign-policy breakthrough has been to release the US from the grip of the “global war on terror.”
Jettisoning the Manichean rhetoric of that “war” allowed the US to regain the political legitimacy that former President George W. Bush had lost, without diminishing its strategic credibility.
After the Vietnam War, Jimmy Carter hoped to make a break with established US policy.
But his administration’s actions – including serious blunders in Iran and Afghanistan – made the US appear weak and indecisive.
While Obama’s policies have not weakened America’s international standing, they also have not led to achievements comparable to Richard Nixon’s rapprochement with China, largely owing to what might be described as the dogmatic pragmatism that underlies them – an emphasis on avoiding the worst, rather than on striving for the best.
Moreover, Obama has been confronted with significant constraints, including the global economic crisis, domestic political polarization, a hostile Congress, and the rise of emerging powers that need the US but are unwilling to accept its dominance.
As a result, he has failed to change strategic realities by, for example, reconciling America’s broader interests with those of Iran (a declared enemy), Pakistan (a “frenemy”), and Israel (a key ally).
To be sure, Obama faces a more complex diplomatic and strategic environment than Nixon faced in the 1970’s.
Unstable coalitions in Iran prevent any substantive negotiations between the two countries, while political fragmentation in Pakistan significantly hinders US policy there.
And the fragility of Israel’s ruling coalition, combined with strong congressional support for Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu, makes it difficult to influence the country’s policies, despite Israel’s significant impact on US strategy in the Arab world.
But Obama has also struggled to define the terms of a possible grand bargain.
Any agreement with Iran would require consent from Israel and the Gulf countries, which do not share the same objectives.
And the US cannot reach an accord with Pakistan without India’s consent, which America would be unable to force, especially given that it relies on India to counterbalance China’s growing clout in Asia.
With Israel, the terms are ostensibly simpler: in exchange for a stronger US security guarantee, Israel would accept the establishment of a Palestinian state based on the 1967 borders.
But Israel is also a crucial domestic political topic in the US; indeed, any distancing from Israel is unacceptable to most Americans.
While Obama’s first term could not be called a foreign-policy disappointment, his achievements – although not trivial – have been limited.
If he wins a second term, he is likely to find it increasingly difficult to win by playing not to lose.
America’s Groucho Marxists
LONDON – Groucho Marx has always been my favorite Marxist.
One of his jokes goes to the heart of the failure of the ideology – the dogmatic religion – inflicted on our poor world by his namesake, Karl.
“Who are you going to believe,” Groucho once asked, “me, or your own eyes?”
For hundreds of millions of citizens in Communist-run countries in the twentieth century, the “me” in the question was a dictator or oligarchy ruling with totalitarian or authoritarian powers.
It didn’t matter what you could see with your own eyes. You had to accept what you were told the world was like.
Reality was whatever the ruling party said it was.
The designated successor to Mao Zedong in China, Hua Guofeng, raised this attitude to an art form. He was known as a “whateverist.”
The Party and people should faithfully follow whatever Mao instructed them to do.
Groucho posed two insuperable problems for the “whateverists” of communism. First, your own eyes and your reason would surely tell you before long that the communist idyll – the withering away of the state and the triumph over need – would never come.
Communism, like the horizon, was always just beyond reach.
It would be interesting to know how many of those at Beijing’s Central Party School – the party’s main educational institute – believe that the Chinese state is about to wither away, or ever will.
The second application of Groucho’s question was that citizens of most Communist countries soon learned that the loss of freedom that they suffered was not compensated by greater prosperity or a higher quality of life.
The more that Russians, Poles, Czechs, and others saw of the life-style in the Western democracies, the more they questioned their own system. In his magisterial book
So, in the political sphere, reason has trumped both faith in an unattainable goal and self-delusion about the consequences of its pursuit.
Authoritarian party-states, such as China and Vietnam, survive, but not through commitment to communism. Their legitimacy depends on their ability to deliver economic growth through state-managed capitalism.
Democracies, of course, allow people to use their reason to make choices based on the evidence of their own eyes.
When you don’t like a government, you can turn the rascals out without overthrowing the whole system.
Change can be made in an evolutionary, rather than a revolutionary, way.
But no one should think that debate in democracies is always based on reason, or that democracy necessarily makes people more rational.
Sometimes reason does prevail.
This is what appeared to happen in the last Indian election, and the election in the United States of President Barack Obama was also plainly a supremely rational moment.
But reason does not seem to be getting much of a hearing during the current health-care debate in the US.
Outsiders, even admirers, have often wondered how the most globalized country in the world – a continent inhabited by people from every land – can be so irrationally insular on some issues.
We scratch our heads about America’s gun laws. We were astonished during President George W. Bush’s first term at the administration’s hostility to science, reflected in its stance on climate change and Charles Darwin’s theory of evolution.
The opposition to health-care reform is a similar cause of bemusement.
We know that despite its great wealth – and its groundbreaking medical research – America’s health-care system is awful. It is hugely expensive.
Its costs overwhelm workplace health-insurance schemes. The poor go unprotected.
Too many of the sick are untreated. Overall health statistics are worse than those in comparable countries.
Yet Obama’s attempts to reform health care have run into hysterical opposition.
His proposals would lead, it is said, to the state murdering the elderly.
They would introduce Soviet communism into the US – just like what apparently exists in Canada and Britain, with their state-sponsored health systems.
Communism in Toronto and London?
Or just better, cheaper, more reliable health care for all?
Reason seems to be having a hard time of it in the US just now.
Maybe it’s no coincidence that Groucho Marx was an American citizen.
But surely the way a society cares for its sick and needy and elderly is sufficiently important to deserve serious and thoughtful argument based on what we really can see with our own eyes rather than on uninformed partisan prejudice.
Gun Control After Newtown
NEW YORK – The brutal murder of 20 children and seven adults in Newtown, Connecticut, shakes us to the core as individuals and requires a response as citizens.
The United States seems to reel from one mass gun killing to another – roughly one a month this year alone.
Easy access to guns in the US leads to horrific murder rates relative to other highly educated and wealthy societies.
America needs to find a better way.
Other countries have done so.
Between the mid-1970’s and the mid-1990’s, Australia had several mass shootings.
After a particularly horrible massacre in 1996, a new prime minister, John Howard, declared that enough was enough.
He instituted a severe crackdown on gun ownership, and forced would-be gun owners to submit to a rigorous application process, and to document why they would need a gun.
Conditions for gun ownership in Australia are now very strict, and the registration and approval process can take a year or more.
Howard’s government also implemented a rigorous “buyback” policy, to enable the government to purchase guns already owned by the public.
The policy worked.
While violent crime has not ended in Australia, murders are down, and, even more dramatically, there has not been a single mass shooting since 1996 in which three or more people died (the definition used in many studies of mass shootings).
Before the crackdown, there had been 13 such massacres in 18 years.
Yet the US still refuses to act, even after this year’s string of shocking incidents: the massacre in a movie theatre in Colorado, an attack on a Sikh community in Milwaukee, another on a shopping mall in Oregon, and many more before the ruthless slaughter of first graders and school staff in Newtown.
The gun lobby in the US remains powerful, and politicians are afraid to counter it.
Given the shooting of then-Congresswoman Gabrielle Giffords in 2011, perhaps they even fear that they, too, might be targeted.
There can be little doubt that some societies are more steeped in violence than others, even controlling for obvious factors like income levels and education.
The US homicide rate is roughly four times that of comparable societies in Western Europe, and Latin America’s homicide rates are even higher than in the US (and dramatically higher than Asian countries at roughly the same income level).
What accounts for staggeringly high rates in the US and Latin America?
American violence is rooted in history.
The US and Latin American countries are all “conquest” societies, in which Europeans ruled over multi-racial societies.
In many of these countries, including the US, the European conquerors and their descendants nearly wiped out the indigenous populations, partly through disease, but also through war, starvation, death marches, and forced labor.
In the US and many Latin American countries, slaveholding fueled mass violence as well.
The slaves – and generations of their descendants – were routinely murdered.
The US also developed a particular populist belief that gun ownership constitutes a vital protection against government tyranny.
The US was born in a citizens’ revolt against British imperial power.
The right of citizens to organize militias to fight government tyranny was therefore a founding idea of the new country, enshrined in the Second Amendment to the US Constitution, which declares that, because a country needs a well-regulated militia, the people have the right to bear arms.
Since citizens’ militias are anachronistic, gun owners now use the second amendment merely to defend individual gun ownership, as if that somehow offers protection against tyranny.
A reckless, right-wing Supreme Court has agreed with them.
As a result, gun ownership has become perversely linked to freedom in the vast gun-owning American sub-culture.
But, instead of protection of freedom, Americans nowadays are getting massive bloodshed and fear.
The claim that gun ownership ensures freedom is especially absurd, given that most of the world’s vibrant democracies have long since cracked down on private gun ownership.
No tyrant has risen in Australia since Howard’s gun-control reforms.
Simply put, freedom in the twenty-first century does not depend on unregulated gun ownership.
Indeed, America’s gun culture is a threat to freedom, after the murder of a president, senator, and other public leaders, and countless assassination attempts against public officials over recent decades.
Yet US gun culture remains as pervasive as it is unrecorded.
America reels from one shooting disaster to the next, and on nearly every occasion, politicians dutifully declare their continued devotion to unregulated gun ownership.
Indeed, no one even knows how many guns Americans hold.
The number is estimated to be around 270 million, or almost one per person on average.
According to one recent poll, 47% of households have a gun at home.
The shooting in Newtown was not only especially horrific and heartbreaking, but is also part of an increasingly common pattern – a specific kind of murder-suicide that has been carefully studied by psychologists and psychiatrists.
Loners, often with paranoid tendencies, commit these heinous acts as part of their own suicide.
They use carefully planned and staged mass murders of innocents in order to take revenge on society and to glorify themselves as they take their own lives.
The perpetrators are not hardened criminals; many have no previous criminal record.
They are pathetic, deranged, and often have struggled with mental instability for much of their lives.
They need help – and society needs to keep guns out of their reach.
America has now suffered around 30 shooting massacres over the past 30 years, including this year’s deadly dozen; each is a gut-wrenching tragedy for many families.
And yet, each time, gun owners scream that freedom will be eliminated if they are unable to buy assault weapons and 100-round clips.
The bloodbath in Newtown is the time to stop feeding this gun frenzy.
Australia and other countries provide models of how to do it: regulate and limit gun ownership to approved uses.
America’s real freedoms depend on sane public policy.
America’s G-Zero Moment
NEW YORK – The 2008 financial crisis marked the end of the global order as we knew it.
In advance of the upcoming G-8 summit, it is impossible to overlook the fact that, for the first time in seven decades, the United States cannot drive the international agenda or provide global leadership on all of today’s most pressing problems.
Indeed, the US has trimmed its presence abroad by refusing to contribute to a eurozone bailout, intervene in Syria, or use force to contain Iran’s nuclear breakout (despite strong Israeli support).
President Barack Obama officially ended the war in Iraq, and is withdrawing US troops from Afghanistan at a pace constrained only by the need to save face.
America is handing off the leadership baton – even if no other country or group of countries is willing or able to grasp it.
In short, US foreign policy may be as active as ever, but it is downsizing and becoming more exacting about its priorities.
As a result, many global challenges – climate change, trade, resource scarcity, international security, cyber-warfare, and nuclear proliferation, to name a few – are bound to loom larger.
Welcome to the G-Zero world, a more turbulent, uncertain environment in which coordination on global policy issues falls by the wayside.
Paradoxically, this new environment, though daunting, is less troublesome for the US; in fact, it provides fresh opportunities for the US to capitalize on its unique position.
The G-Zero world is not all bad for the US – if it plays its cards right.
Many residual strengths take on greater importance in such a world, and America remains the world’s only true superpower and its largest economy – still more than twice the size of China’s.
Its defense expenditures represent nearly half the world total, and exceed those of the next 17 countries combined.
The dollar remains the world’s reserve currency, and investors’ scramble into US government debt at every peak in the crisis since 2008 has underscored America’s safe-haven status (even in crises that America caused).
Likewise, the US continues to lead in entrepreneurship, research and development, higher education, and technological innovation.
Moreover, it is now the world’s largest natural-gas producer and calorie exporter, which has reduced its vulnerability to price shocks or food shortages.
No country rivals America’s promotion of the rule of law, liberal democracy, transparency, and free enterprise.
While other countries certainly support these values, only the US has been willing, healthy, and big enough to ensure that they prevail.
So, as America curtails its global leadership, it will find itself in more demand.
Consider Asia, for example.&nbsp;As China’s economic importance and regional influence grows, its neighbors are seeking to deepen ties with the US.
Japan, Australia, Indonesia, and Taiwan have all recently closed trade and security-related deals with the US.
Even Burma has gotten on board, resuming diplomatic engagement with the US while trying to work its way out of China’s shadow.
In other words, in a G-Zero world, an increasingly aggressive global environment makes the US all the more appealing to countries seeking to hedge their bets.&nbsp;As a result, the US has an opportunity to act more precisely in its own interests.
Supplying less leadership allows the US to weigh opportunity costs before taking action, and to select the issues and circumstances that suit it the best.&nbsp;In this environment, military intervention in Libya does not necessitate the same in Syria.
The extent to which the US will capitalize on these opportunities remains to be seen.
In fact, America’s short-term advantages pose the biggest obstacle to its long-term outlook.
Call this the “safe-haven curse”:&nbsp;as long as the US remains the safest port in any storm, it faces no immediate pressure to address its weaknesses.
For example, for all of the hand-wringing about America’s national debt, investors will continue to loan the US money.
Over the long term, however, US policymakers must make steady progress in restoring confidence in the nation’s fiscal health by cutting politically sacred programs like social security, Medicare, and defense.
Officials will have to put aside short-term motives and party orthodoxy to bolster America’s aging infrastructure, reform its education and immigration systems, and pursue long-term fiscal consolidation.
America’s advantages in the G-Zero world afford it the chance to invest in the future.
But, by cushioning against sufficiently calamitous risks, the same advantages allow the US to procrastinate.
American politicians need to recognize the new G-Zero reality and rebuild America’s domestic sources of strength, even if only incrementally.&nbsp;If they do, the US will have the vigor and flexibility to shape the next world order.
America’s political system usually works well in crises.&nbsp;But, thanks to its residual advantages in a leaderless world, the US need not rely on a crisis to precipitate action.
It need only seize the G-Zero moment.
America’s Houses of Cards
There are times when being proven right brings no pleasure.
For several years, I argued that America’s economy was being supported by a housing bubble that had replaced the stock market bubble of the 1990’s.
But no bubble can expand forever.
With middle-class incomes in the United States stagnating, Americans could not afford ever more expensive homes.
As one of my predecessors as Chairman of the US President’s Council of Economic Advisers famously put it, “that which is not sustainable will not be sustained.”
Economists, as opposed to those who make their living gambling on stocks, make no claim to being able to predict when the day of reckoning will come, much less identifying the event that will bring down the house of cards.
But the patterns are systematic, with consequences that unfold gradually, and painfully, over time.
There is a macro-story and a micro-story here.
The macro-story is simple, but dramatic.
Some, observing the crash of the sub-prime mortgage market, say, “Don’t worry, it is only a problem in the real estate sector.”
But this overlooks the key role that the housing sector has played in the US economy recently, with direct investment in real estate and money taken out of houses through refinancing mortgages accounting for two-thirds to three-quarters of growth over the last six years.
Booming home prices gave Americans the confidence, and the financial wherewithal, to spend more than their income.
America’s household savings rate was at levels not seen since the Great Depression, either negative or zero.
With higher interest rates depressing housing prices, the game is over.
As America moves to, say, a 4% savings rate (still small by normal standards), aggregate demand will weaken, and with it, the economy.
The micro-story is more dramatic.
Record-low interest rates in 2001, 2002 and 2003 did not lead Americans to invest more – there was already excess capacity.
Instead, easy money stimulated the economy by inducing households to refinance their mortgages, and to spend some of their capital.
It is one thing to borrow to make an investment, which strengthens balance sheets; it is another thing to borrow to finance a vacation or a consumption binge.
But this is what Alan Greenspan encouraged Americans to do.
When normal mortgages did not prime the pump enough, he encouraged them to take out variable-rate mortgages – at a time when interest rates had nowhere to go but up.
Predatory lenders went further, offering negative amortization loans, so the amount owed went up year after year.
Sometime in the future, payments would rise, but borrowers were told, again, not to worry: house prices would rise faster, making it easy to refinance with another negative amortization loan.
The only way (in this view) not to win was to sit on the sidelines.
All of this amounted to a human and economic disaster in the making.
Now reality has hit: newspapers report cases of borrowers whose mortgage payments exceed their entire income.
Globalization implies that America’s mortgage problem has worldwide repercussions.
The first run on a bank occurred against the British mortgage lender Northern Rock.
America managed to pass off bad mortgages worth hundreds of billions of dollars to investors (including banks) around the world.
They buried the bad mortgages in complicated instruments, buried them so deep that no one knew exactly how badly they were impaired, and no one could calculate how to re-price them quickly.
In the face of such uncertainty, markets froze.
Those in financial markets who believe in free markets have temporarily abandoned their faith.
For the greater good of all (of course, it is never for their own selfish interests), they argued a bailout was necessary.
While the US Treasury and the IMF warned East Asian countries facing financial crises ten years ago against the risks of bail-outs and told them not to raise their interest rates, the US ignored its own lectures about moral hazard effects, bought up billions in mortgages, and lowered interest rates.
But lower short-term interest rates have led to higher medium-term interest rates, which are more relevant for the mortgage market, perhaps because of increasing worries about inflationary pressures.
It may make sense for central banks (or Fannie Mae, America’s major government-sponsored mortgage company) to buy mortgage-backed securities in order to help provide market liquidity.
But those from whom they buy them should provide a guarantee, so the public does not have to pay the price for their bad investment decisions.
Equity owners in banks should not get a free ride.
Securitization, with all of its advantages in sharing risk, has three problems that were not adequately anticipated.
While it meant that American banks were not hit as hard as they would otherwise, America’s bad lending practices have had global effects.
Moreover, securitization contributed to bad lending: in the old days, banks that originated bad loans bore the consequences; in the new world of securitization, the originators could pass the loans onto others.
(As economists would say, problems of asymmetric information have increased.)
In the old days, when borrowers found it impossible to make their payments, mortgages would be restructured; foreclosures were bad for both the borrower and the lender.
Securitization made debt restructuring difficult, if not impossible.
It is the victims of predatory lenders who need government help.
With mortgages amounting to 95% or more of the value of the house, debt restructuring will not be easy.
What is required is to give individuals with excessive indebtedness an expedited way to a fresh start – for example, a special bankruptcy provision allowing them to recover, say, 75% of the equity they originally put into the house, with the lenders bearing the cost.
There are many lessons for America, and the rest of the world; but among them is the need for greater financial sector regulation, especially better protection against predatory lending, and more transparency.
America’s Interest-Rate Puzzle
A great puzzle in today’s world economy is the continued low level of long-term real interest rates in the United States.
Conventional macroeconomists like me look at America’s current-account deficit, now running at 7% of GDP, and know that such vast deficits are inevitably followed by large currency depreciations.
So we expect a substantial depreciation premium on US interest rates.
If the dollar falls 20% more against the euro sometime in the next ten years, US long-term interest rates should be two percentage points higher than euro rates.
If it falls 40% against the yen sometime in the next ten years, US long-term interest rates should be four percentage points higher than Japanese rates.
If it falls 60% against China’s currency, the yuan, sometime in the next ten years, US long-term interest rates should be six percentage points higher than Chinese rates.
But we are not seeing signs of anything like this.
The puzzle is not only that long-term rates are too low when viewed in the international context, but also that they are too low when viewed in America’s domestic context.
The Bush administration continues to have no plans to sew up the veins it has opened with its medieval economic policy, which holds that bleeding revenue from the government cures all economic problems.
This means that unless America’s domestic savings rate rises mightily – which it shows no signs of doing – and unless investment expenditure remains abnormally low for the rest of this decade, the supply of loanable funds to finance investment will soon be much less than demand when the current-account deficit narrows to sustainable levels. But when supply is less than demand, prices rise sharply.
In this case, the price of loanable funds is the real interest rate.
An expectation that interest rates will be high sometime in the next decade should mean high interest rates on long-term bonds today.
Yet financial markets are not pricing dollar depreciation and a rise in long-term US interest rates accordingly.
When we macroeconomists talk to our friends on Wall Street, we find that they don’t view this as a puzzle at all.
On the contrary, they are puzzled about why we view the current low level of US long-term interest rates as worrisome.
From their perspective, today’s high demand for long-term dollar-denominated securities is easily explained: Asian central banks are buying in order to hold down their currencies, the US Treasury is borrowing short (and thus not issuing that many long-term securities), and US companies are not undertaking the kinds of investments that would lead them to issue many long-term bonds.
But for every market mispricing there is a profit opportunity: if long-term interest rates are, indeed, too low and long-term bond prices too high, investors will short long-term US bonds, park the money elsewhere, wait for bond prices to return to fundamentals, and then cover their short positions.
By doing so, they will push prices close to fundamentals today.
Wall Streeters, however, offer a counterargument: for any financial institution to, say, bet on the decline of the dollar against the yuan over the next five years in a serious, leveraged way is to put its survival at risk should the trades go wrong.
And trades do go wrong: remember the collapse of Long-Term Capital Management.
The existence of large financial-market actors that do not care about maximizing their profits magnifies the riskiness of the bets.
If, say, the Bank of China and the Federal Reserve decided to teach speculators a lesson by pushing the dollar’s value relative to the yuan up by 20% for a month, they could do so, bankrupting many financial institutions with short positions.
Similarly, any financial institution that bets on a sharp rise in long-term interest rates over the next five years in a serious, leveraged way also puts its survival at risk.
For where should they park their money?
Real estate rental yields and stock-market payouts are low, and real estate and stock prices may well fall as much as or more than bond prices if interest rates spike.
Only businesses that can borrow long-term now, lock in a low real interest rate, and invest in expanding their capacity can make the domestic bet that interest rates will rise.
But America’s businesses see enough risk in the future to be wary of getting stuck with unutilized capacity.
Economists believe that market forces drive prices to fundamentals.
But we are not careful enough to distinguish situations in which equilibrium-restoring forces are strong from those in which such forces are weak.
The dollar will fall and US long-term interest rates will rise, but only when traders on Wall Street and elsewhere decide that holding dollars and long-term US bonds is more risky in the short run.
When that happens, the long-run future will be now.
America’s Islamist Allies of Convenience
NEW DELHI – In just one decade, the United States has intervened militarily in three Muslim-majority countries and overthrown their governments.
Now the same coalition of American liberal interventionists and neoconservatives that promoted those wars is pushing for punitive airstrikes in Syria without reflecting on how US policy has ended up strengthening Islamists and fostering anti-Americanism.
Indeed, the last “humanitarian intervention” has clearly backfired, turning Libya into a breeding ground for transnational militants.
As the intense US debate about President Barack Obama’s proposed use of military force highlights, the attack-Syria push is not about upholding America’s national interest.
Rather, the desire to protect US “credibility” has become the last refuge of those seeking yet another war in the wider Middle East.
If “credibility” were purged from the debate and the focus placed squarely on advancing long-term US interests, it would become apparent that an attack on Syria might not yield even temporary geopolitical gains.
Beyond the short term, it would unleash major unintended consequences, potentially including an Iraq-style “soft” partition of Syria and the creation of a haven for extremists stretching across much of Islamist-controlled northern Syria and into the Sunni areas of Iraq.
Indeed, an attack would most likely increase America’s reliance on unsavory Islamist rulers in countries ranging from Saudi Arabia and Qatar to Turkey and the United Arab Emirates.
Some Arab monarchs have pledged to bankroll the US attack – an investment that they would easily recover, given that the war talk has already increased oil prices.
Al Qaeda-type groups already have gained ground in the Middle East and North Africa as an unintended byproduct of US policies, creating fertile conditions for stepped-up international terrorism in the coming years.
The US invasion and occupation of Iraq, for example, created a major opening for Al Qaeda, whose affiliates now represent the Sunni struggle against the Shia-dominated government.
Likewise, regime change in Libya aided the rise of Al Qaeda-linked militants, leading to the killing in Benghazi of the US ambassador.
A system based on sharia (Islamic law) has been imposed, human-rights abuses are legion, and cross-border movement of weapons and militants has undermined the security of Libya’s neighbors.
Meanwhile, America’s support for the regimes in Yemen and Saudi Arabia has contributed to the rise of Al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula.
In parts of southern Yemen, an Al Qaeda affiliate, Ansar al-Sharia, functions as a de facto government.
In Syria, where sizable chunks of territory are already under Islamist control and the pro-Al Qaeda Al Nusra Front overshadows the US-backed Free Syrian Army, the Obama administration is staring at the bitter harvest of its previous policy choices.
Airstrikes now would merely make matters worse by undercutting the FSA’s grassroots legitimacy and aiding Islamist forces.
Farther east, the US wants an “honorable” exit from Afghanistan – the longest war in its history – through a peace deal with the Taliban, its main battlefield opponent.
In seeking to co-opt the Taliban – an effort that has resulted in the Taliban establishing what amounts to a diplomatic mission in Doha, Qatar – the US is bestowing legitimacy on a thuggish militia that enforces medieval practices in the areas under its control.
America’s dalliances with Islamist-leaning political forces – and governments – have been guided by the notion that the cloak of Islam helps to protect the credibility of leaders who might otherwise be seen as foreign puppets.
That simply will not work, even in the short term.
On the contrary, until the Egyptian army removed him from the presidency, the Muslim Brotherhood’s Mohamed Morsi was coming to be seen by many as America’s man in Cairo.
In the long term, the US will gain nothing – and risk much – by continuing to back oil sheikhdoms that fund Muslim extremist groups and madrasas from the Philippines and India to South Africa and Venezuela.
By supporting Islamist rulers, the US is contributing to a trend evident from the Maghreb to the badlands of Afghanistan and Pakistan – Muslims killing Muslims.
American policy has also contributed to a growing conflict between Islamist and secular forces in Muslim countries.
This is best illustrated by Turkey, where Obama has ignored Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdoğan’s heavy-handed efforts to annul free speech and turn himself into a twenty-first-century Sultan.
There and elsewhere, the US, motivated by the larger geopolitical goal of containing Shia Iran and its regional allies, has embraced Sunni rulers steeped in religious and political bigotry, even though they pose a transnational threat to the values of freedom and secularism.
Moreover, the clash within Islam is likely to be destabilizing regionally and counterproductive to the interests of the free world.
Against this background, Obama should heed the doctrine proposed in 1991 by General Colin Powell.
The Powell doctrine stipulates that the US should use military force only when a vital national-security interest is at stake; the strategic objective is clear and attainable; the benefits are likely to outweigh the costs; adverse consequences can be limited; broad international and domestic support has been obtained; and a plausible exit strategy is in place.
Given the US record since the doctrine was formulated, another criterion should be added: the main beneficiaries of military intervention are not America’s mortal enemies.
Drone Wars
BRUSSELS – “Sometime they’ll give a war and nobody will come,” the American poet Carl Sandburg wrote hopefully in 1936.
His sentiment seems more apt than ever nowadays, but not because humanity has turned pacifistic.
Rather, wars are increasingly fought remotely, with drones – or unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) – doing the killing.
Under President Barack Obama, the number of drone strikes carried out by the United States has soared, with more than 300 UAV attacks reported in Pakistan alone.
In March 2011, the US Air Force for the first time trained more pilots for drones than for any other purpose.
This raises serious ethical questions.
With no military personnel risking their lives, UAVs make it easier to kill, and to justify war operations to the public at home.
Moreover, a human being’s reticence to kill is inversely related to the distance between attacker and target.
In the case of a pilot flying drones over Yemen by operating a joystick in Nevada, the threshold to pulling the trigger is dangerously low.
Killing is just a part of the job, to be followed by bowling, perhaps, or a quiet evening at home.
Meanwhile, the mere sound of drones terrorizes whole populations, indicating to enemies and civilians alike that they are being watched and might be attacked at any moment – which could well play into the hands of terrorist recruiters.
From a legal and human-rights point of view, the US drone program is even more alarming.
After all, countries such as Pakistan, Yemen, and Somalia do not belong to declared war zones.
Outside the context of war, in turn, state killings are legal only if they prove absolutely necessary to save lives.
They must be conducted either in self-defense after an attack, or in anticipatory self-defense against an immediate threat, when taking time to discuss non-lethal alternatives is not feasible.
More than a decade after September 11, America’s drone program does not fall into the first category of reactive self-defense.
Likewise, there is no evidence that any presumed terrorist who was killed outside of official war zones in the last few years represented a threat so immediate to US citizens’ lives that preventive and premeditated killing was the only option.
Unless US leaders prove otherwise in every case, American UAV attacks in countries like Pakistan or Yemen should be called what they are: extrajudicial killings.
US State Department legal adviser Harold Koh disagrees, arguing that America is involved in a worldwide “armed conflict with Al Qaeda, as well as the Taliban and associated forces.”
So, Koh claims, drone attacks are part of a global war, fought both in declared war zones and non-war countries; therefore, they are legal.
But, even under this adventurous assumption, human-rights issues arise.
The laws of war condone targeted killings only of “combatants” who “directly participate in hostilities.”
The killings must be proportionate, strategically necessary, and publicly justified.
Avoiding harm to civilians should be the top priority.
At the slightest sign of illegality, an investigation must be conducted, offenders prosecuted, and victims compensated.
The US drone program’s legal basis is entirely unclear, however.
Given that most information about UAV activity is classified, it is impossible to know whether all drone targets directly participated in hostilities.
And, while the Obama administration’s claim of zero or single-digit civilian fatalities may be true according to the official definition, it rests on the premise that any military-age male killed in a drone strike is a militant, unless intelligence posthumously proves otherwise.
A recent report by the law schools at Stanford University and New York University concludes that, in reality, civilian casualties in Pakistan may have accounted for up to 75% of all UAV victims between 2008 and 2011.
Others estimate a lower, but still alarming, rate of 30%.
The legal obligation of proportionality is clearly being violated.
Accountability is also being flouted.
Drone operations are carried out by the Central Intelligence Agency, an organization whose activities are shrouded in secrecy.
And, unlike military personnel, CIA agents enjoy extensive immunity, undermining international legal standards.
Without increased transparency, to declare America’s UAV campaign legal is impossible, both in the context of war and outside of armed conflict.
As long as the US keeps the rest of the world in the dark, illegal acts – including possible war crimes – may be committed with impunity.
Just as citizens worldwide are demanding increased economic and financial accountability, more pressure must be placed on the US to either prove that its drone activities are necessary and legal, or to stop them immediately.
Victims of UAV attacks, their families, and civil-society groups have begun to speak out against America’s questionable drone campaign, and to pursue legal action.
Others should feel encouraged to follow suit.
In the meantime, every drone strike will not only undermine human rights and international humanitarian law, but will also further widen a legal loophole that other governments and armed groups will not hesitate to exploit.
The US drone program does not make the world a safer place; it creates an environment in which unlawful killings can happen virtually anywhere, at any time, violating the fundamental human right not to be arbitrarily deprived of one’s life.
America’s Locust Years
BERKELEY – It is hard right now to write about American political economy.
Nobody knows whether the debt-ceiling tripwire will be evaded; if so, how; or what will happen if it is not.
If no deal to raise the debt ceiling is reached by August 3, interest rates on United States Treasury bonds could spike, or they could remain stable, as investors decide they have other problems to worry about.
Or the US Federal Reserve, the Peoples Bank of China (PBC), or both – or even some other body – could support the market.
Or interest rates could rise if people expect a much weaker global economy – and, in a weaker global economy with no inflation, investors should be holding more US Treasuries, not fewer.
Frankly, no one knows what legislative deal will be struck to raise the debt ceiling.
All we know as of this writing is that a deal would probably involve cuts in near-term spending, meaning weaker growth and higher unemployment over the next 18 months.
And we can assume that it would be repealed and replaced by something else come January 2013, either by a re-elected President Barack Obama, or by a new, Republican president.
So, rather than talking about the US debt ceiling, let us think instead about all of the things that the debt-ceiling impasse has prevented the US government from doing during the past six months – all of the useful policies that might have been debated and enacted, but were not.
The risks imposed by global warming, for example, have not gone away.
The sooner the world starts preparing to deal with those threats, the better.
Another six months should not be lost.
The employment-to-population ratio in the US remains flat – mired at the very low levels to which it fell during the recession.
With households desperately trying to rebuild their balance sheets, and with capital investment remarkably healthy, the only places to boost spending to restore capacity utilization and unemployment to normal levels are exports, government purchases, and construction investment.
But opportunities to pursue the necessary policies have not been grasped.
Here, too, another six months should not be lost.
Likewise, the US could have fulfilled its normal role as the conductor of the international economic orchestra. It has not, even as the European Union continues to respond inadequately to its own slow-moving solvency crises.
The mandarins of northern Europe continue to measure out a drip-feed of support with coffee spoons.
Another six months have been lost.
America faces long-run and short-run problems: decaying infrastructure, weakening educational systems, and a dysfunctional health-care system that produces sub-standard outcomes at twice the cost of any other industrial country.
Solving any of these three problems would go a long way toward resolving the long-run financing imbalance between current tax rates and America’s long-run social-insurance promises that the debt-ceiling debate’s instigators supposedly want to address.
But the US government won’t address them. Six months that could have been spent boosting the long-run growth potential of the American economy through infrastructure investment, educational reform, or an overhaul of health-care financing – greatly easing America's long-run deficit and debt dilemmas in the process – have been lost.
During the run-up to World War II, Winston Churchill, speaking in Parliament, lamented “the years that the locusts hath eaten” – the period during which preparatory action to face the great crisis of his day (the rise of Continental fascism) could have been taken, but was not.
Over the past century – with the notable exception of the Great Depression – the US political system has been remarkably good at foreseeing crises long before they have happened, and at least setting the foundation for dealing with them when they have occurred.
But so far in the third millennium, this skill – or simply run of luck – has deserted the US.
My view is that the problem would fix itself easily if only the Republican Party of Dwight D. Eisenhower could stage a comeback (though without Richard Nixon and Joseph McCarthy).
It is becoming increasingly clear, however, that the problem is one not only for the US, but for the rest of the world as well.
Since December 7, 1941, the world has in large part been able to rely on global governance by a somewhat-competent hyperpower.
That America may be gone for good.
If it is, the world needs to develop other institutions for global management – and quickly.
America’s Misguided Immigration Debate
A debate on immigration is beginning in the United States Senate, which will take up several proposals.
These include a hateful bill – which the House of Representatives has already approved – that provides for the construction of a wall along the US-Mexican border and makes unauthorized entry into the US a felony.
The US Senate will also consider a bill co-authored by Senator Edward Kennedy and Senator John McCain, which proposes stronger border enforcement, a temporary workers program with a path to residency and citizenship, and legalization for people already in the US without papers.
Another idea is to require anyone in the US wanting to regularize their immigration status to go home and wait in line there.
This last component is largely rhetoric; it is hard to imagine any Mexican already in the US voluntarily returning to, say, Zacatecas to wait patiently in line for a new visa.
President George W. Bush has been skirting the question ever since he committed himself to an immigration agreement with Mexico when he visited President Vicente Fox in Guanajuato almost exactly five years ago.
There was a time when north-south migratory flows in the western hemisphere were limited to Mexico and the Caribbean.
That changed in the 1980’s, when Central America’s civil wars sent hundreds of thousands of migrants thru Mexico to the US, and then in the 1990’s, when people fleeing violence in Colombia, Venezuela, Peru, and Ecuador also began searching for opportunity.
Today, even Brazil, traditionally a country of immigration, has become one of emigration.
Moreover, these migrants are no longer exclusively of rural origin, nor do they travel only to traditional areas in the US; they are, literally, everywhere.
Their remittances contribute immensely to the economic welfare of their families, communities, and home countries’ economies.
Thus, whatever immigration policy emerges in the US will have an enormous impact south of the Rio Grande well beyond Mexico.
This will occur precisely at a time when Latin America is swerving left, with country after country drifting back to anti-American, populist stances: Venezuela in 1999, Bolivia last year, perhaps Mexico, Peru, and Nicaragua later this year.
If the perception of further US hostility toward Latin America persists, the tilt toward an irresponsible, demagogic left will harden.
The responsible left in Chile, Brazil, and Uruguay are an exception to the emerging rule set by Venezuela’s President Hugo Chávez.
The best way to accentuate the region’s growing anti-American sentiment is to try to close the US-Mexican border (which will be futile).
Instead, the US should establish humane, secure, and legal mechanisms of temporary or permanent entry for people the American economy needs and wants, and it should work with, not against, governments in Latin America.
Five years ago, Mexico’s President Vicente Fox tried to convince Bush that something had to be done before a nativist backlash in the US complicated its relations with Latin America and made goals such as a Free Trade Agreement of the Americas (FTAA) impossible.
But matters have gotten worse: border tensions between the US and Mexico have grown, the proposed wall has rightly provoked indignation, more unauthorized immigrants than ever are entering the US, and the FTAA has collapsed.
Bush must begin to use what political capital he has left to support enlightened immigration reform, along the lines of the Kennedy-McCain bill.
He will never get a guest-worker program without Democratic support, which in turn is unlikely unless the White House supports access to a program for unauthorized immigrants already in the US that includes some type of path to residence and citizenship.
Mexico and the US must be sensitive to domestic political concerns in both countries.
No immigration deal is feasible north of the border without addressing security matters; south of the border, there is no conceivable Mexican cooperation on border security or on a Temporary Workers Program if immigration reform ignores the nearly five million Mexican citizens without papers currently living in the US.
Mexico must act on what Fox has called “shared responsibility.”
The best imaginable deal between the US and Mexico, or the best imaginable US immigration reform, will not eliminate the flow of undocumented migrants from Mexico and South America overnight.
Mexico has to assume responsibility for regulating this traffic, which means more than sealing off its southern border.
The government could, for example, double welfare payments to households whose male heads stay home, threaten to revoke land reform rights after years of absence in rural communities, and establish choke points on highways at the Tehuantepec Isthmus.
Fox has said that he is willing to break with old Mexican taboos, but the Bush administration has never taken him up on it.
That is unfortunate, because Fox will not be around forever.
Immigration has always been an immensely complex and delicate issue inside the US, and now for Latin America as well.
A window of opportunity opened at the beginning of Bush’s first term, and closed shut after the terrorist attacks of September 2001.
It is opening again and should be taken advantage of before it is too late.
Why Iran Won’t Budge
TEL AVIV – No one really believed that the latest round of international negotiations with Iran over its nuclear program would produce a breakthrough.
So it was no surprise that itdid not, despite the concessions that were made at the meeting in Kazakhstan by the P5+1 (China, France, Russia, the United Kingdom, and the United States, plus Germany).
America’s belief that a harsh sanctions regime could coax Iran into a deal has proved – at least so far – to be unrealistic.
Despite being isolated and ostracized, Iran has managed to gain some strategic breathing room with the help of countries like China, Russia, India, Syria, and Venezuela, allowing it to resist Western pressure.
More important, even though the severe sanctions regime led by the United States is bound to be imperfect – it only hardens further Iran’s resistance to “America’s designs.”
To be sure, Iran’s alliances are vulnerable to erosion and, in the case of two staunch allies, Syria and Venezuela, to outright collapse.
The end of Chavismo would threaten Iran’s vast interests in Venezuela and its considerable presence in the Andes, while the fall of the Assad dynasty would be a devastating blow to Iran’s regional strategy.
Even so, Russia and China continue to take a much more lenient approach to Iran than Europe and the US have since the International Atomic Energy Agency’s report in November 2011 described in detail Iran’s activities in pursuing the capability to produce nuclear weapons.
While the Western powers have embraced ever-harsher sanctions, Russia and China view Iran as a tool in their global competition with the US.
China’s Iranian interests boil down to economics.
Bilateral trade stands at about $40 billion a year, and China is not only Iran’s largest customer for crude oil, but also a colossal investor – somewhere between $40 billion and $100 billion – in Iran’s energy and transport sectors.