So why is China being so severe?
One possible explanation is that China is a little drunk on its new great-power status.
For the first time in almost 200 years, China can really throw its weight around, and it will do what it wants, regardless of what other countries may think.
A few decades ago, it was Japan that thought it was going to be Number One, and its businessmen, politicians, and bureaucrats were not shy about letting the rest of the world know.
Call China’s recent actions revenge for a century of humiliation by stronger powers.
But this may not be the best explanation for China’s behavior.
In fact, the reason may be just the opposite: a sense among China’s rulers of weakness at home.
At least since 1989, the legitimacy of the Chinese Communist Party’s monopoly on power has been fragile.
Communist ideology is a spent force.
Using the People’s Liberation Army to murder civilian protesters, not only in Beijing, but all over China in June 1989, further undermined the one-party system’s legitimacy.
The way to regain the support of the burgeoning Chinese middle class was to promise a quick leap to greater prosperity through high-speed economic growth.
The ideological vacuum left by the death of Marxist orthodoxy was filled with nationalism.
And nationalism in China, promoted through schools, mass media, and “patriotic” monuments and museums, means one thing: only the firm rule of the CCP will prevent foreigners, especially Westerners and the Japanese, from humiliating Chinese ever again.
This is why anyone, even a relatively unknown intellectual like Liu Xiaobo, who challenges the legitimacy of Communist Party rule by demanding multi-party elections, must be crushed.
It is why the government does not dare to let the renminbi appreciate too fast, lest economic growth slow, causing the Party loses face and legitimacy.
And it is why bullying Japan is always a good option: China’s rulers do not necessarily hate Japan, but they are afraid to look weak in the eyes of their citizens, who are taught from kindergarten that foreign powers want to humiliate China.
This suggests that if Liu Xiaobo and like-minded dissidents ever got their wish, and democracy came to China, the problem of Chinese nationalism would not go away.
After all, if the people feel persecuted by Japan or the United States, then the people will demand chauvinistic policies.
Democracy has not tempered South Korean chauvinism much, either, since the demise of the military dictatorship in the 1980’s.
But nationalism may not be a political constant.
Nationalism is often fed by a sense of impotence.
When citizens feel disempowered by an authoritarian government, the next best thing is to feel empowered by national prowess.
In a multi-party democracy, on the other hand, citizens are concerned with other interests, material, social, even cultural ones, and thus less likely to be drawn into aggressive chauvinism.
Or so we must hope.
The state of many democracies today is not the best advertisement for political freedom. But the Chinese should have the right to decide about that themselves.
And Liu Xiaobo should be honored for saying so.
Why is France Burning?
The urban disturbances in France have been called the most severe since the riots by students and workers in 1968.
The analogy is misleading.
While the 1968 protests challenged the French Republican model to live up to its finest aspirations, today’s crisis challenges the French Revolution’s model of citizenship and integration itself.
The French Republican model asserts that all French citizens have the same cultural identity.
Indeed, this is the only acceptable identity.
To achieve this shared identity, all citizens have to speak the one official language and be educated according to a common curriculum.
But they also enjoy equal rights, and have the same duties, in the public arena.
All this is not only fostered by the state, but also requires the kind of uniformity that only a centralized state can impose.
Indeed, the French Revolution’s ideological commitment to unity was so strong that during parts of the nineteenth century, advocating federalism was a capital offense.
Three components of this model incited today’s crisis and make it difficult for the French Republic to address it effectively.
The first component is the classic French Republican prohibition on gathering data in the official census – or by government agencies or public or private enterprises – on ethnicity, religion, and even social class.
Collecting these data would, it is argued, violate the Republican tenet that France is “one and indivisible.”
But the absence of a secondary breakdown of such data, like the UK-style, four-fold class analysis (plus examination of patterns of unemployment by ethnicity or religion), makes it hard for social workers, public heath officials, and economic planners to diagnose new problems.
Without the necessary data for analysis, public health policies, for example, cannot be directed toward groups that are especially disadvantaged or otherwise at risk.
The second factor is the classic French Republican rejection of, and legal norms against, any form of “affirmative action,” or positive discrimination, even of the most inoffensive kind.
Like the prohibition of fine-tuned data – without which positive discrimination is in any case impossible – affirmative action is seen as damaging to the Republican model because it is based on recognition of ethnic differences.
The third component is the post-welfare state, which is now part of the French model of citizenship and guarantees all full-time employees one of the highest minimum wages in the world and high employer-paid benefits.
This makes it extremely difficult to let workers go, which makes employers reluctant to hire new people in the first place.
Many of the social-democratic countries of Europe, like Sweden, Holland, and Denmark, created similar norms in their full-employment eras.
Unlike France, however, they also used census data to identify pockets of new unemployment, and to invest socially and politically, not only in excellent job-training programs, but in job creation, and, just as importantly, in job-placement schemes.
France is now very bad at creating new jobs.
It has few training programs, but high benefits for the unemployed and strong restrictions against firing workers.
Put all of this together, and it is like slamming a door in the face of young minority men looking for work.
This is the primary cause of the 30-50% unemployment rates among minorities aged 16-24 in many French “urban zones of sensitivity.”
Thus, the riots that France is now seeing emerge from French policies, not from instigations by Islamists.
France has simply failed to incorporate minority citizens – many of them third-generation immigrants who have been educated for twenty years in assimilationist public schools.
But few political leaders accept that the crisis has anything to do with the French model of citizenship.
Indeed, they confidently wait for assimilation to kick in.
But in today’s high unemployment, low job-creation, and now multicultural France, assimilation will not occur without big changes.
France is only now beginning to come to grips with the crisis of its Republican model of equal citizenship.
A newly created Minister of Social Cohesion has begun to commission studies documenting discrimination.
One study showed that for similarly qualified job applicants, those with an Islamic-sounding name, and an address in an ethnically segmented suburb, had only one-fifth the chance of even getting an interview as people with a French-sounding name and a “safe” address.
Two hundred and fifty of the largest private and public enterprises have created an organization aimed at working with the government to allow them, for the first time ever, to document, and then redress, their discriminatory employment practices.
Fortunately, organized Muslim leaders so far have not aggravated the rioting.
Of course, the government’s reduction of community policing in favor of paramilitary forces stationed in quasi-military barracks, and the Minister of Interior’s description of the young rioters as “scum” who should be washed away with an industrial power hose, has not helped.
The French Republican model enshrines the laudable abstract principles of liberty, equality, and fraternity.
However, so long as second- and third-generation minority citizens are taught that the only acceptable cultural identity is French, but are not in fact accepted as French – indeed, are blocked from enjoying the full rights of French citizenship – the Republican model will fuel alienation rather than democratic integration.
Why ISIS Persists
NEW YORK – Deadly terrorist attacks in Istanbul, Dhaka, and Baghdad demonstrate the murderous reach of the Islamic State (ISIS) in Europe, North Africa, the Middle East, and parts of Asia.
The longer ISIS maintains its strongholds in Syria and Iraq, the longer its terrorist network will create such carnage.
Yet ISIS is not especially difficult to defeat.
The problem is that none of the states involved in Iraq and Syria, including the United States and its allies, has so far treated ISIS as its primary foe.
It’s time they do.
ISIS has a small fighting force, which the US puts at 20,000 to 25,000 in Iraq and Syria, and another 5,000 or so in Libya.
Compared to the number of active military personnel in Syria (125,000), Iraq (271,500), Saudi Arabia (233,500), Turkey (510,600), or Iran (523,000), ISIS is minuscule.
Despite US President Barack Obama’s pledge in September 2014 to “degrade and ultimately destroy” ISIS, the US and its allies, including Saudi Arabia, Turkey, and Israel (behind the scenes), have been focusing instead on toppling Syria’s Bashar al-Assad.
Consider a recent candid statement by Israeli Major General Herzi Halevy (quoted to me by a journalist who attended the speech where Halevy made it): “Israel does not want to see the situation in Syria end with [ISIS] defeated, the superpowers gone from the region, and [Israel] left with a Hezbollah and Iran that have greater capabilities.”
Israel opposes ISIS, but Israel’s greater concern is Assad’s Iranian backing.
Assad enables Iran to support two paramilitary foes of Israel, Hezbollah and Hamas.
Israel therefore prioritizes the removal of Assad over the defeat of ISIS.
For the US, steered by neoconservatives, the war in Syria is a continuation of the plan for global US hegemony launched by Defense Secretary Richard Cheney and Under Secretary Paul Wolfowitz at the Cold War’s end.
In 1991, Wolfowitz told US General Wesley Clark:
“But one thing we did learn [from the Persian Gulf War] is that we can use our military in the region – in the Middle East – and the Soviets won’t stop us.
And we’ve got about 5 or 10 years to clean up those old Soviet regimes – Syria, Iran (sic), Iraq – before the next great superpower comes on to challenge us.”
The multiple US wars in the Middle East – Afghanistan, Iraq, Syria, Libya, and others – have sought to remove the Soviet Union, and then Russia, from the scene and to give the US hegemonic sway.
These efforts have failed miserably.
For Saudi Arabia, as for Israel, the main goal is to oust Assad in order to weaken Iran.
Syria is part of the extensive proxy war between Shia Iran and Sunni Saudi Arabia that plays out in the battlefields of Syria and Yemen and in bitter Shia-Sunni confrontations in Bahrain and other divided countries in the region (including Saudi Arabia itself).
For Turkey, the overthrow of Assad would bolster its regional standing.
Yet Turkey now faces three foes on its southern border: Assad, ISIS, and nationalist Kurds.
ISIS has so far taken a back seat to Turkey’s concerns about Assad and the Kurds.
But ISIS-directed terrorist attacks in Turkey may be changing that.
Russia and Iran, too, have pursued their own regional interests, including through proxy wars and support for paramilitary operations.
Yet both have signaled their readiness to cooperate with the US to defeat ISIS, and perhaps to solve other problems as well.
The US has so far spurned these offers, because of its focus on toppling Assad.
The US foreign-policy establishment blames Russian President Vladimir Putin for defending Assad, while Russia blames the US for trying to overthrow him.
These complaints might seem symmetrical, but they’re not.
The attempt by the US and its allies to overthrow Assad violates the UN Charter, while Russia’s support of Assad is consistent with Syria’s right of self-defense under that charter.
Yes, Assad is a despot, but the UN Charter does not give license to any country to choose which despots to depose.
The persistence of ISIS underscores three strategic flaws in US foreign policy, along with a fatal tactical flaw.
First, the neocon quest for US hegemony through regime change is not only bloody-minded arrogance; it is classic imperial overreach.
It has failed everywhere the US has tried it.
Syria and Libya are the latest examples.
Second, the CIA has long armed and trained Sunni jihadists through covert operations funded by Saudi Arabia.
In turn, these jihadists gave birth to ISIS, which is a direct, if unanticipated, consequence of the policies pursued by the CIA and its Saudi partners.
Third, the US perception of Iran and Russia as implacable foes of America is in many ways outdated and a self-fulfilling prophecy.
A rapprochement with both countries is possible.
Fourth, on the tactical side, the US attempt to fight a two-front war against both Assad and ISIS has failed.
Whenever Assad has been weakened, Sunni jihadists, including ISIS and al-Nusra Front, have filled the vacuum.
Assad and his Iraqi counterparts can defeat ISIS if the US, Russia, Saudi Arabia, and Iran provide air cover and logistical support.
Yes, Assad would remain in power; yes, Russia would retain an ally in Syria; and yes, Iran would have influence there.
Terrorist attacks would no doubt continue, perhaps even in the name of ISIS for a while; but the group would be denied its base of operations in Syria and Iraq.
Such an outcome would not only end ISIS on the ground in the Middle East; it could lay the groundwork for reducing regional tensions more generally.
The US and Russia could begin to reverse their recent new cold war through shared efforts to stamp out jihadist terrorism.
(A pledge that NATO will not offer admission to Ukraine or escalate missile defenses in Eastern Europe would also help.)
There’s more.
A cooperative approach to defeating ISIS would give Saudi Arabia and Turkey reason and opportunity to find a new modus vivendi with Iran.
Israel’s security could be enhanced by bringing Iran into a cooperative economic and geopolitical relationship with the West, in turn enhancing the chances for a long-overdue two-state settlement with Palestine.
The rise of ISIS is a symptom of the shortcomings of current Western – particularly US – strategy.
The West can defeat ISIS.
The question is whether the US will undertake the strategic reassessment needed to accomplish that end.
Why Is Physics Beautiful?
CAMBRIDGE – The nineteenth-century physicist Heinrich Hertz once described his feeling that James Clerk Maxwell’s equations, which depict the fundamentals of electricity and magnetism, “have an independent existence and an intelligence of their own, that they are wiser…even than their discoverers, that we get more out of them than was originally put into them.”
Not long after, Albert Einstein called Niels Bohr’s atomic model “the highest form of musicality in the sphere of thought.”
More recently, the late Nobel laureate Richard Feynman, describing his discovery of new laws of physics, declared, “You can recognize truth by its beauty and simplicity.”
Similar sentiments are all but universal among modern physicists.
Wishful thinking could never produce working iPhones, photographs of Pluto, or atomic bombs.
Physics, as summarized in a handful of mathematically precise laws, indisputably works.
Yet many things that “work” do not inspire the kind of admiration that the fundamental laws of nature do.
Their beauty is rooted, first, in the laws’ symmetry, here meaning the possibility of change without change – a precise yet almost mystical concept.
Just as a circle can be rotated about its center at any angle, changing the position of each of its points without changing its form, symmetric laws apply to changed situations without changing or losing validity.
For example, special relativity asserts that the fundamental laws of physics remain the same when we view the world from a platform moving at constant velocity.
Similarly, so-called time translation symmetry encodes the uniformity of physical law in time: Even as the universe ages, the laws remain the same.
The second source of beauty in the laws of physics is their productivity – what I call their exuberance.
Just a handful of basic principles generates an astonishing wealth of consequences – everything in the physical world!
You can write the equations of the core theories of physics – known as the standard model – quite comfortably on a T-shirt.
To paraphrase Hertz, they give back far more than we put in.
It is important to note that the laws of physics need not necessarily have such marvelous properties.
Consider this hypothetical situation: Developments in computer power, virtual reality, and artificial intelligence enable the creation of self-aware beings whose “world” is, from our perspective, a programmed simulation.
If a self-aware Super Mario began to analyze the laws of his world, he would find very little symmetry or productivity.
Instead, he would find a vast collection of loosely connected, quirky rules, reflecting the whims of the programmer.
The beauty of physical law is too impressive to be accidental.
It has led people throughout history to believe that some tasteful higher being created us, and that we inhabit a consciously designed world, like our notional Super Mario.
But this is an extravagant hypothesis, which goes far beyond the facts it is meant to explain.
Before adopting it, we should explore more economical alternatives.
The answer likely lies within us.
Beautiful things are those in which we find pleasure and seek out.
They are, in neurobiological terms, things that stimulate our reward system.
That explains why parents tend to find their young children beautiful, and adults are attracted to nubile models and their images.
It makes evolutionary sense to reward such feelings.
The evolutionary utility of the beauty of physical laws is somewhat less obvious, but no less real.
Given the usefulness of accurately assessing the consequences of our actions, our reward system has evolved so that we derive joy from making successful predictions.
Understanding the forces and patterns defining our world, and especially principles that apply (without changing) to a wide variety of situations, can help to improve our predictions.
The fact that we can often infer the behavior of complex objects or systems from knowledge of their parts – that we get back more than we put in – can help us to hone our predictions further.
In short, because evolution predisposes us to find beautiful those things that help us understand the world correctly, it is no accident that we find the correct laws of nature beautiful.
Viewed from this perspective, the apparent beauty of the laws of physics – our attraction to their symmetry and exuberance – is not surprising.
What remains mysterious is why they are comprehensible.
A profound link between beauty and comprehensibility is an increasingly important source of scientific progress.
Today’s frontiers of fundamental physics are far removed from everyday experience.
They are difficult and expensive to access experimentally, and we cannot rely on our intuition to fill in the blanks.
The patient accumulation of fact recommended by Francis Bacon, Isaac Newton, and Sherlock Holmes is thus no longer practical.
Instead, we reverse the process, using guesswork to motivate experiment.
We first construct beautiful equations, then derive their consequences, and, finally, craft experiments to test them.
In recent decades, that strategy has proved remarkably successful.
It has given us quantum chromodynamics, which resolves the central problem of nuclear physics, as well as predicting the Higgs particle and much else.
Rather than recognizing the beauty of laws otherwise discovered, we use principles of beauty – vast symmetry and a high ratio of output to input – to enable discovery.
When this works, we have an “anthropic” explanation of the laws’ beauty: If they were not beautiful, we would not have found them.
Why is the US Presidential Race So Close?
WASHINGTON, DC – Many people around the world are probably wondering why Hillary Clinton – who is obviously more prepared and better suited for the American presidency than her opponent, Donald Trump – isn’t waltzing to victory.
Many Americans share the world’s bewilderment.
National opinion polls may well continue to fluctuate until the election on November 8.
But Trump has been closing in on Clinton in recent weeks, even threatening to catch up with her in the Electoral College vote, where the Democrats’ control of some of the most populous states (New York and California) give Clinton an advantage.
Why is this happening?
For starters, Trump, despite knowing almost nothing about governance or public policy, has managed to consolidate most Republicans behind him.
One motivation is Republicans’ long-held hatred of Clinton.
Another is the Supreme Court; the court already has one vacant seat for the next president to fill and is likely to have more over the next four years.
Trump has also exploited many Americans’ economic anxieties, tapping the same anti-immigrant, anti-elite rage that is sweeping across European countries.
But Trump cannot win by appealing only to white men without a college degree.
So he has been clumsily trying to suggest that he also cares about African Americans and Latinos – not by talking to African-American and Latino voters, but by speaking in exaggerated stereotypes about them to white audiences.
Not surprisingly, African-Americans and Latinos consider his comments insensitive and patronizing; white women – his real target audience – haven’t yet been persuaded, either.
Meanwhile, Clinton is having her own difficulties reconstructing President Barack Obama’s coalition of women, African Americans, Latinos, and millennials.
Many young people who passionately supported Clinton’s Democratic primary opponent, Senator Bernie Sanders, have ignored Sanders’s own admonitions to support Clinton, and are saying that they’ll vote for third-party candidates, which would help Trump.
Since the two major parties’ national conventions in July, each candidate has alternately made gains and suffered losses.
This month, just as Trump was rising in the polls, he attempted to separate himself from the racist “birther” movement, which falsely claims that Obama – America’s first black president – wasn’t born in the United States, and thus was ineligible for the presidency.
Trump’s remarks, terse and grudging, reminded everyone that he himself was one of the loudest “birthers” of all.
His damage-control effort further backfired, because he falsely claimed that Clinton and her 2008 presidential campaign had started the birther rumor.
Many news outlets finally used the word “lie” in their coverage of Trump, who had gone essentially unchallenged on past fabrications.
Trump’s recent polling gains say less about his improvement as a candidate than they do about Clinton’s own weaknesses and bad luck.
Outside her base of passionate loyalists, Clinton has always had a voter-enthusiasm problem.
She comes across to many as a packaged know-it-all, the super-smart girl who put off the boys in school.
And she confronts a fair amount of sexism, even among her supporters.
(A former Democratic governor recently declared that she should smile more.
Would he have said that about a man?)
But Clinton has also created some of her own problems.
Her poor judgment in using a private email server as Secretary of State, thereby risking the disclosure of classified material, has become a chronic burden for her campaign.
She compounded the problem when she claimed, falsely, that her predecessors had done the same thing, and that State Department security officials had cleared it.
And, unlike Trump, she received no deference from the press on this issue.
The email saga added to voters’ long-held impression that Clinton isn’t “honest and trustworthy,” and it exposed her to attacks from adversaries on the right.
The highly conservative advocacy group Judicial Watch has continually called attention to the issue, forcing the disclosure of emails that Clinton hadn’t turned over to the State Department.
(The FBI found nearly 15,000 emails on Clinton’s server that she hadn’t provided.)
Numerous as-yet-undisclosed emails with the potential to damage Clinton may well be released before the election.
While FBI Director James Comey decided not to recommend prosecution of Clinton for the email issue, he hurt her campaign by commenting that she’d been “extremely careless.”
In any case, the choice not to prosecute had Republicans and conservative commentators howling that she’d received preferential treatment from the Democratic administration.
Polls showed that 56% of respondents agreed that Clinton should have been prosecuted.
A new issue for Clinton arose in August, when the Associated Press reported that numerous donors to the Clinton Foundation had received special treatment by the State Department during Clinton’s tenure there, mainly by winning an appointment with her.
But many of these people would have received an appointment anyway; and there is no evidence that State Department policies were changed as a result.
Meanwhile, the Washington Post has begun to report on questionable – possibly illegal – expenditures by Trump’s own charitable foundation.
Trump, who hadn’t donated to his foundation since 2008, subsequently used its funds to buy personal items (including a six-foot portrait of himself) and to pay legal settlements.
Previously, it had also been disclosed that funds from the Trump Foundation had been used to contribute to the election campaigns of attorneys-general in Florida and Texas, which would also be illegal.
Finally, Clinton had the bad luck of falling ill, with cellphone video showing her nearly collapsing as she left early a ceremony in New York City commemorating the September 11, 2001, terrorist attack.
This added further fuel to right-wing media speculation that she is in poor health; Trump added the sexist charge that she lacks the “stamina” to be president.
The press covering Clinton were furious to learn that two days earlier she had been diagnosed with pneumonia and had kept it to herself.
But American presidential elections are brutal marathons, and it’s understandable that she did not want to cancel planned events.
A later poll showed that the majority of the public agreed.
Clinton’s four-day convalescence came just as she was preparing to make the case for why people should vote for her, rather than why they shouldn’t vote for Trump.
Just as she resumed campaigning, there were bombings in New York and New Jersey, and two more police shootings of unarmed African Americans, which spurred demonstrations in North Carolina, a swing state.
The events took over the national dialogue, with Trump, as usual, playing on racial divisions and blaming Obama and Clinton.
This is the background against which the candidates will head into face-to-face debates, which tend to play a large (even excessive) role in shaping US elections.
It would be unwise to call this election over before it is.
Pulling the OMT Trigger
CHICAGO – Europe has been experiencing a period of calm after the storm since European Central Bank President Mario Draghi’s “whatever it takes” speech in July and the ECB’s decision in September to proceed with its “outright monetary transactions” (OMT) program to purchase distressed eurozone members’ government bonds.
The interest-rate spreads for Italian and Spanish government bonds have dropped dramatically, corporate-bond issues have resumed, and a sense of normalcy is slowly pervading the continent.
But it would be foolish to conclude that the euro’s problems have been solved.
The economic fundamentals are far from stable, while the reduced financial tension is the fortunate outcome of an expectation game.
As long as investors believe that Italy and Spain will eventually be rescued by the OMT, these countries’ borrowing costs will be low, and the rescue will not be needed.
If, however, the slightest doubt about the OMT’s effectiveness arises, the expectation game will shift into reverse, and both countries’ bonds will quickly come under attack.
One such source of doubt may be the OMT’s safety catch.
To become operational, all European governments must approve it.
The rules vary among EU countries, but, in Germany, “government approval” implies parliamentary approval.
In an emergency situation, it is difficult to imagine that Germany will not prefer approval to the disaster of an Italian or Spanish default.
Still, any delay could be enough to trigger a bank run in either country.
By the time the German Bundestag decided, it could be too late.
To eliminate this uncertainty, Italy and Spain should ask for the OMT intervention before it is desperately needed – a request that the Bundestag would most likely approve, viewing it as an insurance scheme rather than a pure transfer.
Doing so would also eliminate the uncertainty surrounding the program itself and its implementation mechanisms.
Identifying and addressing problems when intervention is not urgently needed is much easier than working them out under the threat of a pending sovereign default.
Finally, an early request for OMT intervention would not only reduce the Italian and Spanish governments’ borrowing costs (and thus their fiscal deficits), but would also lower the cost of capital for local firms, which currently find it difficult to borrow and invest.
Thus, it would provide a much-needed boost to these countries’ struggling economies.
So, if triggering OMT intervention would be so beneficial, why are the Spanish and Italian governments so reluctant to do so?
The main reason is political.
In the 1930’s, all European governments feared that breaking from the gold standard would be perceived as a sign of weakness.
As a result, they waited too long.
The same is true of the OMT program: elected politicians fear that triggering it would be perceived as a sign of weakness, implying a cost that they have a strong incentive to delay paying.
But why is Italian Prime Minister Mario Monti, who is not an elected politician (and has promised not to run for election), so hesitant?
Given that he does not have to fear electoral defeat, he could help Spanish Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy by filing first, which would weaken the political stigma for Rajoy’s government were it to file subsequently.
Triggering OMT now would also be a safe play for Italy in the face of an imminent general election with a highly uncertain outcome.
What is not uncertain is that an anti-euro party, run by a professional comedian, Beppe Grillo, will gain at least 20% of the Italian vote.
The political instability that could ensue would not provide a good opportunity to ask Germany for help.
In fact, if one were to imagine reasons why Germany might not approve a request by Italy to trigger the OMT, political turmoil would top the list.
By contrast, triggering the OMT in advance would promote political stability in the face of uncertainty, because it would tie the hands of any future Italian government.
Why, then, is Monti not acting?
One possible reason is personal pride.
Monti wants to be remembered as the prime minister who saved Italy from disaster.
He does not want to go down in history as the prime minister who had to surrender Italy’s sovereignty to save the country from default.
An alternative explanation is that Monti does indeed have political ambitions.
While Monti’s mandate was set to last until the election, he might be trying to extend it with the support of the new parliament.
Delay for either of these reasons would be a very selfish act.
Monti should not risk European stability for his personal benefit.
He should trigger OMT before it is too late.
Italy’s French Temptation
FLORENCE – Italy is once again being gulled by the false hope that if it can just “fix” its institutions, its politics will normalize.
This time, it is the French model that is enticing Italy’s leaders.
Since February’s inconclusive general election, Italian lawmakers have managed to agree on only one thing: the reelection of 88-year-old President Giorgio Napolitano, which makes him the first two-term president since Italy abolished the monarchy in 1946.
The main center-left and center-right parties that supported Napolitano – despite the protests of Beppe Grillo and his anti-establishment Five Star Movement, which won a quarter of the parliamentary vote – hope that he can oversee the creation of a broad-based coalition government.
But addressing Italy’s myriad institutional weaknesses – which have led to ungovernability, endemic fragmentation, disfattismo (defeatism), and widespread public frustration with the establishment – will require an overhaul of the country’s political system.
Given that France overcame similar weaknesses and political deadlock with the creation of the Fifth Republic, which includes a robust executive led by a powerful president, the French model seems like an effective one to follow.
Indeed, at first glance, pursuing such a change in Italy appears simple.
Perhaps it is not surprising that Italians admire France’s Fifth Republic.
After all, its governments – unlike those in Italy – have been remarkably stable and relatively durable, lasting 643 days, on average.
Moreover, no one party or figure has dominated French politics for too long, with power alternating regularly between parties of the left and the right, at least since François Mitterrand’s first victory in 1981.
But, for many Italians, the French political system’s most attractive feature is that the president is the true head of the executive – and, since the presidential and legislative terms were aligned in 2000, that authority has run for five years at a time.
To Italian lawmakers, mired in stalemate and indecision, the French executive’s considerable influence over the parliament is appealing.
That influence is bolstered by the electoral rules’ inherent bias in favor of powerful parties.
Indeed, no electoral system creates a greater vote-seat distortion than France’s two-round majoritarian system.
For example, in 2012, the Socialists obtained nearly 50% of the seats in the National Assembly, despite having won only 29% of the vote in the first round.
The right-wing RPR-UDF coalition did even better in 1993, when it won 38.5% of the vote in the first round but obtained an astonishing 82% of the seats.
In France, smaller parties can gain parliamentary seats only if they manage to negotiate a pre-election agreement with one of the major parties to secure for them some constituencies.
One could argue that this system facilitates more efficient governance, and thus could potentially save Italy from its debilitating gridlock.
But it is difficult to see how it is good for democracy.
Before becoming overly enamored of French institutions, Italians should consider what the French think of their own system.
In fact, the French are extremely frustrated with their country’s politics, particularly with their presidents.
This dissatisfaction does not reflect a failure of François Hollande, whose approval rating stands at only 26% one year into his presidential term; his two immediate predecessors, Jacques Chirac and Nicolas Sarkozy, also left office in disgrace.
According to Eurobarometer data collected over the last two decades, Italy’s political system, its leaders, and its democratic institutions have the lowest level of citizen satisfaction among the first 15 European Union countries.
But France is a close second.
Likewise, France is second only to Italy when it comes to the desire to reform and restructure its political institutions.
At the end of the day, there is no institutional reform that could miraculously “save” Italy.
While a semi-presidential system like France’s could enable Italy to suppress symmetric bicameralism and reform the worst aspects of its electoral law (known as porcellum, or “the crap law”), thereby improving governability, it would create as many problems as it would solve.
French history demonstrates that excessive presidential power is likely to create an almighty and, at times, politically feckless executive, alongside a weak parliament that chronically under-represents a significant proportion of the population.
Beyond the incantatory formulas, Italians should reflect carefully on the desirability of adopting such a system.
Why Mexico is Sick
Mexico City – As I reflect on my troubled country, the lyrics of a Bruce Springsteen song come to mind: “We are far, far away from home.
Our home is far, far away from us.”
That’s how it feels to live in Mexico nowadays: far from democratic normalcy; far from a health system that inspires confidence; far from a government that builds trust; far from home and close to everything that imperils it.
My homeland has become a place where too many people are victims, succumbing to a virus, or gunned down by a drug-trafficker; assaulted by a robber, shot by an ill-trained policeman, or kidnapped by a member of a criminal gang.
The flu epidemic, which probably began in the southern state of Veracruz, is yet another sign that all is not well in Mexico.
The country seems to be caught in a permanent, uneasy tug-of-war between the past and the future, between change and the actors who seek to place obstacles in its path.
For example, when initial reports surfaced about the first swine flu cases, it took three weeks for the information to reach federal health authorities, because state governments were reluctant to report cases quickly due to political and electoral considerations.
Mexico faces mid-term elections for Congress in the fall, and President Felipe Calderón’s National Action Party is trailing slightly in the polls over its main rivals, who would like nothing better than to see a health emergency translate into a political defeat.
In the face of a public health system that seemed incapable of diagnosing and treating the outbreak quickly, the government felt it had little choice but to shut down Mexico City, dealing a severe blow to an already crippled economy.
In contrast with Mexico’s authoritarian past, when an “imperial presidency” constituted a major obstacle to modernization, power has been dispersed.
What the executive branch has relinquished, or been forced to give up, vested interests have seized.
The problem is no longer too much power in the president’s hands, but too much power in the hands of “veto centers” – including public-sector unions – that are blocking much-needed reforms, including in the health system.
In all likelihood, the 22 reported dead from swine flu reflect a social safety net falling to pieces due to lack of public investment and union recalcitrance.
The flu also revealed some of Mexico’s other fundamental flaws.
The political system has become a peculiar hybrid of authoritarian remnants and newly established mechanisms for transparency.
The electoral process has been unable to guarantee decent democratic governance, rein in predatory practices among the political class, or make public officials follow established rules, keep them responsive to citizen preferences, and deter them from channeling public funds into private hands.
Lack of accountability has both encouraged corruption and fed perceptions that abuse remains unpunished. Impunity, in turn, erodes the credibility of the country’s institutions, including public hospitals and clinics.
Today, conspiracy theories abound in Mexico about the origins of the virus, because government officials are viewed with such ingrained suspicion.
Throughout the epidemic, citizens have largely obeyed government guidelines and followed public health prescriptions. But that doesn’t mean they trust the government.
Public-opinion polls reveal that more than 50% of the population believe that political parties are “not necessary” for the good of the country.
Disapproval of Congress is growing, and people’s satisfaction with representative democracy has decreased.
In the midst of the epidemic, 66% of Mexicans believe that the country is regressing.
Seventy-five percent of crimes are not reported due to lack of trust in the authorities, and 98% of crimes are never resolved or punished.
Public opinion seems disenchanted with a democracy incapable of offering tangible solutions to problems, the flu crisis being the most recent example.
Saddled by a viral infection, drug-related insecurity, and rising crime, Mexico feels like a besieged place.
The noted columnist Miguel Angel Granados Chapa wrote last week: “All that’s missing is for Mexico to get peed on by a dog.”
Mexico’s bad health is a symptom of problems that run deeper and are more widespread than swine flu.
Over the past ten years, political and economic actors intent on preserving the status quo have blocked further democratic change and economic reform, condemning Mexico to move sideways, even as other emerging markets surge ahead.
Lately, political battles among key actors have not been about how to build a more effective of representative political system or a more equitable, dynamic economy, but about how to maintain control of accumulated power or distribute it among their allies.
Political parties appear far removed from citizen demands, beset by internal divisions, incapable of addressing deep-rooted inequality and lawlessness, and prone to populist or authoritarian leadership that promises quick fixes to entrenched problems.
Mexico’s current quandary is the flu, but it faces more important challenges than a mutating microbe.
With more than 40 million people living in poverty and 7,000 killed in drug-related violence last year, Mexico will need to reform quickly to address what the virus has brought to light: a government far removed from the suffering of ordinary people and too frequently insensitive to their plight.
In this national crisis, Mexico’s people have closed ranks, collaborated, and showed that they are capable of working together to achieve common goals in the public interest.
But their political and economic elites frequently seem incapable of doing so.
That is why home seems far, far away for so many Mexicans.
Natural-Born Pianists?
LONDON – The editor of The Guardian, Alan Rusbridger, has written a book about how he decided to practice the piano 20 minutes a day.
Eighteen months later, he played Chopin’s fearsomely difficult Ballade No. 1 in G Minor to an admiring audience of friends.
Could anyone have done this?
Or did it require special talent?
The nature-versus-nurture debate has been around a long time. It is unresolved because the scientific question has always been entangled with politics.
Broadly speaking, those stressing inborn capacity have been political conservatives; those emphasizing nurture have been political radicals.
The nineteenth-century philosopher John Stuart Mill was of the “anyone can do it” school.
He was convinced that his achievements were in no way due to superior heredity: anyone of “normal intelligence and health,” subjected to his father’s educational system – which included learning Greek at the age of three – could have become John Stuart Mill.
Mill was part of his century’s liberal attack on aristocratic privilege: achievement was the result of opportunity, not birth.
The practice of the faculties (education) unleashes potential that would otherwise remain dormant.
Charles Darwin seemingly overturned this optimistic view of the potential beneficial effects of nurture.
Species evolve, Darwin said, through “natural selection” – the random selection, through competition, of biological traits favorable to survival in a world of scarce resources.
Herbert Spencer used the phrase “survival of the fittest” to explain how societies evolve.
Social Darwinists interpreted natural selection to mean that any humanitarian effort to improve the condition of the poor would impede the progress of the human race by burdening it with an excess of drones.
Society would be spending scarce resources on losers rather than winners.
This fit the ideology of a brand of capitalism that was “red in tooth and claw.”
Indeed, social Darwinism provided a pseudo-scientific justification for the American belief in laissez-faire (with the successful businessman epitomizing the survival of the fittest); for eugenics (the deliberate attempt to breed superior individuals, on the model of horse-breeding, and prevent the “over-breeding” of the unfit); and for the eugenic-cum-racial theories of Nazism.
In reaction to social Darwinism’s murderous tendencies, Mill’s view became dominant after World War II in the form of social democracy.
State action to improve diet, education, health, and housing would enable the poor to realize their potential.
Competition as a social principle was downgraded in favor of cooperation.
Differences in innate ability were not denied (at least by the sensible).
But it was rightly felt that there was a huge amount of work to be done to raise average levels of achievement before one needed to start worrying that one’s policies were promoting the survival of the unfit.
Then the mood began to shift again.
Social democracy was attacked for penalizing the successful and rewarding the unsuccessful.
In 1976, the biologist Richard Dawkins identified the unit of Darwinian selection as the “selfish gene.”
The evolutionary story was now recast as a battle of genes to secure their survival over time by means of mutations, which create individuals (phenotypes) best adapted to pass on their genes.
In the course of evolution, the inferior phenotypes disappear.
Although this view of evolution would not have been possible before the discovery of DNA, it is no coincidence that it rose to prominence in the age of Ronald Reagan and Margaret Thatcher.
To be sure, the selfish gene needs to be “altruistic” insofar as its survival depends on the survival of the kinship group.
But it need not be that altruistic.
And, although Dawkins later regretted calling his gene “selfish” (he says that “immortal” would have been better), his choice of adjective was certainly best adapted to maximizing sales of his book at that particular time.
Since then, we have turned away from advocacy of selfishness, but we have not recovered an independent moral language.
The new orthodoxy, suitable for a world in which the unrestrained pursuit of greed has proved economically disastrous, is that the human species is genetically programmed to be moral, because only by acting morally (caring for the survival of others) can it ensure its long-term survival.
The “hard-wiring” metaphor dominates contemporary moral language.
According to the United Kingdom’s chief rabbi, Jonathan Sacks, religious beliefs are useful for our survival, by inducing us to act in socially cooperative ways: “We have mirror neurons that lead us to feel pain when we see others suffering,” he recently wrote. Consideration for others is “located in the prefrontal cortex.”
And religion “reconfigures our neural pathways.”
In short: “Far from refuting religion, the Neo-Darwinists have helped us understand why it matters.”
So we need not fear that it will decline.
Atheists might not agree.
But it is an extraordinary statement for a religious leader to make, because it sets to one side the question of the truth or falsehood, or the ethical value, of religious beliefs.
Or rather: all that wiring in the prefrontal cortex must be ethical, because it is good for survival.
But, in that case, what ethical value is there in survival?
Does the continued survival of the human race have any value in itself, independent of what we achieve or create?
We need to rescue morality from the claims of science.
We need to assert what philosophers and religious teachers have at all times asserted: that there is something called the good life, apart from survival, and our understanding of it has to be taught, just as Mill’s father taught him the elements of Aristotle’s Posterior Analytics.
Our nature may predispose us to learn; but what we learn depends on how we are nurtured.
Obama’s Rocky Path to Success in Syria
NEW YORK – In my experience, if you are attacked for your diplomacy from both left and right, by doves and hawks, and by internationalists and isolationists, you probably have it just right.
In the avalanche of commentary on this month’s US-Russia deal on Syria’s chemical weapons, few have been prepared to call it a “win-win-win” outcome for the United States, Russia, and the Syrian people.
But – at least so far – that is what it is.
President Barack Obama and his team, despite some missteps, deserve most of the credit.
The charge sheet against Obama over Syria is long.
The US, it is said, took no decisive action while 100,000 Syrians were dying, and it had no strategy to end the conflict.
Obama created expectations that the US would act if chemical weapons were used, only to stall when the time came.
Then, when a response became unavoidable, he threatened both too much and too little military force.
He paid too little, then too much, attention to domestic opponents of intervention.
Above all, he allowed an ever-cynical Kremlin to outplay the US diplomatically.
But consider the constraints.
There was never a time in the crisis, until the chemical-weapons issue erupted, when US military intervention in any form seemed likely to save more lives than it would endanger.
The increasing influence of jihadists in the rebel ranks made support for an outright opposition victory increasingly untenable.
There simply was not enough hard evidence of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad’s use of chemical weapons, at least before the Ghouta massacre in August, to pressure Russia – either in the United Nations Security Council or the court of global opinion – to reconsider its reflex support of the regime.
Moreover, while the Obama administration remained determined to preserve US leadership in responding – with force, where necessary – to mass atrocity crimes (the global “responsibility to protect” agenda), a decade of fighting in Iraq and Afghanistan has left Americans desperately war-weary.
That is true in the West generally, as shown by the United Kingdom’s parliamentary vote against participating in any intervention.
For almost everyone, George W. Bush’s “decisiveness” made vacillation seem like a better option.
Against this background, consider what Obama has achieved.
A descent into chemical-weapons hell has been averted, almost certainly permanently: the Assad regime knows that it has no friends or protectors left should it cross that red line again.
Military intervention, with all of its problems, has been avoided for now; but Assad knows that the US will have no option but to attack – with or without explicit Security Council and Congressional resolutions – should he perpetrate another such horror.
Above all, diplomatic cooperation on chemical weapons has opened the door at last to a negotiated settlement of the underlying conflict in Syria.
And the UN is back at center stage, as a rules-based international order demands that it should be on such issues, with both its weapons inspectors and the Security Council regarded as central to future developments.
Yes, there were some things that could and should have been done differently.
There always are.
If the justified intervention in Libya by the US, the UK, and France had not later been conducted with such cloth-eared indifference to Russian, Chinese, and developing-country concern about mandate overreach, greater unity on Syria could have been achieved in the Security Council in 2011, when a united message might have stopped Assad cold.
Going to Congress for approval was always going to involve more risks than rewards.
Secretary of State John Kerry’s description of the planned US military response to the Ghouta massacre as likely to be “unbelievably small” almost derailed the utility of the US threat in concentrating Syrian and Russian officials’ minds.
And the administration could have helped itself by better explaining that a cooperative response to the Assad regime’s use of chemical weapons had long been on the table, and was not just the result of deftly opportunistic Russian diplomacy in response to a Kerry thought-bubble.
What has trumped these missteps, and enabled each side to focus on opportunities rather than excuses, is that both the US and Russia now understand that they have common interests in Syria.
Both sides want not only to preclude the Assad regime’s further use of chemical weapons, but also to find a route to sustainable peace in Syria, and to reestablish the authority and utility of the UN in these situations.
Of course, optimism must be tempered.
Plenty can go wrong in the period ahead.
Either a beleaguered Assad or an increasingly desperate opposition might destroy the deal on the ground.
The fragile rapprochement between the US and Russia may not hold, particularly if the US again insists – breaking its recent helpful silence – that Assad has no place at the negotiating table.
But when the major powers cooperate in a just cause, the world is a safer and saner place.
That is where both the US and Russia – and on this issue China as well – want to be.
If Obama’s caution and flexibility have been the key to getting us here, let us give praise where it is due.
The US with Iran in Syria
PRINCETON – The prospect of a US military strike on Syria has dimmed following President Barack Obama’s embrace of an international initiative to take control of Syria’s chemical-weapons stockpile.
The eleventh-hour U-turn on the push for military action has come against a backdrop of intensifying diplomatic pressure from the international community to avoid escalation of the violence in Syria.
And that outcome is not possible without Iran.
In a joint press conference with his Syrian counterpart, Walid al-Moallem, Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov tabled a proposal, originally agreed with Iran, calling for Syria to “place chemical weapons storage sites under international control.”
The stockpiles would then be destroyed and Syria would fully join the international Chemical Weapons Convention.
The second component of the Russian-Iranian proposal calls for international efforts, under the auspices of the United Nations Security Council, to rein in Syrian rebel forces’ chemical-weapons capabilities.
Moallem immediately embraced the proposal.
Hours later, UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon did as well, while Obama said that “I fervently hope that this can be resolved in a non-military way.”
This initiative would allow Obama to escape from a messy political and foreign-policy predicament.
But the matter is far from settled: Obama has not ruled out a military strike.
So here are 12 reasons why America should grasp the opportunity for a diplomatic resolution afforded by the Russian-Iranian plan.
First, there is evidence that the Syrian opposition has amassed chemical weapons.
In December 2012, Iran officially informed the US about chemical weapons, including sarin gas, being transferred to Syria.
The US declined to cooperate with Iran to press ahead on the case.
Second, US military strikes on Syria have the potential to engulf the entire region – and perhaps the US – in a broader war.
After its experiences in Afghanistan and Iraq over the past decade, the US can hardly afford a Syrian quagmire.
Third, with the regional Sunni-Shia conflict intensifying, the prospect of tens of billions of petrodollars backing terrorist extremists has already destabilized the region.
US military strikes against Syria would further fuel extremism and result in widespread atrocities by the rebels against Syrians of all faiths.
Reports point to the execution and mutilation of Syrian-government prisoners.
There is no doubt that the fate of Syria’s Christian and Jewish communities is now extremely precarious.
Fourth, America’s decision to back extremists in Syria contradicts its “war on terrorism” and will erode international support for it.
The prospect of Iranian cooperation to root out Al Qaeda extremists, which it provided in Afghanistan and Iraq, would be unlikely following any intervention.
Fifth, it is wrong to assume that without Syrian President Bashar al-Assad, Iran would lose its influence in the Muslim world as well as its link to Hezbollah in Lebanon.
America’s regional position weakened, and Iran’s strengthened, following the US-led invasions of Afghanistan and Iraq; US intervention in Syria could reproduce that pattern.
Sixth, a US attack on Syria would leave the US isolated internationally and end any hope of a diplomatic resolution.
There is no domestic or international appetite for another US military adventure – NATO, the G-20, the Europeans, Russia, China, and 60% of Americans oppose a unilateral US military strike.
Seventh, the civilian casualties arising from a military strike would be high.
If the main justification for an attack is humanitarian – to end the senseless slaughter of Syrian civilians – US military intervention would do more harm than good.
Eighth, US involvement in Syria will breathe new life into efforts to press for a wider war between the US and Iran.
Al Qaeda affiliates will target US regional interests in the hope that the blame falls on Iran and its militant proxies – providing a pretext for US military confrontation.
Ninth, a US military strike against a third Muslim-majority country would demolish the credibility of Obama’s efforts to repair America’s image in the Islamic world.
Indeed, it would most likely prove to be a strategic boon to the “resistance axis” – Iran and Hezbollah.
Tenth, any US unilateral military strike against Syria would ratchet up tensions between the US and Russia.
This, in turn, would strengthen the Russia-Iran alliance.
Eleventh, Iranian Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei has issued permission for President Hassan Rouhani’s new administration to enter into direct talks with the US.
No better opportunity to end decades of bilateral hostility is likely to come along.
In these circumstances, a US attack on Syria would almost certainly dash any hope of a US-Iran rapprochement for years to come.
Finally, with the moderate Rouhani now installed as President, a US military strike could undermine a golden opportunity for America and Iran to reach a face-saving solution (for both sides) on Iran’s nuclear program.
Both Iran and the US consider the use of weapons of mass destruction a grave crime.
Indeed, Iran was a major victim of chemical-weapons attacks during its 1980-1988 war with Saddam Hussein’s Iraq.
Iran can be a major partner to halt proliferation of WMDs in Syria, the Middle East, and beyond.
Iran maintains that the Security Council is the only body legally authorized to verify allegations concerning the use of such deadly weapons and to decide on the appropriate response.
One promising avenue for US-Iran cooperation on Syria could be joint support for a fact-finding mission by the Security Council to identify the perpetrators.
Obama has his “red line” on the use of chemical weapons.
So does Khamenei.
Why Pay More for Fairness?
Marks & Spencer, a supermarket and clothing chain with 400 stores throughout Britain, recently announced that it is converting its entire range of coffee and tea, totaling 38 lines, to Fairtrade, a marketing symbol of “ethical production.”
The chain already sells only Fairtrade tea and coffee in its 200 Café Revive coffee shops.
It is also boosting its purchases of shirts and other goods made with Fairtrade cotton.
The announcement came during “Fairtrade Fortnight,” a two-week promotion of Fairtrade products that included speaking tours by farmers from developing countries, telling Britons how Fairtrade has assisted their communities.
The movement toward more ethical consumption has made significant gains in the United States as well, as consumers increasingly turn to organic, locally produced foods, and eggs from hens not kept in cages.
In the UK, a survey has found that half of those shown the Fairtrade symbol recognized it and understood that it refers to products that give a better deal for Third World farmers.
There is no comparable US research, but related data, and discussions with my own students, suggests that the figure would be much lower.
Traders seeking Fairtrade certification must pay producers a price that covers the costs of sustainable production and provides a living wage.
For example, the minimum price for coffee is $1.26 per pound, no matter how low the market price may fall.
If the market price rises above that figure, the fair trade price will increase so that it remains five cents per pound higher.
Small farmers, for their part, are required to be organized in cooperatives or other groups that allow democratic participation.
Plantations and factories can use the Fairtrade label if they pay their workers decent wages, comply with health, safety, and environmental standards, allow unions or other forms of workers’ associations, provide good housing if workers are not living at home, and do not use child labor or forced labor.
Not every one approves of Fairtrade.
Brink Lindsey, director of the pro-market Cato Institute’s Center for Trade Policy Studies, believes that the campaign for Fairtrade coffee is a “well-meaning dead end.”
With some justification, he argues that the real cause of the fall in coffee prices was not the profiteering of multinationals, but big increases in coffee production in Brazil and Vietnam, combined with new techniques that make it possible to grow coffee with less labor and hence more cheaply.
In Lindsey’s view, if we want to assist coffee growers, we should encourage them either to abandon coffee and produce more profitable crops – and here he rightly points to rich nations’ trade barriers and subsidies as obstacles that must be dismantled – or to move into higher-value products, like specialty coffees, that bring higher prices.
What is curious about Lindsey’s argument, however, is that the Fairtrade coffee campaign can be seen as doing just what he recommends – encouraging coffee farmers to produce a specialty coffee that brings a higher price.
Pro-market economists don’t object to corporations that blatantly use snob appeal to promote their products.
If people want to pay $48 for a pound of Jamaican Blue Mountain coffee because that’s what James Bond prefers, economists don’t object that the market is being distorted.
So why be critical when consumers choose to pay $12 for a pound of coffee that they know has been grown without toxic chemicals, under shade trees that help birds to survive, by farmers who can now afford to feed and educate their children?
Economists might reply that if you want to help people feed and educate their children, you can pay $10 for a pound of non-Fairtrade coffee that tastes the same and give the $2 you save to an aid agency that provides food and education to poor children.
That’s a possible strategy, but there are advantages to Fairtrade.
The growers know that they have to provide a product that consumers like, both for its taste and for the way it is grown.
If their product sells well, they can take pride in having produced something that is sought after around the world.
From the growers’ perspective, receiving a premium by selling a Fairtrade product is preferable to receiving a charitable handout that they would get whether they worked or not and regardless of the quality of what they produce.
Paying more for a Fairtrade label is no more “anti-market” than paying more for a Gucci label, and it reflects better ethical priorities.
Fairtrade is not a government subsidy.
Its success depends on market demand, not political lobbying.
Fortunately, in Europe, that market demand is growing rapidly.
One hopes that it will soon reach similar levels throughout the developed world, and wherever people can make choices about their discretionary spending.
Why Putin Makes a Bad Ally
STANFORD – Russian President Vladimir Putin’s intervention in the Syrian conflict has been welcomed by some as a moment for the Kremlin to “come in from the cold.”
Russia’s conflict with the Islamic State, the argument goes, has aligned the country’s interests with those of the West.
Even Turkey’s downing of a Russian warplane does not seem not to have deflated this optimism.
Indeed, at a recent press conference, US President Barack Obama again urged Putin to join the alliance against the Islamic State.
And French President François Hollande billed his recent visit to Moscow as an effort to build a broad international coalition against the terrorist group.
At first blush, the idea that Russia is a natural ally against Islamist terrorists seems to make sense.
The country has suffered horrific terrorist attacks by Islamist extremists, including the bombing in November of a plane above the Sinai Peninsula, which killed 224 passengers and crew, nearly all of them Russian.
Around 20 million Muslims, most of them Sunni, live within the Russian Federation, and the country’s security officials report that some 7,000 fighters from the former Soviet republics and Russia have joined the Islamic State.
On deeper examination, however, it becomes clear that an anti-terror alliance with Russia is wishful thinking.
Putin has not gone into Syria to defeat the Islamic State.
He has intervened to save the regime of Russia’s client, Syrian President Bashar al-Assad.
Putin may sometimes give the appearance that he is ready to abandon Assad, but ultimately he will defend him.
Leaving Assad to his fate would be a sign of weakness – and thus anathema to Putin.
Ordinary Russians may be in danger of attacks by Islamic extremists, but they pose little threat to Putin or his allies.
Russia has indeed suffered a number of terrorist attacks, including the 2004 Beslan massacre, in which 334 people, most of them schoolchildren, were killed.
In nearly every case, the response to the attacks was brutal, inept, and costly in terms of civilian lives lost.