The scale of the penalties is now large enough to have a substantial impact on banks’ balance sheets, delay the restoration of their health, and constrain their lending capacity.
Some of the money, especially in the UK, has gone back to individual customers.
But more has gone to the regulators themselves and onward to national governments.
In the UK, fines once helped defray the regulator’s costs: bad actors reduced the fees charged to the good ones, creating a positive feedback loop.
Today, the payments have become so large that the government has seized them and channeled revenues exceeding the regulator’s enforcement costs to veterans’ charities.
In the US, the end recipients are less clear; indeed, they are undisclosed.
Charles Calomiris of Columbia University has challenged what he calls “a real subversion of the fiscal process” as funds are raised and spent in non-transparent ways.
The most important question, however, is whether fines on this scale serve as useful deterrents.
Clearly, the post-crisis period has revealed unacceptable behavior in many institutions.
It will be some time before we know whether large fines on corporations, paid principally by their shareholders, contribute to keeping the system honest.
But that seems unlikely when banks and investors seem punch-drunk, barely reacting to regulators’ blows.
The reputational impact of each new settlement is modest, despite the escalation in the level of fines imposed.
The FCA has just announced a review of its pricing policies.
“This is not a penalties race,” according to Georgina Philippou, the authority’s enforcement strategy director.
Whether the current approach serves as an effective deterrent is a question that should be widely debated.
Senior bank managers and regulators have a common interest in developing a more effective system – one that punishes the guilty and creates the right incentives for the future.
Fear and Freedom on the Internet
Earlier this month it was reported that, at the request of China’s rulers, Microsoft shut down the Web site of a Chinese blogger that was maintained on a Microsoft service called MSN Spaces.
The blogger, Zhao Jing, had been reporting on a strike by journalists at The Beijing News that followed the dismissal of the newspaper’s independent-minded editor.
Microsoft’s action raises a key question: can the Internet really be a force for freedom that repressive governments cannot control as easily as newspapers, radio, and television?
Ironically, Microsoft’s founder and chairman, Bill Gates, has been an enthusiastic advocate of this view.
Just last October, he said: “There’s really no way to, in a broad sense, repress information today, and I think that’s a wonderful advance we can all feel good about….[T]his is a medium of total openness and total freedom, and that’s what makes it so special.”
Despite these sentiments, Microsoft is helping the Chinese authorities to repress information as best they can.
A Microsoft spokeswoman was reported as saying that the corporation has blocked “many sites” in China, and it has been known for several months that Microsoft’s blog tool in China filters words like “democracy” and “human rights” from blog titles.
Microsoft’s defense is that it must “comply with local and global laws.”
But the MSN Spaces sites are maintained on servers in the United States.
The relevant local laws would therefore seem to be those of the US, and Zhao Jing’s discussion of the Beijing journalists’ strike does not violate any of them.
Nor are there any global laws that prevent Chinese people from discussing events that their government would prefer them not to discuss.
TheNew York Times, for example, is free to publish its report on the strike, even though it operates a Web site that anyone with unfettered Internet access can read.
If the Chinese government does not want its citizens to read a foreign newspaper,then it is up to them to figure out how to block access to it. The newspaper is under no obligation to do it for them.
So Microsoft’s defense misfires.
We can only guess at the company’s real reason for taking down the Web site, but fear of repercussions against its commercial interests in China seems likely to have been an important factor.
To be sure, a corporation can and should place limits on the use of its services.
The absolutist line – let complete freedom of expression prevail – crumbles in the face of uncomfortable examples.
According to Gates, Microsoft might prevent the use of its services to spread instructions about making nuclear bombs, to send pro-Nazi statements into Germany, where such material is illegal, and to propagate child pornography.
But how relevant are such examples?
In his classic defense of freedom of expression, On Liberty, John Stuart Mill argued that the most important reason for freedom of expression is to promote competition between the widest possible range of ideas, and that unfettered debate is the best way to test them.
For the government to protect ideas from criticism is to turn them into a lifeless and rigid dogma, regardless of whether they are true.
If we agree with Mill, then only one of Gates’s examples falls into the category of expression that should be protected.
Recipes for making nuclear bombs are techniques, not ideas.
Nor is child pornography the expression of ideas.
We may therefore restrict both of them without running afoul of Mill’s argument.
(On the other hand, an essay arguing that there is nothing wrong with adults taking a sexual interest in children, and that such conduct should be permitted, expresses ideas, and thus should not be censored, no matter how poisonous we may consider them.)
The most difficult of Gates’s three examples is that of pro-Nazi statements on a Web site aimed at Germany.
It is easy to understand why Germany would wish to prohibit such statements.
Several countries’ laws proscribe incitement of racial hatred, which can be justified, consistently with Mill’s defense of liberty, if such laws really focus narrowly on incitement of hatred rather than on suppressing arguments, bad as they may be, that appeal to people’s intellectual capacities.
A defender of suppression of Nazi ideas might argue that have already been tried, and have failed – in the most horrendous manner imaginable – to produce a better society.
Nevertheless, the best possible sign that Germany has overcome its Nazi past would be to focus its laws specifically on incitement to racial hatred, rather than on Nazism as such.
In any case, China’s crackdown on straightforward reporting and discussion of events taking place in that country is not the suppression of a discredited political ideology, but of open and informed political debate.
If Bill Gates really believes that the Internet should be a liberating force, he should ensure that Microsoft does not do the dirty work of China’s government.
Fear and Loathing in Europe
Two far-right parties, the Austrian Freedom Party and the Movement for Austria’s Future, won 29% of the vote in the latest Austrian general election, double their total in the 2006 election.
Both parties share the same attitudes toward immigrants, especially Muslims, and the European Union: a mixture of fear and loathing.
Since the two parties’ leaders, Heinz-Christian Strache and Jörg Haider, despise each other, there is little chance of a far-right coalition taking power.
Nonetheless, this is Adolf Hitler’s native land, where Jews were once forced to scrub Vienna’s streets with toothbrushes before being deported and killed, so the result is disturbing.
But how disturbing?
That 29% is about 15% more than populist right-wing parties get in very good years (for them) in other European countries.
Strache, the leader of the Freedom Party, wants the government to create a new ministry to manage the deportation of immigrants.
Muslims are openly disparaged.
Haider once praised the employment practices of Hitler’s Third Reich.
Inevitably, the new rightists bring back memories of storm troopers and race laws.
Yet, to see the rise of the Austrian right as a revival of Nazism is a mistake.
Neither party advocates violence, even if some of their rhetoric might inspire it.
Voters for the far right may be motivated less by ideology than by anxieties and resentments that are felt in many European countries, including ones with no Nazi tradition, such as The Netherlands and Denmark.
In Denmark, the hard-right Danish People’s Party, with 25 parliamentary seats, is the country’s third largest party.
Dutch populists, such as Rita Verdonk or Geert Wilders, who is driven by a paranoid fear of “Islamization,” are putting the traditional political elites – a combination of liberals, social democrats, and Christian democrats – under severe pressure.
This is precisely the point.
Expressions of nationalism in postwar European democracies were always tolerated in soccer stadiums, not in public life.
Skepticism about European unity was routinely denounced as bigotry, or even a form of racism.
Attachment to national feeling was further undermined by governments’ habit of blaming unpopular policies on European Union bureaucrats, who are increasingly seen as yet another bunch of self-satisfied, privileged, and unaccountable elitists.
This is linked to resentment of immigrants.
When the offspring of manual workers imported from countries such as Turkey and Morocco in the 1960’s began to form large Muslim minorities in European cities, tensions rose in working-class neighborhoods.
Complaints about crime and unfamiliar customs were often dismissed by liberal elites as “racism.”
People simply had to learn to be tolerant.
None of this was necessarily wrong.
Tolerance, European unity, distrust of nationalism, and vigilance against racism are laudable goals.
But promoting these aims without discussion, let alone criticism, resulted in a backlash.
When the Dutch, the French, and the Irish voted against the European constitution, they were expressing distrust of their political elites.
And populists who promise to restore national sovereignty by rejecting “Europe,” fighting “Islamization,” and kicking out immigrants are exploiting this distrust.
The rhetoric of xenophobia and chauvinism is unpleasant, and, in a country with Austria’s past, even alarming.
But the new populism is not yet undemocratic, or even anti-democratic.
The phrase most often heard in Austria among voters of the right-wing parties is “fresh air.”
People say they voted for Haider and Strache to break the stranglehold of the ruling parties.
This is not an illegitimate motivation.
If people are anxious about their national identities, the sovereignty of their governments, the demographic and social complexion of their societies, such fears are best voiced in the political arena.
As long as people express their concerns, however distasteful to liberal ears, by votes, not violence, democracy will not be seriously harmed.
Running against the political elite is, of course, the essence of populism everywhere.
American presidential candidates pretend to run against “Washington” even when they are the sons of former presidents.
Real damage is done when people lose confidence, not only in the elites, but in the system itself.
This has not yet happened in Europe, not even in Austria.
There is no need for liberal, traditional parties, in a fit of panic, to battle the right by pandering to the same resentments.
But those resentments should be taken seriously in political debates.
That way, the dangers of popular antipathies will be contained.
Instead of damaging democracy, the rise of the right, by challenging the corruption of vested interests, might actually turn out to strengthen it.
Fear and Loathing in the First World
Within the last few years, people throughout the world's most advanced economies have become acutely worried about the economic prowess of China, India, and other emerging countries with large low-wage populations.
They fear for their own jobs and for their children's future in a world where they must compete alongside the world's poorest.
Those fears are testing political leaders in the world's richest countries.
Newspaper stories are an indicator of this rising concern.
I searched the Lexis-Nexis database of English-language newspaper stories around the world that contained all three of the words "outsourcing," "jobs," and "India."
In 1999, Lexis-Nexis produced only 39 stories; by 2003, there were 749 stories.
In the first six months of 2004, there were already 1208 stories.
The results were much the same when I searched "outsourcing," "jobs", and "China."
I found similar growth in the use of these three terms together when I searched in French, German, Italian, and Spanish: 90% of the stories were in 2003 and 2004.
Why this explosion of concern?
After all, advanced countries have been losing manufacturing jobs to less developed countries for more than fifty years.
One reason is that the expanding development and use of new information technology, notably cell phones and the Internet, shrinks the world and makes competition from abroad more plausible.
In fact, new technologies are probably the most important reason why globalization is advancing at a rapid pace.
Cell phones and the Internet link the minds of many people in different countries effortlessly and efficiently, encouraging trade in intellectual creations.
At the same time, the new information technology makes us more aware that the kinds of jobs that are migrating to India and China are high-quality jobs, the jobs for educated and skilled people.
Over the last fifty years, people in advanced countries have increasingly sought university education and specialized training to protect them from an unforgiving labor market.
Now First-Worlders are uncertain whether even this will protect their economic status.
Increased fear of competition from emerging countries is also a natural consequence of the collapse of the speculative bubble in equities in 2000; stock markets in some countries fell to less than half their peak value.
Once we saw our exaggerated hopes for our investments failing, we began to consider our other sources of income and wealth, only to confront the worldwide economic slowdown that began in 2001.
Increased economic anxiety has, unsurprisingly, fueled increasing unease about foreign competition.
Earlier this year, I surveyed people who recently bought homes in four American cities.
My questionnaire asked: "Do you worry that your (or your household's) ability to earn as much income in future years as you expect might be in danger because of changes in the economy (someone in China competing for your job, a computer replacing your job, etc.)?"
Of 442 respondents, 11% answered, "Yes, I worry a lot," 36% replied, "Yes, I worry a little," and 52% said, "No, I don't worry at all."
Thus, while most respondents said they were not worried, nearly half expressed some worry.
I asked this question of recent homebuyers on the theory that fear of job loss might help explain the remarkable boom in home prices in the US (as well as many other advanced countries).
After all, people who fear losing their jobs may seek greater economic security by investing in real property in their own wealthy country, bidding up prices in the process.
My survey's results lend some support to this theory.
Although 81% of the respondents said fear of job loss had no effect on their decision to buy a house, of those who said it did, the number who said it encouraged home purchase outnumbered those who said it discouraged home purchase by a margin of two to one.
Growing fear of foreign competition ought to explain a lot of things in the future.
People used to feel insulated from economic problems that occurred beyond their country's borders.
No more.
Fear of competition from abroad is now fundamental, and will change the political process in advanced and relatively advanced emerging countries throughout the world.
It helps explain the rise of protectionism, and the failure of the WTO trade talks in Cancun last September to improve emerging countries' access to advanced-country markets.
As a professor, I find that my students often ask me for career advice with a different tone than in the past.
What I hear is a fundamental lack of confidence that they will do well in any chosen career.
They want to figure out how they can compete with Chinese or Indian workers who have the same, or better, education.
Despite bravado about American superiority, the students themselves do not seem to feel superior, and wonder if they will be living emerging-country lives of their own in coming years.
This sudden fear of emerging countries presents a major dilemma.
The fear is real and visceral, and politicians ignore it at their peril.
Its further increase could lead to counterproductive protectionist measures.
We must not let this happen.
The emerging countries are doing nothing more blameworthy than working towards their place as equals alongside advanced countries.
It is morally and practically vital that they succeed.
The Fear Factor in Global Markets
CAMBRIDGE – The phenomenal market volatility of the past year owes much to genuine risks and uncertainties about factors such as Chinese growth, European banks, and the oil glut.
For the first two months of this year, many investors were panicked that even the United States, the world’s most comforting growth story, was about to fall into recession.
Indeed, among the experts who participate in the Wall Street Journal’s monthly poll, 21% believed a recession was around the corner.
I won’t deny that there are risks.
A big enough hit to China’s growth or to Europe’s financial system could certainly tip the global economy from slow growth to recession.
An even more frightening thought is that by this time next year, the US presidency may have turned into a reality television show.
Yet, from a macroeconomic perspective, the fundamentals are just not that bad.
Employment numbers have been strong, consumer confidence is solid, and the oil sector is just not large enough relative to GDP for the price collapse to bring the US economy to its knees.
In fact, the most under-appreciated driver of market sentiment right now is fear of another huge crisis.
There are some parallels between today’s unease and market sentiment in the decade after World War II.
In both cases, there was outsize demand for safe assets.
(Of course, financial repression also played a big role after the war, with governments stuffing debt down private investors’ throats at below-market interest rates.)
Even a full decade after World War II, when the famous economist John Kenneth Galbraith opined that the world might experience another depression, markets went into a tizzy.
People still remembered how the US stock market had fallen 90% during the early years of the Great Depression.
Back in the 1950s, it was not hard to imagine that things might go wrong again.
After all, the world had just navigated through a series of catastrophes, including two world wars, a global influenza epidemic, and of course the Depression itself.
Sixty years ago, the specter of atomic war also seemed all too real.
People today need no reminding about how far and how fast equity markets can fall.
After the 2008 financial crisis, US stocks fell by more than 50%.
Equity markets in some other countries fell significantly more: Iceland’s, for example, plummeted by over 90%.
No wonder that once the recent market drop hit 20%, many people wondered how much worse it could get – and whether fears of a new recession could become a self-fulfilling prophecy.
The idea is that investors become so worried about a recession, and that stocks drop so far, that bearish sentiment feeds back into the real economy through much lower spending, bringing on the feared downturn.
They might be right, even if the markets overrate their own influence on the real economy.
On the other hand, the fact that the US has managed to move forward despite global headwinds suggests that domestic demand is robust.
But this doesn’t seem to impress markets.
Even those investors who remain cautiously optimistic about the US economy worry that the US Federal Reserve will view growth as a reason to continue raising interest rates, creating huge problems for emerging economies.
There are other explanations for volatility besides fear, of course.
The simplest is that things really are that bad.
Maybe the individual risks aren’t of the same order of magnitude as in the 1950s, but there are more of them, and markets are starting from a much more inflated position.
Moreover, financial globalization has profoundly deepened interlinkages, magnifying the transmission of shocks.
There are large pockets of fragility and weakness in world debt markets, with current monetary easing covering up deep-rooted problems beneath the surface.
Some have pointed to a lack of liquidity in leading markets as driving the massive price fluctuations; in a thin market, a small change in demand or supply can sometimes require a big shift in prices to restore equilibrium.
The most convincing explanation, though, is still that markets are afraid that when external risks do emerge, politicians and policymakers will be ineffective in confronting them.
Of all the weaknesses revealed by the financial crisis, policy paralysis has been the most profound.
Some say that governments did not do enough to stoke demand.
Although that is true, it is not the whole story.
The biggest problem burdening the world today is most countries’ abject failure to implement structural reforms.
With productivity growth at least temporarily stuck in low gear, and global population in long-term decline, the supply side, not lack of demand, is the real constraint in advanced economies.
In the long run, it is supply factors that determine a country’s growth.
And if countries cannot manage deep structural reform after a crisis, it is hard to see how it will happen.
Running the government like a reality TV show, with one eye always on the ratings, is not going to do the job.
Fear of Finance
Common opinion suggests that this state of affairs is unjust.
As Franklin D. Roosevelt put it, we must cast down the “money changers” from their “high seats in the temple of our civilization.”
We must “restore the ancient truths” that growing, making, managing, and inventing things should have higher status, more honor, and greater rewards than whatever it is that financiers do.
Of course, there is a lot to fear in modern global finance.
Its scale is staggering: more than $4 trillion of mergers and acquisitions this year, with tradable and (theoretically) liquid financial assets reaching perhaps $160 trillion by the end of this year, all in a world where annual global GDP is perhaps $50 trillion.
Consider the $4 trillion of mergers and acquisitions this year, as companies acquire and spin off branches and divisions in the hope of gaining synergies or market power or better management.
Owners who sell these assets will gain roughly $800 billion relative to the pre-merger value of their assets.
The shareholders of the companies that buy will lose roughly $300 billion in market value, as markets interpret the acquisition as a signal that managers are exuberant and uncontrolled empire-builders rather than flinty-eyed trustees maximizing payouts to investors.
This $300 billion is a tax that shareholders of growing companies think is worth paying (or perhaps cannot find a way to avoid paying) for energetic corporate executives.
Where does the net gain of roughly $500 billion in global market value come from?
We don’t know.
Some of it is a destructive transfer from consumers to shareholders as corporations gain more monopoly power, some of it is an improvement in efficiency from better management and more appropriately scaled operations, and some of it is overpayment by those who become irrationally exuberant when companies get their names in the news.
If each of these factors accounts for one-third of the net gain, several conclusions follow.
First, once we look outside transfers within the financial sector, the total global effects of this chunk of finance is a gain of perhaps $340 billion in increased real shareholder value from higher expected future profits.
A loss of $170 billion can be attributed to future real wages, for households will find themselves paying higher margins to companies with more market power.
The net gain is thus $170 billion of added social value in 2007, which is 0.3% of world GDP, equal to the average product of seven million workers.
In one sense, we should be grateful for our hard-working M&amp;A technicians, well-paid as they are: it is important that businesses with lousy managements or that operate inefficiently be under pressure from those who may do better, and can raise the money to attempt to do so.
We cannot rely on shareholder democracy as our only system of corporate control.
The second conclusion is that the gross gains – fees, trading profits, and capital gains to the winners (perhaps $800 billion from this year’s M&amp;A’s) – greatly exceed the perhaps $170 billion in net gains.
Governments have a very important educational, admonitory, and regulatory role to play: people should know the risks and probabilities, for they may wind up among losers of the other $630 billion.
So far there is little sign that they do.
Finally, finance has long had an interest in stable monopolies and oligopolies with high profit margins, while the public has an interest in competitive markets with low margins.
The more skeptical you are of the ability of government-run antitrust policy to offset the monopoly power-increasing effects of M&amp;A’s, the more you should seek other sources of countervailing power – which means progressive income taxation – to offset any upward leap in income inequality.
Eighteenth-century physiocrats believed that only the farmer was productive, and that everyone else was somehow cheating the farmers out of their fair share.
Twentieth-century Marxists thought the same thing about factory workers.
Both were wrong.
Let us regulate our financial markets so that outsiders who invest are not sheared.
But let us not make the mistake of fearing finance too much.
Eurozone Budgets Under the Spotlight
DUBLIN – Bond markets are notoriously fickle, often driven by sentiment rather than rigorous macroeconomic analysis, and, as the 2008 global financial crisis demonstrated, they are far from infallible.
They can also be particularly unreliable when assessing an economy’s long-term prospects.
Though interest rates across the European Union are at historic lows, government debt in the eurozone could come under severe pressure should bond markets re-evaluate the riskiness of sovereign borrowers.
That is a consideration that should weigh heavily on indebted governments as they submit their budgets for scrutiny to the European Commission.
It is not just bond traders who can be swayed by irrational exuberance (or its opposite).
The verdicts of rating agencies on asset quality can also be flawed.
Too often, the raters seem content to follow rather than lead sentiment.
Like the proverbial bus driver fixated on what is happening in his rear view mirror rather than watching what is in front of him, too many bond analysts focus on historical economic data as the key determinant of future performance.
It is against this background that the budget plans submitted by eurozone governments on October 15 will have to be assessed.
This requirement of the eurozone’s Stability and Growth Pact, specified by Article 126 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, applies to member states that fail to meet their commitments to bring their budget deficits below 3% of GDP.
The main source of concern is that the low interest rates at which most European governments can currently borrow are not likely to last.
There are two reasons for this.
First, sovereign bonds held by banks are treated as risk-free assets under EU rules for calculating banks’ solvency and capital-adequacy levels.
This is a risky assumption, because it implies that no European government will ever fail to repay the bond in full, with all interest due, and on time.
But the debt levels of some European countries relative to their income raise serious questions about whether their bonds really are risk-free.
And, assuming that there is no surge in inflation or economic growth, the danger of default cannot be so easily dismissed.
Second, with low interest rates causing vast sums of money to chase so few opportunities for decent yields, it is understandable that investors have turned to government bonds, thereby driving down yields still further.
But this situation cannot last forever; if the flow of funds slows, or alternative, higher-yielding assets become available, demand for government bonds could drop markedly.
At that point, interest rates on sovereign debt would have to rise to sustain governments’ borrowing levels.
This is not a far-fetched scenario, and its realization would play havoc with the budgets of many indebted eurozone member states.
Therefore, in assessing member states’ draft budgets, governments and the Commission would be foolish to assume that low interest rates on government bonds will be around for the foreseeable future.
If investors do decide that government bond yields are no longer worth the investment, sovereign borrowers’ options may be limited.
They might be able to defy the European Commission, but they would be hard-pressed to resist the views of the bond markets.
After all, the world’s financial centers are not only susceptible to bouts of irrationality; they are also less likely to be swayed by the sort of political rhetoric that might find some sympathy within the Commission or among ministerial colleagues in the EU Council.
Moreover, the market’s change of heart can occur very quickly and without warning, giving governments little if any time to make the necessary fiscal adjustments.
But that is less likely to happen if the EU system for coordinating the 18 eurozone members’ budget policies (the so-called Two Pack and Six Pack) is seen to be respected – especially by the larger countries, such as France and Italy.
On the other hand, if the system is defied, or reinterpreted in a way that alters its intended meaning, bond markets could once again become nervous.
Ireland knows better than most countries the difficulties that can arise from having to borrow to fund services or repay maturing debts.
Federalisme dan Perlawanan Progresif di Amerika
BERKELEY – 2016 adalah tahun dimana populisme naik daun di Amerika Serikat, Inggris, dan banyak negara maju lainnya.
Dengan adanya stagnasi pendapatan, melemahnya peluang ekonomi, dan adanya pendapat bahwa tidak ada kemajuan yang terjadi menyebabkan banyak orang yang merasa tidak puas, dan munculnya kandidat yang memperoleh dukungan karena berjanji untuk mengembalikan kekuasaan kepada “masyarakat” dan mengubah sistem politik yang “dikuasai” oleh para elit demi keuntungan “elit” yang korup.
Semakin banyaknya keragaman etnis, ketegangan antar ras, dan perubahan norma sosial, menambah gejolak yang terjadi pada pemilihan umum di Amerika Serikat.     
Di Amerika Serikat, menipisnya kepercayaan kepada pemerintah federal mencapai puncaknya saat Donald Trump memenangi pemilihan umum pada bulan November: walaupun Presiden Barack Obama mendapatkan tingkat persetujuan publik yang tinggi, hanya 19% masyarakat Amerika yang percaya bahwa pemerintah federal akan mengambil kebijakan yang memihak masyarakat.
Melihat prioritas partai Republik, yang tercermin dalam pemilihan kabinet Presiden terpilih Trump, program pemerintah federal (dengan pengecualian pada program militer) kemungkinan akan dipangkas.
Namun ironisnya, pemotongan anggaran untuk kesehatan, pendidikan, pelatihan dan lingkungan hidup, ditambah dengan penurunan pajak pribadi dan bisnis yang signifikan, akan lebih memperkaya kelompok “elit” dan pada saat yang sama melemahkan program yang memberikan manfaat bagi sebagian besar masyarakat.       
Namun tantangan besar dari segi sosial dan ekonomi yang ditangani oleh program federal ini tidak akan hilang.
Tanggung jawab untuk menghadapi tantangan ini akan lebih banyak jatuh ke pemerintah negara bagian dan pemerintah lokal, yang harus menghadapinya dengan cara yang inovatif.
Memang betul bahwa jawaban dari Trumpism adalah “federalism progresif”: usaha untuk mencapai tujuan kebijakan progresif dengan menggunakan banyaknya kewenangan yang dilimpahkan kepada pemerintahan subnasional di sistem federal Amerika Serikat.  
Jajak pendapat tahunan yang dilakukan Gallup menunjukkan bahwa mayoritas Masyarakat Amerika mempercayai pemerintah negara bagian (62%) dan pemerintah lokal (71%) mereka untuk menangani permasalahan yang ada.
Penelitian PEW pada tahun 2014 menunjukkan bahwa hanya 25% responden yang merasa puas dengan arah kebijakan nasional, sementara 60% merasa puas dengan pemerintahan di komunitas mereka.
Dan Undang-Undang Amerika Serikat memungkinkan masing-masing negara bagian untuk berfungsi sebagai apa yang disebut Hakim Brandeis sebagai laboratorium demokrasi dengan melakukan eksperimen menggunakan kebijakan inovatif tanpa membahayakan seluruh negara.
Terdapat sejarah panjang dari keberhasilan eksperimen ini.
Pemerintah negara bagian dan lokal adalah pionir dalam menyusun sistem pendidikan dasar dan menengah, serta perguruan tinggi negara dan universitas.
Kalifornia, Wyoming, dan negara bagian lainnya memperbolehkan perempuan untuk ikut memilih dalam pemilu – sebuah contoh yang mendorong dilakukannya Amandemen ke Sembilan belas (yang memberikan hak pilih kepada semua perempuan dewasa).
Program untuk membantu masyarakat mendapat pekerjaan di Michigan dan Wisonsin adalah model untuk reformasi program kesejahteraan pemerintah federal pada masa Presiden Bill Clinton, dan Obamacare dibuat berdasarkan sistem kesehatan di Massachusetts, yang dilakukan pada masa Gubernur dari Partai Republik Mitt Romney.     
Hal yang sama juga terjadi pada tahun 2000 hingga 2014, dimana berbagai kebijakan energi diberlakukan – dari kebijakan perubahan iklim yang umum menjadi standar energi terbarukan – 33 negara bagian menurunkan emisi karbon dioksida dan pada saat yang sama meningkatkan perekonomian mereka.
Baru-baru ini, beberapa negara bagian telah memberlakukan sistem cap and trade untuk menentukan harga karbon, dan banyak negara bagian yang sudah berada dalam jalur yang tepat untuk mencapai target Rencana Energi Bersih Presiden Obama.
Setengah dari keseluruhan jumlah negara bagian kini telah memperbolehkan penggunaan beberapa bentuk mariyuana, dan delapan negara bagian memperbolehkan seluruh penggunaannya.
Tiga negara bagian telah memberlakukan peraturan untuk cuti keluarga berbayar, dan negara keempat sedang dalam proses melakukan hal tersebut.
Sembilan belas negara bagian memulai tahun 2017 dengan meningkatkan standar gaji minimum.         
Dan masih banyak contoh lainnya.
Contoh sukses dari federalism progresif terlihat di banyak bidang, termasuk kesehatan, reformasi penjara, pendidikan tinggi dan pelatihan kerja, kewirausahaan, perlindungan dan imbalan untuk pekerja yang terdapat di kontrak jangka pendek dan kontrak berbasis hasil yang dilakukan pemerintah.
Kerjasama, kolaborasi, dan kompromi – antara sektor swasta dan pemerintah, organisasi profit dan non-profit, Partai Republik dan Demokrat – adalah elemen penting yang terdapat dalam seluruh contoh sukses ini.
Hal ini juga menunjukkan berbagai contoh kebijakan inovatif dan kerjasama sipil di tingkat lokal seperti yang dijelaskan oleh James Fallows di artikel terbarunya dan buku yang akan diluncurkan.         
Untuk mendukung inovasi kebijakan di tingkat negara bagian dan pemerintahan lokal, pemerintah federal sering mengambil peran sebagai ventura kapitalis, yang memberikan target terukur dan insentif, dibanding mendiktekan solusi.
Presiden Obama melakukan pendekatan ini melalui kompetisi di seluruh negara bagian seperti yang diselenggarakan oleh Kementrian Pendidikan dengan program Menuju Puncak, dan melalui “hibah inovasi sosial” dari pemerintah federal untuk mendukung pemerintah negara bagian dan pemerintah lokal, dan melalui perluasan program Medicaid.
Wakil Presiden terpilih Mike Pence bangga dengan perluasan program Medicaid pada saat beliau menjabat sebagai Gubernur Indiana – namun, sejak bulan Oktober 2016, 19 negara bagian, yang kebanyakan berada di bagian Selatan dan Barat Tengah Amerika Amerika Serikat, memilih untuk tidak ikut serta dalam perluasan Medicaid, sehingga mengakibatkan 2.5 juta orang dengan penghasilan rendah tidak memiliki asuransi kesehatan.     
Dengan status sebagai ekonomi terbesar ke-enam di dunia, jumlah populasi yang hampir mencapai 40 juta orang yang merupakan generasi mendatang Amerika Serikat, dan pemerintah yang solid dan demokratis, Kalifornia adalah contoh dari apa yang bisa dicapai oleh federalisme progresif.
Negara bagian ini memimpin upaya untuk memperluas, diantaranya, hak-hak perempuan, pekerja di pertanian, imigran, dan kaum minoritas seksual.
Selain itu, mereka juga menjadi bagian terdepan dalam perlindungan lingkungan dan upaya untuk mengatasi perubahan iklim – dengan cara menetapkan standar yang tinggi dalam konsumsi energi dan emisi kendaraan bermotor (yang dijadikan undang-undang federal pada tahun 2016), hingga menjadi perintis sistem penetapan harga emisi.
Gubernur Jerry Brown baru-baru ini berjanji bahwa jika Trump memotong anggaran dari pemerintah federal untuk satelit yang diperlukan untuk mengumpulkan data perubahan iklim, maka Kalifornia akan “meluncurkan satelitnya sendiri”.   
Kalifornia juga bisa menjadi pemimpin perlawanan progresif atau “federalisme tidak kooperatif” dengan menolak melakukan kebijakan federal yang ditentang negara bagian tersebut.
Banyak kota-kota di Kalifornia dan negara bagian itu sendiri yang bertindak sebagai “wilayah suaka” yang melindungi imigran gelap dari deportasi dengan cara membatasi kerjasama dengan pemerintah federal.
Berdasarkan hukum, pelaksanaan kebijakan imigrasi adalah tanggung jawab pemerintah federal; namun dalam prakteknya, pemerintah federal tidak mempunyai sumber daya yang cukup.
Kenaikan belanja negara dan pengurangan jumlah personil yang dijanjikan oleh Trump akan memperparah kurangnya sumber daya yang ada, sehingga memaksa pemerintah federal untuk lebih bergantung pada pemerintah negara bagian dan pemerintah lokal untuk melaksanakan kebijkan imigrasi.
Untuk mengisyaratkan ketidaksetujuan mereka, badan legislatif Kalifornia memperkenalkan sebagai pertimbangan undang-undang baru mengenai pembiayaan layanan hukum bagi imigran untuk melawan proses deportasi dan melarang penggunaan sumber daya pemerintah negara bagian dan pemerintahan lokal untuk pelaksanaan kebijakan imigrasi dengan alasan melanggar konstitusi.      
Trump telah mengancam untuk memotong anggaran federal ke wilayah suaka.
Namun taktik tersebut akan menjadi lebih sulit untuk dilakukan karena adanya keputusan Mahkamah Agung yang membatasi penggunaan persyaratan pembiayaan sebagai alat pemerintah federal untuk memaksa pejabat negara untuk melaksanakan kebijakan federal.
Kita mungkin akan mengingat tahun 2016 sebagai tahun dimana populisme kembali berkuasa di Amerika Serikat.
Tapi tahun ini juga bisa diingat sebagai awal dari era federalisme dan perlawanan progresif, yang diperjuangkan oleh pemerintah negara bagian dan pemerintah lokal yang mendapat kepercayaan dari masyarakat mereka untuk memperbaiki kehidupan dan komunitas mereka.             
Uncertainty at the Fed
BERKELEY – The US Federal Reserve is increasingly at risk of losing credibility – and for good reason.
As Narayana Kocherlakota, former President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, recently argued, Fed officials seem be balancing their stated aim of keeping inflation near 2% over the long term with a host of other, inexplicit, considerations.
In public statements, officials have given some hints as to what these other considerations may be.
They seem to include the risk of distortion in the financial system, worries that unemployment may fall to unsustainable lows, and concerns that raising interest rates too quickly will disrupt economic recovery.
A lack of clarity about the Fed’s economic objectives is just one factor obscuring understanding of its decision-making.
The heart of the trouble consists in the fact that neither financial-market participants nor, it seems, the Fed itself know the true state of the economy or how best to model it – especially in the wake of the 2008 financial crisis.
And it remains unclear how the Fed is using new data to update its analysis.
The confusion about which factors – besides price stability and maximum feasible employment – the Fed takes into consideration in setting monetary policy aggravates the problem.
It has become nearly impossible to predict how the Fed will respond to events.
In an environment of economic volatility like the one in which we find ourselves today, a prudent central bank should do everything it can to raise expected and actual inflation, in order to gain the ability to stabilize the economy in any direction.
If interest rates were well above zero, the Fed would have scope to raise them further in case of overheating or to lower them in response to adverse demand shocks.
But the Fed is not pushing for inflation at or above its target.
Instead, by tightening policy, it is narrowing its room for maneuver – and is champing at the bit to narrow it even more.
Nor did it perform better on other measures.
The Fed predicted an annual inflation rate, based on the personal consumption expenditures index, of 1.9% for 2015.
The true number was 1.5%.
Similarly, its average projection of the federal funds rate for 2015 was 1.5%.
The figure is currently 0.25%.
This three-year period, starting in 2013, in which the economy undershot the Fed’s expectations, follows a three-year period in which the economy likewise fell short of the Fed’s forecast.
And that period followed a three-year period, starting in 2007, in which the Fed massively understated downside deflationary risks.
One would think that such a track record would have prompted officials to revise their model of the economy.
But the Fed continues to neglect asymmetry, considering it only a second- or third-order phenomenon.
It continues to gear inflation expectations at unrealistically high levels based on past inflation.
And it continues to rely on the unemployment rate as a stand-in for the state of the labor market, at the expense of other indicators.
The Fed has also been consistently more optimistic than market expectations about the available headroom for raising interest rates.
This had led observers to conclude that Fed officials have not just been unlucky; they have an incorrect understanding of the economy.
Indeed, the failure of officials to convey how their inability to make accurate predictions has prompted them to update their model is leading many to lose confidence in the Fed’s capacity for sound decision-making.
If the Fed is to maintain the confidence of markets, it will need not only to communicate its key objectives; it will also have to make clear which considerations have priority and how officials will respond if policy prescriptions required to meet various objectives conflict with one another.
Finally – and most important – the Fed will have to provide reassurance that it is keeping its internal model of the economy up to date.
Would Higher Interest Rates Boost US Growth?
BERKELEY – Blackstone CEO Tony James recently published a column in the Financial Times titled “To revive America’s economy, raise interest rates.”
This is a very bad idea.
Let us imagine that we have been transported to a parallel universe, one where the US Federal Reserve has not held interest rates at or near zero.
Instead, this Fed has gradually raised interest rates for the past six years, and the federal funds rate is now 400 basis points higher than it currently is.
Before looking at what this alternate-universe economy would look like, let us review what has happened in the real world.
In the fourth quarter of 2015, households, businesses, and foreign investors saved $940 billion in the United States.
Of that amount, $185 billion was invested in newly issued government bonds, and the other $755 billion flowed into interest- and dividend-paying savings vehicles such as loans, corporate bonds, and new equity issues, which in turn added to the US private sector’s productive-capital stock.
In our hypothetical scenario, $755 billion in new savings vehicles would not have been created in the fourth quarter of 2015 to fund investment.
With higher interest rates, that $755 billion could still have been as high as $735 billion, or it could have dropped to as low as $700 billion.
In any case, we know that it would have been lower, and that the liquidity balances that support spending would have been deprived of $20-55 billion.
Perhaps James only talks to firms that do not rationalize their investment plans when interest rates rise; but many firms certainly do.
For example, interest rates play a major role in the construction business, especially on the coasts, where real-estate values are especially sensitive to financing costs and available cash flows.
Increased financing costs and reduced liquidity can also dampen consumer-goods purchases and prevent small businesses from expanding.
The Fed could respond by adding to the economy’s cash stock, but then interest rates would fall, and we would be exactly where we are now.
On the other hand, if the Fed maintained the higher federal funds rate, financial flows would be diverted away from productive investment and into idle cash balances, spending would decrease, and the economy would enter a new recession.
At this point, James would object that this is not what he wanted at all.
He would have expected the confidence fairy to show up and spur production and demand across all economic sectors, so that businesses still would have created $755 billion in new savings vehicles, aside from government bonds, in the fourth quarter of 2015.
With the confidence fairy’s arrival, everything would indeed be fine: the economy would be stable and close to full employment, interest rates would be higher, and the negative effects of abnormally low interest rates that James lists would all disappear.
According to James, these effects include “companies substituting capital for labor to an unnatural degree”; economic hardship for “the elderly and others who depend on income-producing investments”; higher retirement-savings requirements; “systemic risks” in the financial system as investors buy “esoteric assets” to “grasp for higher returns”; and lower bank profitability from lending.
But these problems would not be averted by the Fed independently raising interest rates.
Rather, businesses must create savings vehicles and make investments, to which the Fed can then respond by allowing interest rates to rise, in order to head off excess demand and high inflation.
The Federal Open Market Committee cannot dictate this process from the Eccles Building in Washington, DC.
But the Fed has now tried to induce the creation of more savings vehicles, in part through $3 trillion in purchases of long-term securities.
The Fed has removed an annual $30 billion in duration risk from private-sector balance sheets – which bond issuers previously had to pay savers to bear – and that freed-up risk-bearing capacity has presumably been used to fund risky investment projects.
But surely James would agree that financial organizations that assess and bear duration risk are not necessarily competent to judge other risky ventures.
If we want more savings vehicles to push up interest rates in loanable-funds markets, so that the Fed can then increase the federal funds rate, there is an obvious solution: the government itself should create savings vehicles.
For example, a government-sponsored infrastructure bank could start borrowing $100 billion every quarter to finance infrastructure projects.
With that, concerns about abnormally low interest rates would be a thing of the past.
In the meantime, the Fed should certainly not take the lead in raising interest rates when there is no evidence of excess supply in savings vehicles.
To do so would be akin to building a half-mile landing strip in the Pacific Ocean in 1944, and thinking that cargo-bearing B-17s would suddenly start to land.
The Fed Under Fire
CAMBRIDGE – The Federal Reserve is under attack.
Bills subjecting the United States' central bank to “auditing" by the Government Accountability Office are likely to be passed by both houses of Congress.
Legislation that would tie how the Fed sets interest rates to a predetermined formula is also being considered.
Anyone unaware of the incoming fire only had to listen to the grilling Fed Chair Janet Yellen received recently on Capitol Hill.
Members of Congress criticized Yellen for meeting privately with the president and treasury secretary, and denounced her for weighing in on issues tangential to monetary policy.
Still others, like Richard Fisher, the outgoing president of the Dallas Fed, have inveighed against the special role of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
Reflecting the New York Fed's heavy regulatory responsibilities, owing to its proximity to the seat of finance, its president has a permanent seat on the Federal Open Market Committee, the body that sets the Fed's benchmark interest rate.
This, its detractors warn, privileges Wall Street in the operation of the Federal Reserve System.
Finally, some object that bankers dominate the boards of directors of the regional Reserve Banks, making it seem that the foxes are guarding the henhouse.
This criticism reflects the fact that the United States has just been through a major financial crisis, in the course of which the Fed took a series of extraordinary steps.
It helped bail out Bear Stearns, the government-backed mortgage lenders Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae, and the insurance giant AIG.
It extended dollar swap lines not just to the Bank of England and the European Central Bank but also to the central banks of Mexico, Brazil, Korea, and Singapore.
And it embarked on an unprecedented expansion of its balance sheet under the guise of quantitative easing.
These decisions were controversial, and their advisability has been questioned – as it should be in a democracy.
In turn, Fed officials have sought to justify their actions, which is also the way a democracy should function.
There is ample precedent for a Congressional response.
When the US last experienced a crisis of this magnitude, in the 1930s, the Federal Reserve System similarly came under Congressional scrutiny.
The result was the Glass-Steagall Act of 1932 and 1933, which gave the Fed more leeway in lending, and the Gold Reserve Act of 1934, which allowed it to disregard earlier gold-standard rules.
The Banking Act of 1935, as amended in 1942, then shifted power from the Reserve Banks to the Board in Washington, DC, and confirmed the special role of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
These reforms reflected an overwhelming consensus that the Fed had been derelict in fulfilling its duties.
It had failed to prevent the money supply from contracting in the early stages of the Great Depression.
Heedless of its responsibilities as an emergency lender, it had allowed the banking system to collapse.
When financial stability hung in the balance in 1933, the Reserve Banks' failure to cooperate prevented effective action.
Given such incompetence, it is not surprising that subsequent reforms were far-reaching.
But these reforms went in precisely the opposite direction from today's proposed changes: fewer limits on policy makers' discretion, more power to the Board, and a larger role for the New York Fed, all to enable the Federal Reserve System to react more quickly and robustly in a crisis.
It is far from clear, in other words, that the right response to the latest crisis is an abrupt about-face.
Ultimately, whether significant changes are warranted should depend on whether the central bank's interventions in fact aggravated the recent crisis, as they aggravated the crisis of the 1930s.
But the Fed's critics have been curiously nonspecific about what they regard as the Fed's mistakes.
And where they have been specific, as with the accusation that the Fed was fomenting inflation, they have been entirely wrong.
Fed officials, for their part, must better justify their actions.
While they would prefer not to re-litigate endlessly the events of 2008, continued criticism suggests that their decisions are still not well understood and that officials must do more to explain them.
In addition, Fed officials should avoid weighing in on issues that are only obliquely related to monetary policy.
Their mandate is to maintain price and financial stability, as well as maximum employment.
The more intently Fed governors focus on their core responsibilities, the more inclined politicians will be to respect their independence.
Finally, Fed officials should acknowledge that at least some of the critics' suggestions have merit.
For example, eliminating commercial banks' right to select a majority of each Reserve Bank's board would be a useful step in the direction of greater openness and diversity.
The Federal Reserve System has always been a work in progress.
What the US needs now is progress in the right direction.
The Great Policy Divergence
WASHINGTON, DC – Over the next few weeks, the US Federal Reserve and the European Central Bank are likely to put in place notably different policies.
The Fed is set to raise interest rates for the first time in almost ten years.
Meanwhile, the ECB is expected to introduce additional unconventional measures to drive rates in the opposite direction, even if that means putting further downward pressure on some government bonds that are already trading at negative nominal yields.
In implementing these policies, both central banks are pursuing domestic objectives mandated by their governing legislation.
The problem is that there may be few, if any, orderly mechanisms to manage the international repercussions of this growing divergence.
The Fed is responding to continued indications of robust job creation in the United States and other signs that the country’s economy is recovering, albeit moderately so.
Also conscious of the risk to financial stability if interest rates remain at artificially low levels, the Fed is expected to increase them when its policy-setting Federal Open Market Committee meets on December 15-16. The move marks a turning point in the Fed’s approach to the economy.
In deciding to raise interest rates, it will be doing more than simply lifting its foot from the financial-stimulus accelerator; it will also be taking a notable step toward the multiyear normalization of its overall policy stance.
In the meantime, the ECB is facing a very different set of economic conditions, including generally sluggish growth, the risk of deflation, and worries about the impact of the terrorist attacks in Paris on business and consumer confidence.
As a result, the bank’s decision-makers are giving serious consideration to pushing the discount rate further into negative territory and extending its large-scale asset-purchase program (otherwise known as quantitative easing).
In other words, the ECB is likely to expand and extend experimental measures that will press even harder on the financial-stimulus accelerator.
In a perfect world, policymakers would have assessed the potential for international spillovers from these divergent policies (including possible spillbacks on both sides of the Atlantic) and put in place a range of instruments to ensure a better alignment of domestic and global objectives.
Unfortunately, political polarization and general policy dysfunction in both the US and the European Union continue to inhibit such an effort.
As a result, lacking a more comprehensive policy response, the harmonization of their central banks’ divergent policies will be left to the markets – in particular, those for fixed-income assets and currencies.
Already, the interest-rate differential between “risk-free” bonds on both sides of the Atlantic – say, US Treasuries and German Bunds – has widened notably.
And, at the same time, the dollar has strengthened not only against the euro, but also against most other currencies.
Left unchecked, these trends are likely to persist.
If history is any guide, there are three major issues that warrant careful monitoring in the coming months.
First, the US is unlikely to stand by for long if its currency appreciates significantly and its international competitiveness deteriorates substantially.
Companies are already reporting earning pressures due to the rising dollar, and some are even asking their governments to play a more forceful role in countering a stealth “currency war.”
Second, because the dollar is used as a reserve currency, a rapid rise in its value could put pressure on those who have used it imprudently.
At particular risk are emerging-country companies that, having borrowed overwhelmingly in dollars but generating only limited dollar earnings, might have large currency mismatches in their assets and liabilities or their incomes and expenditures.
And, finally, sharp movements in interest rates and exchange rates can cause volatility in other markets, most notably for equities.
Because regulatory controls and market constraints have made brokers less able to play a countercyclical role by accumulating inventory on their balance sheets, the resulting price instability is likely to be large.
There is a risk that some portfolios will be forced into disordered unwinding.
Furthermore, the central banks’ policy of curtailing so-called “volatile volatility” is likely to be challenged.
Of course, none of these outcomes is preordained.
Politicians on both sides of the Atlantic have the ability to lower the risk of instability by implementing structural reforms, ensuring more balanced aggregate demand, removing pockets of excessive indebtedness, and smoothing out the mechanisms of multilateral and regional governance.
The three possible outcomes of all this include a relatively stable multi-speed world, notable disruptions that undermine the US’s economic recovery, and a European revival that benefits from US growth.
The good news is that the impact of the divergence will depend on how policymakers manage its pressures.
The bad news is that they have yet to find the political will to act decisively to minimize the risks.
As the Fed normalizes its monetary policy and the ECB doubles down on extraordinary measures, we certainly should hope for the best.
But we should also be planning for a substantial rise in financial and economic uncertainty.
Why the Fed Buried Monetarism
LONDON – The US Federal Reserve’s decision to delay an increase in interest rates should have come as no surprise to anyone who has been paying attention to Fed Chair Janet Yellen’s comments.
The Fed’s decision merely confirmed that it is not indifferent to international financial stress, and that its risk-management approach remains strongly biased in favor of “lower for longer.”
So why did the markets and media behave as if the Fed’s action (or, more precisely, inaction) was unexpected?
What really shocked the markets was not the Fed’s decision to maintain zero interest rates for a few more months, but the statement that accompanied it.
The Fed revealed that it was entirely unconcerned about the risks of higher inflation and was eager to push unemployment below what most economists regard as its “natural” rate of around 5%.
It is this relationship – between inflation and unemployment – that lies at the heart of all controversies about monetary policy and central banking.
And almost all modern economic models, including those used by the Fed, are based on the monetarist theory of interest rates pioneered by Milton Friedman in his 1967 presidential address to the American Economic Association.
Friedman’s theory asserted that inflation would automatically accelerate without limit once unemployment fell below a minimum safe level, which he described as the “natural” unemployment rate.
In Friedman’s original work, the natural unemployment rate was a purely theoretical conjecture, founded on an assumption described as “rational expectations,” even though it ran counter to any normal definition of rational behavior.
The theory’s publication at a time of worldwide alarm about double-digit inflation offered central bankers exactly the pretext they needed for desperately unpopular actions.
By dramatically increasing interest rates to fight inflation, policymakers broke the power of organized labor, while avoiding blame for the mass unemployment that monetary austerity was bound to produce.
A few years later, Friedman’s “natural” rate was replaced with the less value-laden and more erudite-sounding “non-accelerating inflation rate of unemployment” (NAIRU).
But the basic idea was always the same. If monetary policy is used to try to push unemployment below some pre-determined level, inflation will accelerate without limit and destroy jobs.
A monetary policy aiming for sub-NAIRU unemployment must therefore be avoided at all costs.
A more extreme version of the theory asserts that there is no lasting tradeoff between inflation and unemployment. All efforts to stimulate job creation or economic growth with easy money will merely boost price growth, offsetting any effect on unemployment.
Monetary policy must therefore focus solely on hitting inflation targets, and central bankers should be exonerated of any blame for unemployment.
The monetarist theory that justified narrowing central banks’ responsibilities to inflation targeting had very little empirical backing when Friedman proposed it.
Since then, it has been refuted both by political experience and statistical testing.
Monetary policy, far from being dissipated in rising prices, as the theory predicted, turned out to have a much greater impact on unemployment than on inflation, especially in the past 20 years.
But, despite empirical refutation, the ideological attractiveness of monetarism, supported by the supposed authority of “rational” expectations, proved overwhelming.
As a result, the purely inflation-oriented approach to monetary policy gained total dominance in both central banking and academic economics.
That brings us back to recent financial events.
Otherwise, either a disastrous inflationary blowout will inevitably follow, or the body of economic theory that has dominated a generation of policy and academic thinking since Friedman’s paper on “rational” expectations and “natural” unemployment will turn out to be completely wrong.
What, then, should we conclude from the Fed’s decision not to raise interest rates?
One possible conclusion is banal.
Because the NAIRU is a purely theoretical construct, the Fed’s economists can simply change their estimates of this magic number.
In fact, the Fed has already cut its NAIRU estimate three times in the past two years.
But there may be a deeper reason for the Fed’s forbearance.
To judge by Yellen’s recent speeches, the Fed may no longer believe in any version of the “natural” unemployment rate.
Friedman’s assumptions of ever-accelerating inflation and irrationally “rational” expectations that lead to single-minded targeting of price stability remain embedded in official economic models like some Biblical creation myth.
But the Fed, along with almost all other central banks, appears to have lost faith in that story.
Instead, central bankers now seem to be implicitly (and perhaps even unconsciously) returning to pre-monetarist views: tradeoffs between inflation and unemployment are real and can last for many years.
Monetary policy should gradually recalibrate the balance between these two economic indicators as the business cycle proceeds.
When inflation is low, the top priority should be to reduce unemployment to the lowest possible level; and there is no compelling reason for monetary policy to restrain job creation or GDP growth until excessive inflation becomes an imminent danger.
This does not imply permanent near-zero US interest rates.
The Fed will almost certainly start raising rates in December, but monetary tightening will be much slower than in previous economic cycles, and it will be motivated by concerns about financial stability, not inflation.
As a result, fears – bordering on panic in some emerging markets – about the impact of Fed tightening on global economic conditions will probably prove unjustified.
The bad news is that the vast majority of market analysts, still clinging to the old monetarist framework, will accuse the Fed of “falling behind the curve” by letting US unemployment decline too far and failing to anticipate the threat of rising inflation.
The Fed should simply ignore such atavistic protests, as it rightly did last week.
The Fed’s Risky New Mandate
LONDON – “In this world, there are only two tragedies,” Oscar Wilde once wrote. “One is not getting what one wants, and the other is getting it.”
As the US Federal Reserve inches closer to achieving its targets for the domestic economy, it faces growing pressure to normalize monetary policy.
But the domestic economy is no longer the Fed’s sole consideration in policymaking.
On the contrary, America’s monetary authority has all but explicitly recognized a new mandate: promoting global financial stability.
The US Congress created the Fed in 1913 as an independent agency removed from partisan politics, tasked with ensuring domestic price stability and maximizing domestic employment.
Its role has expanded over time, and the Fed, along with many of its developed-country counterparts, has engaged in increasingly unconventional monetary policy – quantitative easing, credit easing, forward guidance, and so on – since the 2008 global financial crisis.
Now, the unconventional has become conventional.
A generation of global market participants knows only a world of low (or even negative) interest rates and artificially inflated asset prices.
But the Fed’s dual mandate remains in force.
And while the Fed’s recent rhetoric has been dovish, the fundamentals of the US economy – particularly those that supposedly matter most for the Fed – indicate a clear case for further rate hikes.
Consider, first, the Fed’s employment mandate.
The unemployment rate is down to just 5%, job growth is strong and consistent, and jobless claims have been on a clear downward trajectory for several years.
At the same time, the cost drag on inflation is set to diminish as the oil price stabilizes, and the dollar’s recent softness implies further inflationary pressure.
But this domestic progress puts the Fed in a difficult position.
As a result, the Fed is effectively trapped between a US economy that increasingly justifies normalization of monetary policy and the interest of fragile global markets – in which about 60% of the world’s transactions are dollar-denominated – in further dovishness.
Messaging from financial markets increasingly influences the Fed’s decision-making.
Any suggestion that the Fed will hike faster or sooner than anticipated leads to fears of tighter financial conditions, and violent risk-off moves.
After a multi-year bull market in equities and fixed-income securities, stimulated by the very monetary policies the Fed is trying to leave behind, there is no valuation support to dampen the reaction.
In the absence of genuinely robust global growth, which is unlikely in the near term, financial markets are relying on extremely loose monetary policy to prop up prices.
The Fed’s rate decision in March, and Fed Chair Janet Yellen’s commentary, was a case in point.
The Fed apparently could not stomach the sell-off in global financial markets in January and February, which was driven largely by concerns about further tightening.
This is odd, because effects on consumption from changes in financial wealth (stocks and bonds) are small.
What matters far more are changes in house prices, which have not deteriorated.
Similarly, changes in the cost of capital, including the equity cost of capital, have a minor impact on business investment.
In other words, from the standpoint of its dual mandate, the Fed should not be terribly concerned about market volatility, even of the magnitude seen in January and February.
But every signal sent from Yellen and the Fed was that policymakers were very concerned about exactly this.
And the rally in markets that came after the Fed backpedaled on the pace of rate increases has only served to strengthen the feedback loop between the probability of US interest-rate hikes and global market volatility.
The loop has become calcified into a new mandate for the Fed, with other global policymakers becoming increasingly overt in referring to it.
China’s deputy finance minister recently praised Yellen for her communication and cautious approach, which “takes us into consideration.”
The implications of this are worrying.
If Yellen and the Fed feel beholden to financial markets, the risk of sharper rate hikes further down the road, as the Fed increasingly falls behind the inflation curve, will rise.
Beyond this, there are important longer-term considerations.
Given the low base, and the Fed’s obvious caution, nominal interest rates are unlikely to climb too far by the next US recession.
With a lack of traditional rate-cutting firepower, the next downturn could be longer than usual, compelling further reliance on unconventional monetary policy – even beyond the negative nominal interest rates now being pursued in Europe and Japan.
Indeed, Yellen’s predecessor, Ben Bernanke, recently addressed such possibilities, notably the potential for a permanent increase in the money supply (so-called helicopter money).
This could take a number of forms: quantitative easing combined with fiscal expansion (for example, higher infrastructure spending), direct cash transfers to the government, or, most radically, direct cash transfers to households.
Such extreme policies are still only theoretical, and implementing them would most likely spur heightened congressional scrutiny.
Nonetheless, the pressure to support global financial markets and other external economies suggests why the issue is being debated.
With the Fed deciding in their just-concluded April meeting, yet again, to hold rates, their dilemma is set only to intensify this year: normalize monetary policy in line with domestic fundamentals, or cede to the pressures of global financial markets.
The former is sure to usher in a highly volatile future; the latter would further entrench the Fed’s new mandate – one that undermines any semblance of central-bank independence.
The World’s Reluctant Central Banker
NEW YORK – This is supposed to be the era of powerful central banks, ready to wield their firepower worldwide.
Yet the most powerful of all central banks – the United States Federal Reserve – is also the most reluctant to acknowledge its global reach.
Like all central banks, the Fed has a local mandate, focused on domestic price stability and employment.
But, unlike most central banks, the Fed has global responsibilities.