The new Kazakh fuel bank is a significant step toward achieving a world free of nuclear weapons.
Those who have worked to establish it deserve the world’s gratitude.
Keeping Africa\u0027s Turnaround on Track
MONROVIA – For more than a decade, much of Africa has been moving forward.
Economic growth is rising, poverty is falling and democratic governance is spreading.
But the global financial crisis threatens to undo this progress by reducing investment, exports and aid just as they should be expanding to build on these successes.
While international attention has been understandably focused on events in Darfur, Somalia and Zimbabwe, countries across the continent including Ghana, Tanzania, Mozambique and Liberia have been quietly turning their economies around.
Economic growth rates regularly exceed 5% in many nations.  The key to this progress is stronger African leadership and more accountable governance.
Today, more than 20 African countries are democracies, up from just three in the 1980’s.
They have competitive elections and improved human rights, and a much freer media.
These efforts have been supported by increasingly effective development assistance.
Consider what has happened in my country, Liberia.
After 14 years of devastating war, we faced enormous challenges.
Our democratically elected government has worked with international partners and a growing number of private investors to turn things around.
In the past three years, we have doubled primary school enrollment nationwide, refurbished hundreds of health facilities, begun rebuilding roads and restoring electricity.
We have taken steps to root out corruption and remove unscrupulous officials.
Growth has exceeded several percent per year.
And, most critical, we are at peace.
We are restoring our once-vibrant nation, and the crucial component &#45;&#45; hope &#45;&#45; has already been revived.
Without international support, we would not have made this progress and would be at much greater risk of returning to war.
The global economic crisis threatens the progress in my country and elsewhere on our continent.
Declining remittances from overseas workers, shrinking trade flows and investment could undermine new businesses, throw thousands out of work, and increase tensions and instability.  The crisis &#45;&#45; which Africa did nothing to cause &#45;&#45; demands a strong response.
African nations must do their part by continuing to address corruption, eliminate red tape and reduce obstacles to private-sector growth.
But just as industrialized countries need a stimulus, African economies need a boost to keep their progress on track.
Both must continue to do their part.
Keep the IMF Out of Europe
BUENOS AIRES – A short-lived rumor recently suggested that the International Monetary Fund was putting together a €600 billion ($803 billion) package for Italy to buy its new government about 18 months to implement the necessary adjustment program.
Except for the magnitude of the package, this sounds no different from a standard IMF adjustment program – the kind that we are accustomed to seeing (and criticizing) in the developing world.
But there is one crucial difference: Italy is part of a select club that does not need outside rescue funds.
So far, programs for the eurozone periphery have been spearheaded and largely financed by European governments, with the IMF contributing financially, but mainly acting as an external consultant – the third party that tells the client the nasty bits while everyone else in the room stares at their shoes.
By contrast, the attempt to crowd multilateral resources into Europe was made explicit by eurozone finance ministers’ call in November for IMF resources to be boosted – preferably through debt-generating bilateral loans,– so that it could “cooperate more closely” with the European Financial Stability Facility.
That means that the short-lived story of Italy’s jumbo IMF package, which was to be funded largely by non-European money, can be regarded as a game changer: while Italy may never receive such a package, Europe, it seems, is determined to resolve its problems using other people’s money.
There are at least three reasons why the IMF should resist this pressure, and abstain from increasing its (already extremely high) exposure to Europe.
First, and most obviously, Europe already has its own in-house lender of last resort.
The European Central Bank can make available all the euros needed to backstop Italy’s debt.
And printing them would only offset, through mild inflation, the effects of the otherwise Draconian relative price adjustment that is taking place under the corset of the common currency.
So it is puzzling that some observers have saluted the IMF’s involvement as a virtuous effort by the international community to bring the listing European ship to port.
Why should the IMF (or, for that matter, the international community) do for Europe what Europe can but does not want to do for Italy?
Why should international money be mobilized to pay for European governance failures?
And if, as appears to be the case, Germany is playing a dangerous game of chicken with some of its eurozone partners, why should the cost be shifted to the IMF for the benefit of Europe’s largest and most successful economy?
Letting the ECB off the hook in this manner would simply validate for Europe as a whole the same moral hazard feared by German and other leaders who oppose ECB intervention.
The second reason to avoid IMF intervention in Europe is that lending to a potentially insolvent country has serious implications for the Fund.
For starters, taking the IMF’s preferred-creditor status at face value, an IMF loan would entail substituting its “non-defaultable” debt for “defaultable” debt with private bondholders, because the Fund’s money is used primarily to service outstanding bonds.
As a result, a group of lucky bondholders would be bailed out at the expense of those that became junior to IMF debt and remained highly exposed to a likely restructuring.
Since a “haircut” can be imposed only on whatever is left of the defaultable private debt, the larger the IMF share, the deeper the haircut needed to restore sustainability.
For the same reason, IMF loans can be a burdensome legacy from a market perspective.
Because they represent a massive senior claim, they may discourage new private lending for many years to come.
This brings us to the third reason why the IMF should stay out of Europe’s crisis: what if Fund seniority fails?
The implicit preferred-creditor status is based on central-bank practices that establish that the lender of last resort is the “last in and first out.”
It is this seniority that enables the IMF to limit the risk of default so that it can lend to countries at reasonable interest rates when nobody else will.
This works when the IMF’s share of a country’s debt is small, and the country has sufficient resources to service it.
But seniority is not written in stone: poor economies that are unable to repay even the IMF are eligible for debt reduction under the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries program, and 35 have received it since the program was established in 1996.
What would happen if, in five years, Italy were heavily indebted to the IMF?
What if private debt represented a share so small that no haircut would restore sustainability, forcing multilateral lenders to pitch in with some debt relief?
The IMF’s seniority is an unwritten principle, sustained in a delicate equilibrium, and high-volume lending is testing the limit.
From this perspective, the proposal to use the IMF as a conduit for ECB resources (thereby circumventing restrictions imposed by European Union’s treaties), while providing the ECB with preferred-creditor status, would exacerbate the Fund’s exposure to risky borrowers.
This arrangement could be seen as an unwarranted abuse of Fund seniority that, in addition, unfairly frees the ECB from the need to impose its own conditionality on one of its members.
It makes little sense for the international community to assume that unnecessary risk.
Let us hope that the IMF’s non-European stakeholders will be able to contain the pressure.
The solution for Europe is not IMF money, but its own.
Northern Europe’s Drag on the World Economy
MADRID – In recent years, China’s current-account surpluses – which have averaged almost $220 billion annually since 2000 – have attracted much criticism from the rest of the world.
But Germany’s similar-size surpluses – which have averaged about $170 billion since the euro’s introduction in 1999 – have, until recently, largely escaped scrutiny.
The difference, it was argued, was monetary union.
So long as the eurozone as a whole was relatively balanced, Germany’s surpluses were considered irrelevant – just as, say, Texas’s surpluses have never been considered an issue in the United States.
Chinese surpluses, by contrast, were seen as a cause of global imbalances.
This argument is correct in the sense that it is the current-account surplus or deficit of a monetary union as a whole that can be expected to have exchange-rate implications.
And, unlike China, Germany no longer has a “national” exchange rate that can adjust in response to its current-account surplus.
These factors – together with the lack of trade data for regions within countries – have led economists only rarely to consider countries’ internal surpluses or deficits.
But, in net terms, a region within a country – or, like Germany, a country or sub-region within a monetary union – still “subtracts” from national and global aggregate demand if it exports more than it imports.
Witness how expenditure cuts by US state governments – many of which are constitutionally required to balance their budgets – frustrated, to some degree, America’s massive federal-government stimulus in 2010-2011.
For this reason, it is relevant to ask whether a country as large as Germany – or even a large state like California or Texas – augments or depletes global aggregate demand.
(In fact, as sovereign countries, California and Texas would have been the world’s 12th and 14th largest economies, respectively, in 2012 – ahead of the Netherlands, Mexico, and South Korea.)
That question is all the more important, because the Netherlands and Austria, two of Germany’s Northern European eurozone neighbors, continue to run current-account surpluses, while the Southern European crisis countries have reversed their previously large deficits, as austerity has squeezed domestic demand and made room for an increase in exports.
As a result, the eurozone as a whole will produce a surplus close to $260 billion this year, which represents a new global imbalance that is more directly comparable to China’s in the past decade.
Europe’s non-eurozone surplus countries – Sweden, Denmark, Switzerland, and Norway (all of which tie their exchange rates to the euro to some degree) – magnify this global imbalance.
Northern Europe – including these four countries and Germany, the Netherlands, and Austria – is running a massive current-account surplus of about $550 billion.
Meanwhile, China’s surplus is unlikely to exceed $150 billion this year.
In fact, the highest level that China’s annual surplus has ever reached was around $400 billion in 2007-2008 – when the US was poised to introduce trade sanctions against the country, because it viewed this imbalance as a threat to the stability of the US and the world economy.
What is most problematic about the eurozone’s situation is that unemployment in some of the crisis countries – Spain and Greece – remains above 20%.
These countries are trying to achieve a difficult “internal devaluation” – that is, a reduction in their domestic unit labor costs relative to the eurozone’s stronger economies – while the overall eurozone surplus caused by Northern Europe puts upward pressure on the exchange rate, undermining their competitiveness outside the monetary union.
Spain and Greece have managed to achieve an internal devaluation of about 5% this year vis-à-vis Germany, but their competitiveness vis-à-vis the US and dollar-linked countries has not improved, because the euro has appreciated by more than 5% against the dollar.
And, indeed, the euro should appreciate, because the eurozone as a whole is now running a large current-account surplus.
One can only pity the Southern European countries.
They should almost thank the French for their inability to impose effective austerity measures and thereby still run a small current-account deficit, which has prevented the eurozone surplus from becoming even larger.
But an abundance of pity alone will not help.
Northern European countries, which have ample room to increase wages and implement expansionary policies, must do so.
This would directly benefit Northern European citizens themselves, while helping to keep the euro down and stimulate growth and adjustment in Southern Europe and the global economy as a whole.
A Great Breakdown?
ISTANBUL – This month –&nbsp;the centenary of the outbreak of World War I – is an opportune time to reflect on big risks.
As Michael Spence recently warned, the international order’s widening security deficit, reflecting the weakening of whatever global governance we have, is fast becoming the biggest risk facing the world economy.
The same point could have been made a century ago.
On July 30, 1914, Austrian warships bombarded Belgrade, five weeks after the assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand in Sarajevo.
By mid-August, the world was at war.
The armistice that was agreed four years later, after about 20 million people had died, amounted only to an interlude before the horror of World War II.
In the years preceding August 1914, until the assassination of the archduke, the global economy performed relatively well: trade expanded worldwide, financial markets seemed healthy, and the business community shrugged off political problems as either temporary or irrelevant.
It was a political breakdown that led to three terrible decades for the world economy.
Markets and economic activity can withstand a great deal of political stress and uncertainty –&nbsp;up to the point that the international order breaks down.
Today, for example, the economic mood is rather upbeat.
The International Monetary Fund forecasts 4% growth for the world economy in 2015, while stock-market indices are up in many parts of the world; indeed, the Dow Jones reached an all-time high in July.
In the last few months, however, a civilian airliner was downed in eastern Ukraine by a sophisticated Russian-made missile, tensions have increased around disputed islands in the South and East China Seas, and chaos in the Middle East has continued to spread.
The Israeli-Palestinian conflict is in one of its worst phases in decades, with the renewed frustration unleashed by the massive loss of civilian life in Gaza likely to encourage extreme reactions.
Terrorists may be on the verge of designing much less detectable weapons.
There are other, less “political” dangers.
West Africa is afflicted by a terrible outbreak of the deadly Ebola virus, which will kill thousands of people.
The outbreak has so far remained regional, but it serves as a reminder that in an age of air travel by millions, no one is safe from the spread of infectious disease.
Containing a disease or a terrorist threat by curtailing international travel or transport would devastate the world economy.
Thinking about August 1914 should remind us that great catastrophes can materialize gradually.
Leaders can be “sleepwalkers” who fail to manage risk by, say, establishing institutions that can channel the rival interests and claims that fuel international conflict.
Such sleepwalking by policymakers caused the financial meltdown of 2008 as well.
Its consequences were not as deadly, though the political effects of mass unemployment and the heightened perception of economic insecurity are still with us.
These examples should spur the world to find ways forward for cooperative action.
But the opposite appears to be happening.
The United Nations seems more paralyzed than ever.
The US Congress still has not approved the IMF reform package agreed in 2010, weakening one of the most important international institutions.
Partly because the United States makes capital increases and governance reforms in global financial institutions so difficult, the BRICS countries (Brazil, Russia, India, China, and South Africa) have launched their own development bank, to be based in Shanghai.
Likewise, instead of providing a shining example of supranational cooperation and pooled sovereignty for the twenty-first century, the European Union remains mired in rather petty disputes.
While it still cannot fully agree on the design of its banking union, it is allowing Prime Minister Viktor Orbán of Hungary, a member country, to denigrate the democratic and liberal values upon which the EU rests.
The way forward cannot be a return to the past, with its clashing nation-states.
The future can be secured only by strong cooperation among all those committed to liberal democracy and the rule of law, with no double standards or excuses, and by patient strengthening of international institutions that embody these values and can translate them into practice.
Whenever a global or regional power acts in a way that contradicts these values, or allies itself closely with those who do, it undermines the international order, which should deliver security and increasing prosperity (and to some degree has).
The global economy holds great promise, but it is a promise that can be realized only in an international system based on rules, consent, respect, and a shared sense of justice.
The fact that neither the mayhem in the Middle East nor the crisis in Ukraine seem to touch financial markets should not lull us into complacency.
The memory of August 1914 should remind us how the world stumbled into catastrophe.
As we know – or should know – from the example of climate change, big risks must be managed, even if the probability of worse-case outcomes is low.
Catching Up at Different Speeds
PARIS – With weak demand in advanced countries now impeding growth in emerging economies, including major players in Asia and Latin America, many are arguing that the era of income convergence has come to an end.
Nothing could be further from the truth.
As I have argued before, convergence of emerging countries’ real average incomes, in the aggregate, with advanced countries’ incomes is likely to continue into the 2020’s.
That process started in the late 1980’s, and continued unabated, except in the years around the Asian financial crisis in 1997-1998.
The pace of convergence accelerated further during, and just after, the global financial crisis of 2008-2009: the aggregate average differential in per capita income growth increased to more than four percentage points in the 2008-2012 period, from a little more than two percentage points in the two decades before.
As the advanced economies recover, however weakly, the growth differential is likely to narrow again, perhaps to about two percentage points, which still implies steady convergence at a decent pace.
In that sense, it is not “the end of the party” for emerging markets, as some claimed early last summer, when US Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke’s suggestion of a possible “taper” of the Fed’s policy of quantitative easing triggered a “mini-crisis” in several of the more vulnerable emerging markets.
These economies have since recovered a significant part of the lost ground in terms of exchange rates and asset prices.
A major part of the economic-convergence process that has been taking place since the late 1980’s has been due to “catch-up” growth.
The emerging markets developed the institutions and the skills base needed to import and adapt technology, which is easier than generating new technology from scratch.
The pace of catch-up growth declines only gradually over time, as the less advanced economies slowly move closer to the technological frontier.
The catch-up process also takes place within countries, as labor moves from low-productivity rural activities to higher-productivity urban activities, and as low-productivity firms in all sectors emulate their more advanced domestic counterparts.
Moreover, the transfer and diffusion of technology has been facilitated greatly over the last few decades by increased foreign direct investment, the information revolution, which has facilitated access to knowledge, increased trade, and the globalization of financial markets.
These factors apply to emerging countries generally.
Why, then, do Latin American economists seem to share a cautious – even pessimistic – mood about future growth and convergence in the region, whereas most Asian economists, while conceding that further structural reforms are needed, believe strongly that Asia will continue to converge rather rapidly?
Beyond global factors that apply to all, rapid catch-up growth requires sufficient investment in both physical and human capital.
New manufacturing techniques and new products or product improvements are usually embodied in new machines and skills.
China has invested about 43% of its GDP, on average, during the 2000-2013 period.
Emerging Asia, excluding China but including India, has invested about 28% of GDP over the same period, while the investment share for Latin America has been just 21%.
That alone probably explains much of the difference among China, in a category of its own, emerging Asia, and Latin America.
The quality of skills and education cannot be measured as easily by a single figure, but there is ample evidence that Latin America has also lagged behind most of Asia when it comes to skills accumulation.
Many other factors, of course, influence growth and convergence: macroeconomic stability, the efficiency and robustness of the financial sector, the terms of trade, the quality of public administration, demographic factors, and political factors.
There also is variation within regions, including among provinces of China.
(Likewise, Africa’s growth performance has improved spectacularly since the turn of the century, but variance within the continent is even larger than elsewhere.)
Nonetheless, in terms of the likely strength of the convergence process that globalization has facilitated, it is important to distinguish between Latin America and Asia, and, within Asia, to distinguish China from the rest of the continent.
China’s economy will most likely continue to converge rapidly, though its annual growth rate may fall from 9% to 7%.
The rest of emerging Asia will also converge reasonably quickly, though not as quickly as China.
Latin America, however, will likely converge only very slowly in the absence of major structural reforms that increase its ability to invest and improve the quality of education.
There will surely be exceptions to this general trend, but there are some stable regional characteristics.
Overall, however, basic economics, which has always stressed the need to save and invest in order to grow, still explains a lot.
Latin America and Asia operate in the same global economy, with access to similar technology and markets.
If Latin America invests around 20% of its national income in a sustained manner, while emerging Asia invests close to 30% – including investments in education – emerging Asia will converge significantly more rapidly.
Democracy in Europe
ROME – A real struggle over who will preside over the European Commission has begun.
Though the center-right European People’s Party won only a narrow plurality of 221 seats in the 751-seat European Parliament, center-left, green, and liberal MEPs have all rallied behind the EPP’s candidate, Jean-Claude Juncker, as the “legitimate” choice.
The opposition, led by British Prime Minister David Cameron with the support of “sovereignists” across Europe, particularly in Scandinavia, but also in Hungary, contends that someone whom the majority of European citizens hardly know, cannot claim any kind of political legitimacy.
German Chancellor Angela Merkel is now in a bind.
Though she endorsed Juncker before the election, she never really backed the notion that the European Parliament should have a decisive part in selecting the Commission’s president.
She was certain that no party would win an absolute majority, but she did not foresee that almost all representatives from moderate parties would back whichever candidate won a plurality, making it difficult to appoint anyone else.
The larger issue at stake is whether Europe is prepared to establish the common political space that is needed to manage the monetary union and strengthen the European Union’s influence in world affairs.
Most economists agree that in the absence of advanced fiscal-policy coordination and a real banking union, Europe’s monetary union cannot succeed.
This does not bother the United Kingdom, which has no desire to join the eurozone.
Among eurozone members, however, the need for greater political integration is broadly accepted, and not just by the economic and political elites.
Moreover, as Russia’s recent assertions of power in Ukraine and elsewhere in the former Soviet Union demonstrate, European countries need to deepen their security cooperation and develop a common energy policy.
And, though cooperation in areas such as of data privacy, financial-sector regulation, and climate change may not require the degree of political integration that a common currency does, it would benefit greatly from stronger political cohesion and a more profound sense of shared European identity.
The pan-European parties’ nomination of Spitzenkandidaten for the Commission presidency – and the three direct debates among the nominees – marked the start of building a genuine supranational European political space.
Indeed, the endorsement of Juncker by the Social Democrats, the Greens, and the Liberals reflects their belief in the need for such a space.
The candidates, particularly Martin Schulz, the leader of the Party of European Socialists, campaigned beyond their national borders.
But Europe still has a long way to go, which is apparent from the fact that only a minority of European citizens followed the campaign.
A supra-national political space can develop only if European politics gains visibility, influence, and credibility.
For this reason, Europe’s leaders should reach a compromise on the next Commission president quickly and transparently, thereby dispelling the impression among ordinary citizens that European politics is shaped by a dysfunctional process of behind-the-scenes horse-trading.
As usual, Merkel has a critical role to play.
Her endorsement of a candidate whom she knew Cameron would vehemently oppose was a serious mistake, because it strengthened the hand of those in the UK who want to leave the EU.
Merkel must now determine how to forge a compromise that does not discredit the Europe-wide democratic process, which currently has more support in Germany than in any other large European country.
To this end, support from Italian Prime Minister Matteo Renzi – whose party won 41% of his country’s vote, arguably making him the only real winner at the national level – could help.
The stakes are high – and not just for Europe.
The world needs a thriving, cohesive EU to advance democratic principles, facilitate conflict resolution, protect the global commons, promote peace, and build trust across borders.
The alternative – already gaining traction – is the resurgence of naked power politics and dangerous xenophobia.
Without a shared European political space, everyone will be much worse off.
Revamping Europe’s Tattered Social Contract
WASHINGTON, DC – For most of the beginning of 2014, the eurozone seemed to be in a state of recovery – weak and unsteady, but nonetheless real.
In April, the International Monetary Fund estimated that overall GDP growth would reach 1.2% this year, with slowly declining unemployment, up from its previous forecast of 1% growth.
With the threat of unsustainably high interest rates in the countries of the eurozone periphery having disappeared, the path to moderate recovery was supposedly open, to be followed by some acceleration in growth in 2015.
While it is important not to overreact to quarterly figures, recent data, as well as some of the revised data for the first quarter, are deeply disappointing.
The pessimism of two years ago has returned – with good reason.
Italy is in an outright recession, and, far from showing hoped-for signs of vitality. French growth is close to zero.
Even Germany’s GDP declined in quarterly terms in the first half of the year.
Finland, a staunch supporter of firm austerity policies, is in negative territory for the first half of the year.
Nominal interest rates for periphery countries’ sovereign debt have remained extremely low, and, even when taking into account expectations of very low inflation (or even deflation), real interest rates are low.
The eurozone now is facing not only a financial crisis, but a stagnation crisis.
Tensions with Russia may make recovery even more difficult, and it is unlikely that the eurozone can attain 1% growth in 2014 without major policy changes.
The European Central Bank has announced that it will offer new monetary-policy support and has decided to use all instruments short of direct quantitative easing (it is still not buying sovereign bonds).
But it is far from clear whether the proverbial horse led to water will actually drink.
If growth and employment expectations remain dismal, it will be difficult to rekindle demand, particularly private business investment, no matter how low interest rates are, or how many resources banks have for potential lending.
ECB President Mario Draghi’s message in his speech last month in Jackson Hole, Wyoming, as well as at his September press conference was a clear call for more fiscal support to boost effective demand.
The essential economic problem is clear: there is an almost desperate need for more fiscal space in the eurozone to boost aggregate demand, including more investment in Germany.
But there is also a persistent need for deep structural reforms on the supply side, so that fiscal stimulus translates into sustainable long-term growth, not just temporary spurts and further increases in countries’ debt ratios.
What the “best” structural reforms actually are remains a matter for debate.
But in most countries, they include some combination of tax, labor-market, service-sector, and education reforms, as well as reforms in territorial administration, particularly in France.
These reforms should seek to achieve a thoroughly revamped social contract that reflects the realities of twenty-first-century demographics and global markets, but that also remains sensitive to Europeans’ commitment to distributive fairness and political equality, and insures citizens against shocks.
It is easy to call for “reforms” without specifying their content or taking into account the social, historical, and political context.
At the same time, it will not be possible to design this new social contract country by country.
Europe has become too interwoven in myriad ways – not just in purely financial and economic terms, but also psychologically.
It must have come as a surprise to many that it was a German court, not a French one, that banned Uber, the mobile app that is revolutionizing the taxi business.
If the new social contract cannot be forged Europe-wide, it must at least apply to the eurozone to enable the necessary structural reforms.
Otherwise, given that the politics and economics of eurozone reform are inseparably linked, fiscal expansion could prove to be as ineffective as efforts by monetary policymakers to foster growth.
Italy’s finance minister, Pier Carlo Padoan, is rightly pushing for a eurozone “reform scorecard,” which would enable direct comparison among national reforms.
But, beyond such a scorecard, the will to overcome the stagnation trap must be more than a sum of national wills.
Germany must be reassured by what is happening in France and Italy; conversely, Southern Europeans must be able to trust that their efforts will gain additional traction from greater investment throughout the region, particularly in Germany.
A new social contract will not appear out of thin air.
Now is the time for the new European Commission to propose – and the new European Council and European Parliament to endorse – a political pact to legitimize and sustain the reforms needed to solve Europe’s economic problems.
Good Governance and Economic Performance
BERLIN – The debate about emerging countries’ growth prospects is now in full swing.
Pessimists stress the feared reversal of private capital flows, owing to the US Federal Reserve’s tapering of its purchases of long-term assets, as well as the difficulties of so-called second- and third-generation structural reforms and the limits to “catch up” growth outside of manufacturing.
Optimists argue that the potential for rapid growth remains immense, owing to better macroeconomic fundamentals and the promise of best-practice technology spreading throughout the emerging world.
So who is right?
Recent events point once again to the importance of good governance and responsive political systems, a familiar topic in studies of long-term economic growth.
Countries that appeared successful for a long time, such as Turkey or Thailand, suddenly seem to face obstacles related to governance and the ability to forge domestic political compromises.
The resulting divisiveness and dysfunction are surely bigger threats than the Fed’s tapering.
It is the nature of governance that determines whether people deploy their talents and energy in pursuit of innovation, production, and job creation, or in rent seeking and lobbying for political protection.
And here the contrast between Egypt and Tunisia may turn out to be an object lesson in what makes the difference between success and failure.
In Egypt, the old regime under Hosni Mubarak, having failed to democratize, collapsed in the face of massive protest.
A low-turnout election gave a plurality of the popular vote to the Muslim Brotherhood, which came to power alone and proceeded to ignore good governance and alienate all except its most fervent followers.
The Brotherhood’s approach to governance also explains the mess it made of the economy.
Instead of trying to build non-partisan and competent regulatory institutions, all positions were stacked with political followers.
Unfortunately, the military intervention last July gave rise to yet another regime that seems unable to build durable institutions that could foster political reconciliation and deliver inclusive growth.
Tunisia may give us an example of the opposite scenario: a real constitutional compromise supported by an overwhelming majority (reflected in a 200-16 vote in the National Constituent Assembly).
If that compromise holds, stability will take hold, markets will function, Tunisia will attract investment, and tourism will thrive again.
At the heart of the difference between the two cases is a vision of governance that makes such compromise possible.
Such a vision presupposes an assurance that a winner-take-all system will not be established, as well as broad agreement that regulatory institutions should be reasonably non-partisan and staffed with competent professionals.
China’s long-lasting success is sometimes given as a counterexample to the importance of good governance for economic performance.
The Chinese example certainly calls into question a strong correlation between multi-party democracy and economic growth.
Democracy is of course something valuable in itself and can be desired independently of its effect on economic growth.
But, in the context of economic performance, it is important to emphasize that there is a huge difference between dictatorial regimes, where a single individual monopolizes all power – à la Mubarak or Syrian President Bashar al-Assad – and China, where there has been competition and contestability within a large communist party.
And it is the party, operating as a fairly inclusive and meritocratic institution, not an autocratic leader, that has governed in the post-Mao period.
Lack of reasonably independent regulation and competent public administration – or, worse, one-person dictatorships – lead inexorably to economic waste and inefficiency, and eventually to political turmoil.
This is true even in cases like Venezuela, where large oil revenues masked the underlying weakness for a while.
In the complex global economy of the twenty-first century, sustained good economic performance requires a panoply of well-functioning institutions that do not fall within a single leader’s purview.
For example, successful economies require a reasonably independent central bank, and competent bank supervision that does not get dragged into short term politics.
They also need regulatory agencies in sectors such as telecommunications and energy that can pursue policies in accordance with broad goals established by the political process, but with appointees selected according to nonpartisan criteria who then exercise their authority in a way that fosters competition open to all.
When credit decisions, public procurement, construction contracts, and price determination reflect only short-term and purely political goals, good economic performance becomes impossible – even in countries with large natural-resource endowments.
In countries with little or no such endowments – where innovation, competitive efficiency, and a focus on production rather than rents is all the more important – the lack of good governance will lead to failure more rapidly.
All of this implies that analyzing the determinants of economic success is a subject not just for economists.
Why do some societies achieve the compromises needed to sustain an independent judiciary and a modern regulatory framework – both necessary for an efficient modern economy – while others perpetuate a partisan, winner-take-all approach to governance that weakens public policy and erodes private-sector confidence?
The contrast is starkest in emerging countries, but differences also exist among the advanced economies.
Perhaps Germany’s ability to reach sociopolitical compromise – again demonstrated by the formation of a right-left coalition after the 2013 elections – has been more fundamental to its recent economic success than the details of the fiscal and structural policies it has pursued to achieve it.
Social Choice and Social Welfare
CAMBRIDGE – Human beings have always lived in groups, and their individual lives have invariably depended on group decisions.
But the challenges of group choice can be daunting, particularly given the divergent interests and concerns of the group’s members.
So, how should collective decision-making be carried out?
A dictator who wants to control every aspect of people’s lives will seek to ignore the preferences of everyone else.
But that level of power is hard to achieve.
More important, dictatorship of any kind can readily be seen to be a terrible way to govern a society.
So, for both ethical and practical reasons, social scientists have long investigated how the concerns of a society’s members can be reflected in one way or another in its collective decisions, even if the society is not fully democratic.
For example, in the fourth century BC, Aristotle in Greece and Kautilya in India explored various possibilities of social choice in their classic books, Politics and Economics, respectively (the Sanskrit title of Kautilya’s book, Arthashastra, translates literally as “the discipline of material wellbeing”).
The study of social choice as a formal discipline first came into its own in the late eighteenth century, when the subject was pioneered by French mathematicians, particularly J. C. Borda and Marquis de Condorcet.
The intellectual climate of the time was greatly influenced by the European Enlightenment, with its interest in reasoned construction of a social order, and its commitment to the creation of a society responsive to people’s preferences.
But the theoretical investigations of Borda, Condorcet, and others often yielded rather pessimistic results.
For example, the so-called “voting paradox” presented by Condorcet showed that majority rule can reach an impasse when every alternative is defeated in voting by some other alternative, so that no alternative is capable of standing up to the challenge of every other alternative.
Social choice theory in its modern and systematic form owes its rigorous foundation to the work of Kenneth J. Arrow in his 1950 Columbia University PhD dissertation.
Arrow’s thesis contained his famous “impossibility theorem,” an analytical result of breathtaking elegance and reach.
Arrow’s theorem shows that even very mild conditions of reasonableness in arriving at social decisions on the basis of simple preference rankings of a society’s individuals could not be simultaneously satisfied by any procedure.
When the book based on his dissertation, Social Choice and Individual Values, was published in 1951, it became an instant classic.
Economists, political theorists, moral and political philosophers, sociologists, and even the general public rapidly took notice of what seemed like – and indeed was – a devastating result.
Two centuries after visions of social rationality flowered in Enlightenment thinking, the project suddenly seemed, at least superficially, to be inescapably doomed.
It is important to understand why and how Arrow’s impossibility result comes about.
Scrutiny of the formal reasoning that establishes the theorem shows that relying only on the preference rankings of individuals makes it difficult to distinguish between very dissimilar social choice problems.
The usability of available information is further reduced by the combined effects of innocuous-seeming principles that are popular in informal discussions.
It is essential, particularly for making judgments about social welfare, to compare different individuals’ gains and losses and to take note of their relative affluence, which cannot be immediately deduced only from people’s rankings of social alternatives.
It is also important to examine which types of clusters of preference rankings are problematic for different types of voting procedures.
Nonetheless, Arrow’s impossibility theorem ultimately played a hugely constructive role in investigating what democracy demands, which goes well beyond counting votes (important as that is).
Enriching the informational base of democracy and making greater use of interactive public reasoning can contribute significantly to making democracy more workable, and also allow reasoned assessment of social welfare.
Social choice theory has thus become a broad discipline, covering a variety of distinct questions.
Under what circumstances would majority rule&nbsp;yield unambiguous and consistent decisions?
How robust are the different voting procedures for yielding cogent results?
How can we judge how well a society as a whole&nbsp;is doing in light of its members’ disparate interests?
How, moreover, can we accommodate individuals’ rights and liberties&nbsp;while giving appropriate recognition to their overall preferences?
How do we measure aggregate poverty&nbsp;in view of the varying predicaments and miseries of the diverse people who comprise the society?
How do we arrive at social valuations of public goods such as the natural environment?
Beyond these questions, a theory of justice can draw substantially on the insights and analytical results emerging from social choice theory (as I discussed in my 2009 book The Idea of Justice).
Furthermore, the understanding generated by social choice theorists’ study of group decisions has helped some research that is not directly a part of social choice theory – for example, on the forms and consequences of gender inequality, or on the causation and prevention of famines.
The reach and relevance of social choice theory is extensive.
Rather than undermining the pursuit of social reasoning, Arrow’s deeply challenging impossibility theorem, and the large volume of literature that it has inspired, has immensely strengthened our ability to think rationally about the collective decision-making on which our survival and happiness depend.
The Exaggerated Death of Inflation
CAMBRIDGE – Is the era of high inflation gone forever?
In a world of slow growth, high debt, and tremendous distributional pressures, whether inflation is dead or merely dormant is an important question.
Yes, massive institutional improvements concerning central banks have created formidable barriers to high inflation.
But a significant part of a central bank’s credibility ultimately derives from the broader macroeconomic environment in which it operates.
In the first half of the 1990s, annual inflation averaged 40% in Africa, 230% in Latin America, and 360% in the transition economies of Eastern Europe.
And, in the early 1980s, advanced-economy inflation averaged nearly 10%.
Today, high inflation seems so remote that many analysts treat it as little more than a theoretical curiosity.
They are wrong to do so.
No matter how much central banks may wish to present the level of inflation as a mere technocratic decision, it is ultimately a social choice.
And some of the very pressures that helped to contain inflation for the past two decades have been retreating.
In the years preceding the financial crisis, increasing globalization and technological advances made it much easier for central banks to deliver both solid growth and low inflation.
This was not the case in the 1970s, when stagnating productivity and rising commodity prices turned central bankers into scapegoats, not heroes.
True, back then, monetary authorities were working with old-fashioned Keynesian macroeconomic models, which encouraged the delusion that monetary policy could indefinitely boost the economy with low inflation and low interest rates.
Central bankers today are no longer so naive, and the public is better informed.
But a country’s long-term inflation rate is still the outcome of political choices not technocratic decisions.
As the choices become more difficult, the risk to price stability grows.
Yes, advanced economies are in a very different position today, but they are hardly immune.
Many of the same pundits who never imagined that advanced economies could have massive financial crises are now sure that advanced economies can never have inflation crises.
More fundamentally, where, exactly, does one draw the line between advanced economies and emerging markets?
The eurozone, for example, is a blur.
Imagine that there was no euro and that the southern countries had retained their own currencies – Italy with the lira, Spain with the peseta, Greece with the drachma, and so on.
Would these countries today have an inflation profile more like the United States and Germany or more like Brazil and Turkey?
Most likely, they would be somewhere in between.
The European periphery would have benefited from the same institutional advances in central banking as everyone else; but there is no particular reason to suppose that its political structures would have evolved in a radically different way.
The public in the southern countries embraced the euro precisely because the northern countries’ commitment to price stability gave them a currency with enormous anti-inflation credibility.
As it turned out, the euro was not quite the free lunch that it seemed to be.
The gain in inflation credibility was offset by weak debt credibility.
If the European periphery countries had their own currencies, it is likely that debt problems would morph right back into elevated inflation.
I am not arguing that inflation will return anytime soon in safe-haven economies such as the US or Japan.
Though US labor markets are tightening, and the new Fed chair has emphatically emphasized the importance of maximum employment, there is still little risk of high inflation in the near future.
Still, over the longer run, there is no guarantee that any central bank will be able to hold the line in the face of adverse shocks such as continuing slow productivity growth, high debt levels, and pressure to reduce inequality through government transfers.
The risk would be particularly high in the event of other major shocks – say, a general rise in global real interest rates.
Recognizing that inflation is only dormant renders foolish the oft-stated claim that any country with a flexible exchange rate has nothing to fear from high debt, as long as debt is issued in its own currency.
Imagine again that Italy had its own currency instead of the euro.
Certainly, the country would have much less to fear from an overnight run on debt.
Nevertheless, given the huge governance problems that Italy still faces, there is every chance that its inflation rate would look more like Brazil’s or Turkey’s, with any debt problems spilling over faster price growth.
Modern central banking has worked wonders to bring down inflation.
Ultimately, however, a central bank’s anti-inflation policies can work only within the context of a macroeconomic and political framework that is consistent with price stability.
Inflation may be dormant, but it is certainly not dead.
The 4% Non-Solution
PARIS – For some time now, there has been concern that central bankers have “run out of bullets.”
Having lowered their policy rates to near zero, they have engaged in increasingly extravagant measures such as “quantitative easing” and “forward guidance.”
Given the fog cast over real economic activity by the financial crisis, it is difficult to offer a definitive assessment of just how well or badly those measures have worked.
But it is clear that there must be a better way to do things.
There is no longer any reason to let the zero bound on nominal interest rates continue to hamper monetary policy.
A simple and elegant solution is to phase in a switchover to a fully electronic currency, where paying interest, positive or negative, requires only the push of a button.
And with paper money – particularly large-denomination notes – arguably doing more harm than good, currency modernization is long overdue.
Using an electronic currency, central banks could continue to stabilize inflation exactly as they do now.
(Citigroup’s chief economist, Willem Buiter, has suggested numerous ways to address the constraint of paper currency, but eliminating it is the easiest.)
A second, less elegant idea is to have central banks simply raise their target inflation rates from today’s norm of 2% to a higher but still moderate level of 4%.
The idea of permanently raising inflation targets to 4% was first proposed in an interesting and insightful paper led by IMF chief economist Olivier Blanchard, and has been endorsed by a number of other academics, including, most recently, Paul Krugman.
Unfortunately, the problem of making a smooth and convincing transition to the new target is perhaps insurmountable.
When Blanchard first proposed his idea, I was intrigued but skeptical.
Mind you, two years previously, at the outset of the financial crisis, I suggested raising inflation to 4% or more for a period of a few years to deflate the debt overhang and accelerate wage adjustment.
But there is a world of difference between temporarily raising inflation to address a crisis and unhinging long-term expectations.
After two decades of telling the public that 2% inflation is Nirvana, central bankers would baffle people were they to announce that they had changed their minds – and not in some minor way, but completely.
Just recall the market’s “taper tantrums” in May 2013, when then-Fed Chairman Ben Bernanke suggested a far more modest turn in monetary policy.
People might well ask why, if central bankers can change their long-term target from 2% to 4%, they could not later decide that it should be 5% or 6%?
Given the likelihood of a confused, mistrustful public, it is hard to find any deep rationale for a 4% target.
At least the existing 2% inflation target stands for something, because central bankers can portray it as the moral equivalent of zero.
(Most experts believe that a true welfare-based price index would show significantly lower inflation than government inflation statistics indicate, because official data fail to capture the benefits of the constant flow of new goods into the economy.)
There is an analogy to the problems countries faced when they tried to re-establish the gold standard after World War I. Until the war, money was backed by gold and could be redeemed at a fixed rate.
Though the system was highly vulnerable to bank runs and there was little scope for a monetary stabilization policy, people’s confidence in the system enabled it to anchor expectations.
Unfortunately, the system completely collapsed after the war broke out in August 1914.
Revenue-desperate combatants were forced to turn to inflation finance.
They could not simultaneously debase the currency and back it with gold at a fixed rate.
After the war, as things settled down, governments tried to return to gold, partly as a symbol of a return to normalcy.
But the revived inter-war gold standard ultimately fell apart, in no small part because it was impossible to rebuild public trust.
A move by central banks to a long-term 4% inflation target risks triggering the same dynamic.
Fortunately, there is a much better way.
Moving to an electronic government currency would not require a destabilizing change in the inflation target.
Minor technical issues could easily be ironed out.
For example, ordinary citizens could be allowed zero-interest-transactions balances (up to a limit).
Presumably, nominal interest rates would move into negative territory only in response to a deep deflationary crisis.
But when such a crisis does occur, central banks could power out of it far more quickly than is possible today.
And, as I have argued elsewhere, governments have long been penny-wise and pound-foolish to provide large-denomination notes, given that a large share are used in the underground economy and to finance illegal activities.
Moving to a twenty-first-century currency system would make it far simpler to move to a twenty-first-century central-banking regime as well.
Malthus, Marx, and Modern Growth
CAMBRIDGE – The promise that each generation will be better off than the last is a fundamental tenet of modern society.
By and large, most advanced economies have fulfilled this promise, with living standards rising over recent generations, despite setbacks from wars and financial crises.
In the developing world, too, the vast majority of people have started to experience sustained improvement in living standards and are rapidly developing similar growth expectations.
But will future generations, particularly in advanced economies, realize such expectations?
Though the likely answer is yes, the downside risks seem higher than they did a few decades ago.
So far, every prediction in the modern era that mankind’s lot will worsen, from Thomas Malthus to Karl Marx, has turned out to be spectacularly wrong.
Technological progress has trumped obstacles to economic growth.
Periodic political rebalancing, sometimes peaceful, sometimes not, has ensured that the vast majority of people have benefited, albeit some far more than others.
As a result, Malthus’s concerns about mass starvation have failed to materialize in any peaceful capitalist economy.
And, despite a disconcerting fall in labor’s share of income in recent decades, the long-run picture still defies Marx’s prediction that capitalism would prove immiserating for workers.
Living standards around the world continue to rise.
But past growth performance is no guarantee that a broadly similar trajectory can be maintained throughout this century.
Leaving aside potential geopolitical disruptions, there are some formidable challenges to overcome, mostly stemming from political underperformance and dysfunction.
The first set of issues includes slow-burn problems involving externalities, the leading example being environmental degradation.
When property rights are ill-defined, as in the case of air and water, government must step in to provide appropriate regulation.
I do not envy future generations for having to address the possible ramifications of global warming and fresh-water depletion.
A second set of problems concerns the need to ensure that the economic system is perceived as fundamentally fair, which is the key to its political sustainability.
This perception can no longer be taken for granted, as the interaction of technology and globalization has exacerbated income and wealth inequality within countries, even as cross-country gaps have narrowed.
Until now, our societies have proved remarkably adept at adjusting to disruptive technologies; but the pace of change in recent decades has caused tremendous strains, reflected in huge income disparities within countries, with near-record gaps between the wealthiest and the rest.
Inequality can corrupt and paralyze a country’s political system – and economic growth along with it.
The third problem is that of aging populations, an issue that would pose tough challenges even for the best-designed political system.
How will resources be allocated to care for the elderly, especially in slow-growing economies where existing public pension schemes and old-age health plans are patently unsustainable?
Soaring public debts surely exacerbate the problem, because future generations are being asked both to service our debt and to pay for our retirements.
The final challenge concerns a wide array of issues that require regulation of rapidly evolving technologies by governments that do not necessarily have the competence or resources to do so effectively.
We have already seen where poor regulation of rapidly evolving financial markets can lead.
There are parallel shortcomings in many other markets.
A leading example is food supply – an area where technology has continually produced ever-more highly processed and genetically refined food that scientists are only beginning to assess.
What is known so far is that childhood obesity has become an epidemic in many countries, with an alarming rise in rates of type 2 diabetes and coronary disease implying a significant negative impact on life expectancy in future generations.
Many leading health researchers, including Kelly Brownell, David Ludwig, and Walter Willett, have documented these problems.
Government interventions to date, mainly in the form of enhanced education, have proved largely ineffective.
Self-destructive addiction to processed foods, which economists would describe as an “internality,” can lower quality of life for those afflicted, and can eventually lead to externalities for society, such as higher health-care costs.
Again, despite a rising chorus of concern from researchers, political markets have seemed frozen.
All of these problems have solutions, at least in the short to medium run.
A global carbon tax would mitigate climate risks while alleviating government debt burdens.
Addressing inequality requires greater redistribution through national tax systems, together with enhanced programs for adult education, presumably making heavy use of new technologies.
The negative effects of falling population growth can be mitigated by easing restrictions on international migration, and by encouraging more women and retirees to enter or stay in the workforce.
But how long it will take for governments to act is a wide-open question.
Capitalist economies have been spectacularly efficient at enabling growing consumption of private goods, at least over the long run.
When it comes to public goods – such as education, the environment, health care, and equal opportunity – the record is not quite as impressive, and the political obstacles to improvement have seemed to grow as capitalist economies have matured.
Will each future generation continue to enjoy a better quality of life than its immediate predecessor?
In developing countries that have not yet reached the technological frontier, the answer is almost certainly yes.
In advanced economies, though the answer should still be yes, the challenges are becoming formidable.
Europe’s Debt Wish
CAMBRIDGE – Eurozone leaders continue to debate how best to reinvigorate economic growth, with French and Italian leaders now arguing that the eurozone’s rigid “fiscal compact” should be loosened.
Meanwhile, the leaders of the eurozone’s northern member countries continue to push for more serious implementation of structural reform.
Ideally, both sides will get their way, but it is difficult to see an endgame that does not involve significant debt restructuring or rescheduling.
The inability of Europe’s politicians to contemplate this scenario is placing a huge burden on the European Central Bank.
Although there are many explanations for the eurozone’s lagging recovery, it is clear that the overhang of both public and private debt looms large.
The gross debts of households and financial institutions are higher today as a share of national income than they were before the financial crisis.
Nonfinancial corporate debt has fallen only slightly.
And government debt, of course, has risen sharply, owing to bank bailouts and a sharp, recession-fueled decline in tax revenues.
Yes, Europe is also wrestling with an aging population.
Southern eurozone countries such as Italy and Spain have suffered from rising competition with China in textiles and light manufacturing industries.
But just as the pre-crisis credit boom masked underlying structural problems, post-crisis credit constraints have greatly amplified the downturn.
True, German growth owes much to the country’s willingness a decade ago to engage in painful economic reforms, especially of labor-market rules.
Today, Germany appears to have full employment and above-trend growth.
German leaders believe, with some justification, that if France and Italy were to adopt similar reforms, the changes would work wonders for their economies’ long-term growth.
Yet what of Portugal, Ireland, and (especially) Spain, all of which have taken significant steps toward reform since the crisis?
All are still experiencing double-digit unemployment rates amid moribund growth, and, as the last International Monetary Fund Fiscal Monitor made abundantly clear, all still suffer from significant debt problems.
Debt overhang traps countries in a vicious circle.
Exceptionally high public and private debts constrain a country’s options and are indisputably associated with slower growth, which in turn makes it difficult to escape a debt trap.
Last spring’s campaign against anyone who dared to worry about the long-run effects of high debt largely ignored the substantial academic literature, just as a remarkably similar recent challenge to Thomas Piketty’s research on inequality took no account of a larger body of evidence.
It is true that not all debt is created equal, and there is a strong case for adding more of it if the purpose is to finance highly productive infrastructure investments.
Europe greatly lags many Asian countries in its efforts to expand the reach of broadband.
Outside the Nordic countries, electricity networks are thoroughly Balkanized, and major efforts are needed to integrate them.
Raising debt for the purposes of significantly increasing or ensuring long-run growth makes sense, especially in an environment of low real interest rates.
A similar argument can be made for expenditures aimed at improving education, for example to improve Europe’s underfunded universities.
Beyond growth-enhancing investment, however, the case for greater stimulus becomes more nuanced.
Brad Delong and Larry Summers have argued that in a repressed economy, short-term increases in borrowing can pay for themselves, even if the expenditures do not directly increase long-run potential. By contrast, Alberto Alesina and Silvia Ardagna argue that in an economy with a large and inefficient government, debt-stabilization measures directed at reducing the size of government can actually be expansionary.
I admit to being an outsider to this debate.
(The word “austerity” does not appear once in my 2009 book with Carmen Reinhart on the history of financial crises.)
My general sense, however, is that both views are extreme.
In general, neither pure austerity nor crude Keynesian stimulus can help countries escape high-debt traps.
Throughout history, other measures, including debt rescheduling, inflation, and various forms of wealth taxation (such as financial repression), have typically played a significant role.
It is hard to see how European countries can indefinitely avoid recourse to the full debt toolkit, especially to repair the fragile economies of the eurozone’s periphery.
The ECB’s expansive “whatever it takes” guarantee may indeed be enough to help finance greater short-term stimulus than is currently being allowed; but the ECB’s guarantee will not solve long-run sustainability problems.
Indeed, the ECB will soon have to confront the fact that structural reforms and fiscal austerity fall far short of being a complete solution to Europe’s debt problems.
In October and November, the ECB will announce the results of its bank stress tests.
Because many banks hold a large volume of eurozone government debt, the results will depend very much on how the ECB assesses sovereign risk.
If the ECB grossly understates the risks, its credibility as a regulator will be badly tarnished.
If it is more forthright about the risks, there is a chance that some periphery countries might have difficulty plugging the holes, and will require help from the north.
One hopes that the ECB will be forthright.
It is high time for a conversation on debt relief for the entire eurozone periphery.
Why Wealth Taxes Are Not Enough
CAMBRIDGE – Should advanced countries implement wealth taxes as a means of stabilizing and reducing public debt over the medium term?
The normally conservative International Monetary Fund has given the idea surprisingly emphatic support.
The IMF calculates that a one-time 10% wealth levy, if introduced quickly and unexpectedly, could return many European countries to pre-crisis public debt/GDP ratios.
It is an intriguing idea.
The moral case for a wealth tax is more compelling than usual today, with unemployment still at recession levels, and with deep economic inequality straining social norms.
And, if it were really possible to ensure that the wealth levy would be temporary, such a tax would, in principle, be much less distortionary than imposing higher marginal tax rates on income.
Unfortunately, while a wealth tax may be a sound way to help a country dig out of a deep fiscal pit, it is hardly a panacea.
For starters, the revenue gains from temporary wealth taxes can be very elusive.
The economist Barry Eichengreen once explored the imposition of capital levies in the aftermath of World Wars I and II.
He found that, owing to capital flight and political pressure for delay, the results were often disappointing.
Italy’s armada of Guardia di Finanza boats would hardly forestall a massive exodus of wealth if Italians see a sizable wealth tax coming.
Over- and under-invoicing of trade, for example, is a time-tested way to spirit money out of a country.
(For example, an exporter under-reports the price received for a foreign shipment, and keeps the extra cash hidden abroad.)
And there would be a rush into jewelry and other hard-to-detect real assets.
The distortionary effects of a wealth levy would also be exacerbated by concerns that the “temporary” levy would not be a one-off tax.
After all, most temporary taxes come for lunch and stay for dinner.
Fears of future wealth taxes could discourage entrepreneurship and lower the saving rate.
In addition, the administrative difficulties of instituting a comprehensive wealth tax are formidable, raising questions about fairness.
For example, it would be extremely difficult to place market values on the family-owned businesses that pervade Mediterranean countries.
Wealth taxes that target land and structures are arguably insulated from some of these concerns, and property taxes are relatively underused outside the Anglo-Saxon countries.
In theory, taxing immobile assets is less distortionary, though taxes on structures obviously can discourage both maintenance and new construction.
So what else can eurozone governments do to raise revenue as their economies recover?
Most economists favor finding ways to broaden the tax base – for example, by eliminating special deductions and privileges – in order to keep marginal tax rates low.
Broadening the income-tax base is a central element of the highly regarded Simpson/Bowles proposals for tax reform in the United States.
In Europe, efficiency would be enhanced by a unified VAT rate, instead of creating distortions by charging different rates for different goods.
In principle, low-income individuals and families could be compensated through lump-sum transfer programs.
Another idea is to try to raise more revenue from carbon permits or taxes.
Raising funds by taxing negative externalities reduces distortions rather than creating them.
Though such taxes are spectacularly unpopular – perhaps because individuals refuse to admit that the externalities they themselves create are significant – I regard them as an important direction for future policy (and I intend to suggest other ideas along these lines in future columns).
Unfortunately, advanced countries have implemented very little fundamental tax reform so far.
Many governments are giving in to higher marginal tax rates rather than overhauling and simplifying the system.
In Europe, officials are also turning to stealth taxes, particularly financial repression, to resolve high public-debt overhangs.
Through regulation and administrative directives, banks, insurance companies, and pension funds are being forced to hold much higher shares of government debt than they might voluntarily choose to do.
But this approach is hardly progressive, as the final holders of pensions, insurance contracts, and bank deposits are typically the beleaguered middle class and the elderly.
There is also the unresolved question of how much the periphery countries really should be asked to pay on their debilitating debt burdens, whatever the tax instrument.
Although the IMF seems particularly enthusiastic about using wealth taxes to resolve debt overhangs in Spain and Italy, some burden sharing with the north seems reasonable.
As the economists Maurice Obstfeld and Galina Hale recently noted, German and French banks earned large profits intermediating flows between Asian savers and Europe’s periphery.
Unfortunately, arguing over burden sharing creates more scope for delay, potentially undermining the efficacy of any wealth tax that might finally be instituted.
Still, the IMF is right – on grounds of both fairness and efficiency – to raise the idea of temporary wealth taxes in advanced countries to relieve fiscal distress.
However, the revenues will almost certainly be lower, and the costs higher, than calculations used to promote them would imply.
Temporary wealth taxes may well be a part of the answer for countries in fiscal trouble today, and the idea should be taken seriously.
But they are no substitute for fundamental long-term reform to make tax systems simpler, fairer, and more efficient.
Foreign-Aid Follies
MUMBAI – The huge gap between the world’s richest and poorest countries remains one of the great moral dilemmas for the West. It also presents one of the greatest challenges for development economics.
Do we really know how to help countries overcome poverty?
In his eloquently written and deeply researched new book The Great Escape: Health, Wealth, and the Origins of Inequality, Princeton University’s Angus Deaton urges caution.
For those interested in world poverty, it is unquestionably the most important book on development assistance to appear in a long time.
Deaton suggests that far too often, Western aid serves to assuage donors’ guilt rather than improve recipients’ plight.