Heads of departments carried inordinate power.
So, no surprise, many of us left.
We Hindus may believe in an infinity of lifetimes, but we maximize our welfare in this one, just like everyone else.
Besides, simply holding people back, even if feasible, would do little for their countries.
The “brain” is not a static concept.
Trapped in Kinshasa, under appalling conditions, the brain will drain away in less time than it takes to get to New York.
Moreover, keeping people at home is easier said than done.
In many poor countries, except those like India and South Korea, which have now developed superb educational institutions, the brightest citizens receive their education abroad.
The challenge, then, is to prevent them from staying there and settling down.
But, in any event, emigration restrictions today would violate a human right enshrined in current international treaties.
But would immigration restrictions work instead, as proposed by some developed-country organizations, which worry about the “brain drain”?
Here, human-rights concerns pose serious difficulties.
Could we really say to a Ghanaian doctor that she must return to her country while an immigrant Russian doctor is allowed to settle down and start a new life?
This is likely to run afoul of anti-discrimination principles and constitutional provisions in countries like the United States.
The proper response to the outflow of skilled manpower from poor countries, especially those in Africa, is to be found in a different direction.
Given that outflows of skilled workers cannot be restricted – and, indeed, should not be – we must devise institutional mechanisms to work with it.
This means adopting a “diaspora” model, which implies four policy proposals.
First, stop crying over the fact that the diaspora is not returning home. Instead, nurture the loyalty of professionals settling abroad, so that they assist their home countries in a variety of ways.
Thus, they may be offered voting rights.
Restrictions on investment and land purchases can be dropped.
And immigration experts like me have proposed since the 1970’s that schemes be developed to enable the academic diaspora to run workshops aimed at bringing teachers up to the best international standards.
Second, while the diaspora should be integrated through more rights, its members also ought to accept obligations that put them on an equal footing with those who remain behind.
I suggested in the 1970’s that a tax be levied on citizens abroad.
Known as the “Bhagwati Tax,” it is of course “the American way”: US citizens and permanent residents abroad, like those at home, must pay federal taxes.
Third, because skills are necessary for nearly all activities in most of Africa, here and now, we need to organize ways to supply such skills to these countries.
I have long argued that, because many in rich countries are retiring while still in sound health, and because altruism increases with age, we could organize a Grey Peace Corps of senior citizens to share their skills in countries whose own trained professionals prefer to settle abroad.
Finally, foreign aid should be used to expand training massively for Africans in all the essential fields in rich countries like the US, the United Kingdom, France, and the Netherlands.
They would add to the diaspora, while the Grey Peace Corps would help to fill current needs.
When development has taken off, and conditions have improved sufficiently to attract people back to their homelands, the hugely increased diaspora would indeed return, as they have done in India, South Korea, and China.
Together, these policies would benefit Africa both immediately and in the long run.
Sentimental handwringing over the “brain drain,” and foolish attempts at restricting people’s mobility, will not.
What the World Needs from the BRICS
CAMBRIDGE – In 2001, Goldman Sachs’ Jim O’Neill famously coined the term BRIC to characterize the world’s four largest developing economies – Brazil, Russia, India, and China.
But, more than a decade later, just about the only thing that these countries have in common is that they are the only economies ranked among the world’s 15 largest (adjusted for purchasing power) that are not members of the OECD.
The four countries have very different economic structures: Russia and Brazil rely on commodities, India on services, and China on manufacturing.
Brazil and India are democracies, while China and Russia are decidedly not.
And, as Joseph Nye has written, Russia is a superpower in decline, while China and (less markedly) the others are on the rise.
Yet, in a strange case of life imitating fantasy, BRICS – the original four countries, now joined by South Africa – have formed a grouping of their own with regular meetings and policy initiatives.
Their most ambitious effort to date is the establishment of a development bank.
At their meeting in Durban in March, the five countries’ leaders announced that their “New Development Bank” will focus on infrastructure investment in developing countries, which, they said, was constrained by “insufficient long-term financing and foreign direct investment.”
They pledged to make an initial capital contribution to the bank that would be “substantial and sufficient for the bank to be effective in financing infrastructure.”
A second initiative announced in Durban is the creation of a $100 billion contingent reserve facility to deal with “short-term liquidity pressures.”
It can be cause only for celebration that the world’s largest developing economies are regularly talking to each other and establishing common initiatives.
Nonetheless, it is disappointing that they have chosen to focus on infrastructure finance as their first major area of collaboration.
This approach represents a 1950’s view of economic development, which has long been superseded by a more variegated perspective that recognizes a multiplicity of constraints – everything from poor governance to market failures – of varying importance in different countries.
One might even say that today’s global economy suffers from too much, rather than too little, cross-border finance.
What the world needs from the BRICS is not another development bank, but greater leadership on today’s great global issues.
The BRICS countries are home to around half of the world’s population and the bulk of unexploited economic potential.
If the international community fails to confront its most serious challenges – from the need for a sound global economic architecture to addressing climate change – they are the ones that will pay the highest price.
Yet these countries have so far played a rather unimaginative and timid role in international forums such as the G-20 or the World Trade Organization.
When they have asserted themselves, it has been largely in pursuit of narrow national interests.
Do they really have nothing new to offer?
The global economy has operated so far under a set of ideas and institutions emanating from the advanced countries of the West.
The United States gave the world the doctrine of liberal, rule-based multilateralism – a regime whose many blemishes highlight the lofty principles according to which the system has generally functioned.
Europe brought democratic values, social solidarity, and, for all its current problems, the century’s most impressive feat of institutional engineering, the European Union.
But these old powers have neither the legitimacy nor the power to sustain the global order into the future, while the new rising powers have yet to demonstrate which values they will articulate and promote.
They have to develop their vision of a new global economy, beyond complaints about its asymmetric power structure.
Unfortunately, it is not yet clear whether they have the inclination to rise above their immediate interests in order to address the world’s common challenges.
Their own development experience makes countries like China, India, and Brazil resistant to market fundamentalism and natural advocates for institutional diversity and pragmatic experimentation.
They can build on this experience to articulate a new global narrative that emphasizes the real economy over finance, policy diversity over harmonization, national policy space over external constraints, and social inclusion over technocratic elitism.
But they must stop being supplicants, and act like real leaders, understanding that others, too, including advanced countries, face challenges that sometimes require policies that put the domestic economy first.
And they must work to uphold the bedrock principles of the global economy that have served it – and them – so well in the last 60 years: non-discrimination and multilateralism.
Ultimately, though, the BRICS must also lead by example.
The human-rights practices in China and Russia, and their suppression of political dissent, are incompatible with global leadership.&amp; These authoritarian regimes must reform themselves at home if they are to exert any kind of moral claim abroad.
Crumbling BRICS
NEW DELHI – In 2001, when Jim O’Neill of Goldman Sachs coined the acronym BRIC to refer to Brazil, Russia, India, and China, the world had high hopes for the four emerging economies, whose combined GDP was expected to reach $128.4 trillion by 2050, dwarfing America’s projected GDP of $38.5 trillion.
When the four countries’ leaders gather on March 26 in South Africa – which joined their ranks in 2010 – for the fifth BRICS summit, their progress and potential will be reassessed.
The summit’s hosts have set ambitious goals, reflected in the summit’s theme: “BRICS and Africa – a partnership for development, integration, and industrialization.”
They seek to advance national interests, further the African agenda, and realign the world’s financial, political, and trade architecture – an agenda that encompasses objectives from previous summits, while reflecting South Africa’s goal of harnessing its membership to benefit all of Africa.
But, while strengthening ties with African countries might seem like the kind of pragmatic development issue that should bring consensus, the seeds of doubt are already being sown.
Lamido Sanusi, the governor of Nigeria’s central bank, has called for Africans to recognize that “their romance with China” has helped to bring about “a new form of imperialism.”
Moreover, the central item on the summit’s agenda, a proposed “BRICS development bank,” is one that has gone nowhere at previous summits.
This time, armed with a “feasibility study” put together by the five BRICS finance ministers, some progress may at last be made.
With trade, both among the BRICS countries and between the BRICS and the rest of Africa, expected to increase from roughly $340 billion in 2012 to more than $500 billion in 2015, there is also much to discuss on the commercial front.
So far, the goal of “global realignment” away from the advanced countries has catalyzed these five very disparate countries’ efforts to forge their own bloc.
But the primacy given to “advancing national interests” has always precluded real concerted action, at least until now.
This is why the idea of establishing a BRICS development bank has taken on such importance.
And the recently conducted feasibility study might spur long-awaited progress.
But toward what end?
According to China’s official news agency, the development bank’s primary objective would be “to direct development in a manner that reflects the BRICS’ priorities and competencies.”
Once the bank is established, a working group will be tasked with building the necessary technical and governance capacity.
But this stock rhetoric fails to address the discrepancies between the BRICS’ interests, or to define the bank’s role in reconciling and advancing them.
The fact that China is already Africa’s top trading partner, for example, invites questions about the proposed bank’s potential contributions.
And China’s answer – that the bank would foster the “development of more robust and inter-dependent ties between the BRICS” – provides little substance.
Is the bank supposed to serve as a counterweight to global multilateral development banks like the World Bank, or to reduce American and European dominance over the Bretton Woods institutions?
Whatever the underlying objective, it must be identified, and its concomitant risks addressed, if the BRICS are to make genuine progress.
For example, if the proposed bank is simply an additional funding institution aimed at supporting the BRICS’s development agenda, the participating countries’ leaders must establish how it will interact with national institutions, such as the Brazilian Development Bank, the China Development Bank, and the Export-Import Bank of India.
But the problem of aligning the BRICS’ interests is a much deeper one.
Consider India’s need for massive investments in infrastructure, made evident in its just-proposed 2013-2014 budget.
Some hopeful Indians see a BRICS bank as a way to channel China’s surplus funds – as well as its expertise and experience – to such investments (especially railways), as well as to strengthen Sino-Indian ties.
But, given the two countries’ many serious bilateral problems, will either government really want to bind itself so closely to the other?
Likewise, it is unclear what South Africa has to gain from the BRICS.
Over the last few decades, the country has used mining revenues to pave roads, strengthen law enforcement, advance education, and revitalize cities and towns.
The country’s most serious remaining problems – poverty and social inequality – are unlikely to be ameliorated through cooperation with the other BRICS countries, all of which rank among the world’s most unequal societies.
Other shared problems – such as corruption, poverty, and social underdevelopment – would be similarly difficult to address together.
And it seems that the BRICS may not even be willing to try.
Although Wen Jiabao, in his final address as Prime Minister, highlighted the enduring obstacles to China’s economic development (many of which its fellow BRICS share), China’s new president, Xi Jinping, insists that his country will not sacrifice its “sovereignty, security, or development interests” for the sake of more trade.
Meanwhile, Russia’s impaired democracy and resource-driven economy are a poor example for its fellow BRICS – and, in fact, could serve as a warning to the others about the risks of excessive reliance on the state.
And Brazil, like India a genuine democracy, also seems sui generis.
Despite the commodities boom of the last decade, its industrial output relative to GDP is no higher than it was when the effort to create a BRICS bloc began.
The BRICS’ ambitions – and the world’s expectations for them – may yet be fulfilled.
But shared potential does not translate into collaborative action.
On the contrary, each of the BRICS will have to pursue its goals, and confront its challenges, individually.
What International Community?
NEW YORK – Whenever something bad happens – Iran moving closer to acquiring nuclear weapons, North Korea firing another missile, civilian deaths reaching another grim milestone in Syria’s civil war, satellites revealing an alarming rate of polar-ice melt – some official or observer will call upon the international community to act.
There is only one problem: there is no “international community.”
Part of the reason stems from the absence of any mechanism for “the world” to come together.
The United Nations General Assembly comes closest, but little can be expected from an organization that equates the United States or China with, say, Fiji or Guinea-Bissau.
To be fair, those who founded the UN after World War II created the Security Council as the venue in which major powers would meet to determine the world’s fate.
But even that has not worked out as planned, partly because the world of 2013 bears little resemblance to that of 1945.
How else could one explain that Britain and France, but not Germany, Japan, or India, are permanent, veto-wielding members?
Alas, there is no agreement on how to update the Security Council.
Efforts like the G-20 are welcome, but they lack authority and capacity, in addition to suffering from excessive size.
The result is “multilateralism’s dilemma”: &#160;the inclusion of more actors increases an organization’s legitimacy at the expense of its utility.
No amount of UN reform could make things fundamentally different.
Today’s major powers do not agree on the rules that ought to govern the world, much less on the penalties for breaking them.
Even where there is accord in principle, there is little agreement in practice.
The result is a world that is messier and more dangerous than it should be.
Consider climate change.
Burning fossil fuels is having a measurable impact on the earth’s temperature.
But reducing carbon emissions has proved impossible, because such a commitment could constrain GDP growth (anathema to developed countries mired in economic malaise) and impede access to energy and electricity for billions of people in developing countries, which is unacceptable to China and India.
Stopping the spread of nuclear weapons would seem a more promising issue for global collaboration.
The Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) limits the right to possess nuclear weapons to the Security Council’s five permanent members, and then only temporarily.
But agreement is thinner than it appears.
The NPT allows countries the right to develop nuclear energy for purposes such as electricity generation, a loophole that allows governments to build most of what is necessary to produce the fuel for a nuclear weapon.
The inspection regime created in 1957 under the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) is a gentlemen’s agreement; inspectors can inspect only those facilities that are made known to them by the government in question.
Governments (such as Iran’s) can and do carry out illegal nuclear activities in secret sites that international inspectors either do not know about or cannot enter.
At least as important, there is no agreement on what to do when a country violates the NPT, as Iran and North Korea (which withdrew from the treaty in 2003) have done.
More international cooperation exists in the economic realm.
There has been real progress toward reducing tariff barriers; the World Trade Organization has also established a dispute-resolution mechanism for its 159 members.
But progress on expanding free trade at the global level has stalled, as many countries disagree on the treatment of agricultural goods, the elimination of subsidies, and trade in services.
Meanwhile, cooperation in the realm of cyberspace is just getting started – with difficulty.
The US is most concerned about cyber security and the protection of intellectual property and infrastructure.
Authoritarian governments are more concerned about information security – the ability to control what is available on the Internet in order to maintain political and social stability.
There is no agreement on what, if anything, constitutes an appropriate target for espionage.
The prevalence of non-state actors is further complicating efforts.
Another area where there is less international community than meets the eye is human suffering.
Governments that attack their own people on a large scale, or allow such attacks to be carried out, expose themselves to the threat of outside intervention.
This “Responsibility to Protect,” or R2P, was enshrined by the UN in 2005.
But many governments are concerned that R2P raises expectations that they will act, which could prove costly in terms of lives, military expenditure, and commercial priorities.
Some governments are also worried that R2P could be turned on them.
Russian and Chinese reticence about pressuring governments that deserve censure and sanction stems partly from such concerns; the absence of consensus on Syria is just one result.
In short, those looking to the international community to deal with the world’s problems will be disappointed.
This is not reason for despair or grounds for acting unilaterally.
But so long as “international community” is more hope than reality, multilateralism will have to become more varied.
In the trade area, this implies regional and bilateral accords.
On climate change, it makes sense to seek “mini-agreements” that set minimum common standards for fuel efficiency, slow deforestation, or limit the largest economies’ carbon output.
In these and other areas, governments will need to rally around regional undertakings, form coalitions of the relevant or willing, or simply seek understandings among countries to do their best to adopt common policies.
Such approaches may lack the reach and legitimacy of formal global undertakings, but they do have the advantage of getting something done.
The “Browning” of African Technology
Forget MIT.
Hello, Tsing Hua University.
For Clothilde Tingiri, a hot young programmer at Rwanda’s top software company, dreams of Beijing, not Cambridge, animate her ambitions.
Desperate for more education, this fall she plans to attend graduate school for computer science – in China, not America.
The Chinese are no strangers to Rwanda.
Near Tingiri’s office, Rwanda’s largest telecom company, Rwandatel, is installing new wireless telephony equipment made by Huawei of Shenzen.
Africa boasts the world’s fastest-growing market for wireless telephony, and Huawei – with offices in 14 African countries – is running away with the business, sending scores of engineers into the bush to bring a new generation of low-cost technology to some of the planet’s poorest people.
Motivated by profit and market share rather than philanthropy, Huawei is outpacing American and European rivals through lower prices, faster action, and a greater willingness to work in difficult environments.
According to Chris Lundh, the American chief of Rwandatel, “That’s the way things work in Africa now.
The Chinese do it all.”
Well, not quite.
Across sub-Saharan Africa, engineers from India – armed with appropriate technologies honed in their home market – are also making their mark.
India supplies Africa with computer-education courses, the most reliable water pumps, low-cost rice-milling equipment, and dozens of other technologies.
The sudden influx of Chinese and Indian technologies represents the “browning” of African technology, which has long been the domain of “white” Americans and Europeans who want to apply their saving hand to African problems.
“It is a tectonic shift to the East with shattering implications,” says Calestous Juma, a Kenyan professor at Harvard University who advises the African Union on technology policy.
One big change is in education.
There are roughly 2,000 African students in China, most of whom are pursuing engineering and science courses.
According to Juma, that number is expected to double over the next two years, making China “Africa’s leading destination for science and engineering education.”
The “browning” of technology in Africa is only in its infancy, but the shift is likely to accelerate.
Chinese and Indian engineers hail from places that have much more in common with nitty-gritty Africa than comfortable Silicon Valley or Cambridge.
Africa also offers a testing ground for Asian-designed technologies that are not yet ready for US or European markets.
A good example is a solar-powered cooking stove from India, which has experimented with such stoves for decades.
Wood-burning stoves are responsible for much of Africa’s deforestation, and, in many African cities, where wood accounts for the majority of cooking fuel, its price is soaring.
The Indian stove is clearly a work-in-progress; it is too bulky and not durable enough to survive the rigors of an African village.
But with India’s vast internal market, many designers have an incentive to improve it.
How many designers in America or Europe can say the same?
Of course, technology transfer from China and India could be a mere smokescreen for a new “brown imperialism” aimed at exploiting African oil, food, and minerals.
In recent years, China’s government alone has invested billions of dollars in African infrastructure and resource extraction, raising suspicions that a new scramble for Africa is underway.
But Africans genuinely need foreign technology, and the Chinese, in particular, are pushing hard – even flamboyantly – to fill the gap.
This year, Nigeria’s government bought a Chinese-made satellite, and even paid the Chinese to launch it into space in May.
China was so eager to provide space technology to Africa’s most populous country that it beat out 21 other bidders for a contract worth $300 million.
China’s technology inroads are usually less dramatic, but no less telling.
In African medicine, Chinese herbs and pharmaceuticals are quietly gaining share.
For example, the Chinese-made anti-malarial drug artesunate has become part of the standard treatment within just a few years.
Likewise, Chinese mastery over ultra-small, cheap “micro-hydro” dams, which can generate tiny amounts of electricity from mere trickles of water, appeals to power-short, river-rich Africans.
Tens of thousands of micro-hydro systems operate in China, and nearly none in Africa.
Americans do-gooders like Nicholas Negroponte, with his $100 laptop, have identified the right problem: Africa is way behind technologically and rapid leap-frogging is possible.
But Chinese and Indian scientists argue that Africa can benefit from a changing of the technological guard.
They may be right.
The Buck Stops at the Top
Recent news coverage showed Ken Lay, the former CEO of Enron, being led away in handcuffs.
Finally - years after Enron's collapse - Lay faces charges for what happened when he was at the helm.
As is so often the case in such circumstances, the CEO pleads innocence: he knew nothing about what his underlings were doing.
Bosses like Lay always seem to feel fully responsible for their companies' successes - how else could they justify their exorbitant compensation?
But the blame for failure - whether commercial or criminal - always seems to lie elsewhere.
America's courts (like Italy's courts in the case of Parmalat) will make the final judgment over criminal and civil liability under existing law.
But there is a broader issue at stake in such cases: to what extent should a CEO be held responsible for what happens under his watch?
Clearly, no CEO of a large corporation, with hundreds of thousands of employees, can know everything that goes on inside the company he or she runs.
But if the CEO is not accountable, who is?
Those below him claim that they were just doing what they thought was expected of them.
If they were not following precise orders, they were at least responding to vague pro forma instructions from the top: don't do anything illegal, just maximize profits.
The result, often enough, is a climate within which managers begin to feel that it is acceptable to skirt the edges of the law or to fudge company accounts.
Even though a CEO cannot know everything, he or she is still ultimately responsible for what occurs in the company they run.
They choose their subordinates, so it is their responsibility to ask the hard questions about what is going on under their watch.
More importantly, it is their responsibility to create a climate that encourages, or discourages, certain kinds of activities.
Simply put, it is their responsibility to be true leaders.
What's true for business bosses is doubly true for presidents and prime ministers.
The United States is in the process of choosing who will lead it for the next four years.
President George W. Bush may claim that he didn't know that the information he was provided by the CIA concerning weapons of mass destruction in pre-war Iraq was so faulty.
He may also claim that, with many thousands of troops under his command, it was impossible for him to ensure that US soldiers were not committing atrocities, torture, or violations of civil liberties.
But there is a fundamental sense in which Bush, like Ken Lay, is culpable, and must be held accountable.
Just as a CEO with a record not only of poor performance, but also of massive corporate misconduct, should be fired, so, too, should political leaders be held to a similar standard.
Bush had a responsibility for the behavior of the people working for him.
Instead, almost across the board in his administration, he chose as advisors people akin to Ken Lay.
Bush chose as his Vice-President a man who once served as CEO of Halliburton.
Dick Cheney clearly cannot be held responsible for corporate misconduct after he left Halliburton, but there is mounting evidence about misconduct that took place while he was at the helm.
Similarly, at the Securities and Exchange Commission, Bush appointed in the person of Harvey Pitt a fox to guard the chickens - until public outrage forced Pitt's resignation.
Bush chose the people who provided him with faulty information about Iraq, or at least he chose the heads of the organizations that provided the faulty information.
He chose his defense secretary and attorney general.
He, and the people he appointed, created an environment of secrecy, a system in which the normal checks on the accuracy of information were removed.
Most importantly, Bush did not ask the hard questions - perhaps because he, like those below him, already knew the answers they wanted.
They created a closed culture, impervious to contradictory facts, a culture in which civil rights have been given short shrift and some people have been deemed not to deserve any rights protection at all.
Only such a culture - one that undermined the longstanding presumption that an accused person is innocent until proven guilty - could produce the Bush administration's niggling legal distinctions concerning what is and what is not torture.
The abuses that have been documented at places such as Abu Ghraib and Guantanamo may not have been an inevitable consequence of the administration's legal memos, but surely those memos increased enormously the likelihood that torture would be viewed as acceptable.
Many Americans will reject Bush this November because of the poor performance of the economy or the quagmire in Iraq.
Others will oppose him due to his environmental record or his budget priorities.
But the intensity of opposition in America to Bush runs deeper than any single issue.
There is a growing recognition that the values he and his administration reflect are the antithesis of what America has long stood for - the values of an open society, in which differences of view are freely debated within a culture of civility and mutual respect for the rights of all.
The battle being waged in America today to restore these values is one that has been waged repeatedly around the world.
Both in America and elsewhere, much hinges on the outcome, for it is nothing less than a battle to force our leaders to accept responsibility for their actions.
The Bumpy Road Ahead
CAMBRIDGE – If stock market and interest-rate spreads are to be believed, America’s economy has seen the worst and may be on its way to a slow recovery.
But the troubles for the world economy are just starting.
If globalization does not get the fix it needs, economic prospects will be dim for rich and poor countries alike.
The worst that could happen is a return to the 1930’s, when countries put up high trade barriers and retreated into isolationism, to the detriment of all.
Fortunately, this is a remote scenario today.
But the next worst thing is to assume that a minor patch-up will be enough to render globalization healthy and sustainable.
It will take real effort and creativity to repair the deep cracks in globalization revealed by the financial crisis.
First, the good news.
The global response to the crisis may not have been stellar, but neither has it been the free-for-all that might have been feared.
The G-20 could not agree on coordinated fiscal stimulus or concrete steps towards banking reform.
But it did coalesce behind the International Monetary Fund and provided it with additional resources.
Despite scores of new protectionist measures around the world since the onset of the financial crisis, the vast majority are nothing to lose sleep over.
Globalization has not received a mortal blow – at least not yet.
The real test is yet to come.
The problem is that none of globalization’s underlying weaknesses is likely to be adequately addressed under the current agenda.
Financial regulation and supervision will surely be strengthened, but they will remain national in character, with little safeguard against cross-border spillover and regulatory arbitrage.
Moreover, the World Trade Organization’s agenda will remain irrelevant and, in any case, deadlocked.
China has yet to discover and adopt an alternative growth strategy that does not rely on a large trade surplus.
Trade and immigration (legal and illegal), if left unchecked, will continue to exert downward pressure on rich countries’ labor markets.
The financial crisis has not helped improve the image of globalization, which has long been deeply unpopular among ordinary voters in most of the world’s advanced countries.
As a result, globalization’s tendency to produce macroeconomic imbalances and financial fragility, its adverse impact on equality and social peace in many countries, and its weak political legitimacy will continue to generate tension and periodic crises. 
Two other developments will greatly aggravate these weaknesses.
The first is that the United States and other advanced countries are unlikely to recover their previous economic dynamism even after financial stability is restored.
Rich-country households have suffered a momentous loss of wealth (amounting to tens of trillions of US dollars).
This implies that consumption growth will remain muted for some time.
With public debt rising very rapidly, and in some countries projected to exceed 100% of GDP, governments will not be in a position to take up the slack.
The restructuring of economies away from finance will necessarily take some time.
Stagnation rather than growth will be the name of the game.
Second, global leadership is likely to remain in very short supply.
The US will be crippled by its high debt, under-performing economy, and discredited economic model.
The European Union will be preoccupied with its own internal integration process.
And China, where income per person is one-eighth the level of the US (adjusted for purchasing power parity), is simply too poor to become the new hegemony.
History teaches that global economic order is difficult to establish and maintain in the absence of a dominant economic power.
The interwar period, which suffered from a similar crisis of leadership, produced not only a collapse of globalization, but a devastating armed conflict on a global scale.
So the stakes in righting the world economy could not be higher.
Mismanage the process, and the consequences could be unimaginable.
Unfortunately, many of the solutions on offer are either too timid or demand too much of a global leadership that is in short supply.
The conundrum of global reform is that the proposals that go far enough, such as establishing a global financial regulator, are wildly unrealistic, while those that are realistic, such as reform of the IMF, fall far short of what is needed.
What we need is a vision of globalization that is fully cognizant of its limits.
We can start with a simple principle: We should strive not for maximum openness in trade and finance, but for levels of openness that leave ample room for the pursuit of domestic social and economic objectives in rich and poor countries alike.
In effect, the best way to save globalization is to not push it too far.
Consider a traffic analogy.
One way to prevent traffic accidents is to require everyone to drive a similar car, travel at the same speed, and head in the same direction.
Another is to enforce some simple rules: don’t drive in the fast lane if going slow, stop at red lights, use a signal before a turn, and so on.
The first approach may maximize the traffic load that can be carried safely, but it fails to take most people where they want to go and is ultimately self-defeating.
The second approach allows drivers to make their own choices, even if this means that they will have to slow down or stop on occasion.
Similarly, healthy and sustainable globalization should not impose a straitjacket of common rules on everyone.
The financial crisis laid bare the soft underbelly of globalization.
It would be a mistake to respond by trying to take globalization to the next level.
The economic and political obstacles that block deep integration cannot be wished away by exhortations.
It would serve us far better to take these limits into account and scale down our ambitions.
The Burma Road Goes Through Beijing
NEW YORK amp#45;amp#45; Three hard facts are setting the boundaries for the talks United Nations negotiator Ibrahim Gambari is undertaking as he shuttles between Burma’s ruling generals and the detained opposition leader Aung San Suu Kyi.
First, despite the heroic leadership of the Buddhist clergy and the pro-democracy community, almost 50 years of military misrule and terror tactics have worn down Burma’s people, who will likely find it hard to maintain their defiance without obvious splits among the ruling generals or widespread desertions among ordinary soldiers.
Second, Burma’s generals know that they face a stark choice: either maintain power or risk imprisonment, exile, and possible death.
In their eyes, this leaves them with virtually no choice but to hold on to power at all costs.
Finally, as long as China provides political, financial, and military support for Burma’s rulers, it will be all but impossible for any meaningful change to occur.
Until China decides that it has more to gain from a more legitimate government in Burma than it does from the current incompetent military regime, little can happen.
China’s decision to block the UN Security Council from condemning the Burmese regime’s assault on the Buddhist monks and other peaceful protestors underscores its long-standing political support for the junta.
This past January, China, alongside Russia, vetoed a Security Council resolution that condemned Burma’s human rights record and called on the government to stop attacks on ethnic minorities, release political prisoners, and begin a transition towards national reconciliation and democracy.
For years, China has also blocked meaningful sanctions against Burma.
China’s economic ties to Burma’s rulers are strategically important for both sides.
Annual bilateral trade, estimated at $1.1 billion – a huge figure, given Burma’s total GDP of $9.6 billion – provides an economic lifeline for the Burmese government.
China is also Burma’s largest military supplier.
At the same time, the $2 billion oil pipeline that China is seeking to build from Burma’s southern coast to China’s Yunnan province will allow China to get Middle East oil to its southern provinces more easily and securely.
When completed, the pipeline will make China much less susceptible to foreign military pressure in the event of international conflict.
So the stakes in Burma are high for China, as are Chinese fears of about how any future “national reconciliation” government might react to China’s record of complicity with the corrupt military rulers.
It should be remembered that America and its allies, faced with strategic fears of a similar type during the Cold War, also supported repugnant and oppressive regimes in places like Zaire, Chile, and Indonesia.
But America and the West did, at key turning points, realize that times had changed so much that these dictators had outlived their usefulness.
Thus, despots like Ferdinand Marcos in the Philippines and Chun Doo-hwan in Korea were jettisoned, because the price of supporting their despicable regimes became greater than the benefits.
In today’s Internet age, the costs of China’s support for Burma’s generals are rising fast.
Just as in Darfur, where China’s perceived support for the Sudanese government translated into harsh criticism and threats to brand the 2008 Olympics the “Genocide Games,” China’s backing of the Burmese generals, particularly if the death toll rises, could cause similar problems.
Indeed, an Olympic boycott will become more likely if scenes of murdered or brutalized Buddhist monks are flashed around the world.
Moreover, Burma’s public health woes and drug and human trafficking are increasingly being exported to southern China.
Although China has expressed some vague concerns over the crisis to the Burmese government, it has not taken any action that could meaningfully affect the regime’s calculations, despite its singularly unique leverage.
To encourage China to take the lead in fostering national reconciliation in Burma, the international community must convince China that pushing for reform and change can be a win-win proposition.
The international community must make clear that China’s interests would be protected during a transition to a more open society in Burma, and that some version of the oil pipeline project will be supported by any new regime.
Because China has been competing with India for access to Burma’s natural resources, India also needs to be actively included in efforts to pressure the Burmese regime, a process that the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) might effectively coordinate.
In a statement issued on September 27, ASEAN foreign ministers expressed a surprising degree of condemnation of the crackdown in Burma.
They could play an essential leading role in a process including the Burmese parties, China, India, the European Union, Russia, and the United States that could devise a roadmap for change in Burma.
Such an international process simply cannot happen without China.
The road to change in Burma runs through Beijing.
The Bush in Obama
GUANTÁNAMO BAY, CUBA – Hearings are underway in the United States Senate to assess what to do with the 240 detainees still behind bars at Guantánamo Bay, and what will become of the military tribunals and detention without trial that the Bush administration and a compliant Congress put into place.
The US Congress is also debating what will happen to the detention camp itself, which was established in 2002 to house men who were allegedly “the worst of the worst,” in a setting deliberately framed by Bush attorneys as “legal outer space.”
But are those Senate hearings actually window dressing on a new reality that is just as bad as the old one – and in some ways worse?
Military tribunals without due process are up and running again.
While President Barack Obama has released a few prisoners, notably the Chinese Uighurs, and sent another for a real trial in New York City, he is now, chillingly, signalling that he is about to begin “preventive detention,” which would empower him to hold forever an unspecified number of prisoners without charges or trials.
If there is to be a genuine review of the accusations against these detainees, how can it be known in advance that the third category will be required?
Indefinite preventive detention is, of course, the foundation of a police state.
Human rights organizations knew that Obama had prepared the way, in public-relations terms, for some criminal trials – talking up the “supermax” security of some US prisons, and noting that other terrorists have successfully been tried by America’s justice system.
(Other democracies, such as the United Kingdom and Spain, always try terrorism suspects, including alleged Al Qaida members, in ordinary criminal trials).
But, six months after he ordered an end to torture and CIA “black sites,” and promised to close Guantánamo within a year, Obama seems to be re-branding Bush’s worst excesses.
He has brought in planeloads of journalists to Guantánamo Bay to show them a “safe, transparent, and humane” facility that now offers fresh baklava and video viewing from a shackled loveseat.
But the roughly 240 detainees remain incarcerated without having been charged with any crime, and will still not get a fair trial, even under Obama’s proposed military commissions.
After all, the prosecutor, the judge, and the “panel” are all to be US government employees.
Furthermore, Obama’s Justice Department has invoked Bush’s argument that the State Secrets Act bars evidence about torture from being disclosed, which means that anyone who was tortured can never appear in court.
Moreover, Obama has sought to suppress hundreds of photographs depicting sexual assault in US-run prisons, and has done nothing to roll back the Patriot Act.
Why should Obama, a constitutional scholar, be backtracking this way?
First, he does not dare appear to be “soft on terror.”
Second, perhaps he needs to be able to try the Guantánamo detainees in a rigged setting, or even keep them from trial forever: lawyers claim that torture, including sexual torture, was so endemic in the CIA and the military that Obama could be holding scores, if not hundreds, of prisoners whose bodies are crime scenes.
According to Wells Dixon, a lawyer at the Center for Constitutional Rights who represents some of the detainees, the Obama administration cannot risk calling the torture practices crimes, so it calls them “classified sources and methods” that cannot be revealed in court.
“I can’t even tell you about the way my clients were tortured or I will be prosecuted,” he says.
In fact, even the explanation of why this material is classified cannot be reproduced, because it is privileged.
Nor has the access of lawyers to their Guantánamo clients improved under Obama.
“We are subject in all detainee cases to a protective order,” Dixon says. “Under this order, everything the detainee says is classified,” unless the Department of Defense “Privilege Team” decides otherwise.
Dixon then told me a revealing story of one of his clients, Majid Khan, a so-called “high-value detainee” who was held for three years in CIA “black sites.”
Khan was tortured, Dixon said, though “the government would say that what happened to him is an ‘intelligence source or method.’”
Because Dixon has a security clearance, he cannot discuss those classified “sources and methods.”
On the other hand, Dixon continued, “When the government does something to [Khan] that they say is classified, they have disclosed to him classified information.
The Bush Repression
How will President George W. Bush’s administration be remembered historically?
After five years in office, and with another three years to go, some answers are already apparent.
Others are emerging gradually.
The latter category includes an increasing assault on civil liberties within the United States that now compares to that of Richard Nixon’s administration more than thirty years ago.
Of course, civil liberties were bound to suffer in the wake of the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001.
Throughout American history, threats to national security, whether real or imagined, have led to clampdowns on the rights of citizens and, to a far greater extent, on the rights of immigrants and others suspected of acting in the interests of alien forces.
In the twentieth century, abuses of civil liberties were particularly severe during four periods.
In the years 1917 to 1919, US participation in World War I and anarchist bombings after the war led to almost two thousand federal prosecutions, mass roundups of aliens, and summary deportations.
During World War II, Japan’s attack on the US was followed by the internment of more than 120,000 Japanese-Americans because of their race, including many who were born in the US.
In the late 1940’s and the 1950’s, the Cold War and fears that the Red Menace would sap American resolve from within led to myriad anti-subversive programs, with tens of thousands of Americans losing their livelihoods as a result.
Finally, during the Nixon years, the president’s paranoia about opposition to the Vietnam War and to his policies fuelled a pattern of abuses that eventually brought about his resignation in disgrace.
The Nixon administration’s legacy is particularly instructive in assessing the Bush record.
Though Americans tend to lump Nixon’s violations of civil liberties together under the heading of “Watergate,” much more was involved than the break-in at Democratic Party headquarters and the subsequent cover-up.
The participants in those events included the “Plumbers,” a personal secret police established by Nixon and so named because one of their tasks was to eliminate leaks of information that the White House did not want to disclose.
Another secret assault on civil liberties was Nixon’s adoption of the “Huston Plan” which authorized political surveillance by burglary, electronic eavesdropping, and the use of the military to spy on civilians.
Nixon used these methods against political opponents, journalists, and government employees suspected of disloyalty to the president.
As far as we know, Bush has not gone that far.
Nevertheless, electronic eavesdropping without court authorization, of the sort Bush ordered starting in 2002, played a particularly important part in Nixon’s downfall.
One of the three counts against Nixon in the vote to impeach Nixon by the House of Representatives’ Judiciary Committee was based on such eavesdropping.
In fact, Bush pursued his policy despite a 1978 law – adopted in response to the Nixon-era abuses – that specifically requires judicial approval, and in contradiction to his public assurance that no such eavesdropping takes place without a court order.
Now that his electronic surveillance program has been exposed, Bush’s Justice Department has launched an investigation into how the news became public, threatening the journalists who reported the information.
But even before the latest revelations, the Bush administration’s assaults on civil liberties were legion, including its imprisonment of hundreds of men without charges at Guantánamo Bay in an effort to evade judicial review of their cases.
It also rounded up, jailed, and deported hundreds of aliens in an anti-terrorist drive none of whose targets was shown to have any link to terrorism.
The list does not stop there.
Bush’s subordinates authorized methods of interrogation that led to torture, and his administration adamantly resisted legislation that would ban its use.
It even insisted that it could imprison an American citizen, José Padilla, incommunicado for an indefinite period without criminal charges until, faced with the prospect of Supreme Court review, it suddenly pressed charges that had nothing to do with the allegations that had formed the basis for his detention.
Indeed, a hallmark of the Bush administration’s violations of civil liberties is that many involve efforts to evade judicial review.
Guantánamo, the deportations, the Padilla case, and the electronic eavesdropping program all share this characteristic.
At the same time, Bush has systematically packed the federal courts with judges chosen for their readiness to defer to presidential power.
His latest nominee to the US Supreme Court, Judge Samuel Alito, exemplifies this trend.
The mood in the US today is far from the point that it reached in 1973 and 1974, when the drive to impeach Nixon and convict him in the US Senate forced him to resign.
But, while it seems safe to predict that Bush will serve out the rest of his term, it also appears certain that history will look upon him as a president who sought to undermine civil liberties.
Unfortunately, given Bush’s repeated assertions – in defiance of America’s constitutional tradition of checks and balances – that his office endows him with unilateral powers to violate rights, he appears to be untroubled by that prospect.
The California Syndrome
STANFORD – California has long been a harbinger of national and global trends (both wonderful and overindulgent), a birthplace of innovation in everything from technology and entertainment to lifestyles.
The world’s most important technology companies still make their start – and their headquarters – in California: Apple, Intel, Cisco, Oracle, Google, and Facebook, to name a few in the neighborhood where I teach and live.
California once was a source of widely shared rising standards of living and tremendous upward economic mobility.
The state had America’s best public schools and state universities.
Its citizens were less socially and economically stratified than in many other US states.
After World War II, Americans migrated steadily to California, a land of opportunity, great natural beauty, and some of the world’s most fertile agricultural land.
But then something went radically wrong, and understanding why offers lessons for national and subnational governments everywhere.
California’s economy, which used to outperform the rest of the country, now substantially underperforms.
The unemployment rate, at 12.4%, is higher than in every other state except Nevada.
In recent years, net migration has reversed, with hundreds of thousands of workers and their families leaving the state in search of better job opportunities elsewhere.
California’s public schools, from kindergarten to high school, rank poorly on standardized tests.
The state is an epicenter of the housing bust and the foreclosure crisis.
Silicon Valley CEOs say they will not expand in California because of high taxes and burdensome regulation, which make the state uncompetitive.
With 12% of America’s population, California accounts for more than 31% of its public-assistance recipients.
It has a vast and growing prison population, with annual spending on each incarcerated inmate equivalent to a middle-income California household’s after-tax income.
Meanwhile, the state lurches from fiscal tragedy to fiscal farce.
Governor Jerry Brown (who was also Governor in the 1970’s) inherits a budget deficit of $26 billion. And that’s before the coming deluge from generous public employee pensions and health costs.
At the heart of California’s problem is its deranged progressive tax system, which includes among the highest personal-income, sales, corporate, and gas rates of any state. Only property taxes are below the US average.
California’s government collects about one-half of its income-tax revenue from the top 1% of the state’s taxpayers.
But the system’s extreme progressivity makes proceeds so volatile that the state continually experiences boom-bust cycles of rapidly rising revenue, inevitably followed by collapse.
The revenue is all spent on the upswing, forcing disruptive emergency cutbacks on the way down.
Attempts to build a serious “rainy day fund” have failed badly.
The political economy of California’s budget has taken the progressive tax-and-spend experiment to the breaking point, threatening the state’s ability to fund basic services, from prisons and parks to education and health care, even those aimed at helping its most vulnerable citizens.
California’s government rarely manages to satisfy the balanced-budget requirement in the state constitution.
It winds up borrowing “temporarily” with short-term debt; then, as borrowing accumulates, it is refinanced with longer-term securities. Spending is temporarily reduced and taxes raised, but the long-run structural deficit remains, a pattern now repeated in many state capitals and the primary reason for the current political turmoil over budgets and public sector unions.
Many other strains are also self-inflicted.
From federal water shutoffs, in the name of protecting a tiny fish, which have decimated agriculture and left tens of thousands unemployed, to severe local zoning restrictions that drive home prices higher, California now has a wide array of problems begging for solutions.
Illegal immigrants perform a substantial share of the state economy’s menial and physically demanding work.
Absent a sensible guest-worker program, they remain in the shadows, and they and their children crowd public services. (In one school in Los Angeles, a teacher reported 70 kids who came and went during the year in a class of 25, and more than a dozen languages are spoken in some school districts).
The state’s extensive environmental and energy regulation, including micromanaging carbon emissions, in combination with globalization, has driven away much of California’s manufacturing and many of its middle-class jobs.
Among US states, California still ranks first in technology, agriculture, and entertainment. But it also stands at or near the top in deficits, tax rates, prison inmates, and, by a wide margin, welfare recipients relative to population.
It ranks last or near the bottom in business climate, housing affordability, and state bond rating (below even the US territory of Puerto Rico).
It’s a complex picture, but at its core is a high-tax welfare state run amok.
No one should write off California; it still has great strengths.
And it can turn some of its short-term problems, such as the pressures arising from ethnic and linguistic diversity (the state is now 37% Hispanic and 13% Asian) into long-term strengths in the global economy.
But its political class will have to confront some hard realities and face up to the fact that Californians who pay no income tax (almost half the workforce) will have to start paying for services, and that services will have to be more carefully targeted.
A healthy democracy cannot have half the population paying taxes and the other half collecting benefits.
Relying on ever-higher taxes to fund payments to an outsized population of benefit recipients is a recipe for exporting prosperity elsewhere.
That is one California trend that others emulate at their peril.
The Cancer Season
As summer beckons, we should take a moment to focus on the sun's dark side.
The source of all life on Earth, the sun is also a fountain of environmental carcinogens.
Specifically, we now know that the sun's ultraviolet radiation is the primary cause of most skin cancers. 
Skin cancer, long thought to be a disease of little public health significance, has now become epidemic.
An estimated 90,000 new cases of malignant melanoma and well over one million cases of non-melanoma skin cancer will occur in the United States this year.
Melanoma will cause 8,000 deaths, and non-melanoma skin cancer will kill another 2,000.
Melanoma is now the most common cancer in women aged 24 to 35.
Once a disease of men in their fifties and sixties, it is not unusual for women in their twenties to develop basal cell cancer or squamous cell cancer. 
While the incidence of skin cancer has risen dramatically, so has our understanding of its causes.
For over fifty years, ultraviolet radiation from the sun has been the number one suspected cause of skin cancer.
Epidemiologic data from Australia, animal studies with artificial sources of ultraviolet light, and the development of skin cancer in individuals with a genetic inability to correct the DNA damage caused by ultraviolet radiation provided circumstantial evidence of the connection.
Recent work has made the causal link between the sun and skin cancer at the molecular and cellular level. 
Ultraviolet radiation causes specific and unique mutations in the tumor suppressor gene that produces a protein called p53.
This protein is involved in a process called 
 apoptosis
 in which damaged cells commit "suicide" to ensure that their defective genes are not passed on to daughter cells.
(This is perhaps the first indication that self-sacrifice may be an intrinsic human trait!)
Damaged by the sun, but not quite able to commit suicide, the mutated cell continues to proliferate at the expense of normal surrounding cells, resulting in a pre-cancerous growth that can progress to a full-blown squamous cell carcinoma.
But how should we communicate to people about skin cancer and its prevention?
If our key message is "stay out of the sun forever," we are doomed to fail.
Creating a culture of cave dwellers is no way to decrease the incidence of skin cancer. 
Moreover, in educating the public we confront formidable forces: cultural icons who are as bronze as the statuary in the Louvre, the sheer pleasure of being in the sun, and the 
 perceived
 incremental health benefits
 of ultraviolet radiation.
The dearth of pale actors, actresses, corporate leaders, and politicians confirms that a tan is identified with health, wealth, and power, rather than the travails of the working class, as in the past.
The artificial tanning industry promises that ultraviolet radiation from their machines causes less damage than natural sunlight.
But in both cases, a tan is the body's response to injury.
Microscopic pigment granules produced by skin pigment cells aggregate around the cell's nucleus to shield the DNA from the marauding rays and prevent mutation.
It is irrelevant whether the ultraviolet radiation came from a bulb or a star.
Whether natural or artificial, ultraviolet radiation causes the skin to age prematurely.
The inescapable irony is that teenagers and young women pursue a tan to look more attractive, but trade a moment or two of sunny radiance for a whole lifetime of premature wrinkles, fine lines, and haggard-looking skin.
As young people consider themselves immortal, not even appeals to lifelong vanity, let alone warnings about cancer, are sufficient to deter them from the tanning booths.
But the difficulties of educating the public about the causes of skin cancer do not diminish our obligation to try.
There are enough other diseases about which we do not have a clue as to the cause.
With skin cancer, we know very well how we can prevent it - and prevention is always easier than treatment. 
A good place to start is to ensure that the public has access to accurate information.
While pseudoscience and the anti-aging industry represent an important source of potential misinformation, the Internet often provides damaging false information as well.
Amazingly, the Internet has the same level of credibility with the patient as television does with the consumer: "I read it on the Web, so it must be true." 
At the same time, tanning parlors should be regulated.
While barbers, hairdressers, taxi drivers, bar owners, and doctors are often licensed, permits are rarely required to operate a tanning parlor.
None of the other professions listed above, however, knowingly exposes its clients to a confirmed environmental carcinogen.
Until the tanning industry chooses to police itself, customers should eschew the bulbs and pursue the spray: wear an artificial tan.
This preventable disease should be the focus of a comprehensive educational campaign similar to anti-smoking campaigns, which are now bearing fruit in many countries.
In addition, scientific research on this most accessible of human organs will continue to identify innovative treatments and modes of prevention, which may well become applicable to other cancers.
The Case Against Emergency Food Aid
Niger’s food emergency has reached the world’s headlines, but the crisis there is only one part of a much larger disaster.
On an extended trip this summer through rural areas of Asia, the Middle East, and Africa on behalf of the United Nations, I visited countless villages afflicted with extreme hunger and struggling to survive against the odds.
The villages that I visited – in Tajikistan, Yemen, Mali, Ethiopia, Rwanda, Malawi, Cambodia, and elsewhere – reflect the condition of hundreds of millions of impoverished people worldwide.
Whether caused by drought, exhausted soils, locusts, lack of high-yield seeds, the results were the same: desperation, disease, and death.
Incredibly, the actions of the richest countries – which promised solidarity with the world’s poorest people at the G-8 Summit in July – have intensified the hunger crisis.
Even today, donor governments’ aid efforts are poorly directed.
They respond to hunger emergencies such as Niger’s with food relief, but fail to help with long-lasting solutions.
The expanding hunger crisis reflects a lethal combination of growing rural populations and inadequate food yields.
Rural populations are growing because poor farm households choose to have many children, who work as farmhands and serve as social security for their parents.
This intensifies poverty in the next generation, as average farm sizes shrink.
Food yields per acre (or hectare) are inadequate because impoverished farm households lack some or all of the four inputs needed for modern and productive agriculture: soil-nutrient replenishment (through organic and chemical fertilizers), irrigation or other water-management techniques, improved seed varieties, and sound agricultural advice.
The problem is especially severe in landlocked countries like Mali, Niger, Rwanda, and Malawi, where high transport costs leave villages isolated from markets, and in regions that depend on rainfall rather than river-based irrigation.
Yields, on average, barely support survival, and crop failures are common and deadly, while long-term global climate change, caused mainly by high energy consumption in the rich countries, may be exacerbating the frequency and severity of droughts.
These impoverished villages need financial help to buy vital inputs for farming and to invest in basic infrastructure such as roads and electrification.
Instead, donor governments and the World Bank have insisted for years that impoverished countries cut financing to these villages, under the guise of promoting “macroeconomic stability” – a polite way of demanding debt repayment – and reflecting the ideological delusion that the private sector will step in.
Instead, these policies have left hundreds of millions of people even more desperately poor and hungry, and even more vulnerable to drought, pests, and soil depletion.
Millions die each year, either of outright starvation or from infectious diseases that their weakened bodies cannot withstand.
And still, after twenty years of preaching that private markets would pick up the slack, these impoverished communities are further away than ever from using improved seeds, fertilizers, and small-scale water management technologies.  
The irony is that donors then respond with very expensive emergency food aid, which typically proves to be too little and too late.
A shipment of an equivalent dollar amount of fertilizer and improved seeds from, say, the United States to Africa would yield perhaps five times more food.
But donors have not yet implemented this obvious and basic lesson.
Malawi today is an urgent case in point.
Because of rural impoverishment and a drought earlier this year, dire hunger afflicts millions of people.
Donors are rallying for food aid, but they are resisting the obvious need to help the poorest million farmers (and their four million dependents) get soil nutrients and improved seeds in time for the planting season this autumn.
The cost of sending such help would be around $50 million, and the benefits would be $200 million to $300 million in increased food production next year (and hence less needed in emergency food aid).
Moreover, Malawi has a proven track record of sharply higher food yields when impoverished farmers are helped with inputs.
Yet donors continue shipping expensive food aid while ignoring Malawi’s desperate need to grow more food.
Over the longer term, increased food yields could be turned into sustained economic growth.
First, rural households would be encouraged to have fewer children, and to invest more in each child’s health and education.
Child survival rates would rise, reinforcing lower fertility rates.
At the same time, increased educational opportunities for girls and women, and low-cost contraceptives provided by family-planning services, would empower them to marry later and have fewer children.
Second, and simultaneously, donors should help impoverished countries to invest in roads, ports, rural electricity, and diversified production (both agricultural and non-agricultural), in order to promote higher productivity and alternative livelihoods in the longer term.
Villages currently trapped in hunger and subsistence agriculture would become commercial centers for food processing and exports, and even for rural industry and services supported by electrification, mobile phones, and other improved technologies.
This is a year of both widespread hunger and solemn promises by the rich countries.
But emergency food aid is not enough.
Impoverished communities in Africa, the Middle East, and Asia are ripe for a “green revolution,” based on modern scientific techniques for managing soils, water, and seed varieties.
Donors should lend their support by backing long-term solutions aimed at increasing food production, slowing population growth, and mitigating long-term global climate change.
The Case for Fiscal Stimulus