Sexual violence is used as a tactic of war.
But it is also a disturbing feature of home life; 37% of African women report having been abused by their partner.
In the case of female genital mutilation and child marriage, such violence is culturally sanctioned.
We must change laws, judicial systems, and attitudes that exonerate the perpetrators, and we must provide help to victims.
Attitudes can change.
Contraception, for example, was once a contentious issue.
Today, most African leaders accept it as an important, cost-effective investment and as part of their countries’ economic-development strategies.
Basic family planning in 16 Sub-Saharan countries could save more than $1 billion in education costs alone.
The number of maternal deaths could fall by one-third, saving millions (in developing countries overall, maternal and new-born health-care savings could reach $5.7 billion).
However, the sad reality is that, despite support from various development partners and donors, assistance for reproductive health care and family planning fell by half in the last decade.
The compounding benefits of ending legal, economic, and gender discrimination are vast.
Healthier, wealthier, and better-educated women tend to produce healthier, wealthier, and better-educated families, because women typically invest more of their earnings than men do in their children’s wellbeing.
With the continent’s population forecast to double by 2050, there is hardly a better time to invest in women and girls.
It is as much an economic as an ethical argument.
Europe’s Hidden Stimulus
LONDON – When the European Council next meets, on February 7, it should look at private investment as a means to kick-start Europe’s stagnant economy.
With the usual drivers of GDP growth constrained across Europe, the one economic sector able to spend is the non-financial corporate sector.
Indeed, publicly traded European companies had excess cash holdings of €750 billion ($1 trillion) in 2011, close to a 20-year high.
Unlocking that cash would give Europe a much larger stimulus package than any government can provide.
In 2011, for example, private investment in Europe totaled more than €2 trillion, compared to government investment of less than €300 billion.
And yet, while trends among European economies have varied, private investment was, overall, the hardest-hit component of GDP during the crisis, plunging by more than €350 billion – ten times greater than the fall in private consumption and four times more than the decline in real GDP – between 2007 and 2011.
The magnitude of the private-investment downturn was, in fact, unprecedented – and lies at the heart of Europe’s economic malaise.
Likewise, by historical standards, the private-investment recovery is running late.
In more than 40 past episodes in which GDP fell and private investment declined by 10%, recovery took an average of five years.
Europe is four years removed from the onset of recession, but private investment in 2011 was still lower than its 2007 level in 26 of the European Union’s 27 member states.
To be sure, the fact that companies are holding on to their cash, rather than paying it out in dividends, signals that they expect investment opportunities to return – a far more positive situation than in Japan, for example, where companies lack cash to invest.
But European companies remain hesitant, despite low interest rates, keeping private investment well below its previous peak.
Governments can help to persuade companies to let go of their cash by removing regulatory barriers such as zoning regulations in retail and a plethora of requirements in the construction sector concerning everything from the height of ceilings to the size of staircase areas.
They should also address the lack of uniform standards across Europe’s internal borders; for example, there are 11 separate signaling systems for rail freight in the EU-15.
After Sweden eased planning laws in its retail sector during the 1990’s, the country posted the strongest retail productivity growth in Europe (and outstripped that of the United States) between 1995 and 2005.
Standardization and liberalization in European telecoms underpinned 9% growth in value added and productivity in this period, compared to 6% growth in the US.
The largest scope for renewed private investment is in capital-intensive sectors in which government has a major presence as regulator.
Even if European countries were to close only 10% of the variation in capital stock per worker at the subsector level, the impact could be more than €360 billion in additional investment – offsetting the €354 billion difference in private investment between 2007 and 2011.
Many projects, from airports to university campuses, benefit from returns over decades, which implies that weak demand in the short term will have only a limited impact on their overall viability.
Even among more near-term projects, some – for example, retrofitting buildings with more energy-efficient features – could become viable with action from policymakers.
Some degree of investment will add to demand, which may persuade others to invest – a virtuous circle.
This approach is not about “picking winners and losers.”
It is about targeted microeconomic reforms that reduce or remove barriers to private investment, thereby encouraging the non-financial corporate sector to propel European GDP growth.
But it is important to get this policy activism right.
First, governments need to focus on sectors in which action is likely to trigger renewed investment on a scale large enough to boost GDP – and quickly enough to enable private investment to drive the recovery.
Governments often become enamored of innovative sectors, such as semiconductors, that account for only a very small share of total investment.
Policymakers may wish to develop these sectors as a catalyst to innovation, but they should not expect that such initiatives alone can spur a recovery in private investment.
In fact, construction and real estate are the most promising candidates, as they account for roughly one-third of European fixed investment and more than 17 million jobs.
Although these sectors are unlikely to rebound to pre-crisis levels in Greece, Ireland, and Spain for many years, other European economies, including the United Kingdom, Italy, and Sweden, as well as some Eastern European economies, have scope for further investment.
To meet Europe’s ambitious 2020 energy targets, retrofitting existing buildings and improving new buildings’ energy efficiency, including the use of more energy-efficient materials and equipment, could lead to roughly €37 billion in additional annual investment between now and 2030.
Too often, they spend money to support private-sector projects that fail to provide a positive return for the broader economy.
Three ingredients are vital to getting it right: backing for initiatives at the highest political level; participation by all key stakeholders in deciding what action to take and driving its implementation; and establishing small, high-powered delivery units with clear mandates to coordinate interventions.
Europe’s leaders need to put private investment at the center of their growth strategy by devising policies that open the gates to large potential flows.
The European Council meeting on February 7 is an ideal opportunity to make a start.
Unmasking the Man with the Wooden Face
Ever since he became General Secretary of the Chinese Communist Party and President of the Peoples’ Republic of China four years ago, Hu Jintao has remained infuriatingly wooden-faced and opaque.
Over the past year, however, the shroud of mystery has begun to drop.
Hu’s unbridled glorification of “Mao Zedong Thought,” coupled with his suppression of dissent in the media, has begun not only to reveal a true authoritarian, but also to belie the wishful thinking of liberals, both inside and outside China, who hoped that Hu would be a reform-minded leader.
It was the late patriarch Deng Xiaoping who in 1992 made the surprising demand that Hu, former Secretary of the Communist Youth League and protégé of ousted party chief Hu Yaobang, be inducted into the Chinese Communist Party’s (CCP) Politburo Standing Committee.
Deng, in effect, personally designated Hu as successor to President Jiang Zemin.
As Deng had crushed the protestors in Tiananmen Square in June of 1989, Hu had proven himself to be “firm and resolute” in quelling anti-Beijing riots in Lhasa, Tibet, two months earlier.
Both understood the dangers of political reform.
Hu, a life-long Party functionary, was able to fool most observers during his first year in office.
He and Premier Wen Jiabao – often called a latter-day Zhou Enlai for his administrative abilities and willingness to play second fiddle – rolled out one impressive slogan after another: “Put people first,” “Run the country according to law,” “Render the media closer to the people,” and “Make government transparent.”
The leadership seemed to be moving away from the ancien regime of Jiang.
Hu pledged to replace Deng’s elitist ethos of “letting one part of the population get rich first”– a policy that has produced a staggering wealth gap – with a more egalitarian approach.
As part of his government’s efforts “to construct a harmonious society,” a tax on agricultural produce was scrapped last year, while the State Council vowed to boost annual investment in rural infrastructure.
But Hu’s administration invariably slams on the brakes whenever their “put-people-first” initiatives begin to threaten one-party rule.
Hu’s Politburo has consistently refused to let peasants set up non-official farmers’ associations or trade unions.
At the same time, it has allowed farmers across China to fall victim to an epidemic of illegal land grabs by local governments and developers.
Not only has Hu’s administration failed to protect the rights of the poor and the oppressed, but police and government-hired thugs now frequently harass lawyers and other activists who lobby on behalf of the country’s dispossessed.
Chen Guangcheng, a blind lawyer – famous for exposing a forced abortion scandal in Shandong – was given a four-year jail term on the dubious charge of “organizing a mob to disturb traffic.”
Perhaps the most revealing aspect of Hu’s rule is his failure to reform the government’s outmoded institutions.
In a landmark speech on administrative restructuring in 1980, Deng underscored the urgency of bringing about a “separation of party and government.”
Hu, by contrast, seems to find little fault with the status quo, under which the Party remains in charge of not only government, but also state enterprises.
It is also becoming increasingly clear that Hu will continue to rely on a variety of politically retrograde propaganda tactics.
He has revived the use of ideological campaigns, akin to those used during the Cultural Revolution, such as a requirement that Party members study The Collected Works of Jiang Zemin .
Indeed, Hu has sought to restore some of Mao’s luster.
In a speech marking the Great Helmsman’s 110th birthday in late 2003, he declared Mao to be a “great proletariat revolutionary strategist and theorist.”
While Deng had castigated Mao’s “leftist” errors, Hu’s hagiographic address made no mention of his manifold blunders.
Moreover, Hu has fomented nationalism, not by taking understandable pride in China’s impressive economic growth, but by demonizing Japan.
He has become increasingly reliant on the facile notion that state-sponsored patriotism and nationalism can hold China’s disparate groups together.
Finally, Hu, Wen, and the rest of the top leadership have turned themselves into superb firefighters with an uncanny ability to, in Party parlance, “nip the seeds of opposition before they sprout.”
Apart from sharpening the “tools of the proletarian dictatorship” by strengthening the Peoples Liberation Army and the People’s Armed Police, they have created a labyrinthine “advance warning” system to monitor threats ranging from peasant riots, urban unrest, and bird flu to the influx of Western ideas through the Internet.
Hu is due to remain in power until 2012.
Given the economy’s solid performance and the docility of China’s population, there seems little doubt that Hu’s twenty-first-century market dictatorship will preserve the Party’s mandate to continue ruling – for now.
But it is equally obvious that Hu, the sphinx-like apparatchik in whom Chinese and Western liberals alike had once invested hope, is unlikely to deliver the more open and humane China that they thought he had promised.
China under Hu has perhaps found its development model: a form of Leninist capitalism with no aspirations toward a more democratic form of governance.
Unpredictable Russia
When he first arrived in Paris in 2000 as the newly elected President of Russia, Vladimir Putin had a simple and reassuring message to convey.
“I am bringing you what you need most: a stable and guaranteed source of energy.
My oil and my gas will not be cheaper than supplies coming from the Middle East, but they will be much more secure.”
Putin’s implicit point was that “Christian energy,” even if “Orthodox,” would be more reassuringly certain than “Muslim energy” for a Western world jittery about stability in the Middle East.
The Middle East was supposed to be messy and unpredictable, unlike the new and modern Russia of Putin.
The problem today is that for Ukrainians, Georgians, not to mention Italians, “Christian” oil and gas from Russia does not seem nearly as secure and as fail-proof as Putin promised.
The key criterion by which its allies and partners should judge Russia is predictability, and, in this respect, Russia is increasingly falling short.
When Putin welcomes Hamas’s leaders without consulting the other members of the “Quartet” – the United Nations, the European Union, and the United States – charged with shepherding peace talks between Israel and Palestine, is Russia testing its “nuisance value” or simply performing an “avant-garde” role for the other Quartet members?
What is becoming clearer by the day is that the formula defining Western policy towards Russia since communism’s collapse – “Let’s engage Russia if we can, let’s contain Russia if we must” – must now be completely rethought.
The West has largely failed to engage Russia either as a European or Western ally.
Was this due to a lack of openness or imagination on our part, or a lack of interest or goodwill on Russia’s part?
The inheritors of the Soviet empire never anticipated that their future was to become the West’s “junior,” poorer, repentant, and admiring partner.
Indeed, today’s Russians have no nostalgia for the Yeltsin years, which they associate with confusion, humiliation, shame and weakness.
For most Russians, the emergence of an independent civil society and the first fluttering of an inconstant democratic wind could not balance the deep national frustration felt over the loss of empire and shattered status.
Besides, what would a containment policy applied to Russia today look like?
Russia’s leaders, tucked behind the political safety cushion provided by high energy prices, rightly feel that time is working in their favor, that “we” in the West need Russia more than Russia needs us.
To be sure, Russia’s role as the world’s newest “petro-state” is very different from the Russia where life expectancy for men is bordering on levels seen in the poorest African countries.
But world events are inclining Russia to forget about its bleak demographic outlook and focus instead on its oil-charged future.
Indeed, escalating tensions in the Middle East – particularly Iran’s nuclear ambition – is likely to incline the US to overlook Russia’s diplomatic prickliness even more.
Rapid economic growth in China and India means that both countries will give primacy to a stable flow of energy – and therefore to placid relations with Russia.
Nor can the EU afford a serious crisis with the Kremlin.
The diplomats surrounding Putin may find it natural, given their training, to apply the old Soviet-era methods, and may believe that the moment has come to undo yesterday’s humiliation.
Defending Russia’s national interests, in their view, demands hard bargaining tactics, even if these now verge on the comical, as in the recent case of supposed British spies hiding secrets in a rock in a Moscow park.
Of course, Russia cannot seriously consider balancing the US with China, let alone with France.
An axis between Paris, Berlin, and Moscow never really made sense even when Schroeder was in power in Germany.
It is even more absurd today, with Angela Merkel – someone who is without illusions about Russia – as German Chancellor.
A fine line must be drawn in defining Western policy towards Russia.
Heavy-handed diplomatic pressure – such as threats to exclude Russia from the G8 – must be a weapon of last resort.
But resigned acquiescence in whatever Putin’s regime chooses to do would only confirm it in its belief that it now holds all the cards.
The key word to which we should return in defining our policy towards Russia is “predictability.”
The only secure, predictable Russia is one that offers not “Christian energy,” but “rule of law energy.”
The “democratic energy” of Norway may constitute too distant a goal, but Russia’s role as a predictable energy supplier requires ending the reign of corruption.
Predictability depends on accountability.
We in the West may badly need Russia’s energy, but if Russia does not want its future to degenerate into Oriental despotism, it must engage with the West in good faith.
If Putin genuinely seeks to bolster Russia’s global standing, he must not allow Russians’ sense of humiliation in the years since the Soviet collapse to stand in the way.
Clearing A Path Through the Brain
MADRID – Our brains are like a dense forest – a complex, seemingly impenetrable terrain of interacting neurons that mediates cognition and behavior.
The great challenge is to uncover its mysteries, that is, to find out how the neurons are structured and mutually connected.
How close are we to that goal?
In general, the exchange of information between the billions of neurons that make up the neuronal forest takes place through two types of highly specialized structures: chemical synapses (the majority) and so-called gap junctions (a substrate of one class of electrical synapse).
Chemical synaptic transmission involves the release of specific molecules, neurotransmitters, which diffuse through the intercellular space and interact with specific receptors located on an adjacent neuron.
In the electrical transmission mediated by gap junctions, the plasma membranes of adjacent neurons are separated by a gap of about two nanometers (two-billionths of a meter), but contain small channels (the gap junctions) that connect the cytoplasm of the adjoining neurons, permitting the diffusion of small molecules and the flow of electric current.
The major problem when analyzing the brain is the extreme complexity of its synaptic connections.
A very dense network of processes occupies the space between the cell bodies of the neurons, neuroglia (cells that support and protect neurons), and blood vessels.
This space (the neuropil) represents 90-98% of the volume of the human cerebral cortex, with an estimated one billion synapses per cubic millimeter of neuropil.
As if that didn’t make the brain mappers’ job difficult enough, a wide variety of synaptic relationships has been observed.
And a neurotransmitter may diffuse and act not only on other synaptic contacts, but also on extrasynaptic receptors.
Likewise, not all electrical transmission is mediated by gap junctions, and these forms involve different specialized structures.
In addition, electrical interactions take place between closely apposed neuronal elements without obvious membrane specializations.
Furthermore, it has been proposed that glial cells are involved in information processing through their bi-directional signaling with neurons.
And we now know that the activity of neuronal circuits is strongly influenced by neuromodulators (such as dopamine, serotonin, and acetylcholine), which are secreted by a small group of neurons and diffuse through large regions of the nervous system.
Neurohormones, released by neurosecretory cells, also have an effect on many brain regions via the circulatory system.
Nonetheless, we are beginning to find our way through the forest.
The brain’s wiring – its “synaptome” – is the anatomical substrate for a variety of functions that require information to be communicated rapidly from one point to another.
The neuronal circuits involved in reflexes are a typical example – relatively simple, fast, automatic actions that occur at a subconscious level.
Other, much more complex functions related to the synaptome include information processing in large but discrete circuits in the sensory and motor systems and in the brain regions associated with language, calculation, writing, and reasoning.
The modulatory systems, however, act on multiple neuronal circuits and brain areas.
This diffuse action is related to the overall moods and states of the brain (for example, attentiveness, sleep, and anxiety).
Rapid and automatic serial reconstruction of large tissue volumes, enabled by the recent development of automated electron microscopy techniques, is the method of choice in defining the synaptome.
Nevertheless, even using this technology, full reconstruction of whole brains is possible only for relatively simple nervous systems.
Indeed, even for a small mammal like the mouse, it is impossible to reconstruct the brain completely at the ultrastructural level, because the magnification needed to visualize synapses yields relatively small images.
For example, although the synaptic density within a given area and layer may vary, this variability remains within a relatively narrow window, so the statistical distribution of the variation can be modeled.
That means that we do not need to reconstruct the entire layer within a given area to determine the absolute number and types of synapses; instead, the range of variability can be determined by multiple sampling of relatively small regions within that area.
By combining these detailed structural data with the incomplete light and electron microscopy wiring diagrams, it could be possible to generate a realistic statistical model, rather than attempting to reconstruct the brain in its entirety.
Computational models of neuronal networks based on real circuits already have become useful tools to study aspects of the functional organization of the brain.
Thus, although a true synaptome of the mammalian brain is a chimerical quest, it is possible that in the near future we will be able to construct a “silicon cortex,” a computerized machine based on a realistic model of the complete anatomical, physiological, and molecular design of the cortical circuit.
If we succeed, we will finally be able to see the forest – without having to look for every tree.
Securing the UN’s Future
SHANGHAI – As the existing international order becomes more fragmented, strong global-governance institutions are crucial for addressing the world’s strategic, economic, and sustainability challenges.
And yet rarely have our existing institutions – including, above all, the United Nations – been frailer.
The UN is not broken, but it is in trouble, particularly as more countries treat it as a polite diplomatic afterthought and seek solutions to major global problems elsewhere.
We’ve seen this on issues ranging from Syria to Iran, North Korea, terrorism, cyber security, asylum-seekers and refugees, migration, Ebola, and the emerging crisis in humanitarian-aid funding.
While the UN still has many strengths, it also has clear structural weaknesses.
The gap between what it aspires to do and what it actually does is growing.
But the world needs a UN that not only deliberates on policy, but also delivers in the field.
The UN matters – a lot.
It is a deeply embedded component of the post-World War II order.
If its relevance declines – if it slowly becomes “just another NGO” – countries will change their fundamental assumptions about how to deal with one another in the future.
Unilateralism and the law of the jungle – the hallmark of a now-distant past – would return to international relations.
The UN has shown that it is capable of reinventing itself.
But now it must do so out of necessity, not convenience.
It must urgently re-design its functions, structure, and finance mechanisms to maximize the delivery of measurable results in all areas within its purview, from peace and security to sustainable development, human rights, and humanitarian engagement.
In particular, the next UN secretary-general should consider taking several key steps.
For starters, he or she should convene a summit-level meeting – a sequel to the 1945 San Francisco Conference, where delegates agreed to the UN’s founding charter – at which member states would reaffirm their commitment to multilateralism as a fundamental principle.
The summit should be designed to highlight the critical advantages of cooperation and rebuff the emerging view that multilateralism is simply a burden to bear.
Moreover, the new secretary-general should emphasize the UN’s role in building bridges between the great powers, particularly during tense times, and the great powers’ role in enabling the UN to benefit the wider international community.
Third, the secretary-general should make use of Article 99 of the UN Charter.
Specifically, this agenda should include countering terrorism and violent extremism; enhancing cyber security; limiting the proliferation of lethal autonomous-weapons systems; enforcing international humanitarian law in the context of war (an absolute priority); and developing a comprehensive approach to planetary boundaries and humanity’s ecological footprint, particularly in our oceans.
The new leadership must also introduce effective processes and the organizational machinery to implement current major initiatives, including the Sustainable Development Goals.
Failure to achieve the SDGs – which comprise 17 goals and 169 specific targets – would amount to an indictment of the UN’s raison d'être.
Avoiding such an outcome will require a new global compact between the UN, global and regional development banks, and private finance sources to fund SDG efforts.
The same goes for implementing the 2015 Paris climate agreement, which will require ample investments in energy efficiency and renewable-energy sources to keep global temperatures from rising more than 2º Celsius.
The UN’s manifold agendas – peace and security, sustainable development, human rights, and humanitarianism – must be structurally integrated into one strategic continuum, rather than remaining rigid, self-contained institutional silos.
Multidisciplinary “Team UN” groups could be deployed in the field to break down departmental barriers and confront appropriate challenges.
The groups would operate under a common mandate across all UN agencies, and be led by UN operations directors in each country.
A fifth step should be to integrate women fully and equally into all parts of the UN agenda, not just in discrete areas pertaining to “women’s” issues.
Failure to do this would further undermine peace, security, development, human rights, and already-flagging global economic growth.
According to a 2015 McKinsey report, improving worldwide gender equality could add $12 trillion to global GDP by 2025.
Likewise, young people should be better included in UN decision-making – not simply as a paternalistic afterthought, but in a way that enables them to help shape their own future.
Global youth (those under the age of 25) now represent 42% of the world’s population, and their numbers are growing.
They won’t.
Looking beyond these specific items, two core questions loom in the UN’s future: Given the twenty-first century’s global-governance deficit, can the UN’s deliberative bodies step in and make the big decisions appropriate for the situation?
And can the institutional machinery of the UN itself effectively implement policies once they are decided?
With sufficient political will, strong leadership, and a clear, goal-driven reform program, the UN can still be a pillar of a stable, just, and sustainable global order.
The alternative is benign neglect, institutional decay, and impotence in the face of the great challenges of our time.
That would mean an increasingly unstable world for us all.
Unsafe at Any Speed?
TOKYO – At least 38 people were killed and more than 200 injured by the recent crash of two high-speed trains near Zhenzhou in Zhejiang, a province in China.
The wrecked body of the ruined train was buried immediately afterward, with no investigation.
The intellectual-property dispute between Japan and China over the technology used in China’s new bullet trains was heated even before the accident. In the wake of the crash, the dispute has come to a boil.
Japan, of course, was the first country to build “bullet” trains, and their safety record is enviable.
The Shinkansen super bullet train, which was directly affected by the earthquake that devastated northeast Japan in March, was able to resume operations on April 29.
The latest-model Japanese bullet train, the Hayabusa, which made its debut only a week before the earthquake, can operate at 320 kilometers (200 miles) per hour – and now does, following quick repairs to its line.
Since it began operating between Tokyo and Shin-Osaka in 1964, Japan’s Shinkansen has served as a vital transport artery in Japan, and has suffered no fatal accidents.
Let me reiterate: not a single person has died in a Shinkansen accident.
The automatic train-stop system, perfected for the Shinkansen, functioned flawlessly even during the earthquake.
Despite its technological lead and enviable record, Shinkansen trains were not exported overseas for decades.
The first such technology transfer was the Taiwan High Speed Rail (THSR), which began operating in January 2001.
THSR connects Taipei and Kaohsiung, which are 345 kilometers apart, in 90 minutes.
As a result of a renewed emphasis on safety following an earthquake, the Taiwanese authorities decided to use Japanese technology for the rolling stock and a mixture of German and French technology for other facilities and operations.
Today, the great stage for the Shinkansen is China’s vast territory, where economic development continues at a stunning rate.
On June 30, the Beijing-Shanghai High-Speed Railway, covering the 1,318 kilometers between China’s two most important cities at approximately 300 kilometers per hour, began operating, timed to celebrate the 90th anniversary of the founding of the Communist Party of China.
The rolling stock for China’s CRH380A bullet train is based on technology from Kawasaki Heavy Industries, whereas the German company Siemens provided the technology for the CRH380B.
One reason why Japan hesitated to export its high-speed rail technology was revealed by JR Tokai Chairman Takayuki Kasai, who wanted to make its provision conditional upon the “country being politically stable and governed by the rule of law.”
He regularly highlighted the importance of compliance with enforceable contracts that would guarantee intellectual property rights.
With these reservations in mind, JR East Japan proceeded with the export of Shinkansen technology to China. Unfortunately, Kasai’s fears have been vindicated.
Immediately before the Beijing-Shanghai railway was built, the Chinese Ministry for Railways initiated international patent claims concerning the technology used in the CRH380A.
It is believed that China has now filed for 21 patents in accordance with the Patent Cooperation Treaty (PCT), with the aim of obtaining patents in Japan, the United States, Brazil, Europe, and Russia.
Since 2003, China has filed for 1,902 patents related to high-speed railways, with 1,421 approved and 481 still being examined.
But the 21 recent applications are the first based upon Japanese Shinkansen technology.
It has been reported that these patent applications are for the technology used in the carriage’s chassis and also for the front end of the lead carriage.
The originality remains unknown for now, because the content of the patent application will not become clear until the 18 months required for investigating prior art has elapsed.
But there is a strong view that the technology is an extension of that provided by either Japan or Germany, and the case could well lead to a major intellectual-property dispute.
Infringement of intellectual-property rights by China is one of the most vexing aspects of trade with the Chinese.
For example, a Chinese animation called “Train Hero” received much criticism in Chinese Internet circles when it was found to be nearly identical to the popular Japanese animation called “Japan Hikarian Railroad.”
Not only was the story the same, but it even took shortcuts, such as having characters eat onigiri rice balls, a Japanese food not eaten in China.
As a result, Chinese state television canceled a broadcast scheduled for August.
The market for Shinkansen technology is growing not only in China, but also in the US (where the state of California wants to build such a system) and in emerging-market countries such as Brazil.
With demand extremely large, international competition to construct high-speed railway networks is becoming intense, as the lobbying for the California contract demonstrates.
And this competition concerns not only the level of technology and speed, but also of safety.
So long as protection of intellectual-property rights in China is woefully inadequate, the high-speed rail market is likely to remain riddled with heated disputes.
In China, the rush to apply for patents is sometimes said to be about saving face with ordinary Chinese, who might well object to buying technology from abroad when China’s government so often lauds homegrown technology.
But China will lose even more face if it is shown to have pirated the Shinkansen technologies that it now claims as its own.
The Politics of UN Leadership
NEW DELHI – Election cycles are growing longer worldwide.
In the United States, for example, ambitious politicians are already campaigning hard in bellwether states for the 2016 presidential election.
Yet some races – such as that for the next United Nations secretary-general, which will also be held in 2016 – still occur largely under the radar.
This should change.
A race for UN Secretary-General, which is usually fought so discreetly that it seems almost clandestine, bears little resemblance to the razzmatazz of an American presidential campaign.
This can be explained largely by the fact that the decision comes down to the 15 members of the Security Council, who select the candidate to be rubber-stamped by the UN General Assembly (as has occurred in every case so far).
Crucially, the Security Council’s five permanent members – China, France, Russia, the United Kingdom, and the US – have veto power, so a majority means nothing if a single member of the P-5 dissents.
The selection process is constrained further by an informal – but, after 43 years, essentially requisite – agreement to rotate through regions every two terms.
(The only exception was the extremely popular and well-regarded Kofi Annan, who, despite having succeeded another African after one term, was selected for two consecutive terms.)
With the position having cycled, since 1971, through Western Europe, Latin America, Africa, and Asia – Ban Ki-moon, the current second-term secretary-general, hails from South Korea – only one UN region has yet to be represented: Eastern Europe.
In fact, a number of potential East European candidates have already emerged, with some said to have begun actively soliciting support.
Former Slovenian President Danilo Türk, who served as Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs under Annan, is an early front-runner.
There is also talk of current UNESCO Director-General Irina Bokova, who is Bulgarian, and of two Slovaks, Foreign Minister Miroslav Lajčák and his predecessor, Jan Kubiš, entering the race.
Finally, there is Romania’s former foreign minister, Mircea Geoana, who is highly respected among P-5 governments.
The fact that all five of these candidates are well known in diplomatic circles, and four have direct UN experience, refutes the old canard that Eastern Europe does not have a credible candidate to offer.
(Full disclosure: all five are friends of mine, and I consider them highly capable and well suited for the role.)
But there is a hitch: Eastern Europe must avoid attracting a Russian veto.
Indeed, that may be the main factor derailing the prospects of former Polish Foreign Minister Radek Sikorski.
If, as some fear, the Kremlin vetoes all East European candidates, a representative from the Western Europe and Others Group, such as former New Zealand Prime Minister and current UN Under-Secretary-General Helen Clark, could stand a chance, especially given the appeal of finally selecting a woman for the role.
Will the global public get to see much of the race?
The 2006 election, in which I finished a close second out of seven candidates, featured an unprecedented level of public exposure, with candidates meeting with UN regional groups, addressing the annual African Union summit, and even participating in a debate on the BBC.
Web sites emerged for the sole purpose of analyzing the race.
All of this represented an important step forward.
Given the importance of the UN secretary-general’s vision, candidates should have the opportunity to share their ideas and goals publicly, as I was committed to doing.
Ultimately, however, the public campaign had little impact on the outcome, exemplified in the fact that Ban did not participate in the BBC debate.
Though efforts to share one’s vision can win a candidate wide expressions of support, they can do the same for his or her opponents – and, in the election of a UN secretary-general, Security Council members can vote for as many candidates as they like.
This is not to say that the race does not shape the outcome.
In 2006, South Korea launched a yearlong, amply-financed outreach campaign that targeted all 15 Security Council members with official visits in their capitals, and that often dangled significant bilateral carrots – gestures that other candidates had neither the time nor the resources to offer.
Indeed, South Korea was the only Security Council member country to conduct such a campaign.
The obvious conclusion is that the contest for UN Secretary-General is about neither vision nor the best resume, language skills, administrative ability, or even personal charisma.
It is a political decision, made principally by the P-5.
(It is, after all, unlikely that a candidate would win over the P-5 but fail to win a majority in the Security Council, given the option of casting unlimited votes.)
The result is that the “least unacceptable” candidate gets the job.
And, as it stands, there is no reason to believe that the advent of social media, satellite television coverage, or a more intrusive press will change that fundamental reality.
In 2016, the smart money will be on an East European candidate acceptable to the P-5, particularly Russia.
How agreement on the candidate will be achieved is anyone’s guess.
What is clear is that any candidate who does not fit that description will enter the race with a crippling, though not necessarily insuperable, handicap.
How to Select the Next UN Secretary-General
OXFORD – When the United Nations elects a new secretary-general next year, the world will face a crucial choice.
With crises erupting in every region of the world, the need for strong, decisive leadership is self-evident.
And yet the selection process for filling important international posts has often been characterized more by political horse-trading than a meritocratic search for the best candidate.
The tools to improve the process are available, and the time is right to ensure their adoption by the UN and other international organizations.
A new report by the World Economic Forum and Oxford University’s Blavatnik School of Government lays out a series of best practices – each one of which has already been implemented by at least one international agency – that can guarantee that leaders are drawn from the most qualified candidates, and that the organizations for which they work are vested with the best possible management practices.
For starters, it is important to professionalize the selection process.
For too long, backroom deals among governments have taken precedence over searching for a candidate with the relevant skills and experience.
When Pascal Lamy, one of the authors of the report, was chosen to become head of the World Trade Organization, there was not even a description of the job against which his qualifications could be measured.
Once a candidate has been chosen, it is important to set clear performance expectations that can be evaluated annually.
Groups like the World Health Organization – which came under fierce criticism during the Ebola crisis – can learn from the 80% of American non-profit boards that have a formal process in place for a yearly evaluation of their CEO.
Ethical standards also need to be strengthened.
In April, Spanish police questioned Rodrigo Rato, a former managing director of the International Monetary Fund, as part of a corruption probe.
Not long before that, his successor at the IMF, Dominique Strauss Kahn, faced pimping charges in France.
Putting in place a code that sets out clear standards for identifying conflicts of interest and robust methods for dealing with complaints about a leader’s behavior is crucial.
In recent years, allegations of improper behavior have led to resignations by the heads of the IMF, the World Bank, and the UN Refugee Agency.
A leader is only as good as the people who work for him, so organizations must make it a high priority to attract and retain good staff and rid themselves of those who lack professional integrity or competence.
Many global agencies are introducing systematic surveys of their employees, but much remains to be improved.
Crucially, international organizations must build up the capacity to resist governments’ efforts to protect their underperforming nationals.
Performance evaluations should be made public, allowing outsiders to measure progress (or the lack thereof).
Organizations also need to focus more on delivering results and tracking outcomes.
For decades, countries borrowing from the World Bank and regional development banks have begged for the loan process to be expedited; most cannot afford to wait more than two years to find out whether a loan has been approved.
Halving the time it takes to approve a loan is the kind of operational goal that a good leader can set, and for which he or she can subsequently be held to account.
It is also important to ensure well-structured, systematic engagement with stakeholders and civil-society groups, which is necessary to ensure high-quality and innovative inputs.
Adopting an ad hoc approach, as many organizations currently do, frequently yields poor results.
Finally, it is crucial that organizations learn from their mistakes.
Fortunately, almost all global agencies have instituted processes for independent evaluation.
Less happily, most are still grappling with how to implement lessons learned.
Evaluation is important, but it needs to be followed up with strong governance reforms that require leaders to shift incentives and behavior.
Pressure for change is mounting.
In November 2014, Avaaz, the United Nations Association, and other NGOs launched a campaign to reform the selection process by which the UN secretary-general is chosen, replacing an opaque process dominated by the permanent members of the Security Council with a transparent one, in which all countries have a say.
Among their demands are a clear job description for the role, public scrutiny of candidates, and a shortlist with more than one candidate.
Progress is being made in some agencies.
The UN High Commission for Refugees now describes its objectives in its Global Strategic Priorities and evaluates progress toward them annually.
And all senior UN officials must file an annual financial-disclosure statement with the organization’s ethics office.
One notably successful agency in this regard is the African Development Bank (AfDB), which has introduced an organization-wide whistle-blowing policy, an anti-corruption and fraud framework, and an office to investigate disclosures.
The AfDB will choose a new president in May, and it has not only defined the job clearly; it has also identified eight candidates and asked each to set out their strategy in advance of the election.
The world relies on international organizations to coordinate the global response to a host of critical threats, from pandemics to financial crises.
An effective UN leader needs to be able to persuade member states to cooperate, manage the organization well, and deliver results.
Without good leadership, any organization – even the UN – is destined to fail.
The Security Council’s Credibility Test
CANBERRA – The United Nations Security Council’s membership will be reconstituted in 2015, but it will not look very different from its predecessors.
World War II’s victors – the United States, the United Kingdom, France, Russia, and China – will continue to hold the box seats, which come with veto power.
Five new non-permanent members – New Zealand, Spain, Angola, Malaysia, and Venezuela – will rotate in for a two-year term, replacing Australia, Luxembourg, Rwanda, South Korea, and Argentina, respectively.
The remaining five bleacher seats will be occupied for another year by Chad, Chile, Jordan, Lithuania, and Nigeria.
Aside from Nigeria, none of the twenty-first century’s other major players – including Brazil, Germany, India, Japan, and South Africa – will have a ticket.
All efforts to reform the Security Council’s structure – even an end to prohibiting immediate re-election of non-permanent members, which would enable continuous engagement, if not formal permanent membership – have ground to a halt.
Reconstructing the Security Council to ensure that the most influential powers always have a seat at the table is not the most urgent reform, but it remains one of the most important.
The Council’s institutional legitimacy as the world’s foremost decision-maker on issues of peace and security cannot be taken for granted.
If the Council continues to look the way it does, it is only a matter of time – maybe another 15 years at best – before its credibility and authority for most of the world diminish to dangerous levels.
The immediate task is to find other ways to boost the Security Council’s global standing.
The challenges that the Council faces today are as acute as they have ever been.
More crises have been erupting in more places, more breaches of international humanitarian and human rights law have been occurring, and more people have been displaced by conflict than has been the case for decades.
In responding to these challenges, the Security Council’s record has not been all bad.
It did well to force Syria to give up its chemical weapons, and to authorize humanitarian access without the regime’s consent.
It has authorized more peacekeepers in the field, with more robust civilian-protection mandates, than ever before.
It has also maintained some effective sanctions regimes, and referred some cases to the International Criminal Court.
It stopped an imminent massacre in Libya in 2011 by agreeing (at least at the outset) that the internationally agreed “responsibility to protect” justified military action.
It responded decisively to the Ebola crisis, and has passed some important counter-terrorism resolutions.
And it has been getting better at consulting more widely and debating issues more openly.
And yet, human security issues are overwhelming large swaths of Africa and western Asia.
Too often the Security Council goes missing on the world’s most serious security and human rights problems, constrained by Realpolitik, out-of-date thinking, timidity, institutional limitations, or inadequate resources.
In the most alarming recent crises – Ukraine, Gaza, Syria, and Iraq – it has been almost totally paralyzed.
To restore and enhance the Security Council’s credibility, the focus for now should be on changes that require no amendment of the UN Charter.
A good starting point would be to apply existing best practice more often, making exceptional cases the norm.
The Council can deliver results, as it showed with Syria’s chemical arsenal, when it establishes clear benchmarks, explicit timelines, active monitoring mechanisms, regular reporting processes, and consequences for non-compliance.
The Council needs to devote less rhetoric and more formal process to conflict and crisis prevention, with improved early-warning and briefing mechanisms.
It needs to acknowledge that anticipating and responding to major human-rights violations are part of its core business.
It should encourage the UN’s secretary-general to be less nervous about using his formidable authority under Article 99 of the Charter to bring matters to the Council’s attention on his own.
There is a desperate need to re-establish consensus on how to address atrocity crimes so extreme that they may require a military response.
Efforts must be made to overcome the bitterness still felt toward the US, the UK, and France – which explains much of the paralysis over Syria – for their perceived expansion, without going back to the Security Council, of a narrow civilian-protection mandate in Libya to include full-scale regime change.
The solution seems to lie in some variation on the “Responsibility while Protecting” idea first proposed by Brazil (with China and Russia privately showing some sympathy), which would require some form of ongoing monitoring and review of military mandates.
France has proposed a truly transformative change: The Security Council’s permanent members would forswear using their veto in cases of mass-atrocity crimes certified as such by the Secretary-General or by some other acceptable process, at least where no vital national interests are at stake.
But getting there will be tough.
Though the UK has said that the proposal should be considered, Russia is openly opposed.
Meanwhile, the US is quietly uncomfortable, and China, too, has remained silent.
These reactions are a reminder that the biggest changes that the Security Council needs are to the mindset of its permanent members.
They need to remember that their global responsibilities are formidable; their overwhelming obligation is to find cooperative common ground; and there is limited tolerance for the naked pursuit of narrow self-interest.
If they do not raise their game, the Council’s global authority will wane, and it will face the real possibility of sliding back to the marginalized impotence of the Cold War years.
Unsettling America
LONDON – Is there more to be said about Egypt?
Hosni Mubarak has been sacrificed to save the military regime.
A “strongman” who cannot keep order in the streets is of no use to anyone.
Whether “democracy” will ensue is much more dubious.
Judging on the basis of Pakistan, and much of the rest of the Muslim world, periods of (corrupt) civilian rule will alternate with “cleansing” military coups.
I doubt that most Egyptians put what we call democracy at the top of their political agenda.
Journalists who claim otherwise are not a representative sample, even in Western countries.
They are a restless breed, flitting round the world’s trouble spots, pen and camera poised.
Freedom of expression is in their bones; mass protests their visual lifeblood.
They try to report the world as it is, but theirs is not the world of most people – their business depends on the disruption of “ordinary” business, so they systematically underestimate people’s desire for law and order (or at least order).
Most people, it seems, will tolerate a modest amount of political repression, including secret police, torture, and corruption, if it delivers security and a modicum of prosperity and fairness.
Otherwise, there is no explanation for the longevity of dictatorships such as Mubarak’s 30-year rule.
Likewise, in the referendum that ended his 16-year rule in Chile in 1990, General Augusto Pinochet, with thousands of tortured and vanished victims in his grisly cupboard, ran on a law-and-order platform and received 44% of the vote.
Most Western leaders think naturally in terms of a “transition to democracy.” This is what they want to happen in Egypt, hoping that democracy will not jeopardize Egypt’s peace treaty with Israel.
But Western democracies’ combination of freedom and order – the West’s most precious gift to the world – is the product of a long history that cannot be replicated in short order.
Non-Western political systems are typically archaic: good rulers can sleep soundly at night, while bad rulers face continual danger of overthrow from the army or the streets.
Most non-Western peoples rely upon the ruler’s personal virtues, not institutional limits on his power, to make their lives tolerable.
We interpret as striving for democracy what is really the traditional way of getting rid of bad rulers.
Yet all of this leaves out the possibility of change, particularly change influenced by the United States’ unsettling role in the world.
The idea that the US is a status quo power is a delusion of international-relations experts. In the short run, of course, the US behaves like an ordinary power.
It has interests to protect, and this often requires supporting unsavory regimes. But America’s long-term project is to remake the world in its image.
Where America has room for maneuver, it always presses forward in this direction.
And, despite the rise of China and the move to a more “plural” international system, the US still has the power to change “facts on the ground” in large parts of the world, particularly the Middle East.
Experts have always underestimated the expansionary character of American foreign policy, because they think of expansion in old-world terms: conquest, imperialism, and colonialism.
The US does not seek to create an empire in the old sense: America pursues an imperialism of the values that it holds dear.
If all countries have the same values, traditional imperialism becomes obsolete.
Though it clearly lacks the power to impose its values by force, the US certainly has the power to unsettle established conditions, both through the attraction of its “soft power” (the American way of life) and by the exemplary use of force.
I was one of those who opposed the US-led invasion of Iraq in 2003.
Now I wonder whether I was right.
Parts of the invasion and occupation were certainly badly mishandled by the US, leading to a much greater loss of life than was necessary.
But, taking the long view, can anyone doubt that the invasion had the effect of shaking up the pieces, not just in Iraq, but across the Islamic chessboard?
That is why I am not at all sure that the street uprisings in Egypt, following those in Tunisia, and now spreading to other Muslim-majority countries, can be interpreted simply as traditional forms of protest against bad rulers.
Throughout the Muslim world, there is a sense of enlarged possibilities, especially among the young: more than half of Egypt’s 80 million people are under 25.
Surely, this sentiment can be traced back to the US invasion and forcible overthrow of Saddam Hussein.
With China, like seeks to talk to like. With America, like deliberately engages with unlike, and tries to infuse it with some of its vigor.
True, America’s intervention in the Middle East also strengthened extremist Islam, breeding on the resentment that the US presence arouses.
But, taking the long view, the future surely does not lie with organizations like the Muslim Brotherhood.
The religious demon is a far less appealing devil than Uncle Sam.
Sooner or later, the Brothers will suffer the fate of all bad devils.
Unsustainable Development Goals?
OXFORD – From 2000 to 2015, the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) focused minds and budgets on global poverty, significantly boosting people’s prospects in some of the world’s poorest countries.
The new set of global targets, the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), aim to build on that progress, not only in eradicating poverty, but also in addressing a number of other challenges, such as broadening access to education and protecting the environment.
But, this time, there are significant headwinds.
Recent geopolitical developments, such as the Middle East’s refugee crisis, are complicating government budgets and agendas.
And commodity prices and emerging-economy investments, factors that bolstered progress toward achieving the MDGs, are now slumping.
Without bold innovation, the new development agenda will be far from sustainable.
As it stands, aid budgets from major donors are being surreptitiously redeployed.
In most major donor countries, aid is being redirected to stem the flow of refugees from the Middle East, especially Syria.
The refugee crisis has also changed domestic priorities.
In Sweden, some 30% of the aid budget is now being used to look after arriving refugees; in Switzerland, the comparable figure is 20%.
Other aid funds among the major donors are being redeployed for security, allotted to climate-change adaptation and mitigation, and pledged for other national goals.
In the United Kingdom, for example, a shift toward allocating resources to priorities more clearly “in the national interest” was spelled out in a new aid strategy in 2015.
As for emerging economies, new aid flows do not look as promising as they did five years ago.
By one estimate, Chinese aid rose from $630 million in 2000 to $14.4 billion in the period 2010-2012.
But the country’s ongoing economic slowdown probably augurs a decelerating growth in aid budgets.
And other emerging economies are not likely to pick up the slack.
Brazil, touted in 2010 as an “emerging aid player,” is now in economic and political crisis, as is South Africa.
These challenges are being compounded for developing countries by new financial regulations in the advanced countries that are hampering flows of investment and finance to the developing world.
Weakening developing-economy incomes further is a global demand slowdown and commodities crash, which, as Nobel laureate Angus Deaton has demonstrated, has been disastrous for most of the developing world.
To cap it all off, the expansionary monetary policies adopted by major economies are fueling instability.
In this difficult context, achieving the SDGs – which would be ambitious even in the best of times – will require monumental effort.
To maximize the chances of success will require, first and foremost, that every dollar channeled toward development is used as efficiently as possible.
This means rethinking the way aid is delivered and asking hard questions to the elaborate web of international agencies that deliver it, not least about the cost-effectiveness of their operations.
Consider the World Food Program, which announced in July 2015 that it had no choice but to reduce aid to Syrian refugees in Jordan and Lebanon – a move that risked leaving 440,000 refugees without food, thereby spurring yet more perilous voyages across the Mediterranean.
This decision partly reflects inadequate aid flows; but it may also be rooted in the costs of the WFP’s own operations.
An OECD review of the WFP points to the “high cost of logistics,” as well as “issues in using international tenders,” as a problem affecting efficiency.
While nobody has offered a straightforward value-for-money comparison between the WFP and other providers of relief, some organizations are highly efficient.
BRAC, a Bangladeshi development organization known as the “world’s largest NGO,” seems able to deliver aid for a fraction of the cost of Western-dominated international organizations.
As the United Kingdom’s Department for International Development pointed out in making its case for a strategic partnership with the organization, BRAC innovates in order to respond more effectively to the specific needs of the poor.
For example, it pioneered the use of mobile-phone technology in health care, and championed the provision of cash (or income-generating assets) to those in extreme poverty.
Cash transfers are an interesting case.
The idea of giving money to the neediest is an obvious and powerful one.
But it has long run up against a Victorian belief that the poor are improvident and likely to waste money on alcohol, tobacco, and gambling.
Yet that is not what happened in Mexico, when poor families received cash transfers.
Instead, their children ended up as well nourished and healthy as those on a food program that cost 20% more to administer.
Similar results have been shown in Ecuador, India, and Uganda, as well as in international humanitarian relief programs.
And a study in Zimbabwe showed that, as the poor use their newly acquired cash to purchase goods and services from others in their community, they also generate more income for others.
Of course, not all aid can be replaced with cash transfers.
But in some cases, such an approach offers the opportunity for huge efficiency gains relative to aid delivered through complex and costly institutions.
Imagine eliminating the costs of designing elaborate programs, conditions, monitoring systems, and training schemes for the poor.
Imagine a WFP that is no longer arranging the logistics, procurement, storage, and distribution of 3.2 million metric tons of food, and taking 120 days to obtain and move food to recipient countries.
The WFP reports that it is increasing its use of cash and voucher transfers.
Perhaps it should be pressed to justify doing anything else, and its administrative costs for delivering cash should be compared to those of BRAC.
In a challenging global economic and geopolitical environment, achieving the SDGs will be possible only if we make the most of every multilateral development dollar.
And that may mean giving many more dollars directly to those who need them.
Women’s Rights and Customary Wrongs
SEATTLE – One of the greatest challenges facing women in much of the world is the gap between their legal rights and their ability as individuals to claim them.
National constitutions are increasingly likely to guarantee gender equality, but many also recognize the authority of parallel legal systems based on custom, religion, or ethnic affiliation.
And, unfortunately, law in many parts of the world has not kept up with changing times.
Fortunately, international human-rights bodies are taking notice of the gap.
In 1999 and 2000, two young Tanzanian tailors, married in their teens and widowed in their twenties with four children between them, were dispossessed of their homes under their ethnic group’s customary laws of inheritance.
Those customary laws give male relatives a greater claim to the deceased’s possessions than female members of his family, and typically bar wives altogether and give short shrift to daughters.
In both of the Tanzanian cases, local courts ruled that the property the woman had shared with her husband, including items that had been purchased with proceeds from her labor, should go to her brother-in-law.
The young widowed tailors were left homeless with their children, but they refused to accept their dispossession.
With the help of Tanzania’s Women’s Legal Aid Center and Georgetown University’s International Women’s Human Rights Clinic – which I previously directed – they challenged the decision in the High Court of Tanzania.
In 2006, the High Court concluded that customary laws on inheritance were “discriminatory in more ways than one,” but it refused to overturn them.
The court likened doing so to “opening a Pandora’s box, with all the seemingly discriminative customs from our 120 tribes” vulnerable to legal challenge.
The women ultimately took their case to the United Nations (UN), where they have now struck a historic victory for equality for millions of women around the world.
Tanzania is a party to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW) and its protocol. That allowed the two women to take their complaint to the committee that oversees states’ compliance with the treaty’s implementation.
On March 15, the UN committee declared that Tanzania had violated its international human-rights obligations.
“The right of women to own, manage, enjoy, and dispose of property,” the committee ruled, “is central to their financial independence and may be critical to their ability to earn a livelihood and to provide adequate housing and nutrition for themselves and for their children.”
The committee asserted that, in order to comply with the treaty’s human rights mandate, Tanzania would have to repeal and amend customary inheritance laws that discriminate against women.
It also recommended that the country educate women about their rights under CEDAW and train judges, lawyers, local authorities, and traditional leaders in order to build support for removing discriminatory practices from customary law.
The government of Tanzania has until September to respond to the ruling.
The decision could have a huge impact, for the problem the Tanzanian case exposed is all too common in many parts of Africa and Asia.
India, for example, enacted legislation ten years ago to provide sons and daughters with equal claim to inherit family land in most situations.
And yet a survey of women in three rural Indian states by the international land-rights NGO Landesa found that two-thirds did not know of any woman who had inherited land from her parents.
One in four did not know that they had a right to inherit family land.
There is much more at stake in inheritance rights than who gets the house, the car, and the sewing machine.
Research shows that women’s rights to own and inherit property, including land, are critical to breaking the cycle of poverty.
A study in Tanzania, for example, found that women earned near four times more in areas with strong women’s land rights.
And a study in Nepal found that children whose mothers owned land were 33% less likely to be malnourished.
The benefits are much more than economic: In India, women with secure rights to land were found to be eight times less likely to suffer domestic abuse.
The UN ruling has buoyed the hopes of women worldwide that their countries will be forced to address the injustices that may be found in some customary law and where bias hinders implementation of progressive legislation.
Legislators in South Africa and Kenya have been grappling with the issue.
Tanzania and countries in similar situations must demonstrate their commitment to women’s rights by eliminating systematic discrimination.
When they do, the two widows’ story will end on a note of empowerment not just for them, but for women and communities everywhere.
Colombia’s “Brexit”
CARTAGENA – Peacemaking is always a divisive enterprise – so divisive, in fact, that it is often thwarted by politics within the antagonists’ own camps.
That is precisely what happened in Colombia recently, when voters narrowly rejected a laboriously negotiated peace accord between the government and the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC).
Plebiscites and referenda may seem like the purest manifestation of democracy; in fact, they are a favorite tool of leaders who rely on deceit and mendacity.
There is a reason why dictators and autocrats so often embrace them.
Unsurprisingly, Colombia’s plebiscite – like the United Kingdom’s Brexit referendum in June – was far from a triumph of democracy.
With Hurricane Matthew preventing hundreds of thousands of people from voting in areas where polls indicated support for the deal, only 37% of Colombia’s 34 million eligible voters turned out.
In that context, the “No” camp’s razor-thin margin of victory – just 0.4% – is even less compelling.
Yet the deal’s opponents, led by former President Álvaro Uribe, expect to force President Juan Manuel Santos to head back to the negotiating table and produce a radically different kind of peace agreement with the FARC.
Considering that the deal overseen by Santos emerged from a highly complex four-year-long process, that expectation is totally unreasonable.
No peace plan is perfect, and the Colombian accord was no exception.
But, if a deal is negotiated well, the end result brings significantly more benefits than costs.
And that would have been the case with the Colombian accord, which addresses a vast array of social and economic issues, including problems affecting indigenous communities, gender equality, gay rights, and the millions of people displaced by more than a half-century of fighting.
The deal also included an historic land-reform program.
For Uribe and his opposition allies, the main objection to the deal concerns how it addresses the question of transitional justice.
Negotiators decided that the unconditional application of justice would not be possible.
The opposition decided that this was tantamount to impunity – and thus unacceptable.
But the government had made the right call.
After all, it was a negotiation, not a surrender.
In the transition from war to peace with an undefeated insurgent group, it is unreasonable to expect to be able to treat justice as a strictly legal matter; the political context must be taken into account.
Unfazed by reality, the opposition continues to demand that the guerillas be prosecuted for their crimes, while members of the Colombian armed forces who committed war crimes should be offered “judicial relief.”
They want the Special Tribunal for Transitional Justice to be dissolved, and the FARC leadership to be banned from participating in politics.
They also demand that the interests of big landowners in the agreed rural reform be safeguarded, and argue that implementation of the agreement should be subordinate to the government’s fiscal constraints.
To win support for their unreasonable demands, the No campaign focused unremittingly on the antipathy that Colombians (quite legitimately) feel toward the FARC.
Uribe warned, dramatically, that the peace agreement would deliver Colombia to terrorism and “Castro-Chavismo.”
Of course, opposition to supposed impunity is not the only reason Colombians voted against the peace deal.
Some took issue with the socially progressive elements of the agreement.
One key member of the No campaign, former Attorney General Alejandro Ordóñez, insisted that the word “gender” be removed from the text.
After the vote, he touted it as a victory for “the Colombia of the believers.”
But opposition to impunity was probably not even the real motivation driving Uribe and other No campaign leaders.
After all, some of those who are decrying impunity today, Uribe included, supported impunity for the M-19 left-wing guerrilla group in the 1980s.
The difference today is that a presidential election will be held in 2018, and the campaign has already begun.
More than a drive for a different peace, the No campaign was a struggle for power.
The Uribistas cannot possibly believe their preposterous claims about the peace deal, or think that there is any chance that the FARC will agree to the terms they have set out.
But they do not want Santos to be able to claim credit for bringing peace to Colombia.
If nothing else, this would mean that politicians could no longer use the excuse of armed conflict to justify their failure to address the country’s colossal social and economic problems.
The consequences of these political machinations may be far-reaching.
If peace becomes a matter of electoral politics, so will pretty much everything else – throwing Colombian democracy into a long period of political instability.