That alone should be enough to prove that democracy is a strength, not a weakness.
China’s system may have enabled its rapid economic rise, but its dependence on a top-to-bottom consensus means that it functions well only in a predictable environment.
India’s system, by contrast, requires consensus on only one point: that everyone does not always need to agree, so long as they agree on how to disagree.
In an unpredictable world, that gives India an undeniable – and invaluable – advantage.
Rescaling China’s Debt Mountain
MONTREAL – There is widespread agreement on two facts about the Chinese economy.
Real estate investment is growing again, following its collapse in 2015.
Industrial investment, especially by state-owned enterprises, has been rallying strongly.
At the root of this turnaround is enormous credit growth, as the authorities, concerned that the earlier slowdown was excessive, encourage China’s banks to lend.
Credit growth, known in China as “total social financing,” grew at an annual rate of 13% in the fourth quarter of 2015 and again in the first quarter of this year – that is, double the rate of annual GDP growth.
Since the financial crisis erupted in September 2008, China has had the fastest credit growth of any country in the world. Indeed, it is hard to point to another credit boom of this magnitude in recorded history.
The bad news is that credit booms rarely end well, as the economists Moritz Schularick and Alan Taylor have reminded us.
China’s credit tsunami is financing investment in steel and property, sectors already burdened by massive excess capacity.
The companies doing the borrowing, in other words, are precisely those least capable of repaying.
The International Monetary Fund, which tends to adopt a conservative posture on such matters (not least to avoid antagonizing powerful governments), estimates that 15% of Chinese loans to nonfinancial corporations are at risk.
With nonfinancial corporations’ debt currently standing at 150% of GDP, the book value of the bad loans could be a quarter of national income.
It still may be possible to sell off vacant apartments for a fraction of their construction cost. It may be possible to sell off rolling mill machinery to other countries, or as scrap.
But where the loans at risk are concentrated – in steel, mining, and real estate – suggests that losses will be substantial.
This is why the supposedly painless solution, debt-for-equity swaps, will not be painless.
Yes, bad loans can be purchased by asset-management companies, which can package them up and sell them off to other investors.
It also would not enhance confidence in the public finances.
Public debt in China is still relatively low; but, as any citizen of Ireland can tell you, it can balloon when banking crises strike.
Alternatively, the central bank could finance the repair by providing credit.
But, while the authorities relied on this approach in 1999, the last time they were faced with a serious bad-loan problem, running the money printing press is not compatible with officials’ other stated goal: a stable exchange rate.
We saw last August how investors can panic when the renminbi exchange rate moves unexpectedly.
Currency depreciation may not only precipitate a destabilizing spiral of capital flight; it could also destabilize the banks, from which money leaving the country must first be withdrawn.
The final option is to imagine that the bad-loan problem will solve itself.
The banks would be encouraged to “evergreen” their loans: to roll them over when repayment falls due.
The fiction that the banks are well capitalized will be maintained.
Borrowers that need to be liquidated or reorganized will instead stay alive, thanks to the drip-feed of bank finance.
The result will look familiar to aficionados of Japan’s banking crisis: zombie banks lending to zombie firms, which apply artificial pressure on viable firms, stifling their growth.
Financing bank recapitalization through bond issuance is probably the least bad option.
This doesn’t mean that it will be painless. Nor is there any assurance that Chinese policymakers will opt for it.
But if they don’t, the consequences could be dire.
China’s Bad-Neighbor Policy Is Bad Business
DENVER – These are difficult times for China.
After decades of double-digit GDP growth, today’s slowdown points to an economic system in trouble.
Once hailed as a model of development, the Chinese economy now appears sclerotic and cumbersome.
The Chinese public is growing restive and increasingly questioning the system’s ability to deliver on official promises that the country’s economic “miracle” will continue.
Many Chinese fear that the “Chinese Dream” may be just that: a dream.
China cannot fix its economic problems merely by pulling the right combination of existing policy levers.
Rather, it must embark on a broader and deeper process of reform and renewal; and it must be willing to swallow the bitter pill of slower short-term growth in the interest of long-term goals.
At the same time, an expansive reform effort cannot be advanced by economic decisions alone.
China must also come to terms with the gap between how it wants to be perceived and how the world actually perceives it.
China should take a lesson from business and recognize that many of its actions and affiliations on the world stage pose serious risks to its reputation – and to its bottom line.
For example, consider an international observer’s view of developments in the South China Sea.
China is plainly bullying its southern neighbors by using the menacing term “core interests” (in pursuit of which a country would resort to the use of force) to have its way in various disputes.
But, to hear it from Chinese officials, China is an aggrieved partner in the region.
They argue that they have reined in their fishing fleet to avoid incidents with the Vietnamese, only to see Vietnamese fishermen aggressively claim the relinquished waters.
China obviously has the strength to drive out the Vietnamese, the Filipinos, the Malaysians, the Indonesians, and almost anyone else it chooses to confront.
Southeast Asia represents but a fraction of China’s size and wealth.
But does this behavior make China stronger in the region?
Does a nineteenth-century approach to pursuing economic gain justify ongoing enmity with one’s neighbors?
The peoples of Southeast Asia, after all, will be China’s neighbors for the rest of its history; while their knives may be short, their memories surely aren’t.
Many Chinese genuinely believe that they are unfairly criticized for China’s new assertiveness in the South China Sea.
But certitude has little to recommend itself when the price paid is distrust and condemnation from everyone else.
This is a basic social truth that most people know from their personal lives: Happiness and harmony are far more important than the empty comfort of being convinced you’re right.
Beyond Southeast Asia, nowhere in the world is China’s reputation more at stake than on the Korean Peninsula.
In the South, the Republic of Korea (ROK) has become a modern, vibrant, and culturally sophisticated country that is admired around the world and addresses its problems forthrightly and transparently.
In the North is a state that can best be described as a prison camp, run by a hereditary despotic leader whose regime – most politely described as a cult – is pursuing an unrelenting drive to develop weapons of mass destruction.
Its main exports are the black humor produced by its political system, refugees, and claims of exceptionalism that put America’s to shame.
And China is its only real – albeit increasingly wary – ally.
To be fair, China’s interests on the Korean Peninsula are more complex than how they are often portrayed in the West.
For China, North Korea is not so much a foreign-policy problem as a multifaceted set of issues that impinge on China’s own internal debates as it charts its future course.
What would the demise of North Korea and its potential unification with the ROK mean for Chinese security interests, and for the perception of those interests?
What would be the repercussions of losing a historic “partner” (many Chinese today would bristle at such a description), and potentially strengthening a rival, for China’s own political system or foreign policy?
One thing seems certain: the future of the legacy relationship with North Korea will be determined by the Chinese themselves, not by the international community.
Still, weighing the disposition of the Korean Peninsula offers China an ideal opportunity to begin reconsidering its long-term interests.
It is here, more than anywhere else, that China can align itself within mainstream international thinking and start to close the gap between how it is viewed by the world and how it views itself.
The Art of Capital Flight
CAMBRIDGE – What impact will China’s slowdown have on the red-hot contemporary art market?
That might not seem like an obvious question, until one considers that, for emerging-market investors, art has become a critical tool for facilitating capital flight and hiding wealth.
These investors have become a major factor in the art market’s spectacular price bubble of the last several years.
So, with emerging market economies from Russia to Brazil mired in recession, will the bubble burst?
Just five months ago, Larry Fink, Chairman and CEO of BlackRock, the world’s largest asset manager, told an audience in Singapore that contemporary art has become one of the two most important stores of wealth internationally, along with apartments in major cities such as New York, London, and Vancouver.
Forget gold as an inflation hedge; buy paintings.
What made Fink’s elevation of art to investment-grade status so surprising is that no one of his stature had been brave enough to say it before.
I am certainly not celebrating the trend.
I tend to agree with the philosopher Peter Singer that the obscene sums being spent on premier pieces of modern art are disquieting.
We can all agree that these sums are staggering.
In May, Pablo Picasso’s “Women of Algiers” sold for $179 million at a Christie’s auction in New York, up from $32 million in 1997.
Okay, it’s a Picasso.
Yet it is not even the highest sale price paid this year.
A Swiss collector reportedly paid close to $300 million in a private sale for Paul Gauguin’s 1892 “When Will You Marry?”
Picasso and Gauguin are deceased.
The supply of their paintings is known and limited.
Nevertheless, the recent price frenzy extends to a significant number of living artists, led by the American Jeff Koons and the German Gerhard Richter, and extending well down the food chain.
For economists, the art bubble raises many fascinating questions, but an especially interesting one is exactly who would pay so much for high-end art.
The answer is hard to know, because the art world is extremely opaque.
Indeed, art is the last great unregulated investment opportunity.
Much has been written about the painting collections of hedge fund managers and private equity art funds (where one essentially buys shares in portfolios of art without actually ever taking possession of anything).
In fact, emerging-market buyers, including Chinese, have become the swing buyers in many instances, often making purchases anonymously.
But doesn’t China have a regime of strict capital controls that limits citizens from taking more than $50,000 per year out of the country?
Yes, but there are many ways of moving money in and out of China, including the time-honored method of “under and over invoicing.”
For example, to get money out of China, a Chinese seller might report a dollar value far below what she was actually paid by a cooperating Western importer, with the difference being deposited into an overseas bank account.
It is extremely difficult to estimate capital flight, both because the data are insufficient and because it is tough to distinguish capital flight from normal diversification.
As the late MIT economist Rüdiger Dornbusch liked to quip, identifying capital flight is akin to the old adage about blind men touching an elephant: It is difficult to describe, but you will recognize it when you see it.
Many estimates put capital flight from China at about $300 billion annually in recent years, with a marked increase in 2015 as the economy continues to weaken.
The ever-vigilant Chinese authorities are cracking down on money laundering; but, given the huge incentives on the other side, this is like playing whack-a-mole.
Presumably, the anonymous Chinese buyers at recent Sotheby’s and Christie’s auctions had spirited their money out of the country before bidding, and the paintings are just an investment vehicle that is particularly easy to hold secretively.
The art is not necessarily even displayed anywhere: It may well be spirited off to a temperature- and humidity-controlled storage vault in Switzerland or Luxembourg.
Reportedly, some art sales today result in paintings merely being moved from one section of a storage vault to another, recalling how the New York Federal Reserve registers gold sales between national central banks.
Clearly, the incentives and motives of art investors who are engaged in capital flight, or who want to hide or launder their money, are quite different from those of ordinary investors.
The Chinese hardly invented this game.
It was not so long ago that Latin America was the big driver in the art market, owing to money escaping governance-challenged economies such as Argentina and Venezuela, as well as drug cartels that used paintings to launder their cash.
So how, then, will the emerging-market slowdown radiating from China affect contemporary art prices?
In the short run, the answer is ambiguous, because more money is leaking out of the country even as the economy slows.
In the long run, the outcome is pretty clear, especially if one throws in the coming Fed interest-rate hikes.
With core buyers pulling back, and the opportunity cost rising, the end of the art bubble will not be a pretty picture.
China’s War on Western Values
CLAREMONT – The news from China these days is mostly depressing, owing to the government’s escalating crackdown on its critics.
But what few observers – particularly economic analysts – seem to understand is that the Chinese leadership’s fight against liberalism and “Western values” is directly undermining its efforts to root out official corruption, promote innovation and entrepreneurship, and deepen engagement with the outside world.
The regime’s retrograde politics will have serious consequences for China’s continued economic development.
For starters, the government has intensified its censorship of the Internet, rendering popular portals and sites – including Google, Facebook, and the New York Times – all but inaccessible.
Moreover, prominent human-rights lawyers have been jailed; the well-known free-speech advocate Pu Zhiqiang, for one, has already been held for over six months, while prosecutors attempt to build a case against him.
Meanwhile, senior Chinese officials have taken to enforcing political discipline within the Chinese Communist Party.
Last June, Zhang Yingwei, Head of the CCP’s discipline inspection office at the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences (CASS), said that the institution – China’s most prestigious government-run think tank – had been “infiltrated by foreign forces” and “was conducting illegal collusion at politically sensitive times.”
Zhao Shengxuan, Vice President and Deputy Party Chief of CASS, responded by pledging that the Academy would “treat political discipline as a criterion of the utmost importance in the assessment of academics.”
Soon after, CASS President Wang Weiguang thundered in an essay that class struggle would never be extinguished in China.
Chinese academia more broadly has been the regime’s chief target in its search for enemies, with universities dismissing professors for espousing “seditious” ideas like constitutionalism.
In a particularly egregious case, an official newspaper in Liaoning province dispatched reporters disguised as students to college classrooms to catch professors criticizing the regime.
A recent pronouncement by China’s education minister, Yuan Guiren, threatens to do damage on a far larger scale.
Yuan has vowed never to allow textbooks “promoting Western values” – especially those that “attack or defame the leadership of the Party or smear socialism” – into Chinese classrooms.
Given Yuan’s position, this pledge could effectively amount to official policy.
One hopes, for China’s sake, that it does not.
The recent onslaught against free speech and Western values reflects the central political challenge facing President Xi Jinping, who must transform a one-party system enfeebled by greed and mistrust into a well-ordered, ideologically united regime capable of carrying out market-based reforms and sustaining its own long-term survival.
A crackdown on liberalism, he seems to believe, will work alongside his anti-corruption campaign to advance this goal.
This vision is as intellectually flawed as it is impractical.
However hard one tries, it is virtually impossible to root out corruption in a one-party system without press freedom, a robust civil society, or the rule of law.
Yet these are precisely the “Western values” that CCP apparatchiks are attempting to eliminate.
China will pay dearly for this mistake.
Consider the impact of Yuan’s textbook campaign on China’s 28 million college undergraduates, who would be left with substandard course materials.
How could these students be expected to compete in the global economy, when their education has been compromised in this way?
The current trend implies deteriorating conditions for their teachers as well, particularly in the social sciences and humanities, as academics face tighter restrictions on scholarly exchanges with the West.
With fewer opportunities to attend conferences abroad, publish papers in Western academic journals, or spend time teaching or conducting research outside of China, their professional development and careers could be severely impaired.
As a result, the government’s suppression of “Western values” – not to mention its relentless war on the Internet – is likely to spur an exodus of the country’s best and brightest.
In 2013, an unprecedented 413,900 Chinese studied abroad – and the figure is expected to be even higher for 2014.
Of those, 90% chose to study in Western countries (plus Japan).
To be sure, only a small fraction of college-age Chinese students attend universities overseas.
Indeed, the number of students who went abroad in 2013 was equivalent to only 6% of the students admitted to Chinese universities.
But China’s ruling elite, far from writing off this group as the price of its long-term survival, is leading the rush to the exits – largely sending its children to the Ivy League and Oxbridge.
One wonders whether CCP leaders worry that their offspring will be brainwashed by Western values; they evidently already are reluctant to send their children to local universities.
And, if Yuan has his way, China’s universities would increasingly look like their North Korean counterparts, rather than world-class Western institutions.
That would have far-reaching – and devastating – consequences.
The tens of millions of students who remain in China would not gain the knowledge and skills needed to maintain, much less improve, the economy’s global competitiveness.
Indeed, given that innovation is critical to China’s continued economic development – a point that Xi has repeatedly emphasized – a war against Western influence in Chinese education is downright irrational.
Unless the government’s crackdown ends soon, Xi’s “Chinese dream” of national greatness and prosperity will turn into a nightmare of accelerating decline and increasing backwardness.
One way or the other, the war on Western values is a war that China can only lose.
The Grand Strategy of Xi Jinping
SEOUL – China spent much of 2014 seeking to revive a concept that Japan proclaimed seven decades ago, when it was an imperial power seeking to impose its will on the region: “Asia for the Asians.”
But that effort may not end as badly for China as it did for Japan.
International relations tend to become destabilized by rapid changes in the distribution of power.
Established powers’ resistance to their rising counterparts’ demands for a larger role in setting the global agenda fuel tensions and disrupt the existing world order.
That is precisely what has been occurring lately between China and the United States, and is the impetus for China’s “Asia for the Asians” policy.
In November 2013, China shook the regional order by unilaterally declaring an air-defense identification zone (ADIZ) over a large swath of the East China Sea that includes disputed territory – notably the Senkaku Islands (known in Chinese as the Diaoyu Islands) that are claimed by China, Japan, and Taiwan.
This amounted to an escalation of China’s already assertive stance in the region, with Chinese President Xi Jinping routinely sending maritime-surveillance and fishery law-enforcement ships to the waters surrounding the islands, spurring protests in South Korea and Japan.
The US, prompted by its allies’ anger, dispatched two B-52 bombers into the ADIZ.
Tensions continued to mount through early 2014, raising concerns about an “accidental war” between China and Japan, which would demand the involvement of Japan’s main ally, the US (as President Barack Obama confirmed on a visit to Tokyo last April).
Add to that simultaneous tensions over China’s claims to South China Sea islands and atolls – claims disputed by the Philippines and Vietnam – and a clash between China and the US was beginning to seem inevitable.
Before long, however, the US had to turn its attention to Russia, which under President Vladimir Putin’s leadership has been seeking to recapture the Cold War-era Soviet Union’s geopolitical status.
With its regional authority apparently threatened by rising pro-European sentiment in Ukraine, Russia invaded and annexed Crimea and began supporting separatist rebels in eastern Ukraine, prompting the US and Europe to impose increasingly tough political and economic sanctions.
In this conflict, China has actually become something of a US ally.
Though the conclusion of long-negotiated gas deals between Russia and China may seem to reflect a deepening of the bilateral relationship, China extracted an exceedingly low price from Russia for the gas that it will receive.
This, together with the fact that China has cut lending to Russia since the Crimea invasion, suggests that, in the longer term, the Chinese envision Russia as a natural-resource vassal, not an equal ally.
Chinese and American policies converged even more clearly on North Korea in 2014.
Xi expressed his unwillingness to tolerate any unruly behavior – particularly concerning nuclear weapons – by the country’s unpredictable rulers.
This drove the North, which depends on Chinese aid, to send diplomatic interlocutors to Japan, Russia, and even South Korea.
But, following the United Nations General Assembly’s resolution on North Korea’s human-rights situation, the regime announced that it would hold its fourth nuclear test.
These power shifts are the result less of Russia’s expansionist ambitions or China’s military and economic rise than of America’s declining international leadership.
With Obama unwilling – or unable, due to rising political partisanship at home – to take the lead in addressing crises like those in Egypt, Libya, and Syria, challengers to American primacy took heart in 2014, and US allies took fright.
Global power must be allocated somewhere; if the US would not fill its leading role on the international stage, an understudy would have to step in.
But China’s recent shift away from muscle-flexing, and its confluence of interests with a US-led order, offers hope that it will not fuel large-scale regional instability this year.
Indeed, China withdrew its jumbo oil platform from the waters of the disputed Paracel Islands last July, and it has been sending surveillance ships to the Senkaku Islands less frequently.
Chinese officials have also become more willing to discuss the creation of a code of conduct for the South China Sea.
The most important element of China’s charm offensive is its effort to improve relations with Japan, initiated at a meeting between Xi and Japan’s Prime Minister Shinzo Abe on the sidelines of the recent APEC meeting in Beijing.
The long-awaited climate deal that Xi struck with Obama at another peripheral meeting at the same event is no small step, either.
China’s new, more emollient diplomacy underpins a nuanced foreign policy.
By offering generous economic incentives to its Southeast Asian neighbors, it has weakened their will to confront China in a coalition.
Vietnam, for example, decided to “reset” its relations with China, and not to cooperate with the Philippines in waging a legal battle over China’s maritime claims.
Indeed, China has been shifting from hard power to soft throughout the region, and is using its economic power to challenge Western-dominated multilateral institutions.
Specifically, China has decided to pour huge amounts of money into establishing new development institutions: the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank, the Maritime Silk Road Bank, and the New Development Bank (created by the five major emerging economies, Brazil, Russia, India, China, and South Africa).
Furthermore, Chinese Premier Li Keqiang recently offered $20 billion to finance infrastructure and development projects in the ASEAN countries.
With the US economy yet to recover fully from the global economic crisis, and American politics increasingly dysfunctional, there is a global power vacuum that China, with shrewd diplomacy and economic might, hopes to fill – beginning in Asia.
This may not yet mean Asia for only the Asians; but it could mean a reduced regional role for the US – especially as America turns inward during the presidential election season that starts this year.
China’s $5 Trillion Opportunity
SHANGHAI – China is facing the difficult task of managing a soft economic landing, after decades of spectacular expansion.
Naysayers abound, but never mind them. China has an advantage that other countries in today’s troubled global economy lack: a clear path forward.
If China carries out a sustained, comprehensive effort to raise productivity, it can address its growth challenges, reduce the risks of financial crisis, and complete its transition to a consumption-driven, high-income economy with a large and affluent middle class.
If it does, its annual GDP could be an estimated $5 trillion larger by 2030 than it is likely to be if policymakers continue to pursue investment-led growth.
And, in fact, China may have little choice.
The traditional drivers of its economy – a vast pool of surplus labor and massive investments in infrastructure, housing, and industrial capacity – are becoming exhausted.
The working-age population has peaked, urbanization is slowing, and the steel and cement industries are suffering from overcapacity.
Returns on capital have declined, so China cannot rely on investment spending to generate sufficient growth.
Fortunately, however, China has substantial room for gains in labor productivity, which is only 10-30% of the level in advanced economies.
When the McKinsey Global Institute analyzed more than 2,000 Chinese companies in industries ranging from coal and steel to auto manufacturing and retail, it found opportunities to raise productivity by 20-100% by 2030.
Consider China’s service sector.
Though the sector has grown rapidly and now accounts for about 50% of GDP, low-value-added businesses still dominate.
On average, service businesses in China are just 15-30% as productive as their counterparts in OECD countries.
In addition to streamlining existing operations (for example, by introducing self-checkout systems in retail businesses), China has opportunities to complement its manufacturing sector with high-value-added business services in areas such as design, accounting, marketing, and logistics.
In manufacturing itself, China can do more to automate its factories.
China is the world’s largest purchaser of robots, but it still has only 36 robots per 10,000 workers, compared with 164 in the United States and 478 in Korea.
Chinese companies have already shown that they can mix automated and manual assembly lines. They also can raise productivity by rationalizing operations and improving energy efficiency, bringing their performance closer to that of their global peers.
Chinese companies are major producers in a broad range of industries, but they have yet to take over the steps that add the most value.
When it comes to semiconductors, for example, Chinese companies mostly serve as foundries for companies that design and sell chips (and, in doing so, capture the most value).
Similarly, generics account for 90% of Chinese pharmaceutical sales.
China can support innovation in many ways, including by developing research-and-development clusters and helping inventors reap rewards through stronger intellectual property protection and reforms to the process of bringing firms to market.
In the pharmaceutical industry, for example, a crop of innovative companies is developing a distinctively Chinese approach to drug discovery: massive scale and low-cost technical talent. These firms may be on their way to cracking the more lucrative business of brand-name drugs.
Some of China’s biggest productivity opportunities are in sectors suffering from overcapacity.
Over the past decade, overcapacity has reduced annual returns on capital in the country’s coal and steel industries from 17% to 6%.
The Chinese auto industry is capable of building 40 million cars per year for a market that currently consumes 26 million.
Restructuring industries like steel, by letting uncompetitive players fail and encouraging consolidation, could raise productivity dramatically without compromising the ability to meet demand.
As companies move into higher-value-added activities, millions of better-paying jobs will be created, which should raise household incomes and move more Chinese into the middle class.
In the first two or three years, however, before the income boost from rising productivity kicks in, the massive reallocation of resources could result in considerable pain and dislocation.
Millions of low-skill workers will need to be retrained and redeployed, and GDP may grow more slowly than expected, before assuming a moderately rapid, steady pace through 2030.
The alternative is a continuation of the status quo, with poorly performing companies propped up in the name of job preservation and social stability – even as they raise risks for Chinese banks.
The country would use its resources unproductively, and its firms would become less globally competitive.
China’s history provides reason to believe that its leaders will make the right choice.
In the 1990s, ailing state industries and the Asian financial crisis risked dragging down the country’s economy.
But, rather than attempting to use fiscal and monetary stimulus to provide a short-term economic boost, the government carried out wrenching reforms and put the country on the path to two decades of awe-inspiring, double-digit growth.
Today, China faces a similar decision.
It can settle for temporary fixes that will ultimately make the problem worse. Or it can seize the opportunity and press ahead with reforms that will boost productivity and create economic prosperity for years to come.
The Limits of Chinese Soft Power
CAMBRIDGE – China has been making major efforts to increase its ability to influence other countries without force or coercion.
In 2007, then-President Hu Jintao told the Communist Party that the country needed to increase its soft power; President Xi Jinping repeated the same message last year.
They know that, for a country like China, whose growing economic and military power risks scaring its neighbors into forming counter-balancing coalitions, a smart strategy must include efforts to appear less frightening.
But their soft-power ambitions still face major obstacles.
To be sure, China’s efforts have had some impact.
As China enrolls countries as members of its Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank and doles out billions of dollars of aid during state visits abroad, some observers worry that, when it comes to soft power, China could actually be taking the lead over countries like the United States.
The American sinologist David Shambaugh, for example, estimates that the country spends roughly $10 billion a year in “external propaganda.”
By comparison, the US spent only $666 million on public diplomacy last year.
Yet the billions of dollars China is spending on its charm offensive have had only a limited return.
Polls in North America, Europe, India, and Japan show that opinions about China’s influence are predominantly negative.
The country is viewed more positively in Latin America and Africa, where it has no territorial disputes and human-rights concerns are not always high on the public agenda.
But even in many countries in those regions, Chinese practices like importing labor for infrastructure projects are unpopular.
Combining hard and soft power into a smart strategy, it turns out, is not easy.
A country derives its soft power primarily from three resources: its culture (in places that find it appealing), its political values (when it lives up to them at home and abroad), and its foreign policies (when they are seen as legitimate and having moral authority).
China has emphasized its cultural and economic strengths, but it has paid less attention to the political aspects that can undermine its efforts.
Two major factors limit China’s soft power, as measured by recent international polls.
The first is nationalism.
The Communist Party has based its legitimacy not only on a high rate of economic growth, but also on appeals to nationalism.
Doing so has reduced the universal appeal of Xi’s “Chinese Dream,” while encouraging policies in the South China Sea and elsewhere that antagonize its neighbors.
With, for example, China bullying the Philippines over possession of disputed islands in the South China Sea, the Confucius Institute that China established in Manila to teach Chinese culture can win only so much goodwill.
(China has opened some 500 such institutes in more than 100 countries.)
The consequences of the country’s foreign policy can be seen in last year’s anti-Chinese riots in Vietnam following the positioning of a Chinese oil drilling rig in waters claimed by both countries.
The other limit is China's reluctance to take full advantage of an uncensored civil society.
As noted by The Economist, the Chinese Communist Party has not bought into the idea that soft power springs largely from individuals, the private sector, and civil society.
Instead, it has clung to the view that the government is the main source of soft power, promoting ancient cultural icons that it thinks might have global appeal, often using the tools of propaganda.
In today’s media landscape, information is abundant.
What is scarce is attention, which depends on credibility – and government propaganda is rarely credible.
For all of China’s efforts to position the Xinhua news agency and China Central Television as competitors of CNN and the BBC, the international audience for brittle propaganda is vanishingly small.
The US, by contrast, derives much of its soft power not from the government, but from civil society – everything from universities and foundations to Hollywood and pop culture.
China does not yet have global cultural industries on the scale of Hollywood or universities capable of rivaling America’s.
Even more important, it lacks the many non-governmental organizations that generate much of America’s soft power.
In addition to generating good will and promoting the country’s image abroad, non-governmental sources of soft power can sometimes compensate for the government’s unpopular policies – like the US invasion of Iraq – through their critical and uncensored reaction.
China, by contrast, has watched its government policies undermine its soft-power successes.
Indeed, the domestic crackdown on human-rights activists undercut the soft-power gains of the 2008 Beijing Olympics.
And the benefits of the 2009 Shanghai Expo were rapidly undermined by the jailing of Nobel Peace Prize laureate Liu Xiaobo and the television screens around the world broadcasting scenes of an empty chair at the Oslo ceremonies.
Marketing experts call this “stepping on your own message.”
China’s aid programs are often successful and constructive.
Its economy is strong, and its traditional culture is widely admired.
But if the country is to realize its enormous soft-power potential, it will have to rethink its policies at home and abroad, limiting its claims upon its neighbors and learning to accept criticism in order to unleash the full talents of its civil society.
As long as China fans the flames of nationalism and holds tight the reins of party control, its soft power will always remain limited.
China’s Complexity Problem
NEW HAVEN – There are many moving parts in China’s daunting transition to what its leaders call a moderately well-off society.
Tectonic shifts are occurring simultaneously on several fronts – the economy, financial markets, geopolitical strategy, and social policy.
The ultimate test may well lie in managing the exceedingly complex interplay among these developments.
Is China’s leadership up to the task, or has it bitten off too much at once?
Most Western commentators continue to over-simplify this debate, framing it in terms of the proverbial China hard-landing scenarios that have been off the mark for 20 years.
In the wake of this summer’s stock-market plunge and surprising devaluation of the renminbi, the same thing is happening again.
I suspect, however, that fears of an outright recession in China are vastly overblown.
While the debate about China’s near-term outlook should hardly be trivialized, the far bigger story is its economy’s solid progress on the road to rebalancing – namely, a structural shift away from manufacturing and construction activity toward services.
Largely for that reason, China’s employment trends have held up much better than might be expected in the face of an economic slowdown.
Urban job growth averaged slightly more than 13 million in 2013-14 – well above the ten million targeted by the government.
Moreover, the data from early 2015 suggest that urban hiring remains near the impressive pace of recent years – hardly the labor-market stress normally associated with economic hard landings or recessions.
Services are also the ingredient that makes China’s urbanization strategy so effective.
Today, approximately 55% of China’s population lives in cities, compared to less than 20% in 1978.
And the share should rise to 65-70% over the next 15 years.
New and expanding cities sustain growth through services-based employment, which in turn boosts consumer purchasing power by trebling per capita income relative to that earned in the countryside.
So, despite all the handwringing over a Chinese crash, the rapid shift toward a services-based economy is tempering downside pressures in the old manufacturing-based economy.
The International Monetary Fund stressed the same conclusion in its recent Article IV consultation with China, noting that labor income is now expanding as a share of GDP, and that consumption contributed slightly more than investment to GDP growth in 2014.
That may seem like marginal progress, but it is actually quite rapid relative to the normally glacial pace of structural change – a process that began in China only in 2011 with the enactment of the 12th Five-Year Plan.
Alas, there is an important catch.
While progress on economic rebalancing is encouraging, China has put far more on its plate: simultaneous plans to modernize the financial system, reform the currency, and address excesses in equity, debt, and property markets.
Meanwhile, the authorities are also pursuing an aggressive anti-corruption campaign, a more muscular foreign policy, and a nationalistic revival couched in terms of the “China Dream.”
The interplay among these multiple objectives may prove especially daunting.
For example, the confluence of deleveraging and the bursting of the equity bubble could create a self-reinforcing downward spiral in the old manufacturing economy that shakes consumer confidence and offsets the emerging dynamism of the new services economy.
Similarly, military adventures in the South China Sea could damage China’s links to the rest of the world long before it is able to count on domestic demand for economic growth.
Ironically, China’s juggling act may prove even more difficult for the authorities to pull off in a market-based, consumer-oriented system.
Caught in the transition from China’s tightly controlled, state-directed model, the government seems to be waffling – for example, by stressing a decisive shift to markets, only to intervene aggressively when equity prices plummet.
Likewise, it is embracing more of a market-based foreign-exchange regime while guiding the renminbi lower.
Add to that a stop-start commitment to reform of state-owned enterprises and China could inadvertently find itself mired in something comparable to what Minxin Pei has long called a “trapped transition,” in which the economic-reform strategy is stymied by the lack of political will in a one-party state.
Under President Xi Jinping’s leadership, there is no lack of political will in today’s China.
The challenge is to prioritize that will in a way that keeps China on the course of reform and rebalancing.
Any backtracking on these fronts would lead China into the type of trap that Pei has long feared is inevitable.
Economic development has always been a daunting challenge.
As warnings about the “middle-income trap” underscore, history is littered with more failures than successes in pushing beyond the per capita income threshold that China has attained.
The last thing China needs is to try to balance too much on the head of a pin.
Its leaders need to simplify and clarify an agenda that risks becoming too complex to manage.
China Confronts the Global Meltdown
BEIJING – For three decades, China has been growing at an average annual rate of 9.8%.
For most of this time, world markets were favorable, with no major global economic or financial crisis or slowdown.
Yes, there were regional crises such as Southeast Asia’s financial turmoil of 1997-1998 or the collapse of Japan’s housing bubble in 1990 and America’s high-tech bubble in 2000.
But none of these proved a serious obstacle to China’s long boom.
The past three months, however, have seen a significant slowdown in China’s exports, domestic investment, industrial output, and tax revenues.
A major slowdown seems to be looming.
Will China’s rapid growth persist?
I believe it will.
Within China, the current slowdown is mostly homemade.
Since 2004, China’s government has sought to cool an overheating economy by bringing the growth rate down from 12% to a more sustainable 8-9%.
It even began to tax exports in order to reduce the trade surplus.
Of course, if Chinese policymakers could have predicted what has now happened in the world economy, they might have been less stringent in trying to rein in growth.
But one reason that China has been able to maintain growth over the past 30 years is that it started counter-cycle macroeconomic intervention during the boom times, rather than waiting for a collapse.
China’s government never believed that it should leave what happens in the economy solely to the market.
When there is no big bubble, there is no need to worry about a big crisis.
Another reason that China’s strong growth is likely to continue is that its economic fundamentals are sound.
All the factors that encourage high growth remain in place: low labor costs, education, high savings, improving infrastructure, and rapid urbanization.
Moreover, China’s fiscal position is one of the best in the world.
Government deficits rarely exceeded 3% of GDP in past decades, and there were surpluses in recent years.
Indeed, the government debt-to-GDP ratio is about 20%, compared with more than 80% in the United States, 160% in Japan, and 60-90% in Europe.
Monetary policy has been prudent, and the threat of inflation has now been lessened by the decline in commodity and oil prices.
The international balance of payments remains in surplus, and there is still a net capital inflow despite the global credit crunch.
Official foreign exchange reserves will soon reach US$ 2 trillion.
Thus, policymakers have ample room to maneuver if anything should go wrong.
The recent $568 billion fiscal stimulus package, which will be spent on railway expansion, subway construction, low-budget housing programs for the poor, irrigation systems, rural social security, and health care, will add a few percentage points to growth over the next couple years.
With monetary policy and some of the administrative controls on investment and local spending being relaxed, the slowdown should be brief.
But it is not all good news in China’s economy, because low consumption remains a big weakness.
Household consumption only accounted for 34% of GDP and total consumption is less than 50% of GDP in 2007.   That weakness, however, is institutional and cannot be easily corrected in the short run.
So, with its domestic economy basically secure, is there anything China can do to help the world economy?
If China can manage to maintain real growth at 8% per annum over the next two years, emerging markets may be able to grow at 4%.
That may prevent the world economy from falling into recession.
Indeed, China now looks like it can play the role of “growth anchor.”
But China should not be expected to do too much more.
World financial stabilization, for example, is not something China can do much to help directly.
China played little part in the global derivatives markets, and does not have much toxic securities to clean up or banks to save in order to unfreeze credit flows.
Perhaps China should use its $1.9 trillion official reserves to buy more foreign debt, but this huge asset pool is already heavily loaded with foreign sovereign bonds, so any increase can only be incremental.
China is also probably unsuited at the moment to play a central role in reforming the global financial and monetary system in 2009 because it has not yet fully liberalized its capital accounts and financial system.
So Chinese negotiators would rather play a supporting role and let others, both developed and developing countries, take the lead in most issues concerning risk control and regulations.
But China is likely to increase its voice on one issue – the US dollar’s status as global reserve currency.
China has been criticized in the past for allegedly manipulating its exchange rate, because it did not revalue its currency as much as the US demanded.
So China might like to see, for example, amendments to the IMF mandate or the addition of a “chapter” to the IMF’s working agenda that discipline America’s money supply and debt accumulation.
In China’s view, it is not enough merely to require others to accommodate themselves to dollar devaluation.
As a developing country with US$ 2,500 per capita income and 35% of its labor force still in agriculture, where workers earn only about $600 per year, China’s domestic problems remain enormous.
Thus, development will continue to be the top priority, including the development of China’s own financial market.
The good news is that China recognizes how much it has benefited from the marketization and openness of the past 30 years.
There is no turning back on its path toward full involvement in the global market, despite the current crisis.
Indeed, the real challenge for China in the year ahead will be to find ways to deal with growing global protectionism as the financial crisis and economic recession bite ever deeper in its main foreign markets.
The Making of China’s Consumer Society
HONG KONG – China’s transformation from a manufacturing-driven and export-led economy to one underpinned by services and domestic consumption is firmly underway.
And that’s good news not just for China, but also for the future of the global economy.
The 2016-17 edition of the Blue Book of China’s Commercial Sector by Fung Business Intelligence and the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences maps the change.
China’s retail markets reached CN¥30 trillion ($4.6 trillion) in 2015, after more than a decade of double-digit growth.
Household consumption has begun to climb, even as the pace of investment has fallen, and now exceeds 60% of GDP.
Though the consumption growth rate has slowed to 10.7%, the Blue Book projects that China’s domestic market may reach CN¥50 trillion by 2020.
A key driver of this transformation has been Internet technology.
Building on heavy investments in public infrastructure, such as ports, airports, roads, rail, and telecommunications, the Internet is now expanding rapidly the range of choices available to Chinese consumers, while lowering costs and accelerating delivery.
As a result, China’s online retail sales have surged in recent years, from 6.3% of total retail sales in 2012 to 12.9% by 2015.
With a growth rate of some 33%, it is also the fastest-growing such market.
And despite growth in Internet use – the number of connected Chinese has risen from 253 million in 2008 to 688 million last year – there is plenty of room for further expansion.
This progress reflects innovations that enable broad-based consumption without the construction and maintenance of expensive brick-and-mortar outlets.
In fact, growth in mobile sales has been driven by lower-income consumers, particularly in rural areas, where more than 81% of Internet use occurs via mobile devices.
One key innovation has been multi-sided platforms like Alibaba, which, by providing access to production, logistics, distribution, and payments, challenge traditional business models – and with considerable success.
In the second quarter of 2016, Alibaba announced that its revenue from China’s retail market had increased by 49% year on year; another online platform, Tencent, reported a 52% increase.
By connecting small and medium-size enterprises (which account for 80% of employment in China) with the consumer base, such platforms erode some of the competitive advantage of large state-owned enterprises (SOEs).
Indeed, while the returns from China’s Internet retailing revolution have been highly concentrated, for once this concentration has not been in the state sector.
As a result, SOEs, which have long specialized in single markets or products, have now begun to recognize that they need to re-tool to compete both in China and in global markets.
Given that SOE reform has long been on China’s agenda, this extra impetus may prove beneficial.
But the challenge of determining how to create a level playing field for healthy competition and improve capital allocation in the Internet age remains.
It is not just China’s large companies that need to rethink their business models.
As China’s e-commerce platforms become increasingly global, they may erode the dominance of giant multinationals in international trade.
Already in 2015, China’s cross-border e-commerce amounted to an estimated ¥5.2 trillion, or 17.6% of the country’s total trade; it may reach ¥8 trillion, or 23% of total trade, by next year.
All of this growth is great news for China; indeed, at a time of slowing performance in many traditional sectors, online retailing could be an economic lifesaver.
But it also represents a major challenge for a government that has long relied on top-down decision-making.
China’s e-commerce revolution enables the country’s consumers to decide where to put their money.
They can choose not only what kinds of goods and services they deem worthwhile, but also where to live and receive an education.
As a result, they have become a key driver behind the transformation of the housing market, supply chains, finance, and even monetary policy.
The task for China’s leaders is to respond more effectively to their citizens’ needs and desires, including by accelerating progress on economic reform.
Specifically, they must phase out obsolete supply chains saddled with overcapacity, bad debts, and falling employment, while taxing the winners in the e-commerce game.
These imperatives are challenging traditional approaches to monetary, fiscal, industrial, environmental, and social policy, while testing the capacity of the bureaucracy and political system.
China’s transformation into a consumer society will have profound implications for domestic and global suppliers and distributors of goods and services.
At first, it might hurt some of China’s trading partners, particularly the emerging economies that have long depended on Chinese demand for their commodity exports.
The decline in Chinese imports has already contributed to a decline in commodity prices.
Moreover, foreign importers may find that Chinese-manufactured consumer goods now cater more to local tastes and preferences.
Whatever challenges emerge, the fact is that a prosperous China, underpinned by local consumers, will contribute to – and shape – a prosperous global economy.
We can thank e-commerce for that.
China’s Corporate-Debt Challenge
WASHINGTON, DC – The Chinese economy has slowed in recent years, but it is still a strong performer, contributing about one-third of total economic growth worldwide.
It is also becoming more sustainable, in line with the shift in its growth model away from investment and exports and toward domestic demand and services.
In the run-up to next month’s G20 summit in Hangzhou, China has been calling loudly for new commitments to structural reforms to stimulate growth in advanced and emerging-market economies.
But China faces serious risks at home. Above all, domestic credit continues to expand at an unsustainable pace, with corporate debt accumulating to dangerous levels.
According to the International Monetary Fund’s recently published annual report on the Chinese economy, credit is growing about twice as fast as output. It is rising rapidly in both the non-financial private sector and in an expanding, interconnected financial sector that remains opaque.
Moreover, while credit growth is high by international standards – a key indicator of a potential crisis – its ability to spur further growth is diminishing.
Warning signs are flashing, and the Chinese government has acknowledged the overall problem.
But, to avoid a crisis, it should immediately implement comprehensive reforms to address the root causes of the corporate debt problem.
These include soft budget constraints for state-owned enterprises (SOEs) and local governments, implicit and explicit government guarantees of debt, and excessive risk taking in the financial sector – all of which have been perpetuated by unsustainable official growth targets.
To tackle the problem, the Chinese government must, in the words of Premier Li Keqiang, “ruthlessly bring down the knife [on] zombie enterprises.”
This culling should be combined with a concrete strategy to restructure salvageable firms; recognize and allocate creditor losses; account for displaced workers and other social costs; and further open private-sector markets.
More fundamentally, the government must accept the inevitability of lower near-term growth.
It is especially important to restructure SOEs.
Many are essentially on life support, contributing only one-fifth of total industrial output but accounting for about half of all corporate debt.
A serious restructuring effort – including stricter budget constraints and an end to lending to non-viable firms and government guarantees on debt, along with other supply-side reforms already underway – will create space for more dynamic companies to emerge and contribute to growth.
China is unique in many respects, but it is not the first country to experience corporate-debt difficulties.
Its leaders should heed three broad lessons from other countries’ experience.
First, the authorities should act quickly and effectively, lest today’s corporate-debt problem become tomorrow’s systemic debt problem.
Second, they should deal with both creditors and debtors – some countries’ solutions address only one or the other, sowing the seeds for future problems.
Finally, the governance structures that permitted the problem to arise must be identified and reformed.
At a minimum, China needs an effective system to deal with insolvency; strict regulation of risk pricing and assessment; and robust accounting, loan-loss provisioning, and financial disclosure rules.
Influential voices in China are quick to draw the lesson from international experience that tackling corporate debt can limit short-term growth and impose social costs, such as unemployment.
These are valid concerns, but the alternatives – half measures or no reform at all – would only make a bad situation worse.
China should begin by restructuring unviable companies in its fastest-growing regions, where workers will find new jobs more quickly and reforms are not likely to hurt growth.
Policymakers can then be more selective when it comes to restructuring in slower-growing regions and cities where a single company dominates the local economy.
Moreover, structural unemployment and worker resettlement costs can be mitigated with a strong social safety net that includes funds for targeted labor redeployment so that workers can get back on their feet.
This approach would show the government’s commitment to those at risk of displacement.
To its credit, China has already made some efforts to solve its debt problem and begin deleveraging.
The current Five-Year Plan aims to reduce excess capacity in the coal and steel sectors, identify and restructure nonviable “zombie” SOEs, and fund programs to support affected workers.
Now is the time for China to push for far-reaching reforms.
Banks’ balance sheets still have a relatively low volume of non-performing loans (and high provisioning).
The costs of potential losses on corporate loans – estimated at 7% of GDP in the IMF’s latest Global Financial Stability Report – are manageable.
Furthermore, the government maintains high buffers: debt is relatively low, and foreign-exchange reserves are relatively high.
The question is whether China will manage to deleverage enough before these buffers are exhausted.
Given its record of economic success and the government’s strong commitment to an ambitious reform agenda, China can rise to the challenge. But it must start now.
China’s Credit Overdose
SHANGHAI – The days of double-digit economic growth in China are over.
Indeed, the annual growth rate, which has been lingering at about 7.5% since 2012, is predicted to fall to 7% this year – and is likely to go lower.
This is China’s “new normal,” characterized, according to China’s leaders, by “medium-to-high-speed” (instead of high-speed) growth.
But perhaps even this is optimistic.
In the last two years, credit grew almost twice as fast as GDP, and total social financing grew even faster.
Yet GDP growth slowed considerably – from an annual average of 10.2% in 2002-2011 – suggesting that China may be moving closer to a medium-to-low-speed growth path.
One possible explanation for the divergence between credit and GDP growth is that potential growth has already dropped to 7%.
But such a sharp decline in potential growth typically implies a powerful brake, in the form of an external shock or major internal adjustments.
Under normal circumstances, an economy’s potential growth rate adjusts naturally and gradually, as structural change progresses.
In fact, there is no definitive evidence that China’s potential growth rate has plunged.
China weathered the 2008 global economic crisis better than other emerging economies.
And, though structural factors, including an aging population and shrinking labor force, can certainly undermine potential growth, their effects are not sudden.
So what explains the sharp decline in China’s economic output, in an environment of rapid credit expansion?
The answer is simple: the way the credit is being used.
Before the crisis, credit expansion in China kept pace with GDP growth.
Since the end of 2008, however, credit amounting to 35% of GDP has been issued annually, causing the credit-to-GDP ratio to soar from less than 150% before the crisis to 250% today.
That means that credit has become much less efficient.
The problem stems from the CN¥4 trillion ($660 billion) stimulus plan that the government launched in 2008, which fueled the creation of about CN¥14 trillion worth of credit – and supported a rapid increase in fixed-asset investment, especially in infrastructure and real-estate development.
When, in late 2009, the investment-intensive economy began to show signs of overheating, the government imposed strict macroeconomic controls, forcing investors to halt ongoing projects.
Growth fell immediately.
Meanwhile, debt continued to rise – not least because of the continued accumulation of interest.
Indeed, according to the political economist Victor Shih, the interest that accrued to all debts in China in 2010 amounted to 80% of incremental nominal GDP.
In 2012, the two figures were nearly equivalent, with interest rising to 140% of incremental nominal GDP in 2013 and, Shih expects, to 200% for 2014.
Local governments, in particular, have struggled with a colossal volume of bad debt, which has undermined their capacity for capital expenditure and frozen out private demand for productive investment.
Stringent controls on the real-estate market placed a heavy burden on the developers themselves, as well as related industries like steel.
Yet China’s government failed to acknowledge – much less address – the bad debts in a timely manner, instead allowing them to grow even larger.
Given that the only way to enable borrowers to avoid default – at least temporarily – has been to provide an ever-increasing amount of liquidity, even banks facing liquidity constraints have remained willing to extend new loans.
Though China’s high national savings rate means that it does not have to borrow liquidity from abroad or print large amounts of money, the risks it faces should not be underestimated.
With such a large share of the new liquidity being used to cover debt service, there is little left to finance new, growth-stimulating investment.
Moreover, as debts grow ever larger, banks’ willingness to lend will decline, driving debtors to the unregulated shadow-banking sector, where interest rates are extremely high, for their liquidity needs.
The rising cost of financing will further undermine fixed-asset investment (and thus economic growth).
China’s “new normal” is actually not normal at all.
While the growth curve and structural changes in the East Asian economy from the 1960s to the 1990s suggest that China could experience medium-to-high growth rates for another decade, the country must address its debt problem first.
The first step is to cut interest rates immediately, thereby reducing the burden on debtors and bolstering GDP growth.
The government must also pursue a more active fiscal policy, rather than focusing on monetary policy.
Furthermore, given that local governments and state-owned enterprises are responsible for the majority of China’s bad debts, write-offs, funded by central-government bonds, will probably be necessary – and soon.
Though the “debt swap” scheme that the finance ministry just introduced – which allows highly leveraged local governments to swap CN¥1 trillion of debt maturing this year for bonds with lower interest rates – is a step in the right direction, it is far from adequate.
With the central government enjoying such favorable fiscal conditions – its debt-to-GDP ratio stands at only about 20% – now is the ideal time to initiate a much larger debt-swap program.
Of course, curbing future debt accumulation is also vital to China’s long-term prosperity.
That is why China must reduce local governments’ dependence on banks to meet their financing needs, by nurturing bond and equity markets.
The debt-induced distortions in China’s economy today are precisely that – distortions.
They are not a fundamental feature of the economy, and they need not characterize China’s new normal.
With the right strategy, the authorities can eliminate these distortions and allow the economy to reach its medium-to-high-speed growth potential over the next decade.
False Alarm on China
NEW HAVEN – The prospect of an economic meltdown in China has been sending tremors through global financial markets at the start of 2016.
Yet such fears are overblown.
While turmoil in Chinese equity and currency markets should not be taken lightly, the country continues to make encouraging headway on structural adjustments in its real economy.
This mismatch between progress in economic rebalancing and setbacks in financial reforms must ultimately be resolved as China now enters a critical phase in its transition to a new growth model.
But it does not spell imminent crisis.
Consistent with China’s long experience in central planning, it continues to excel at industrial reengineering.
Trends in 2015 were a case in point: The 8.3% expansion in the services sector outstripped that of the once-dominant manufacturing and construction sectors, which together grew by just 6% last year.
The so-called tertiary sector rose to 50.5% of Chinese GDP in 2015, well in excess of the 47% share targeted in 2011, when the 12th Five-Year Plan, was adopted, and fully ten percentage points larger than the 40.5% share of secondary-sector activities (manufacturing and construction).
This significant shift in China’s economic structure is vitally important to the country’s consumer-led rebalancing strategy.
Services development underpins urban employment opportunities, a key building block of personal income generation.
With Chinese services requiring about 30% more jobs per unit of output than manufacturing and construction, combined, the tertiary sector’s relative strength has played an important role in limiting unemployment and preventing social instability – long China’s greatest fear.
On the contrary, even in the face of decelerating GDP growth, urban job creation hit 11 million in 2015, above the government’s target of ten million and a slight increase from 10.7 million in 2014.
The bad news is that China’s impressive headway on restructuring its real economy has been accompanied by significant setbacks for its financial agenda – namely, the bursting of an equity bubble, a poorly handled shift in currency policy, and an exodus of financial capital.
These are hardly inconsequential developments – especially for a country that must eventually align its financial infrastructure with a market-based consumer society.
In the end, China will never succeed if it does not bring its financial reforms into closer sync with its rebalancing strategy for the real economy.
Capital-market reforms – especially the development of more robust equity and bond markets to augment a long dominant bank-centric system of credit intermediation – are critical to this objective.
Yet in the aftermath of the stock-market bubble, the equity-funding alternative is all but dead for the foreseeable future.
For that reason alone, China’s recent financial-sector setbacks are especially disappointing.
But setbacks and crises are not the same thing.
The good news is that China’s massive reservoir of foreign-exchange reserves provides it with an important buffer against a classic currency and liquidity crisis.
To be sure, China’s reserves have fallen enormously – by $700 billion – in the last 19 months.
Given China’s recent build-up of dollar-denominated liabilities, which the Bank for International Settlements currently places at around $1 trillion (for short- and long-term debt, combined), external vulnerability can hardly be ignored.
But, at $3.3 trillion in December 2015, China’s reserves are still enough to cover more than four times its short-term external debt – well in excess of the widely accepted rule of thumb that a country should still be able to fund all of its short-term foreign liabilities in the event that it is unable to borrow in international markets.
Of course, this cushion would effectively vanish in six years if foreign reserves were to continue falling at the same $500 billion annual rate recorded in 2015.
This was precisely the greatest fear during the Asian financial crisis of the late 1990s, when China was widely expected to follow other so-called East Asian miracle economies that had run out of reserves in the midst of a contagious attack on their currencies.
But if it didn’t happen then, it certainly won’t happen now: China’s foreign-exchange reserves today are 23 times higher than the $140 billion held in 1997-98.
Moreover, China continues to run a large current-account surplus, in contrast to the outsize external deficits that proved so problematic for other Asian economies in the late 1990s.
Still, fear persists that if capital flight were to intensify, China would ultimately be powerless to stop it.
Nothing could be further from the truth.
China’s institutional memory runs deep when it comes to crises and their consequences.
That is especially the case concerning the experience of the late 1990s, when Chinese leaders saw firsthand how a run on reserves and a related currency collapse can wreak havoc on seemingly invincible economies.
In fact, it was that realization, coupled with a steadfast fixation on stability, that prompted China to focus urgently on amassing the largest reservoir of foreign-exchange reserves in modern history.
While the authorities have no desire to close the capital account after having taken several important steps to open it in recent years, they would most certainly rethink this position if capital flight were to become a more serious threat.
Yes, China has stumbled in the recent implementation of many of its financial reforms.
The equity-market fiasco is especially glaring in this regard, as was the failure to clarify official intentions regarding the August 2015 shift in exchange-rate policy.