It is too late to agree on issuing SDRs at the upcoming G-20 meeting, but if it were proposed by President Barack Obama and endorsed in principle by the majority of participants, it would be sufficient to give heart to the markets and make the meeting a resounding success.
A Time to Spend
BERKELEY – The central insight of macroeconomics is a fact that was known to John Stuart Mill in the first third of the nineteenth century: there can be a large gap between supply and demand for pretty much all currently produced goods and services and types of labor if there is an equally large excess demand for financial assets. And this fundamental fact is a source of big trouble.
A normal gap between supply and demand for some subset of currently produced commodities is not a serious problem, because it is balanced by excess demand for other currently produced commodities.
As industries suffering from insufficient demand shed workers, industries benefiting from surplus demand hire them.
The economy rapidly rebalances itself and thus returns to full employment – and does so with a configuration of employment and production that is better adapted to current consumer preferences.
By contrast, a gap between supply and demand when the corresponding excess demand is for financial assets is a recipe for economic meltdown.
There is, after all, no easy way that unemployed workers can start producing the assets – money and bonds that not only are rated investment-grade, but really are – that financial markets are not adequately supplying.
The flow of workers out of employment exceeds the flow back into employment.
And, as employment and incomes drop, spending on currently produced commodities drops further, and the economy spirals down into depression.
Thus, the first principle of macroeconomic policy is that because only the government can create the investment-grade financial assets that are in short supply in a depression, it is the government’s task to do so.
The government must ensure that the money supply matches the full-employment level of money demand, and that the supply of safe savings vehicles in which investors can park their wealth also meets demand.
How well have the world’s governments performed this task over the past three years?
In East Asia (minus Japan), governments appear to have been doing rather well.
Shortage of demand for currently produced goods and services and mass unemployment no longer loom as the region’s biggest macroeconomic problems.
Flooding their economies with liquidity, maintaining export-friendly exchange rates, and spending to employ workers directly and boost the supply of safe savings vehicles have made the Great Recession in East Asia less dire than it has been elsewhere.
In North America, governments appear to have muddled through.
They have not provided enough bank guarantees, forced enough mortgage renegotiations, increased spending enough, or financed enough employment to rebalance financial markets, return asset prices to normal configurations, and facilitate a rapid return to full employment.
But unemployment has not climbed far above 10%, either.
The most serious problems right now are in Europe.
Uncertainty about how, exactly, the liabilities of highly leveraged banks and over-leveraged peripheral governments are to be guaranteed is shrinking the supply of safe savings vehicles at a time when macroeconomic rebalancing calls for it to be rising.
And the rapid reductions in budget deficits that European governments are now pledged to undertake can only increase the likelihood of a full double-dip recession.
The broad pattern is clear: the more that governments have worried about enabling future moral hazard by excessive bailouts and sought to stem the rise in public debt, the worse their countries’ economies have performed.
The more that they have focused on policies to put people back to work in the short run, the better their economies have done.
This pattern would not have surprised nineteenth-century economists like Mill or Walter Bagehot, who understood the financial-sector origins of industrial depression.
But it does seem to surprise not only a great many observers today, but also a large number of policymakers.
A Nuclear South Korea?
SEOUL – South Korean officials have recently realized that the United States is likely to try to forbid them from enriching uranium and expanding their country’s missile range, rather than leave these issues on the diplomatic back burner.
Indeed, recent discreet talks, in which the US has disregarded South Korean efforts to supplement the controversial US-South Korea Nuclear Cooperation Agreement, which expires in March 2014, suggest that there are reasons to be deeply worried about the alliance’s future.
American negotiators – the reluctant midwives of South Korea’s increasing responsibility in the field of atomic energy – remain steadfast in their opposition to South Korea’s drive for improved defensive capabilities and a more advanced energy policy, despite the potential strategic benefits.
But American nonproliferation experts do not anticipate progress on South Korea’s efforts to win support for its preferred policies until the US gains more leverage.
Such a stalemate is not new.
Nuclear talks between the two countries have often been characterized by poor communication and a lack of understanding.
While South Korean officials rarely say in public what they really think, it is widely believed that US policymakers have little motivation to reconcile with South Korea’s government right now – they would prefer to stifle South Korea’s increasingly loud demands.
In the US-South Korea relationship’s heyday, American politicians considered the country an “extended arm of America.”
Such condescension may have been defensible when South Korea’s military dictatorship needed America’s political protection and security guarantee, but now the country is a beacon of democracy in East Asia.
So, while South Koreans understand the need for compromise and cooperation, they believe that the time is right for a more balanced partnership.
This belief does not imply South Korean cynicism about nonproliferation.
Rather, it reflects concern about a nuclear North Korea, compounded by anxiety over the recent US-Japan missile-defense accord.
Given that the US and South Korea have the same assessment of the intelligence regarding North Korea’s nuclear progress, not to mention South Korea’s vulnerability, their failure to reach a practical agreement is troubling.
Former Deputy Foreign Minister Chun Yung-woo warned an American official in 2010 that revising the Nuclear Cooperation Agreement could soon become a “defining issue” in South Korea-US relations, and that it was already attracting “significant amounts of negative press attention.”
Given South Korea’s status as one of the world’s top five nuclear-power producers, Chun argued, the South Korean public would not tolerate the perception that Japan was receiving preferential treatment.
Indeed, right-wing leaders like Representative Chung Mong-joon of the governing Saenuri Party have been vocal in expressing their doubts about South Korea’s current denuclearization policy, suggesting that a nuclear weapons program could prevent a second war on the peninsula.
The conservatives seem to believe that American nuclear protection for South Korea is a thing of the past.
Despite their hawkish approach to North Korea’s nuclear threats, South Korean officials know that uranium enrichment and spent-fuel reprocessing remains only a distant possibility.
As a result, they are approaching negotiations skeptically, rather than emphasizing the sense of mutual obligation that should characterize the alliance.
But their pessimism is hardly groundless, given that the United Arab Emirates has already signed a similar agreement with the US declaring that it would not produce nuclear fuel.
Indeed, South Korean negotiators appear convinced that they will not be able to make any headway with the US on the issue.
(To be sure, this failure may not matter much, given South Korean scientists’ past declaration that they will not contribute to any nuclear program that could be used for military purposes.)
The US-South Korea debate over nuclear weapons should show both sides that their 59-year-old alliance urgently needs to be updated.
Together, the allies can improve global prospects for nuclear nonproliferation, but only if they hammer out a grand bargain that accounts for South Korea’s current – and future – security concerns.
A Tribute to Evil
In May, the world will mark the 60th anniversary of the end of World War II in Europe.
But instead of happily preparing for that occasion, the Baltic countries of Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania – which scarcely 15 years ago regained the independence they lost in WWII – are uneasy.
The heads of state of all three countries have been invited to participate in the parades to be held in Moscow to celebrate the Red Army’s victory over Nazi Germany.
But the host of the celebration, Russia, in the guise of the Soviet Union, itself caused the war – the bloodiest in European history – whose end is being commemorated.
Of course, the USSR instigated the war in tandem with Adolf Hitler, but its responsibility is undeniable.
By holding these celebrations in Red Square, and thus highlighting the Soviet victory, today’s Russia is also celebrating its gains in that war.
One of those gains was my country, Lithuania, whose incorporation into Stalin’s empire was accompanied by countless tragedies.
Unlike Germany, Russia has never recognized its responsibility for the war and the mass graves of the innocent.
Thus, a former captive nation is now being invited to celebrate its captivity.
This is why almost all Lithuanians – indeed, most residents of the Baltic countries – feel queasy at the prospect of their leaders marking this anniversary in Moscow.
But Estonians, Latvians, and Lithuanians are not the only Europeans who should feel this way.
When Stalin offered Hitler his friendship in the spring of 1939 – formally concluded that summer in the Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact – Nazi aggression was assured of not being knifed in the back from the East and so was left with free hands to do as Hitler pleased in the West.
The Pact came after the pogroms of “Kristallnacht” in Germany, so its Soviet initiators knew pretty well to what destiny they were consigning the Jews of Poland and Lithuania, which, in accord with the first secret Protocol signed by Ribbentrop and Molotov on August 23, 1939, were to go to Hitler.
A month later, in equal secrecy, Hitler sold Lithuania to Stalin.
The other countries situated between Germany and the USSR were similarly sentenced to disappear as nations – sooner or later.
Their peoples were treated practically as though they did not exist; the aggressors’ only concern was territory.
The death sentences and torturing that were then imposed on almost entire nations and millions of people are, it now appears, to be silently accepted and noisily celebrated on May 9 in Moscow.
Some Russian officials want to unveil a monument Stalin to crown the festivities.
When Hitler’s Wehrmacht struck West, the USSR duly supported Germany in its war against Poland, France, Belgium, the Netherlands, Luxembourg, Denmark, Norway, and the United Kingdom.
As a result, cities in those countries were flattened and people killed not only by the Nazis, but also by their Soviet ally, which invaded Poland and supplied the Wehrmacht with the material it needed for its war against the West.
In return, Stalin’s USSR was given a free hand to attack Finland and to occupy Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania, as well as a part of Romania.
In law, when two criminals seal a contract with the blood of their victims, that act remains a crime, even if the two criminals later have a falling out and spray bullets at one another.
The same applies to the two greatest European criminals of the twentieth century.
We must not forget the crimes that Hitler and Stalin committed together as de facto allies only because they later turned on each other.
The blood of WWII’s victims calls for justice and fairness, but most of all it demands honesty about who and what caused their tragic fate.
If those who gather in Moscow on May 9 do anything to validate Soviet war crimes, they will show themselves insensitive to the silent cries of WWII’s tens of millions of dead innocents.
The only real winner would be the spirit of that evil.
A Tribute to James Wolfensohn
Over the past decade, the global economy has achieved unprecedented prosperity built on trade, international capital flows, and technological innovation.
Amidst this undeniable progress, however, remain widespread poverty, disease, and illiteracy.
In a world made smaller by modern telecommunications, satellite TV, and the Internet, the vast challenges of development that we continue to face confront us everyday.
Perhaps no individual has done more to raise the alarm – earning deserved credit for many successes and understanding all too clearly the remaining shortcomings – than James Wolfensohn, the outgoing President of the World Bank.
As Managing Director of the IMF, I have had the privilege of working closely with Jim Wolfensohn, seeing up close a man with an extraordinary mission: the sustainable reduction of global poverty.
Wolfensohn left a successful business career to lead the global campaign against poverty.
It is perhaps the ultimate tribute to his commitment and tenacity that his efforts over the past 10 years have attracted criticism as well as praise, for he has stood at the center of every major campaign aimed at alleviating the economic ills of our generation.
Wolfensohn led the World Bank onto the cutting edge of every important development debate, and was at the forefront of the effort to combat HIV/AIDS, as well as other deadly diseases that threaten so many impoverished countries.
He has been a forthright spokesman for women’s rights and a champion of environmental concerns, as well as a formidable advocate in arguing for debt reduction for the most heavily indebted nations.
He also has placed the World Bank at the center of the effort to help rebuild nations emerging from devastating civil conflict, from Bosnia to Sierra Leone to East Timor.
As World Bank president, Wolfensohn argued consistently that the world cannot be divided into “haves” and “have-nots.”
Poverty anywhere means poverty everywhere, and equitable growth is needed for the stability and security of all.
Indeed, that is the true meaning of globalization.
At the same time, Wolfensohn made a big contribution to development work by arguing that poverty must be treated as a multidimensional problem.
It is now widely accepted that financial assistance alone will not bring about effective poverty reduction.
Rather, sustainable, pro-poor growth is the key, requiring political stability – that is, peace and security for individuals – good governance, and ownership of policies by all stakeholders.
Under Wolfensohn, the World Bank followed through on this comprehensive and coordinated approach in a concrete fashion, making significant inroads into global poverty.
In the last 10 years, the Bank was the largest external financier of primary education, basic health care, HIV/AIDS programs, and programs aimed at protecting the environment and biodiversity. This agenda goes to the heart of improving human dignity and maintaining sustainable development.
Wolfensohn’s insistence that corruption be confronted as part of the development process was another valuable step forward. It used to be that even mentioning corruption in some official circles was considered taboo.
But corruption poses the single largest obstacle to growth and development in many countries, especially as it diverts resources from the poor.
The World Bank insisted that corruption be seen as a cancer, and that fighting it be made synonymous with fighting poverty.
Indeed, outspokenness was a hallmark of Wolfensohn’s tenure.
Many a government minister, Bank officer and NGO representative has experienced his blunt criticism, as well as his effusive praise. The IMF has not been immune to this treatment.
The strength of the Bretton Woods institutions lies in intellectual diversity, and the Fund benefited from Wolfensohn’s honesty, as well as from his commitment to Bank-Fund cooperation, which progressively deepened during the past decade.
The work of our two institutions — in areas as diverse as poverty reduction strategies, debt relief, and the unheralded joint program to analyze financial sectors in our member countries — strengthened the global economy.
Ultimately, development is about people.
Jim Wolfensohn’s greatest strength has been his genuine caring for the world’s poor. His legacy will include a World Bank that is firmly committed to a world free of poverty.
The poor around the world may feel poorer from losing him as their champion and advocate.
In fact, their prospects are brighter because of his work over the past decade.
A Triumph for “Old Europe”
Italy may have defeated France to win the World Cup, but the real winner was the “Old Europe” that Donald Rumsfeld once derided.
After all, who would have predicted a World Cup final between France and Italy?
It looks as if the national teams of the two “sick men of Europe,” felt obliged to change their countries’ images in the world.
In the Italian case, following the corruption scandals that have nearly sunk Il Calcio, Italy’s premier football league, the national team had to rehabilitate the game in the eyes of their fellow citizens.
More globally, however, it is as if “Old Europe” had decided that it was time to set the record straight and prove more dynamic than the world’s emerging forces.
Indeed, in the new global balance, where football has become much more than sport, Europe is back with a vengeance.
What has been unfolding in front of our eyes in the last four weeks has been a modern and reduced version of the balance-of-power system that dominated Europe and the world in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries.
If football and its culminating moment, the World Cup, has become the universal religion of the global age, this is above all because it fulfills, in a non-spiritual way, contradictory instincts in human nature.
Football magnifies the cult of the individual and the glorification of the hero, but it is also a celebration of the cooperative team spirit.
More than any other collective activity, it channels the search for identity and identification that dominates our age.
Thanks to the World Cup, one is a citizen of the world, enjoying a spectacle together with billions of others on “Planet Soccer.”
Even in Washington, where I arrived at the beginning of the tournament, I was greeted at the airport by television screens showing the game.
The program was in English, but the advertisements were in Spanish.
In terms of football at least, the Hispanic community’s influence has brought the United States closer to Europe (though not, of course, in its team’s performance on the pitch).
At the same time, during the World Cup, fans are not only universal; they are also unique, and they can express their difference with impunity, sometimes in the most assertive, aggressive, and, unfortunately, occasionally racist manner.
In a world of “multiple identities,” to choose one’s team is in part to decide who one is.
From this standpoint, this year’s World Cup has not only witnessed the triumph of European nations – all semi-finalists were European for the first time since 1982 – but also the absence of even a glimmer of European emotions.
In my country, France, most supporters were clearly motivated more by post-colonial references than by European allegiance.
African teams, except when they were playing against France, were favored over those from the European Union.
As I watched the Croatia-Australia match early in the tournament, I surprised myself, too, as I realized that my emotions were with the Australian team, whatever that could mean, given that there were so many Croatians playing for Australia.
This deep search for identification should not be confused with a simple surge of nationalism.
Reality is more complex.
And this is not only because many coaches of the national teams are, like in the good old days, “foreign mercenaries,” with this Cup’s Swiss guards including the Brazilian coaches of Japan and Portugal, the Swedish coach of England, and the French coach of Tunisia.
The Cup’s explosions of proud nationalism hide more tortured realities.
Nostalgia is not what it used to be.
In 1998, when France won the Cup for the first time, the three colors of the French flag (blue, white, and red) were celebrated alongside with the three colors (“black, white, and
Indeed, after the violent episodes of the last year, France’s immigrant communities have a very different message to deliver: “Without us, you would not have had this World Cup success.
Do you believe you can continue to ostracize the communities from which your soccer heroes come?”
From ping-pong diplomacy with China to the united German Olympic team that competed in 1990 before actual reunification, sport has prefigured political developments, and politicians everywhere have seized on the importance of the World Cup.
Football success has become part of countries’ “soft power.”
France may not have the military might of the US or the growth rate of China and India, but its team reached the World Cup championship, raising its standing in the eyes of billions of people – and perhaps giving a reprieve to its unpopular government.
But sport can also become a kind of gigantic, distracting screen behind which nasty regimes do outrageous things – the very opposite of the Olympic and World Cup spirit.
As the world was watching the football games in Germany, North Korea was testing long-range missiles and Palestinians in the governing Hamas launched attacks on Israel that prompted a bloody invasion of Gaza.
The World Cup is drama, excitement, a dream, but it is also a form of “global escapism.”
Football may explain the world, but it does not improve it.
And now we are back to reality.
Attacking French Hopelessness
As French cities have burned, other countries have been very severe in judging France.
Embassies have issued warnings to tourists and their citizens living in France; television news programs have shown hours of footage of burning cars.
Other countries’ governments, it seems, have been trying to distance themselves from the problem, fearing a contagion that they know is likely to spread.
Mayors across Europe, however, have responded more moderately, feeling and showing solidarity with the plight of their French colleagues.
They know that their cities are also vulnerable to urban violence, in so far as they have pockets of social inequality, including marginalized and excluded young people.
The specificity of the French situation is that the revolt is targeted against the state, and more precisely against the police forces.
Unlike recent riots in the United Kingdom, which were inter-ethnic, the confrontations in France put their participants face to face with the police.
Indeed, there is no specific religious or ethnic character to these riots, in so far as youth from various ethnic backgrounds have taken part.
Minority youth are, to be sure, over-represented among those involved.
This is easily explained by their geographic segregation, higher levels of unemployment, higher school dropout rates, and disproportionately frequent interactions with the criminal justice system.
But, in view of the diversity of the young people convicted so far, it would be a mistake to say that these riots are the result of Muslim radicalization.
There is absolutely no indication so far that organized networks or religious groups are manipulating these youth.
Of course, this is not to say that Muslim radicals will not exploit the disarray if a satisfying resolution is not found rapidly.
The rioting may not be organized - no clear leaders or political demands have emerged.
Yet these violent acts can be viewed as a political conflict in the sense that young people are directly challenging the state by attacking its representatives.
The violence seems to be proportional to these disenfranchised young people’s sense of perceived injustice and the lack of opportunities for them to express themselves.
In this sense, France is paying the price for the lack of continuity, coherence, and appropriate funding given to social development policies over the past 30 years.
Although these policies have undoubtedly helped residents of disadvantaged neighborhoods, they have not been sufficiently ambitious to dampen resentment.
One example of overly timid policies involves policing.
In the last few years, France has distinguished itself from other European nations by gradually abandoning community-based policing, which the government considers too “social” and prevention-oriented.
While European police forces place prevention at the top of their agendas, France has chosen to treat it as a marginal goal.
As a result, tensions between the police, who are increasingly perceived as “outsiders,” and residents have grown to all-time highs.
In the absence of a community-based approach, interactions with law-enforcement authorities are now limited to tense, conflict-ridden situations, reinforcing the confrontational atmosphere between rebellious youth and the police.
At the same time, the fact that police agents must intervene in places with which they are not familiar severely impedes their effectiveness.
In the current violence, the police have unfortunately been placed in the position of sole representative of the state.
But all public actors, not just the police, must respond to urban problems.
First and foremost, mayors should be mobilized as mediators, because they are on the front line in implementing urban policy.
When these policies fail, citizens hold mayors responsible.
But mayors are also the most knowledgeable about communication links within their communities, and are thus the most capable of organizing effective partnerships to address and resolve local issues.
The events in France also point to the need, at the European level, to reinforce policies against discrimination and that promote social equality.
Although these policies must be implemented at a local level, they should be catalyzed and supported by European institutions.
Efforts in this area already exist, but it has become increasingly urgent that these efforts be strengthened.
Equality and social cohesion form the backbone of liberty, justice, and security for European cities.
This is why Europe’s mayors call upon European institutions to focus on social cohesion with the same commitment that has been invested until now in asylum and border controls.
Xi in Russia
MOSCOW – The atmospherics surrounding Xi Jinping’s coming trip to Russia – his first visit to a foreign country as China’s new president – remind me of a slogan from my early childhood in the late 1950’s: “Russia-China, Friendship Forever.”
The irony is that, even in that slogan’s heyday, Sino-Russian relations were deteriorating fast, culminating in spasms of combat along the Amur River in Siberia less than a decade later.
Is that slogan more valid now?
After China opened up its economy and Russia emerged from the Soviet Union, bilateral relations entered a new stage.
Goodwill now prevails, but some of the old suspicions linger – and some new ones have emerged.
Xi’s visit is not expected to usher in any breakthroughs.
A few deals to export Russian hydrocarbons to China can be expected, but not much more.
Nonetheless, the visit will highlight several important features of the bilateral relationship.
For starters, both the Russian and Chinese governments can afford to downplay the significance of their ties with the United States.
China views Russia as its strategic rear – and perhaps a base – in its escalating rivalry with the US (though not yet as an ally).
Russia’s leaders view Sino-American competition as a welcome addition to their country’s strategic weight, which, unlike China’s, is not being augmented by robust economic growth.
The more the US challenges the inevitable expansion of China’s “security perimeter,” the better for Russia, or so the Kremlin’s strategists appear to believe.
Meanwhile, the Sino-Russian relationship has achieved an unprecedented degree of warmth.
The Chinese are doing almost everything possible to placate Russian concerns.
The old border disputes have been silenced.
The volume of trade is growing rapidly.
Moreover, there has been no Chinese demographic expansion into Siberia, though many journalists and pundits have been peddling that story.
The number of Chinese residing in Russia – whether officially or clandestinely – amounts to 300,000.
Many more Chinese lived in the Russian Empire before the 1917 revolution.
But, beneath the surface, unease in the bilateral relationship persists, partly for historical reasons.
Nationalist Chinese remember imperial Russia’s conquests, while many Russians have a morbid fear of the “yellow peril,” even though the Mongols conquered and reigned in China, while they were eventually repelled from Russia (not to mention that the Chinese never invaded Russia).
The more important reasons for the unease are the negative demographic trends in Russia’s far-eastern Trans-Baikal region, and the fear – shared by all of China’s neighbors – of overweening Chinese power.
Indeed, the pundits have a point: if the current economic near-stagnation in Siberia persists, the world will witness a second, epic edition of Finlandization, this time in the east.
That might not be the worst scenario a country could face, but it is not the most pleasant prospect for Russians, given their deeply ingrained sense of their status as a great power.
This scenario is not inevitable, and it certainly will not be on the minds of Xi and Russian President Vladimir Putin when they meet in Moscow.
China is in the throes of an identity crisis as it faces an almost inevitable economic slowdown and the need to implement a new growth model.
Russia, meanwhile, is clearly suffering from an even deeper identity crisis.
It somehow survived the post-Soviet shock, and has now recovered.
Yet, for the last six years or so, Russia has been in a kind of limbo, with no strategy, no goals, and no elite consensus on a vision for the future.
For Sino-Russian relations, such fundamental uncertainties may be a blessing.
Both leaders can count on the other not to create additional problems, and even to help passively on geopolitical questions.
On Syria, for example, the two countries have shown that we are indeed living in a multipolar world.
And those new oil and gas deals will buttress both economies.
In the long term, Sino-Russian relations will depend largely on whether Russia overcomes its current stagnation and, among other steps, starts to develop the vast water and other resources of the Trans-Baikal region.
To do so, capital and technology will be needed not only from China, but also from Japan, South Korea, the US, and Southeast Asian countries.
The Trans-Baikal region could relatively easily expand ties with the resource-hungry Asian economies, to the benefit of all.
Even the labor problem is solvable, with millions of workers from former Soviet Central Asia – and perhaps from a gradually liberalizing North Korea – able to take part in the ambitious development that will be needed.
But the first step is to start to create conditions in the region that make living and working there attractive to Russians.
The Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation summit in Vladivostok last year created a mere enclave of development.
A growth strategy for the whole region is yet to come.
If it does not, the current Sino-Russian entente cordiale is almost certain to sour.
Russia will start to feel vulnerable, and will be pushed toward either geopolitical brinkmanship or submission to China’s will.
At this point, however, relations between China and Russia appear to be far better than the mythical friendship of my childhood.
Putin and Xi will do everything to emphasize that.
Audit the Fed?
BERKELEY – The party platform adopted at the Republican National Convention includes a number of remarkable planks.
To a monetary economist, for example, the party’s proposal to restore some kind of metallic monetary standard is so outlandish as to be an almost irresistible target.
More serious is the Republicans’ proposal for an annual audit of the United States Federal Reserve.
This, like the gold-standard plank, is partly designed to appeal to the libertarian followers of Ron Paul, the Texas congressman and perennial presidential candidate who is hugely popular with the Republicans’ “Tea Party” wing.
While Paul would go further, and abolish the Fed altogether, several bills in the US Congress have mandated an annual audit; earlier this year, one such bill was passed by the House of Representatives (but not the Senate).
The Republicans’ embrace of the audit idea taps into libertarians’ general distrust of government.
But there is also distrust of the Fed on more specific grounds – distrust that extends well beyond the ranks of the Tea Party.
The Fed, its critics complain, has used its expansive powers to engage in a range of unprecedented interventions that have propped up large financial institutions.
So the monetary authorities, they argue, must be in the pockets of powerful bankers.
To be sure, central bankers should be democratically accountable for their actions.
But accountability by audit would carry significant risks.
Undertaken by politicians, an audit might be viewed as an opportunity to score political points or steer policy in self-serving directions, with delicate information leaked in order to pressure policymakers.
While monetary policy conducted by independent bureaucrats is imperfect, handing over effective control to congressmen with one eye on the next election would be infinitely worse.
The Republican platform notes that the audit would have to be “carefully implemented” to ensure that the Fed remains insulated from political pressures.
Indeed, it would.
An audit would also reveal more details about financial-market interventions like those in 2008, when the Fed purchased mortgage securities from Bear Stearns and AIG.
The risk here is that providing too much information in real time about the securities that the Fed is buying and the institutions that it is helping could destabilize markets.
This danger is not hypothetical.
We saw an example of it the last time there were massive government interventions in US financial markets – namely, during the Great Depression.
In 1932, the Fed was unwilling to help stabilize a collapsing banking system.
But someone had to do something.
So President Herbert Hoover created the Reconstruction Finance Corporation, an independent government agency, to aid illiquid but fundamentally sound banks.
The RFC’s largest loan in the summer of 1932 was to a bank run by former Vice President Charles Dawes.
Not only was Dawes, like Hoover, a prominent Republican; he was also an ex-RFC official.
Although Dawes refused to make use of his political connections when his bank was pushed to the brink, the RFC nonetheless faced accusations of favoritism.
Populist members of Congress, predictably outraged, demanded an audit and insisted on publication of a list of all banks that the RFC had aided.
Publication of that list in January 1933 led to a crisis of confidence in banks that were revealed to have borrowed from the government.
Bank runs started almost immediately and quickly engulfed the country, resulting in the Bank Holiday of 1933 – that is, in the forced closure of the entire US banking system.
So it is not just political pressure that an audit must avoid. It must also avoid destabilizing financial markets and institutions.
That requires aggregating information and allowing for suitable delay before publishing it.
Can we trust politicians to understand and respect this, especially in an election year?
It is no coincidence that the demand by Congress for the list of RFC loans occurred in 1932, also a presidential election year.
Fed officials understand that their institution can remain independent only if it is accountable for its actions in the court of public opinion.
That is why the Fed has been taking steps to become more transparent: it releases the minutes of Federal Open Market Committee meetings and publishes transcripts with appropriate delay, while FOMC members give speeches detailing their views.
Moreover, in a recent innovation, the Fed now publishes the inflation and interest-rate forecasts of FOMC members and Reserve Bank presidents.
The Fed almost certainly will move even further in the direction of transparency.
Other central banks are doing likewise.
No less is required to reconcile independence with accountability in a democratic society.
But an audit overseen by politicians is not the right way.
A Universal Library
MELBOURNE – Scholars have long dreamed of a universal library containing everything that has ever been written.
Then, in 2004, Google announced that it would begin digitally scanning all the books held by five major research libraries.
Suddenly, the library of utopia seemed within reach.
Indeed, a digital universal library would be even better than any earlier thinker could have imagined, because every work would be available to everyone, everywhere, at all times.
And the library could include not only books and articles, but also paintings, music, films, and every other form of creative expression that can be captured in digital form.
But Google’s plan had a catch.
Most of the works held by those research libraries are still in copyright.
Google said that it would scan the entire book, irrespective of its copyright status, but that users searching for something in copyrighted books would be shown only a snippet.
This, it argued, was “fair use” – and thus permitted under copyright laws in the same way that one may quote a sentence or two from a book for the purpose of a review or discussion.
Publishers and authors disagreed, and some sued Google for breach of copyright, eventually agreeing to settle their claim in exchange for a share of Google’s revenue.
Last month, in a Manhattan court, Judge Denny Chin rejected that proposed settlement, in part because it would have given Google a de facto monopoly over the digital versions of so-called “orphan” books – that is, books that are still in copyright, but no longer in print, and whose copyright ownership is difficult to determine.
Chin held that the United States Congress, not a court, was the appropriate body to decide who should be entrusted with guardianship over orphan books, and on what terms.
He was surely right, at least in so far as we are considering matters within US jurisdiction.
These are large and important issues that affect not only authors, publishers, and Google, but anyone with an interest in the diffusion and availability of knowledge and culture.
So, while Chin’s decision is a temporary setback on the way to a universal library, it provides an opportunity to reconsider how the dream can best be realized.
The central issue is this: how can we make books and articles – not just snippets, but entire works – available to everyone, while preserving the rights of the works’ creators?
To answer that, of course, we need to decide what those rights are.
Just as inventors are given patents so that they can profit from their inventions for a limited time, so, too, authors were originally given copyright for a relatively short period – in the US, it was initially only 14 years from the first publication of the work.
For most authors, that would be enough time to earn the bulk of the income that they would ever receive from their writings; after that, the works would be in the public domain.
But corporations build fortunes on copyright, and repeatedly pushed Congress to extend it, to the point that in the US it now lasts for 70 years after the creator’s death.
(The 1998 legislation responsible for the last extension was nicknamed the “Mickey Mouse Protection Act” because it allowed the Walt Disney Company to retain copyright of its famous cartoon character.)
It is because copyright lasts so long that as many as three-quarters of all library books are “orphaned.”
This vast collection of knowledge, culture, and literary achievement is inaccessible to most people.
Digitizing it would make it available to anyone with Internet access.
As Peter Brantley, Director of Technology for the California Digital Library, has put it: “We have a moral imperative to reach out to our library shelves, grab the material that is orphaned, and set it on top of scanners.”
Robert Darnton, Director of the Harvard University Library, has proposed an alternative to Google’s plans: a digital public library, funded by a coalition of foundations, working in tandem with a coalition of research libraries.
Darnton’s plan falls short of a universal library, because works in print and in copyright would be excluded; but he believes that Congress might grant a non-commercial public library the right to digitize orphan books.
That would be a huge step in the right direction, but we should not give up the dream of a universal digital public library.
After all, books still in print are likely to be the ones that contain the most up-to-date information, and the ones that people most want to read.
Many European countries, as well as Australia, Canada, Israel, and New Zealand, have adopted legislation that creates a “public lending right” – that is, the government recognizes that enabling hundreds of people to read a single copy of a book provides a public good, but that doing so is likely to reduce sales of the book.
The universal public library could be allowed to digitize even works that are in print and in copyright, in exchange for fees paid to the publisher and author based on the number of times the digital version is read.
If we can put a man on the Moon and sequence the human genome, we should be able to devise something close to a universal digital public library.
At that point, we will face another moral imperative, one that will be even more difficult to fulfill: expanding Internet access beyond the less than 30% of the world’s population that currently has it.
A Universal Revolution
NEW YORK – The most important contribution of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, adopted by the United Nations General Assembly 60 years ago, on December 10, 1948, was to assert a powerful idea: rights are universal.
Rights do not depend on membership of a particular community or citizenship in a certain state.
They do not derive from a social contract.
Rather, because rights are universal, they are attributes of all human beings.
Indeed, they are part of what makes us human.
Each of us may enjoy rights.
Those who exercise power may do so only in limited ways. The limits are set by rights.
It is, of course, possible to trace the concept of universal rights at least as far back as seventeenth-century English thinking about natural law.
The concept was partially embraced in the French Declaration of Rights of 1789 and, to a greater extent, in Thomas Jefferson’s language in the same era about “inalienable rights.”  It also shaped the thinking of those in England who led the anti-slavery struggle of the second half of the eighteenth century, the first human rights movement.
Yet the Universal Declaration marked a giant step forward, as the world’s governments – with abstentions from the Soviet bloc states, Saudi Arabia, and apartheid South Africa, but with no votes in opposition – agreed that rights should take precedence over state power.
One way to think about the six decades that have elapsed since the adoption of the Universal Declaration is as a struggle to implement its promises.
For a long time, it was a losing struggle, marked especially by the spread of both communist and anti-communist tyrannies.
Things began to change in the 1980’s with the fall of military dictatorships in Latin America and in such East Asian countries as the Philippines and South Korea, and with the growing number of people engaged in the struggle for human rights in the Soviet empire.
By the end of the decade, many Soviet bloc regimes had collapsed. 
A factor that contributed to their demise was a shift in thinking that transformed the conflict between East and West away from one that emphasized economic systems.  Instead, it was the contrast between totalitarianism and respect for rights that completely discredited the oppressive regimes linked to Moscow and helped to bring them down.
South Africa’s largely peaceful transition to a multi-racial democracy in the early 1990’s was a further advance for rights.
But the last decade of the twentieth century was also indelibly stained by ethnic cleansing in ex-Yugoslavia and genocide in Rwanda, and during the current decade the tide has seemed to turn against the rights cause.
Powerful states such as China and Russia are not limiting themselves to authoritarian rule at home, but are also supporting those in other countries engaged in similar practices.
The same is true of lesser powers such as Iran and Venezuela.
Moreover, the United States has been squandering much of its capacity to promote human rights internationally.  In responding to the terrorist attacks on its own soil on September 11, 2001, the US has resorted to such measures as prolonged indefinite detention without charges, trials before military commissions lacking due process safeguards, and cruel, inhuman, and degrading treatment of detainees, including torture.
Other governments and intergovernmental bodies have not filled the gap left by the US.
The new UN Human Rights Council has so far disappointed those who hoped that it would be a more principled and effective body than its discredited predecessor, the UN Human Rights Commission.
The European Union has been a positive force in promoting rights in those countries aspiring to membership, but it has not demonstrated a capacity to exercise influence worldwide.
Today, the most effective force promoting human rights is global public opinion, informed and mobilized by the large and growing nongovernmental human rights movement, which, as in the recent war between Georgia and Russia, has focused international attention on violations of the laws of armed conflict that protect noncombatants.
It has also led the way in creating international criminal tribunals that prosecute and punish those who commit war crimes, crimes against humanity, and genocide.
These achievements are not stopping war, but they are reducing the number of terrible human rights violations that accompany armed conflict.
It is, of course, dismaying that 60 years after the adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, so many governments disregard the principles that they endorsed so long ago.
Yet without the legitimacy derived from the Universal Declaration and its role in promoting compliance, the nongovernmental human rights movement could not have developed into a global force.
The fact that the movement continues to secure advances even in difficult times is an indication of the enduring significance of what was achieved in 1948 when the world’s governments declared that rights are universal.
A US-China Climate Surge
LIVERMORE, CALIFORNIA – There are numerous aspects to the United States-China relationship – some currently contentious, others cooperative.
One area that presents an opportunity for cooperation is energy policy and climate change, because the two countries’ account for more than 50% of total coal consumption, while their combined share of both global greenhouse-gas emissions and the world economy is 40%.
If an international agreement to protect the world’s climate is to be reached, much greater action to reduce CO2 emissions will be needed on the part of the US, as well as  binding commitments on China’s part to reduce its carbon burden.
Ultimately, though, without US-China cooperation, a global climate agreement will be held hostage.
That is why a US-China standoff is a worldwide problem.
China has engaged only very reluctantly in the global effort to bring down overall emissions.
The US Congress’s deep reservations regarding the passage of a climate bill has been exacerbated by China’s positions, especially on issues such as international monitoring and accountability for its emissions, which China considers an affront to its sovereignty.
But make no mistake: despite its less-than-constructive role in multilateral efforts, China is not just sitting still on energy and environmental issues.
Within the next ten years, China will build 100,000 megawatts of wind-power generation plants (10 times the US amount), 50,000 MW of nuclear capacity, 10,000 MW of solar photovoltaic power, and 10,000 MW of solar thermal power.
Moreover, China will cut its energy intensity by 40% and is investing $440 billion in clean-energy technology, as well as $9 billion per month in energy R&amp;D. The Chinese are testing on a grand scale novel technologies in coal conversion, solar, wind, and carbon sequestration.
These efforts dwarf expected US initiatives.
Nevertheless, in the near future, China also will build 500,000 MW of coal-fired power plants (more than the entire existing US stock), at great risk to the global atmosphere and environment.
The harsh mathematics of greenhouse gas accumulations in the atmosphere simply does not allow for another lost decade.
To get past these challenges this decade, the world – and especially the US – must create a strong and sustaining partnership with China concerning emissions reduction.
This can best be achieved through institutional relationships based on trust, as well as deep understanding of each other’s needs and capabilities.
The Obama/Hu meetings in Washington appear to have improved the atmosphere for the ongoing discussions on climate.  But, given the two countries’ direct and stiff competition in energy technology, taking advantage of this will require them also to find new ways to coalesce around joint goals for atmospheric stabilization, even as they seek to meet their own undeniable national needs.
In short, what is needed is a massive, joint initiative in innovation, applied science, development, and demonstration.
The US component should involve a new, sustained campaign for clean-energy development that involves large and small companies, national laboratories, universities, and non-governmental organizations (a sustained and expanded version of the Department of Energy’s energy investments under Obama’s stimulus legislation).
The object should be to accelerate and vet the next generation of clean-energy technologies, as well as to meet the level of demand reductions that will be necessary to reduce greenhouse-gas pollution.
While expensive, such an initiative would help give companies and banks the surety they need to invest the capital that these emerging technologies require.
If so stimulated, the domestic energy market for cheap, low-carbon energy would be a massive force multiplier in the US – or any – economy.
A US initiative that is not assured of gaining government support would be insufficient, and only if the US forms a partnership with China would adequate scale and speed be attained to meet the challenge.
For the reality is that China will build its “nth” plant before the US builds its first.
This means that US groups, institutions, and even government agencies must begin sharing with – and sometimes even funding – Chinese companies and organizations.
Such partnerships would cut by half the cost and time of experimenting and learning for the US, while avoiding redundancy and waste.
The cost of this effort would be a fraction of what the US would spend on even a single large-scale demonstration project.
But, perhaps more importantly in the long run, it would create the framework of collaboration and trust that is required if the world is to achieve a larger global climate agreement.
The international energy-technology market is brutal and competitive.
Every country must selfishly use a surge strategy to gain advantage.
But the global environment will not respond to isolated national efforts alone.
It requires new and deeper forms of collaboration, and the US and China are the most important pieces in the larger mosaic that needs to be assembled.
Should Europe be Fracking?
BRUSSELS – The global energy community is abuzz with excitement about hydraulic fracturing, or “fracking,” a newish technology that has opened formerly inaccessible reserves of gas trapped in underground shale formations.
The boom in this so-called shale-gas production has allowed the United States to become almost self-sufficient in natural gas.
Europe, by contrast, is clearly lagging.
Exploration is proceeding only hesitantly and shale-gas production has not even started, prompting many observers to lament that Europe is about to miss the next energy revolution.
Should Europeans be worried?
Critics of Europe’s apparent lack of enthusiasm for fracking miss two key points.
First, Europe’s geology is different from that of America.
There is a huge difference between potential deposits hidden somewhere in large shale formations and recoverable reserves that can actually be produced economically.
In fact, estimates by the International Energy Agency suggest that the most significant recoverable reserves of shale gas are in the US and China, not Europe. Moreover, even these estimates are really not much more than educated guesses, because only in the US have shale formations been subject to intense exploration over a period of decades.
This process is starting in Europe only now.
Poland appears to have Europe’s most favorable geology, and it might become a significant producer on a local scale in about ten years.
This is a fortunate coincidence, because shale-gas production would probably make it politically easier to phase out Poland’s economically and environmentally irrational subsidies to local coal production (and consumption).
Fracking would also be a strategic boon, because it would diminish the country’s dependence on Russia for gas.
But pro-fracking critics of the European Union miss a second point: the EU has no authority over the development of shale gas in Europe.
Licensing and regulation of exploration and production are decided at the national level.
One must admit, however, that in Europe the “Nimby” phenomenon (not in my backyard) is a much more serious obstacle than it is in the US.
While it might be true that Europeans are too sensitive to environmental concerns, incentives also play a role.
In particular, whereas ownership rights over natural resources in the US typically belong to the individual owner of the land under which the resources lie, in Europe ownership belongs to the state.
As a result, Europeans, facing uncertain environmental consequences while receiving none of the revenues, tend to oppose fracking nearby.
In the US, by contrast, local residents benefit handsomely from being able to sell their ownership rights to gas companies – a strong counter-balance to fears of environmental costs.
But private versus state ownership of natural resources is not the only institutional factor underlying the US gas boom.
A seldom-mentioned reason is that shale-gas development in the US has benefited from important tax incentives – a model that Europe has no reason to emulate.
Governments certainly have a role to play in supporting the development of new technologies, such as fracking; but, once the technology has been developed, there is no reason why one form of gas production should be subsidized via tax breaks.
But the most crucial – and almost always overlooked – point about fracking is that shale gas, like all hydrocarbons, can be used only once.
The real issue is thus not whether shale gas should be developed in Europe, but when it should be used: today or tomorrow.
Europe is already a heavy user of gas, but its consumption is stagnating (along with its economy).
Despite the hype about the shale-gas revolution, the extraction cost of (onshore) conventional gas remains below that of shale gas.
Moreover, an existing pipeline network implies that this conventional gas can be brought to Europe at a low marginal cost.
From an economic (and environmental) standpoint, fracking is thus unlikely to bring large benefits for Europe: shale gas might simply substitute for plentiful conventional gas.
In an environment of ultra-low interest rates, the economic cost of being late is low.
The best option for Europe might be to wait and let the market operate.
Fracking is not yet a mature technology, and thus it is very likely to improve over time.
Maybe Europe will become a leader in “advanced fracking” when the shale-gas deposits in the US have already been exhausted.
Austere Growth?
WASHINGTON, DC – The German government’s reaction to newly elected French President François Hollande’s call for more growth-oriented policies was to say that there should be no change in the eurozone’s austerity programs.
Rather, growth-supporting measures, such as more lending by the European Investment Bank or issuance of jointly guaranteed project bonds to finance specific investments, could be “added” to these programs.
Many inside and outside of Germany declare that both austerity and more growth are needed, and that more emphasis on growth does not mean any decrease in austerity.
The drama of the ongoing eurozone crisis has focused attention on Europe, but how the austerity-growth debate plays out there is more broadly relevant, including for the United States.
Three essential points need to be established.
First, in a situation of widespread unemployment and excess capacity, short-run output is determined primarily by demand, not supply.
In the eurozone’s member countries, only fiscal policy is possible at the national level, because the European Central Bank controls monetary policy.
So, yes, more immediate growth does require slower reduction in fiscal deficits.
The only counterargument is that slower fiscal adjustment would further reduce confidence and thereby defeat the purpose by resulting in lower private spending.
This might be true if a country were to declare that it was basically giving up on fiscal consolidation plans and the international support associated with it, but it is highly unlikely if a country decides to lengthen the period of fiscal adjustment in consultation with supporting institutions such as the International Monetary Fund.
Indeed, the IMF explicitly recommended slower fiscal consolidation for Spain in its 2012 World Economic Outlook.
Without greater short-term support for effective demand, many countries in crisis could face a downward spiral of spending cuts, reduced output, higher unemployment, and even greater deficits, owing to an increase in safety-net expenditures and a decline in tax revenues associated with falling output and employment.
Second, it is possible, though not easy, to choose fiscal-consolidation packages that are more growth-friendly than others.
There is the obvious distinction between investment spending and current expenditure, which Italian Prime Minister Mario Monti has emphasized.
The former, if well designed, can lay the foundations for longer-term growth.
There is also the distinction between government spending with high multiplier effects, such as support to lower-income groups with a high propensity to spend, and tax reductions for the rich, a substantial portion of which would likely be saved.
Last but not least, there are longer-term structural reforms, such as labor-market reforms that increase flexibility without leading to large-scale lay-offs (a model rather successfully implemented by Germany).
Similarly, retirement and pension reforms can increase long-term fiscal sustainability without generating social conflict.
A healthy older person may well appreciate part-time work if it comes with flexibility.
The task is to integrate such work into the overall functioning of the labor market with the help of appropriate regulation and incentives.&nbsp;
Finally, particularly in Europe, where countries are closely linked by trade, a coordinated strategy that allows more time for fiscal consolidation and formulates growth-friendly policies would yield substantial benefits compared to individual countries’ strategies, owing to positive spillovers (and avoidance of stigmatization of particular countries).
There should be a European growth strategy, rather than Spanish, Italian, or Irish strategies.
Countries like Germany that are running a current-account surplus would also help themselves by helping to stimulate the European economy as a whole.
Slower fiscal retrenchment, space for investment in government budgets, growth-friendly fiscal packages, and coordination of national policies with critical contributions from surplus countries can go a long way in helping Europe to overcome its crisis in the medium term.
Unfortunately, Greece has become a special case, one that requires focused and specific treatment, most probably involving another round of public-debt forgiveness.
But insufficient and sometimes counterproductive actions, coupled with panic and overreaction in financial markets, have brought some countries, such as Spain, which is a fundamentally solvent and strong economy, to the edge of the precipice, and with it the whole eurozone.
In the immediate short run, nothing makes sense, not even a perfectly good public-investment project, or recapitalization of a bank, if the government has to borrow at interest rates of 6% or more to finance it.
These interest rates must be brought down through ECB purchases of government bonds on the secondary market until low-enough announced target levels for borrowing costs are reached, and/or by the use of European Stability Mechanism resources.
The best solution would be to reinforce the effectiveness of both channels by using both – and by doing so immediately.
Such an approach would provide the breathing space needed to restore confidence and implement reforms in an atmosphere of moderate optimism rather than despair.
The risk of inaction or inappropriate action has reached enormous proportions.
No catastrophic earthquake or tsunami has destroyed southern Europe’s productive capacity.
What we are witnessing – and what is now affecting the whole world – is a man-made disaster that can be stopped and reversed by a coordinated policy response.
Austerity and Debt Realism
CAMBRIDGE – Many, if not all, of the world’s most pressing macroeconomic problems relate to the massive overhang of all forms of debt.
In Europe, a toxic combination of public, bank, and external debt in the periphery threatens to unhinge the eurozone.
Across the Atlantic, a standoff between the Democrats, the Tea Party, and old-school Republicans has produced extraordinary uncertainty about how the United States will close its 8%-of-GDP government deficit over the long term.
Japan, meanwhile is running a 10%-of-GDP budget deficit, even as growing cohorts of new retirees turn from buying Japanese bonds to selling them.
Aside from wringing their hands, what should governments be doing?
One extreme is the simplistic Keynesian remedy that assumes that government deficits don’t matter when the economy is in deep recession; indeed, the bigger the better.
At the opposite extreme are the debt-ceiling absolutists who want governments to start balancing their budgets tomorrow (if not yesterday).
Both are dangerously facile.
The debt-ceiling absolutists grossly underestimate the massive adjustment costs of a self-imposed “sudden stop” in debt finance.
Such costs are precisely why impecunious countries such as Greece face massive social and economic displacement when financial markets lose confidence and capital flows suddenly dry up.
Of course, there is an appealing logic to saying that governments should have to balance their budgets just like the rest of us; unfortunately, it is not so simple.
Governments typically have myriad ongoing expenditure commitments related to basic services such as national defense, infrastructure projects, education, and health care, not to mention to retirees.
No government can just walk away from these responsibilities overnight.
When US President Ronald Reagan took office on January 20, 1981, he retroactively rescinded all civil-service job offers extended by the government during the two and a half months between his election and the inauguration.
The signal that he intended to slow down government spending was a powerful one, but the immediate effect on the budget was negligible.
Of course, a government can also close a budget gap by raising taxes, but any sudden shift can significantly magnify the distortions that taxes cause.
If the debt-ceiling absolutists are naïve, so, too, are simplistic Keynesians.
They see lingering post-financial-crisis unemployment as a compelling justification for much more aggressive fiscal expansion, even in countries already running massive deficits, such as the US and the United Kingdom.
People who disagree with them are said to favor “austerity” at a time when hyper-low interest rates mean that governments can borrow for almost nothing.
But who is being naïve?
It is quite right to argue that governments should aim only to balance their budgets over the business cycle, running surpluses during booms and deficits when economic activity is weak.
But it is wrong to think that massive accumulation of debt is a free lunch.
In a series of academic papers with Carmen Reinhart – including, most recently, joint work with Vincent Reinhart (“Debt Overhangs: Past and Present”) – we find that very high debt levels of 90% of GDP are a long-term secular drag on economic growth that often lasts for two decades or more.
The cumulative costs can be stunning.
The average high-debt episodes since 1800 last 23 years and are associated with a growth rate more than one percentage point below the rate typical for periods of lower debt levels.
That is, after a quarter-century of high debt, income can be 25% lower than it would have been at normal growth rates.
Of course, there is two-way feedback between debt and growth, but normal recessions last only a year and cannot explain a two-decade period of malaise.
The drag on growth is more likely to come from the eventual need for the government to raise taxes, as well as from lower investment spending.
So, yes, government spending provides a short-term boost, but there is a trade-off with long-run secular decline.
It is sobering to note that almost half of high-debt episodes since 1800 are associated with low or normal real (inflation-adjusted) interest rates.
Japan’s slow growth and low interest rates over the past two decades are emblematic.
Moreover, carrying a huge debt burden runs the risk that global interest rates will rise in the future, even absent a Greek-style meltdown.
This is particularly the case today, when, after sustained massive “quantitative easing” by major central banks, many governments have exceptionally short maturity structures for their debt.
Thus, they run the risk that a spike in interest rates would feed back relatively quickly into higher borrowing costs.
With many of today’s advanced economies near or approaching the 90%-of-GDP level that loosely marks high-debt periods, expanding today’s already large deficits is a risky proposition, not the cost-free strategy that simplistic Keynesians advocate.
I will focus in the coming months on the related problems of high private debt and external debts, and I will also return to the theme of why this is a time when elevated inflation is not so naïve.
Above all, voters and politicians must beware of seductively simple approaches to today’s debt problems.
Weimar 2013?
NEW YORK – The worst crisis of capitalism since the Great Depression of the 1930’s has reawakened grim memories on both sides of the Atlantic.
The ghost of Franklin Delano Roosevelt haunts Barack Obama’s United States.
Historical arguments over whether FDR’s New Deal worked now form an important part of American debates over current monetary and fiscal policy in general, and the US Federal Reserve’s policy of quantitative easing in particular.
In Europe, where national economic failure once led to the collapse of democracy itself, people are now asking if it could happen again.
Some see another Weimar moment, reminiscent of the belt-tightening and surging unemployment that characterized Heinrich Brüning’s Germany and helped to bring the Nazis to power.
At first sight, the reasons to dismiss this scenario seem overwhelming.
If the European Union has done one thing, it is to make war between France and Germany unthinkable.
Thus, the entire geopolitical context is far less threatening than it was in the 1930’s.
Moreover, the ideological extremes that excited and polarized the continent back then are hardly in vogue today.
Discredited by the collapse of the USSR and the Soviet bloc in Eastern Europe, communism is effectively moribund, and its core constituencies – where communist parties manage to hang on – are aging and incapable of reproducing themselves.
As for fascism, its political heirs in countries like Italy and France must contend with the stigma of the past.
Vivid memories of total war and genocide, frequently revived, hinder any revival of the totalitarian parties of the right.
This is also why we are unlikely to see the return of military regimes in southern Europe or anywhere else; the suffering that they caused is too vivid in the collective memory.
The last thing the Portuguese or Greek armies want to do is assume responsibility for governing.
Then there is the most fundamental – and hence easily overlooked – difference of all.
In the 1930’s, politics attracted the masses because people believed in the future.
Millions marched for the great causes of the day, and hundreds of thousands joined political parties – often for life.
Today’s marches and demonstrations are a feeble reminder of those times, while parties everywhere are hemorrhaging members.
But it would be rash to conclude that the interwar crisis has nothing to teach us. Quite the contrary.
In the 1930’s, the US and Britain were among the few countries in the world where multi-party democracy survived.
Almost everywhere else veered sharply to the right.
In Germany and Italy, fascist parties came out on top, while elsewhere, dictators were backed by armies or kings.
Analyzing these events much later, historians constructed elaborate typologies to distinguish between fascist and merely authoritarian regimes.
These differences were not trivial.
But much more important was what the fascist and authoritarian regimes shared – all were beneficiaries of a sweeping collapse of the legitimacy of democratic politics.
They all thereby indicated that democracy is not some kind of natural condition, nor some end-point of history whose stability and permanence can be taken for granted.
On the contrary, democracy’s strength lies not just in its character, but in its achievements as well.
Its popularity can ebb quickly when it becomes associated with crippling and systemic failure, whether on the battlefield – as in France in 1940 – or in the corporate boardroom and on the factory floor.
Those who doubt that this could happen again should consider the European country hardest hit in the current crisis – Greece.
After the colonels’ junta there fell in 1974, a democratic system sprang up.
Two main parties began to alternate in power and European integration acted as a stabilizer for domestic politics.