For its part, Iran seems relatively stable, at least compared to its neighbors.
But it faces an uncertain political future.
If a power struggle emerges, the large Bushehr reactor could be used as a bargaining chip.
To mitigate such risks, the international community could maintain its traditional policy of sitting tight and hoping that governments retain control of their nuclear infrastructure.
But the United States, for one, is no longer satisfied with this approach.
According to media reports, it has devised a strategy for deploying Special Forces to neutralize Pakistan’s nuclear arsenal in the event that its authorities lose control.
And some government-connected think tanks have explored the possibility of deploying US combat forces to address nuclear risks in North Korea if the regime crumbles.
Such plans, however, are by no means foolproof – not least owing to the difficulties of finding concealed nuclear assets and safeguarding reactors.
Moreover, the American public’s willingness to become enmeshed in yet another risky military venture, when boosting homeland security could suffice, is dubious, at best.
Instead of waiting for a major development to force hurried action, the world’s major powers should engage in a full-throated debate to determine the best approach to address nuclear risks in volatile countries, seeking ways to cooperate whenever necessary.
After all, even rival powers like China and the US or India and Pakistan share an interest in preventing the world’s most dangerous weapons from falling under the control of its most fanatical minds.
Iran’s Nuclear Quandary
LOS ANGELES – When the United States and its allies resume talks over Iran’s nuclear program on November 7-8, the vexing task of crafting Iran’s recent proposal into an enduring agreement will begin in earnest.
There are many obstacles to an agreement, but among the least examined is the legacy of nuclear-disarmament efforts involving Libya and North Korea.
Both cases raise issues that neither Iran nor the US wants to see repeated – but that both will have difficulty avoiding.
For the US, North Korea illustrates how a poor but ambitious country developed the bomb by gaming talks and gaining time.
For Iran, Muammar el-Qaddafi’s 2003 relinquishment of Libya’s weapons of mass destruction demonstrates how a regime, still considered a bête noire by the international community even after normalization of diplomatic relations, arguably forfeited its survival in 2011 by forgoing the chance to build a nuclear deterrent.
Digging further into each case illuminates the challenges faced by Iran and its international interlocutors.
What makes the North Korea precedent particularly troubling is how much Iran has mimicked the regime in Pyongyang.
This naturally prompts questions about whether Iran is using the current round of negotiations as a façade for an ongoing effort to develop nuclear weapons.
Consider parallels ten years apart.
In June 1993, following talks with the US and a threat to withdraw from the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT), North Korea allowed the International Atomic Energy Agency to conduct limited “safeguards activities.”
Then, in October 1994, the US and North Korea entered into the Agreed Framework to freeze North Korea’s nuclear program.
Similarly, in December 2003, after hiding construction of the Natanz uranium-enrichment facility and other plants from the IAEA, Iran agreed to sign – but not ratify – the so-called Additional Protocol, allowing broader application of IAEA safeguards.
Then, in November 2004, in negotiations with European representatives, Iran agreed to suspend nuclear enrichment.
Neither agreement lasted long.
In March 1996, the IAEA reported that North Korea was not complying with efforts to verify plutonium held at the Yongbyon nuclear facility.
On October 9, 2006, North Korea detonated its first nuclear weapon, and the United Nations Security Council adopted Resolution 1718 calling on the country to abandon its program and re-join international denuclearization talks.
Since then, North Korea has responded to incremental tightening of international sanctions with two more nuclear tests, the latest this year under the new leadership of Kim Jong-un.
Likewise, in January 2006, following the collapse of negotiations with European emissaries, Iran broke the IAEA seals on the Natanz facility’s equipment and storage areas.
The following month, the IAEA reported the Islamic Republic to the Security Council for its failure to be forthright about its nuclear program.
Since then, Iran has responded to incremental tightening of international sanctions by building more centrifuges.
The question now is whether the North Korea-Iran parallel stops with Iran’s new president, Hassan Rouhani.
The Libyan legacy confronts Iran with its own conundrum.
Like Iran, Qaddafi’s Libya suffered economic and political isolation for many years during which it attempted to advance a WMD program.
By the late 1990’s, however, it had had enough.
British and American negotiators secretly met with Libyan counterparts to resolve the case of the 1988 bombing of Pan Am Flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland, and other terrorism issues.
In the quid pro quo that followed, Qaddafi agreed to eliminate his nascent nuclear program in exchange for an end to pariah status.
This was coupled with a critical demand: no deal without America’s commitment to eschew regime change.
On December 19, 2003, Libya formally renounced all WMD efforts.
Eight years later, pinned down by a US Predator drone and French airstrikes, Qaddafi met his demise.
Without a nuclear deterrent, his regime was helpless when the US reneged on the deal – a lesson that has not been lost on North Korea.
Given this history, Iran has a strong incentive to retain at least a nuclear-breakout option (which would mean completing all but the final steps to weaponization).
Of course, Iran’s leaders may believe that economic isolation is the greatest danger to the regime.
But what happened in Libya has made them fear that Qaddafi’s fate could be theirs, too, without an adequate deterrent.
Indeed, commenting on Qaddafi’s plight in 2011, Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei said, “[T]his gentleman wrapped up all his nuclear facilities, packed them on a ship and delivered them to the West and said, ‘Take them!’
Look where we are, and in what position they are now.”
But today, two years later, Iran must look again at where it is.
As long as crippling economic sanctions remain in place, the government will be unable to have its yellowcake and eat it, too.
Allowing Iran to retain some low-grade enrichment capacity would be a plausible concession – and one that would allow the country’s leaders to save face – but only if linked to Iran’s unfettered disclosure of all nuclear activities to the IAEA and confirmed cessation of any capability that contributes to weaponization.
And, given the stakes, any international agreement with Iran must come with an assured response to cheating, including military action.
With little leverage, Iran’s leaders would then have two options.
They could follow North Korea by sacrificing economic prosperity for nuclear breakout, and hope that US and Israeli talk of “all options” being on the table to stop their efforts is a bluff; or they could pursue economic prosperity by forgoing a nuclear-weapons capacity, and hope that a Libya-style revolt does not envelope the country and doom the regime to a fate like that of Qaddafi.
It is not an easy choice, but it is one that Iran’s leaders cannot postpone for much longer.
Kenya’s Somali Contradiction
NAIROBI – The attack that killed more than 70 people at Nairobi’s Westgate shopping mall last week was, according to al-Shabaab, the Somali Islamist militant group that carried it out, retribution for Kenya’s intervention in Somalia.
That raises a simple question: What is Kenya doing in Somalia, and is it worth the price?
Since Kenya’s army invaded its northeastern neighbor two years ago, the government has told Kenyans that they were going to war against al-Shabaab.
But, as with most official pronouncements in Kenya, that story was only partly true.
On the night of October 15, 2011, I lay awake listening to the Kenyan military convoys passing through the border town of Dadaab on their way to Somalia to launch the first foreign military campaign in Kenya’s history.
The proximate cause was the abduction of two Spanish aid workers from the vast refugee camps that encircle Dadaab.
For the Kenyan authorities, it was the final straw after a series of abductions of Westerners by al-Shabaab; to stop the incursions, they launched what military leaders believed would be a quick campaign.
Over the last two years, some progress has ostensibly been made.
The two Spanish aid workers were released last July, and al-Shabaab has attempted only one abduction since.
Moreover, the rebels have been dislodged from the southern Somali port of Kismayo, which was once their main base.
But al-Shabaab retains control of the majority of Somalia and remains capable of striking Mogadishu, the capital, as well as Nairobi.
Given this, if the Kenyan government’s aim was, as it claimed, to destroy al-Shabaab, the intervention has been a spectacular failure.
But there is much more to the story.
In fact, retaliation against the militant group was little more than a convenient excuse to launch the so-called Jubaland Initiative, a plan to protect Kenya’s security and economic interests by carving out a semi-autonomous client state in southern Somalia.
While knowledge of the plan was initially confined largely to Kenyan government officials, it was not long before its contours began to be revealed.
Kenya has installed a client regime in Kismayo, and has supported the new government in its quest to make Jubaland a semi-autonomous region, along the lines of Puntland, Somaliland, and the many other self-declared proto-states that have emerged as Somalia has unraveled.
Beyond preventing Somalia’s violence from spilling over into Kenya and undermining its security and its tourist-driven economy, such a buffer state could be forced to absorb the half-million Somali refugees who now live in Dadaab’s refugee camps.
In this sense, the Jubaland Initiative is a policy of stunning racial profiling – and a gift to al-Shabaab recruiters in Kenya.
Furthermore, contrary to claims that securing Kismayo put al-Shabaab at a disadvantage, the United Nations Monitoring Group on Somalia and Eritrea reported in July that the Kenyan Defense Forces have actually gone into business with al-Shabaab.
The group’s profits from illicit charcoal (and possibly ivory) exported from Kismayo have grown since Kenya took control.
This highlights a fundamental problem: the Kenyan state’s endemic corruption constantly undermines its policymakers’ goals.
Indeed, in Kismayo, Kenyan officials have reverted to their default occupation – the pursuit of private profit.
Instead of working to achieve the diplomatic objective of defeating al-Shabaab, Kenya’s military, politicians, and well-connected businessmen have been lining their own pockets.
Moreover, Kenya’s desire to carve out a buffer state conflicts with the Somali government’s goal of uniting the country.
Indeed, the last thing the government in Mogadishu wants is another semi-autonomous region challenging its authority – or another country annexing southern Somalia for its own purposes.
The United States and the European Union – which are bankrolling the African Union’s intervention in Somalia to support the Mogadishu-based government – have attempted to paper over the disagreement with Kenya over the Jubaland Initiative, despite its potential to fuel further conflict.
In fact, Kenya-backed Jubaland forces clashed with Somali government troops in Kismayo earlier this year.
The Westgate attack should spur Kenya’s leaders to re-think their approach toward Somalia.
A more coherent strategy would involve cutting off al-Shabaab’s funding and addressing the grievances – such as human-rights abuses against Somalis, discrimination against Muslims, foreign meddling in Somalia, and corruption – that motivate its recruits.
In a bizarre twist, al-Shabaab even called on Kenyans to prosecute their leaders for post-election bloodletting in 2007-2008.
Given these intractable grievances – and, more important, the weakness and corruption of the Kenyan state – the cycle of violence will be very difficult to break.
That is why the attack on the Westgate mall is unlikely to be the last such tragedy.
Terrorized Tunisia
TUNIS – The recent terror attack on Berlin’s Christmas market – which killed 12 and injured more than 50 – cast a pall over this year’s holiday celebrations across Europe.
Viewed from Tunis, where I happened to be during the fallout, the attack has also had a major, albeit different, impact.
Tunisia, after all, is the home country of Anis Amri, the alleged perpetrator.
Like Europeans, Tunisians fear terrorism.
But they fear not just individual terrorist attacks, like those in the Bardo museum in Tunis and on the beach in Sousse in 2015, or even the numerous political assassinations it has faced since its regime change began in 2011.
Tunisians worry that social upheaval will destroy their remarkable but fragile young democracy.
Neighboring Libya offers a stark illustration of what that could look like.
The prospect of Tunisia’s government attempting to manage the situation alone is not an attractive one.
Tunisians know that their state is weak and cannot really protect them.
They could end up like Egypt, which is becoming a police state, or move in the direction taken by Algeria, where a brief flirtation with political Islam 25 years ago gave way to an authoritarian clampdown and years of violent conflict.
Making matters worse, concerns about terrorism have all but killed off Tunisia’s large tourism industry, severely weakening the economy.
As a result, a country that already receives International Monetary Fund support is trying to buy social stability by increasing state employment.
To contain the bulging budget deficit, it has opted to increase taxes, further reducing growth.
This downward spiral has become institutionalized, as the main unions have dug in their heels and civil society has become disillusioned.
Young people, in particular, lack trust in institutions – a serious problem in a country where 38% of the population is under 25 years old.
The young people I met in Tunis, brought together by the British NGO Forward Thinking, which promotes understanding between between secular and religious worldviews, come from across the political spectrum.
But they have one thing in common: they view themselves as victims of globalization.
The international community is, in their view, conspiring against them, undermining their chances to find employment and form families.
This perception has created fertile ground for terrorist recruiters; Tunisia has sent more jihadis than any other country to fight in Syria and Iraq.
The threat of cross-border terrorism has attracted international attention to Tunisia.
But it is not the only reason we should care about the country’s fate.
Tunisia remains a beacon of hope for democracy and political freedom in the region.
I visited Tunis with a former official from Ukraine, a country that, despite having a very different history and culture, has a lot in common with Tunisia.
Ukraine, too, experienced a revolution that drove its former leader into exile, only to see sought-after reforms stall.
And both have faced serious disruptions from war (in Tunisia’s case, in Libya), including an influx of displaced people (each country is home to around two million refugees).
The international community must help to ensure that both Tunisia and Ukraine can fulfill their revolutions’ potential.
This must include help in dealing with refugees, as well as – and more important – support for broad state-strengthening reforms.
For all of its flaws, the political dialogue that has been initiated in Tunisia, thanks to the Islamist movement Ennahda and the non-religious parliamentary parties, has saved the country from the political abyss.
But unless the government can deliver on reforms, that dialogue will collapse – and so will the prospects of Tunisia’s young people.
Ukraine holds a lesson here as well.
Its reform process has taken hold, thanks partly to significant outside support.
But entrenched interests are still resisting progress.
While reforms must be owned domestically, outsiders – in particular, the European Union – can help to reinforce the local vision by providing a viable path of institutional change.
Extending a helping hand is in the EU’s self-interest.
It, too, is facing a refugee crisis, which it cannot address without effective partnerships.
For example, European institutions and the Spanish government have succeeded in containing the flow of migrants across the Strait of Gibraltar.
To get a handle on the wider migration crisis, while making migration less hazardous for the migrants themselves, more deals with credible partners must be made.
And here, Tunisia is a good candidate.
Europe already has been able to negotiate arrangements with Tunisia to restrict migrant flows and to return those who have been denied asylum.
Yet the Berlin attack highlights the limits of the country’s institutional capacity.
Apparently, Amri’s expulsion from Germany was postponed, owing to the Tunisian bureaucracy’s slowness in confirming his citizenship.
That is why the international community must also offer Tunisia resources to strengthen its state agencies and civil society alike, as well as a vision of closer integration with the EU to help direct the political process, much as it has done in Ukraine.
This is not about EU membership, but about opening up markets and relaxing visa restrictions (admittedly a hard sell after the Berlin massacre).
The fear, in both Tunisia and Ukraine, is that Europe will close its doors further.
I saw the distress in the eyes of Ukrainian reformers after the United Kingdom’s vote to leave the EU, and I sensed a similar reaction in Tunisia when the Berlin attacker’s identity emerged.
By attempting to insulate itself from the outside world, Europe would only end up depriving these countries’ citizens of any hope of better lives at home.
America’s Berlusconi
LONDON – For the past couple of weeks, the world has been guessing at how US President-elect Donald Trump will behave in office and what policies he will pursue, following a long campaign full of contradictory statements.
America’s previous businessman-presidents – Warren G. Harding and Herbert Hoover – were around too long ago to provide much guidance.
There is, however, a recent European precedent: Italy’s Silvio Berlusconi.
What Trump has achieved, Berlusconi pioneered.
Like Trump, Berlusconi is a businessman who made his first fortune in real estate.
When he entered politics in 1994, he was an outsider, albeit one who, also like Trump, had long been close to plenty of insiders.
The similarities don’t end there.
Both Trump and Berlusconi are intimately familiar with the insides of courtrooms; Trump has moved fast since the election to settle fraud lawsuits against Trump University, but has about 70 other suits outstanding against him and his businesses.
And both have an array of conflicts of interest with their role as head of government, thanks to their large business empires.
Berlusconi, like Trump, managed to present himself as a rich man and a populist.
He preferred to communicate directly with the people, bypassing traditional media and party structures.
His propensity for glamorous women and glitzy homes somehow enhanced his popular appeal.
The comparison between Trump and Berlusconi is far from superficial.
In fact, Italy’s experience with Berlusconi – or Il Cavaliere (the Knight), as he is known in his country – provides six clear lessons for Americans and the world on what to expect from Trump.
First, no one should underestimate the next US president.
Already, Trump has defied expectations; few expected him even to win the Republican primary.
Yet many observers continue to predict his imminent downfall, assuming that he will last only four years in the White House, if he is not impeached before that.
Berlusconi’s experience tells a different story.
Berlusconi, too, has been consistently underestimated by his opponents.
Commentators deemed him too ignorant and inexperienced to last as prime minister, assuming that he would not survive the cut and thrust of politics or the pressures of government.
Yet Berlusconi remains one of the kingpins of Italian politics.
In the last 22 years, he has won three general elections and served as prime minister for nine years.
Every time journalists or intellectuals have tried to take him on in public debate, they have lost.
Trump’s critics – indeed, all US observers – should keep that in mind.
The second lesson is that Trump will probably pursue what is essentially a permanent political campaign, injecting himself directly into conversations.
Berlusconi has often used television, especially his own commercial channels, to that end.
Instead of giving interviews he cannot control, Berlusconi has often worked with favored acolytes, or simply talked directly to the camera.
When he was in office, many a political talk show was interrupted by a phone call from the prime minister demanding to have his say.
From Trump, we should expect not just a continued Twitter barrage, but also the use of TV, including talk shows, and other channels to speak directly to the people.
Trump’s decision to release a two-and-a-half-minute YouTube video laying out his priorities, in lieu of a press conference, reinforces this reading.
While the approach may not seem very presidential, it works, at least when carried out by a master marketer who plays fast and loose with the facts.
The third lesson from Berlusconi’s success is that even a very wealthy and powerful person can wield the victim narrative effectively.
Indeed, even while in office, Berlusconi consistently claimed that he was being attacked by the judiciary, by rival businessmen, by “communists,” by the political establishment.
When the chips are down, expect Trump to do the same.
Never mind that he is a billionaire, born to a wealthy family, or that, in the next election, he will be the incumbent.
He will consistently portray himself as besieged by self-serving enemies.
The fourth lesson is that mudslinging is bound to happen.
Berlusconi’s used his TV stations and newspapers so liberally to smear his opponents that the writer Roberto Saviano called them his macchina del fango or “mud machine.”
Trump’s attacks on the media, often carried out via Twitter, are a precursor to this, as are his campaign vows to “open up” libel laws.
His chief mud-slinger is likely to be his newly appointed chief strategist, Stephen Bannon, the former chair of the ultra right-wing Breitbart News.
The fifth lesson is that Trump will probably continue to prize loyalty above all else in his administration, just as Berlusconi has.
Already, Trump has made his three oldest children – who are supposed to run his business during his presidency – key players in his campaign and transition.
Federal law may prohibit Trump from appointing his children to government posts, but they will surely remain at the center of his decision-making.
Already, his daughter, Ivanka Trump, and her husband, Jared Kushner, attended Trump’s first meeting with a head of government, Japan’s Shinzo Abe.
Even Trump’s non-family appointments – often controversial or radical figures who would not have a place in any administration except his – reflect an emphasis on personal loyalty.
The final lesson of Berlusconi is that expressions of admiration for strongmen like Russian President Vladimir Putin should be taken seriously.
Narcissistic lone rangers like Berlusconi and Trump are accustomed to making personal deals, and prefer other strongmen as their interlocutors.
Berlusconi’s favorite overseas visits while in office were to Putin’s dacha and former Libyan dictator Colonel Muammar el-Qaddafi’s tent, not to boring European Council meetings or G20 summits.
In the end, however, there is one key difference between Silvio Berlusconi and Donald Trump.
Berlusconi had no real agenda while in office, except to further his business and personal interests and nurture his own power by providing resources and favors to his supporters.
His greatest disservice to Italians was his inaction in the face of economic stagnation, but at least he didn’t make it worse.
Trump, by contrast, does have an agenda, however hard to read.
Whether it will make things better or worse remains to be seen.
Berlusconi on the Boil
Silvio Berlusconi was elected as Italy's prime minister after campaigning on a platform of reinvigorating the economy through tax cuts and liberalization.
After three years in office, he has not delivered on his economic agenda and his government is in shambles.
What went wrong?
Italy's economic ills are well known.
At the risk of over-simplifying, they can be grouped under three headings:
· 
 Weak public finances
 .
When Italy joined the European Monetary Union, its primary budget surplus (tax receipts in excess of government spending, excluding interest payments) was about 5% of national income.
In 2004, the surplus will shrink to about 1.5% - before the tax cuts that Berlusconi promised for next year.
Excessive social welfare spending (mainly public pensions) and the cost of servicing the public debt drain resources from more productive government spending and impose a high tax burden.
The government has failed to take any meaningful action, and the problem is getting worse.
Unsurprisingly, the rating agency Standard &amp; Poor's recently downgraded Italian public debt.
· 
 Declining competitiveness
 .
Italy's most dynamic producers are small manufacturing firms in traditional sectors with relatively low technological content.
With these firms now exposed to foreign competition from low-cost producers in Asia and Eastern Europe, Italy's share of world exports has been shrinking in recent years.
Italy has a few large corporations, mainly in services, utilities, or sectors shielded from competition.
These monopolistic producers act like a distorting tax on the rest of the economy.
Smaller but more competitive manufacturing firms lack the resources to expand in more advanced technological sectors.
The volume of private and public R&amp;D spending is one of the lowest among industrial countries.
As a result, Italy is receiving immigrants with relatively low skills, while many of its most productive young graduates emigrate to the US, the UK, or other European countries.
The government has done little to remedy this.
Liberalization attempts in energy and public utilities have faltered, perhaps also because the government pockets monopoly rents through dividends from public enterprises.
Privatization has stalled. 
· 
 The Mezzogiorno
 .
Labor productivity is traditionally much lower in Italy's south than in the rest of the country. But centralized wage negotiations impose the same salary everywhere.
In a well functioning democracy, electoral competition between government and opposition induces the government to pursue efficient policies. Not so in Italy, where the main site of electoral competition has always been 
 within
 the governing coalition.
Each government party is afraid of losing votes to its coalition partners, and undermines or blocks whatever the government is trying to do.
The result is policy paralysis, until time has run out for everyone. 
The same problems led to the collapse of the previous government (a left-wing coalition led by current EU Commission President Romano Prodi), and they would certainly continue under a new government if a left-wing coalition was voted into office at the next election.
Unstable coalition governments have been typical of Italy's postwar politics.
In an attempt to solve the problem, a mixed electoral system was introduced in the early 1990's, with about three quarters of the seats assigned under plurality rule in single member districts and the rest allocated under proportional representation.
But the hope that this would ensure greater stability has been unfulfilled.
The residual proportional component of the electoral system has kept many political parties alive.
Because all of them compete for these proportional seats, government infighting remains acute.
A logical solution would be to scrap the proportional component of the electoral system altogether, and move decisively toward a two-party political system under fully majoritarian elections. But that is unlikely.
On the contrary, the smaller centrist parties that scored a victory in the recent European Parliament elections are now demanding a return to full proportionality. 
If they get it, matters will most likely go from bad to worse.
Under the current system, Italian governments achieve little, but at least they last longer.
A return to full proportionality would probably mean a return to rapid government turnover, which carries with it the risk that policy horizons will also become shorter.
As Italians know all too well, government instability inevitably breeds financial volatility.
Italy’s Taxing Election
MILAN – A winter election is not to Italian tastes.
But, on February 24-25, up to 50 million voters will go to the polls to elect a new parliament, delivering Italy’s 62nd government in the last 65 years.
Since November 2011, Italy has been led not by a politician, but by an academic economist and a former European Union commissioner, Mario Monti.
His emergency technocratic government, supported by the left and right, was a masterstroke of outgoing President Giorgio Napolitano.
Napolitano’s move was crucial, filling Italy’s need to replace the inefficient and scandal-ridden Silvio Berlusconi, in whom fellow leaders and global markets had lost all confidence, with an internationally respected figure.
Under Monti’s leadership, reforms were finally initiated and markets were calmed.
To enhance the credibility of public finances, Monti’s government substantially increased taxes, particularly on real estate, while preserving the already record-high income-tax rate.
The tax plan highlighted that Italy, like Japan, is a country of public debt and private wealth.
As the economist Marco Fortis points out, Italian family wealth is still, if not for long, second to none in Europe.
Beyond growing international credibility, two major changes to the Italian political landscape have shaped the election campaign.
The first is Monti’s surprise resignation in December, after losing the backing of Berlusconi’s party.
While he will not run as a candidate (he is already a senator for life), he formed a centrist coalition – affiliated with neither the left nor the right – to contest the election, and has declared his willingness to resume his leadership role if the coalition is victorious.
The second change is that, after almost two decades of striving for a workable political system dominated by the center-left and center-right parties, Italy is experiencing a remarkable dispersion of forces.
The ballot will include dozens of competing parties, most of which will not win parliamentary seats, owing to a 2005 electoral law requiring at least 4% of the national vote to enter the Chamber of Deputies (the lower house) and 8% on a regional basis to enter the Senate.
According to public-opinion polls, the center-left Democratic Party, led by Pier Luigi Bersani, along with some more left-leaning allies, has the support of roughly 33% of the electorate, down since late January, while backing for Berlusconi’s center-right coalition has risen to 28%.
Meanwhile, Monti’s centrist grouping has only 16% support, while the populist Five Star Movement, founded by the comedian Beppe Grillo in 2009, has 17% backing – a figure that could go higher if those who previously stayed at home decide to cast a protest vote.
The real battle, therefore, is between the Bersani and Berlusconi coalitions.
Most observers believe that Bersani will carry the day, thanks to the much-criticized electoral law, which will give him control of the lower chamber if he wins a majority – regardless of how many people vote or how slim the margin.
The law favored Berlusconi in 2008; it is likely to benefit Bersani now.
But, in order to govern, Bersani would need both chambers, and he is unlikely to muster 50.1% in the Senate.
At the same time, with Monti’s coalition failing to gain traction, reflecting the historically limited appeal of classic bourgeois parties in Italy, many observers are wondering what his role in the next government will be.
For Bersani, creating a coalition with Monti may well be the key to gaining control of the upper house and, in turn, of the government.
Amid these plans and predictions, a growing banking scandal has reminded Italians that, in politics, luck can sometimes make the difference.
When Monte dei Paschi di Siena – Italy’s third-largest bank – revealed that it faced losses of up to €720 million ($970 million) from complex derivatives deals carried out in 2006-2009, support for Bersani’s coalition slipped, owing to the PD’s long-standing ties to the bank.
Given that Italians tend to vote against, rather than for, issues, mistrust of the PD has translated into increased support for Berlusconi’s coalition.
Another issue with the potential to undermine the PD’s standing is the party’s advocacy of a new wealth tax.
Italians already shoulder heavy taxes: an individual taxpayer with annual income of €50,000 pays €15,000 in income tax; with two children, that total drops by only €1,000.
By contrast, a French taxpayer with the same income pays only €9,000; with two children, the tax bill plummets to €3,000, and a €1.5 million fortune would mean an additional wealth tax of only €4,230.
In other words, with or without children, the French citizen’s annual tax payment would be smaller than that of the Italian taxpayer with no additional wealth.
In this context, a new wealth tax could be a dangerous proposition for the PD.
One feature of Italy’s turbulent politics remains consistent: the control exercised by entrenched interests, and the dominance of a bloated and inefficient bureaucracy.
With less than one-fifth of the population of the United States, Italy’s parliament has twice as many members as the US Congress, and they are among the world’s best-compensated and most privileged MPs.
Meanwhile, Italy’s top bureaucrats are the highest paid in history, according to OECD data, with several retired officials drawing larger pensions than former US presidents receive.
The salaries of Italy’s military chiefs of staff and chief of police are almost triple those of their American counterparts.
But prospects for political reform do not inspire optimism.
While Grillo’s supporters may ignite fireworks in protest of these gilded giveaways for a few months, a consistent assault leading to genuine reform seems doubtful.
More broadly, the outcome of Italy’s election will undoubtedly have a far-reaching impact on a still-fragile eurozone, though the nature of that impact remains impossible to predict – unless Berlusconi returns to power, in which case the consequences will be all too clear.
Bernanke Meets the Press
CAMBRIDGE – At the United States Federal Reserve’s recent and first-ever public press conference, Chairman Ben Bernanke gave a spirited defense of the Fed’s much-criticized policy of mass purchases of US government bonds, also known as “quantitative easing.”
But was his justification persuasive?
Most economists viewed his performance as masterful.
But the fact that the dollar has continued to slide while gold prices have continued to rise suggests considerable skepticism from markets.
One of the hardest things in central banking is that investors often hear a very different message from that which the central bank intends to send.
The Fed, of course, has been forced to turn to “QE,” as traders call it, because its normal tool for fine-tuning inflation and growth, the overnight interest rate, is already zero. Yet US economic growth remains sluggish, and is accompanied by stubbornly high unemployment.
QE has been blamed for everything from asset-price bubbles to food riots to impetigo.
Everyone from foreign finance ministers to cartoon satirists (check out the video “quantitative easing explained”) to Sarah Palin has ripped into the policy.
Critics insist that QE is the beginning of the end of the global financial system, if not of civilization itself.
Their most telling complaint is that too little is known about how quantitative easing works, and that the Fed is therefore taking undue risks with the global financial system to achieve a modest juicing of the US economy.
Whether or not the critics are right, one thing is clear: with the Fed lagging other global central banks in the monetary-tightening cycle, and with rating agencies contemplating a downgrade of America’s credit score, the US dollar’s purchasing power has sunk to an all-time low against the currencies of America’s trading partners.
Bernanke’s defense was robust and unequivocal.
He argued that QE is not nearly as unconventional as its critics claim.
If one looks at how it has affected financial conditions, including long-term interest rates, volatility, and stock prices, QE looks an awful lot like conventional interest-rate policy, which we think we understand.
Thus, concerns about QE’s supposed ill effects are wildly overblown, and there is nothing especially challenging about eventually reversing course, either.
Bernanke dismissed complaints about commodity prices and emerging-market inflation, arguing that these phenomena had far more to do with lax monetary policies and overly rigid exchange rates in fast-growing developing economies.
The Fed chairman’s comments come at a critical and sensitive moment.
Over the next year or so, the Fed is likely to enter a tightening cycle, raising interest rates on a steady and sustained basis.
It does not want to rush, because the US economy is still weak, with first-quarter growth a lackluster 1.8%.
But it cannot wait too long, lest inflation expectations drift to a dangerously high level, forcing the Fed to move aggressively – and at the cost of considerable economic pain – to wring inflation out of the system.
In unwinding QE, Bernanke must avoid another landmine, namely an unwelcome collapse in asset prices.
Many savvy Wall Street traders are convinced that QE is just the old “Greenspan put” on steroids.
The cult of the “Greenspan put” stemmed from the previous Fed chairman’s avowed belief that the Fed should not try to resist a sharply rising stock market, except to the extent that such a market undermines the long-term stability of prices for ordinary goods.
But if the stock market collapses too quickly, the Fed should worry about a recession and react aggressively to cushion the fall.
Are traders right?
Is QE merely the sequel to the “Greenspan put”?
It is certainly the case that today’s super-low interest rates encourage investors to pour funds into risky assets.
The Fed probably would argue that it is the job of regulators to make sure that asset bubbles do not induce too much borrowing and an eventual debt crisis, though of course monetary policy has to be in the mix.
Given the sluggish recovery, Bernanke could have gone even further and argued that the Fed is the one who has it right.
Other advanced-economy monetary authorities, such as the European Central Bank, might be over-reacting to short term inflation volatility.
However, perhaps not wanting to cause problems for his foreign counterparts, Bernanke took a more cautious approach, merely defending the Fed’s policy as the right choice for America.
In defending the Fed’s policy, Bernanke had to be careful not to say anything that might overly alarm investors.
Indeed, there is already reason enough for them to be nervous: after all, the Fed’s epic easing of financial conditions must eventually be followed by exceptionally painful tightening.
Will the economy be ready when the time comes?
Explaining the inevitable shift to tightening could prove a far greater challenge than explaining the exceptional accommodation of quantitative easing.
The Fed must always remember that no matter how calm and rational its analysis may be, it is dealing with markets that can be anything but calm and rational.
Precisely because so much emotion has been invested in QE, the psychological effects of returning to normalcy are going to be perilous and unpredictable.
The Tragedy of Ben Bernanke
BERKELEY – It is difficult to read former US Federal Reserve Chair Ben Bernanke’s new memoir, The Courage to Act, as anything other than a tragedy.
It is the story of a man who may have been the best-prepared person in the world for the job he was given, but who soon found himself outmatched by its challenges, quickly falling behind the curve and never quite managing to catch up.
It is to Bernanke’s great credit that the shock of 2007-2008 did not trigger another Great Depression.
But his response to its aftermath was unexpectedly disappointing.
In 2000, Bernanke had argued that a central bank with sufficient will could “always,” in the medium term at least, restore full prosperity via quantitative easing.
If a central bank printed money and bought financial assets on a large-enough scale, people would begin to step up their spending.
Even if people believed that only a fraction of quantitative easing was permanent, and even if the incentive to spend was low, the central bank could restart the economy.
In the end however, Bernanke did not deliver.
Even though the Fed and many other central banks printed much more money than economists would have thought necessary to offset the impact of the financial crisis, full prosperity has yet to be restored.
Bernanke increased the US monetary base five-fold, from $800 billion to $4 trillion.
But it wasn’t enough.
And then, his courage failing, he balked at taking the next leap: more than doubling the monetary base to $9 trillion.
In his last years in office, Bernanke was reduced to begging in vain for Congress to institute fiscal expansion.
So what went wrong?
The answer, as is often the case, depends on which economist you ask.
If I understand Bernanke correctly, he would argue that nothing fundamental went wrong, and that a temporary savings glut has artificially lengthened the time it takes for aggressive monetary expansion to restore full prosperity.
Loss-adverse sovereign wealth funds, emerging-market millionaires parking their money in the US and Europe, and governments seeking to ensure freedom of action have pushed full-prosperity interest rates down substantially and extended the time it takes for shocks to dissipate.
Harvard’s Kenneth Rogoff holds a different view: Bernanke’s cardinal error was to focus too narrowly on the money supply.
According to simple economic models, when the money market is in full-prosperity equilibrium, the debt market is too.
But in the real world, it might have been more effective for governments to buy back risky debts and induce lenders to write off losses.
This, more than loose monetary policy, would have boosted private spending and rapidly restored full prosperity.
Still others would make the case that monetary action would have been enough, if only the Fed had committed to a target for annual inflation that was higher than 2% and vowed to do as much quantitative easing as necessary to reach that goal.
This simple promise – were it to be made credible – would have been far more effective than much larger amounts of quantitative easing.
Finally, there is a fourth view, championed most prominently by Larry Summers and Paul Krugman.
They argue that there is little evidence that monetary policy will ever restore full prosperity.
In this view, Milton Friedman’s dream of using strategic monetary interventions to offset economic shocks remains just that: a dream.
For Keynes, the answer was clear, and it was something close to what is being argued by Summers and Krugman; indeed, his conclusions are what transformed him from a monetarist into a Keynesian.
“It seems unlikely that the influence of [monetary] policy on the rate of interest will be sufficient by itself,” Keynes wrote in 1936. “I conceive, therefore, that a somewhat comprehensive socialization of investment will prove the only means of securing an approximation to full employment.”
Those are words worth considering the next time we find ourselves needing the courage to act.
A New Caliphate?
PRINCETON – The recent declaration of a caliphate by the militant group the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria (ISIS) is an unprecedented event in modern times.
Regardless of how it turns out, one thing is clear: violent jihadism is now an entrenched feature of the Arab political landscape.
Not since the Turkish Republic abolished the Ottoman caliphate in 1924 has any Muslim group in control of territory made such a bid.
Even Al Qaeda and the Taliban have limited their demands to the creation of statelets (emirates), which they hope will eventually coalesce into a caliphate.
This hesitation can be explained, at least partly, by the fact that neither Osama bin Laden nor Mullah Omar (the Taliban’s leader) can fulfill the conditions for being a caliph, one of which is proof of descent from the Prophet Muhammad’s tribe, the Quraysh.
The new caliphal claimant, the Islamic State’s emir Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, can.
As conceived in Islamic political thought, a caliphate, unlike a conventional nation-state, is not subject to fixed borders.
Instead, it is focused on defending and expanding the dominion of the Muslim faith through jihad, or armed struggle.
The statement announcing the new caliphate, entitled “This is the Promise of Allah,” was issued on the first day of the Islamic holy month of Ramadan, and lays out a radical vision for reconfiguring the Arab world.
First, it declares that ISIS will drop its titular reference to “Iraq and Syria” to become simply the Islamic State, implying that it has its sights set on other countries, especially Jordan, Saudi Arabia, and possibly Lebanon.
The rest of the statement is replete with injunctions from the Koran, several of which refer to God deputizing the “true believers” as his regents on earth, empowering them to humiliate and defeat his “enemies,” who now include Shia Muslims, democrats, nationalists, the Muslim Brotherhood, Jews, and Christians.
These believers are now operating, the statement continues, under the banner of the Islamic State, which currently controls the territory between Aleppo in Syria and Diyala in Iraq, where it has already established the structures of a proto-state: courts, a tax system, and security and social services.
The Islamic State argues that all Muslims, including all jihadist factions, must acknowledge the caliph as their leader if they are not to live in sin.
Though this notion of a collective religious obligation is largely consistent with traditional Islamic law, most Muslims consider such injunctions irrelevant in the modern age.
Nonetheless, with al-Baghdadi at its helm, the Islamic State is convinced that its new caliphate will – indeed, is supposed to – flourish.
Al-Baghdadi, whose real name is Ibrahim Awwad Ibrahim Ali al-Badri al-Samarrai, is a 40-something Iraqi from Samarra, north of Baghdad.
A fairly enigmatic figure, he has a higher degree in Islamic studies, and is a gifted strategist and orator.
Al-Baghdadi has managed to strike numerous deals with the Sunni tribes of Iraq, without whom he could not have conquered so much territory so quickly.
And, in the few recorded statements that have been released, he displays a mastery of classical Arabic.
All of this will help him to achieve his goal of succeeding Osama bin Laden as the leader of the global jihad against the forces of nonbelief.
Whether the announcement of the new caliphate turns out to be politically significant, however, remains to be seen.
Its enduring influence will depend on two factors.
The first is the Islamic State’s continued military success, and its ability to maintain and consolidate its control of territory.
So far, jihadist success has depended largely on the divisions within Arab countries and the weakness of their governments, particularly the five – Libya, Egypt, Syria, Iraq, and Yemen – that have lost control over significant portions of their territory.
And these countries are showing no signs of stabilizing.
While it is unlikely that national borders will be redrawn, the fact that large jihadi-controlled territories are becoming the norm will only make it easier for such forces to augment their financial resources and attract new recruits.
The second factor is the Islamic State’s ability to secure sufficient support.
Today, jihadism is more fundamentally divided than ever before.
Even Ayman al-Zawahiri, Al Qaeda’s current leader, views al-Baghdadi as an extremist, and has taken steps to distance his group from the Islamic State.
But many jihadi groups and individuals, particularly young people, have signaled their support for the caliphate.
The Islamic State’s statement has already been viewed more than 187,000 times on YouTube, and has been posted innumerable times on Twitter and Facebook, attracting positive comments.
A more ominous development is the emergence of a group called the Supporters of the Islamic State in Jerusalem, which has claimed responsibility for murdering – as a gift to the new caliph – the three kidnapped Israeli teenagers whose bodies were recently found in the West Bank.
Jihadism is clearly alive and well across the Arab world.
After decades of unjust and ineffective rule, not to mention tragic foreign interventions, there is no shortage of disenfranchised and frustrated citizens for organizations like the Islamic State to recruit.
Whether this new caliphate succeeds or not, religious violence in the Arab world will likely get worse before it gets better.
The Best Ways to Fight Extreme Poverty
COPENHAGEN – In 1950, people in South Korea and Pakistan earned roughly the same amount of money annually.
Today, the two countries are scarcely comparable.
South Korean’s per capita income has grown 23-fold since then, while Pakistan has experienced only a three-fold increase.
How we can help more of the world’s poorest countries emulate South Korea’s success is one of the most important questions facing the world today.
Better economic outcomes mean empowering entire populations with better health, more education, longer life, and less vulnerability to challenges like natural disasters.
Many of the United Nations’ proposed 169 development targets for the next 15 years are, at their heart, concerned with poverty reduction.
But not all targets are equally good.
The Copenhagen Consensus Center, of which I am director, recently asked 60 teams of economists to evaluate the benefits and costs of these proposed targets, which will come into force to replace the Millennium Development Goals in September.
One of the least desirable targets seems laudable at first: full employment for all.
Unfortunately, this is a dream, not a target.
Economies need some unemployment to allow workers to change jobs, and most governments already focus on job creation.
Research suggests that politicians and interest groups would use a full-employment target to support expensive, protectionist policies that generate great jobs for some but drive many into the informal economy.
So it would probably end up doing less good than it would cost, and it is certainly not the way to reduce extreme poverty.
About 14.5% of the world’s population, or one billion people, live on less than $1.25 a day.
So why not end extreme poverty by simply transferring enough resources to this billion people to get them to at least $1.26 a day?
The world’s poorest would be able to feed and educate their children better and become healthier.
But, in addition to the financial cost, there would be huge administrative challenges, along with corruption and institutional deficiencies.
When these factors are weighed against the benefits in monetary terms, each dollar spent ending extreme poverty with cash transfers would achieve about $5 worth of social value.
That is not a bad return at all, but there are many better ways to help.
One possibility is to triple mobile broadband penetration in developing countries.
This would provide small-scale businesspeople such as farmers and fishermen with market information, enabling them to sell their goods at the highest price – and to boost productivity, increase efficiency, and generate more jobs.
Our research shows that the benefits, added up, would be worth $17 for every dollar spent – making it a very good development target.
An even better intervention addresses migration.
More than 200 million people today work outside their home countries.
As rich countries age, they need more workers.
At the same time, people from developing countries are more productive in a developed country.
Easing restrictions on migration would allow young people from developing countries to expand industrialized economies’ diminishing workforces – and generate the taxes needed to pay for care for the elderly.
Such migration would also be good for the developing countries, because migrant workers send home remittances.
In total, every dollar spent on increased migration would produce more than $45 of social good – possibly more than $300.
While in today’s political climate, increasing migration might be difficult to achieve, it is worth pointing out how effectively it could help the world’s poorest.
The single development target that would have the biggest impact on global prosperity would be the completion of the Doha trade round.
Lowering trade barriers would mean that all countries could focus on doing what they do best, making everyone better off.
Moreover, freer trade would accelerate economic growth, owing to increased innovation and knowledge exchange.
Heavy reliance on trading in a global market was one of the main reasons that South Korea has developed so rapidly and essentially eradicated its poverty in the last 65 years.
Economic models indicate that a successful Doha round would make the global economy $11 trillion richer each year by 2030, with most of the benefits going to developing countries.
Each person in the developing world would earn $1,000 more per year, on average.
The number of people living in extreme poverty would fall by 160 million.
For every dollar spent, mostly to pay off Western farmers blocking the current negotiations, the world would achieve more than $2,000 of benefits, making free trade a phenomenal investment.
Each of these proposals – full employment, cash transfers, broadband rollout, freer migration, and lower trade barriers – is covered by at least one of the UN’s 169 development targets.
And herein lies the problem.
Trying to do 169 different things at once would be foolhardy.
It would mean spending too much time and resources on lower-return priorities, instead of focusing on the targets that promise the biggest impact on the world’s poorest.
In fact, our research shows that there are 19 phenomenal targets that – like freer trade – should be prioritized above all of the others.
The final decision about which targets will become global policy will affect the flow of trillions of dollars over the next 15 years.
In September, when world leaders gather in New York, they need to focus on the smartest ways to boost global prosperity.
Doing so would help more countries take South Korea’s path and lift their populations out of poverty.
Better Learning Through Better Betting
PHILADELPHIA – The course of public debate has become depressingly familiar.
It often begins with a surprise – for example, Donald Trump, the real-estate tycoon turned reality TV star, defies the odds to become the US Republican Party’s presumptive presidential nominee.
The pundits dive in.
Why is it happening?
What does it mean?
What will come next?
After a time, the future that was being debated is revealed.
In an ideal world, everyone would acknowledge which forecast proved correct. Lessons would be learned.
People would change their thinking accordingly.
Collectively, we would all be a little wiser.
But this is a less-than-ideal world.
All too often, instead of learning lessons, the pundits just continue arguing.
They dispute what happened.
They disagree about who predicted which outcome.
No minds are changed.
Collectively, we become no wiser.
For those who think we can do better, one solution is to make bets on our predictions.
In early 2014, the economists Tyler Cowen and Bryan Caplan did just that.
Cowen was pessimistic about unemployment in the United States, so he bet Caplan that the rate would not fall below 5% during the following 20 years.
Two years later, unemployment had dropped to 4.9%.
Caplan had won a clear victory.
It is exactly that sort of clarity that betting on predictions seeks to obtain.
Left unchallenged, pundits routinely use vague language, such as “unemployment will remain high for years” or “Trump’s support will slide.”
These sound good on television, but they do not produce an indisputable, testable result.
(How many years is “many”?
How much decline qualifies as a “slide”?)
Bets force the two parties to agree to well-defined terms – making it obvious to everyone who was right and who was wrong.
The purpose of betting, of course, is not to declare winners and losers; it is to replace endless, pointless arguments with a clear determination of whose understanding of reality is closer to the truth.
The ultimate goal is to make us all a little wiser.
And yet, unfortunately, when it comes to achieving that goal, betting has consistently failed.
Take Cowen’s response to losing his bet with Caplan.
He quickly acknowledged that he had lost, according to the terms of the bet.
But he nonetheless insisted that this did not prove Caplan right.
Cowen noted that while the unemployment rate had fallen, the employment-to-population ratio had barely budged.
In his evaluation of the outcome, Cowen concluded that, “I feel I’m the one who won the bet.”
Their wager had settled absolutely nothing.
Unfortunately, that is what typically happens when people make simple bets on complex debates.
In 1980, the biologist Paul Ehrlich and the economist Julian Simon made another famous wager – on the price of five metals ten years later.
Their bet ended with a clear win for Simon, but Ehrlich shrugged off the outcome as meaningless.
And he was not wrong.
If the two scientists had chosen a different starting year, Ehrlich might well have been the winner.
The problem with bets like these is that they are far too simple to settle the complex debates that underlie them.
A handful of metal prices cannot settle a sprawling Malthus vs. Cornucopia argument, just as a single data point for unemployment cannot be the final word in the dispute between Cowen and Caplan.
And yet it would be a shame to abandon bets altogether.
Doing so would leave only the squalid food fights into which so many important debates devolve.
The solution is to take bets far more seriously, to expand them, and to design them to be capable of settling debates to the satisfaction of most reasonable observers.
Ideally, a bet would use a question as big as the debate it means to settle.
But that will not work, because big questions – “Will population growth outstrip resources and threaten civilization?” – do not produce easily measurable outcomes.
The key, instead, is to ask many small, precise questions.
Cowen and Caplan should not have relied on the unemployment rate alone; they should have included the employment-to-population ratio and other metrics they agreed would have diagnostic value.
Ehrlich and Simon should have made a wider array of predictions, on metal prices, food production, air quality, and other factors.
This approach, using question clusters, could be applied to virtually any important debate.
Right now, for example we are putting the hawks-versus-doves argument about the Iran nuclear deal to the forecasting test.
Naturally, using many questions could result in split decisions.
But if our goal is to learn, that is a feature, not a bug.
A split decision would suggest that neither bettor’s understanding of reality is perfectly accurate and that the truth lies somewhere between.
That would be an enlightening result particularly when public debates are dominated by extreme positions – the clash between Ehrlich and Simon being a classic illustration.
Of course, none of this is possible if those involved are not willing to think together about how to settle their disagreement.
This is not always easy, to say the least.
After their famous bet, Simon and Ehrlich considered a second bet involving a large basket of measures; but it never came about, partly because of personal antipathy between the two men.
What is needed is a neutral party and arbiter – a role that think tanks, for example, are well positioned to play.
But, whatever the difficulties, the quality of public debate stands to benefit enormously from well-structured wagers.
When it comes to learning about the world, betting on outcomes beats arguments that settle nothing.
Better Red than Dead?
Will the inexorable rise in medical costs around the world someday pose a major challenge to contemporary capitalism?
I submit that in the not-so-distant future, moral, social, and political support for capitalism will be severely tested as would-be egalitarian health systems face ever-rising costs.
Rising incomes, population aging, and new technologies for extending and enhancing life, have caused health costs to rise 3.5% faster than overall income for many decades now in the United States.
Some leading economists project that health expenditures, which already constitute 16% of the US economy, will rise to 30% of GDP by 2030, and perhaps approach 50% later in the century.
Other rich and middle-income countries, although typically spending only half what the US does today, won’t lag far behind.
Countries in Europe and elsewhere have shielded their citizens from a part of this rise by piggybacking on US technological advances.
Ultimately, though, they face the same upward cost pressures.
Hasn’t the start of the twenty-first century marked the death of all other ideologies, with China’s raw capitalism putting pressure on gentler forms in Europe and elsewhere?
The problem is that attitudes towards healthcare are fundamentally different.
Many societies view healthcare as a right, not a luxury.