That’s why the temptation for Bush and Blair to limit further political damage at home by prematurely declaring victory in Iraq is so dangerous.
If they use the good news to begin withdrawing significant numbers of the foreign troops who bolster Iraq’s stability at a crucial and vulnerable moment, they will have undermined the project to which both have devoted so much political capital.
And they will leave the new Iraqi government at the mercy of forces that would eventually pull the country apart.
Hands Off Syria?
WASHINGTON, DC – More than any of the previous events in the Arab Spring, Syria’s turmoil has presented serious difficulties for Western policymakers.
Just as Syria comprises a more complex society than the other Arab countries currently in the throes of political transition, so, too, are its external relations more complex.
As a result, any attempt at decisive military intervention would be not only difficult, but also extremely risky.
Syria’s leading role in Lebanon, even after withdrawing its occupying forces there, is only one complication.
Another is Alawite-minority rule in a Sunni-majority country, which makes Syria a proxy for Shia Iran in the Sunni Arab world.
Still other Syrian minority groups – non-Alawite Shia, Orthodox and Catholic Christians, and Druze – are linked to neighboring countries and regional players, inviting intense external interest and even active support.
Turkey, Saudi Arabia, and Russia all have strategic interests and factional connections to Syria.
The United States and its NATO allies would, of course, prefer a democratic, Western-oriented regime to emerge in Syria.
But, given the country’s complex society and external ties, the West should happily settle for a stable government not dominated by Russia or Iran, and not in military conflict with its neighbors, including Israel.
So what is the best US and Western policy?
A negotiated end to the current warfare could leave President Bashar al-Assad’s regime in power, albeit with a different face in charge.
Such an outcome would be a triumph for the cause of hardline dictatorship, suppression of human rights, and Iran and Russia.
But it also becomes less feasible as the violence mounts.
That leaves supporting the rebels, but which ones, and how?
Yet another factor militating against intervention is that the distribution of power resulting from the Arab Spring is leaving the US with limited influence and little intelligence.
But the US and the West cannot leave the matter entirely to others or confine their efforts to the United Nations, where Russia and China prevent any effective action.
So, what should be done?
In my view, the US could work with Turkey, Saudi Arabia (taking care not to support Islamic extremists), and its NATO allies, especially France and Britain, to create a prospective successor government for Syria, and to arm its military element.
Such a government would have to be representative and coherent.
And Western powers would need to be sure that their weapons would not fall into potentially unfriendly hands.
The fact that Iran is arming the Assad regime calls for countervailing action.
Some have suggested a more active military role for the US, beginning with a no-fly zone.
It may come to that.
But the French and British, who urged that course in Libya, have made no such proposal for Syria.
One reason is that Syria has a substantial air-defense system, which would have to be suppressed by a bombing campaign – causing significant civilian casualties and risking the loss of aircraft and crews.
Before starting down that road, the US should be convinced that military action would not require US ground forces in Syria.
It should also be confident (which is impossible now) about the nature of a successor government.
To meet these criteria would require convening interested countries in order to gain greater insight into both internal Syrian and regional implications of military action.
The attention devoted to the Syrian issue during the “non-aligned” countries’ recent Tehran summit was a parody of such an exercise.
Holding such a conference is easier said than done.
Merely finalizing the guest list would be a major diplomatic feat.
Surely, Turkey, Egypt, Saudi Arabia, and Iraq must be invited.
Russia, the US, and perhaps France and Britain should be present as well.
But to omit a neighbor like Israel, a Syrian client like Lebanon, or a patron like Iran would be peculiar – and inviting all of them would be a formula for chaos.
The uprising in Syria, the most violent of the Arab Spring rebellions, is playing out slowly and lethally.
The estimated 10,000 deaths over the last 18 months equal the number killed in just a few days in 1982 in the city of Hama by Assad’s father, Hafez al-Assad, whose scorched-earth policy strengthened his hold on power and incurred only rhetorical condemnation from the international community.
The repercussions are likely to be all the more disruptive when, sooner or later, the regime falls.
The Assads, like other authoritarian Arab leaders, kept a lid on internal violence and their own citizens’ aspirations.
But the sheer complexity of conditions in Syria means that the regime’s endgame could trigger a transition unlike any other in the Arab Spring, different in both its domestic course and in its effects on the region.
Diplomats make careers of finding procedural solutions to insoluble dilemmas; surely, they hope, there is a conference table with a shape that matches a given strategic configuration.
So far, the US has handled the various forms of political transition in the Arab Spring without severely damaging missteps.
Syria poses the toughest challenge yet.
Should We Trust Our Moral Intuitions?
When we condemn the behavior of a politician, celebrity, or friend, we often end up appealing to our moral intuitions.
“It just feels wrong!” we say.
But where do these intuitive judgments come from?
Are they reliable moral guides?
Recently, some unusual research has raised new questions about the role of intuitive responses in ethical reasoning.
Joshua Greene, a philosophy graduate now working in psychology who has recently moved from Princeton University to Harvard, studied how people respond to a set of imaginary dilemmas.
In one dilemma, you are standing by a railroad track when you notice that a trolley, with no one aboard, is heading for a group of five people.
They will all be killed if the trolley continues on its current track.
The only thing you can do to prevent these five deaths is to throw a switch that will divert the trolley onto a side track, where it will kill only one person.
When asked what you should do in these circumstances, most people say that you should divert the trolley onto the side track, thus saving a net four lives.
In another dilemma, the trolley, as before, is about to kill five people.
This time, however, you are not standing near the track, but on a footbridge above the track.
You cannot divert the trolley.
You consider jumping off the bridge, in front of the trolley, thus sacrificing yourself to save the five people in danger, but you realize that you are far too light to stop the trolley.
Standing next to you, however, is a very large stranger.
The only way you can prevent the trolley from killing five people is by pushing this large stranger off the footbridge, in front of the trolley.
If you push the stranger off, he will be killed, but you will save the other five.
When asked what you should do in these circumstances, most people say that it would be wrong to push the stranger.
Greene, however, was more concerned to understand why we have the intuitions, so he used functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging, or fMRI, to examine what happens in people’s brains when they make these moral judgments.
Greene found that people asked to make a moral judgment about “personal” violations, like pushing the stranger off the footbridge, showed increased activity in areas of the brain associated with the emotions.
This was not the case with people asked to make judgments about relatively “impersonal” violations like throwing a switch.
Moreover, the minority of subjects who did consider that it would be right to push the stranger off the footbridge took longer to reach this judgment than those who said that doing so would be wrong.
Why would our judgments, and our emotions, vary in this way?
For most of our evolutionary history, human beings – and our primate ancestors – have lived in small groups, in which violence could be inflicted only in an up-close and personal way, by hitting, pushing, strangling, or using a stick or stone as a club.
To deal with such situations, we developed immediate, emotionally based intuitive responses to the infliction of personal violence on others.
The thought of pushing the stranger off the footbridge elicits these responses.
On the other hand, it is only in the last couple of centuries – not long enough to have any evolutionary significance – that we have been able to harm anyone by throwing a switch that diverts a train.
Hence the thought of doing it does not elicit the same emotional response as pushing someone off a bridge.
Greene’s work helps us understand where our moral intuitions come from.
But the fact that our moral intuitions are universal and part of our human nature does not mean that they are right.
On the contrary, these findings should make us more skeptical about relying on our intuitions.
There is, after all, no ethical significance in the fact that one method of harming others has existed for most of our evolutionary history, and the other is relatively new.
Blowing up people with bombs is no better than clubbing them to death.
And surely the death of one person is a lesser tragedy than the death of five, no matter how that death is brought about.
So we should think for ourselves, not just listen to our intuitions.
Hope Amid the Middle East’s Turmoil
LONDON – Syria is a living nightmare.
Egypt hovers on the brink.
But, as the opening of peace talks between Israel and the Palestinian Authority shows, there are signs of hope.
And, though it may seem counter-intuitive, the region’s turmoil is finally bringing to the surface its fundamental problems in a way that allows them to be confronted and overcome.
Now is a time not for despair, but for active engagement.
No one put the chances of reviving the Israel-Palestine peace process at more than minimal.
Yet it has happened.
And these are not talks about talks, but a full-blown revival of final-status negotiations, with an undertaking by both parties to remain in the process for at least nine months.
To those of us who have toiled, often fruitlessly, on this issue in the past, it is a huge achievement brought about by US Secretary of State John Kerry’s sheer dogged determination and the willingness of Israel’s Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu and Palestinian Authority President Mahmoud Abbas to take political risks with their domestic public opinion.
Much less noted was the visit of Yemen’s president, Abd Rabbuh Mansur Hadi, to Washington, DC.
Against all the odds, Yemen is undergoing a process of political transformation, with 500 delegates from all parts of society working on plans for democracy, justice, and equality.
In Iraq, after years of declining sectarian violence, the casualty figures are up again, in part owing to the war in neighboring Syria.
Yet, even in Iraq, Grand Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani, the country’s most influential Shia cleric, recently issued a seminal statement proclaiming the need for a civil, not religious state, with equal freedom for all to participate.
Sistani also expressed disagreement with those close to Iran who want Shia to go to Syria to fight for Bashar al-Assad’s regime alongside Hezbollah.
Similarly, at the start of Ramadan, King Abdullah of Saudi Arabia, who is also the custodian of the two holy mosques, made a powerful statement reclaiming the faith of Islam from those who would pervert it in the name of politics.
Libya and Tunisia are far from settled, as the recent assassination of Tunisia’s leading opposition politician and the presence of unrestrained militia in Libyan towns show.
But the democrats are not giving up.
Across the northern part of Sub-Saharan Africa, there are now huge challenges from well-armed and well-financed terrorist groups that have imported toxic Islamist ideology from the Middle East.
Countries such as Nigeria, for example, have suffered horribly from terrorism based on a brand of religious extremism that is alien to their society.
But, again, despite it all, the country is experiencing rapid economic growth and has just implemented a major reform – widely considered impossible until recently – of the power sector.
Meanwhile, with a genuinely inclusive and objectively administered constitution, Egypt could pivot back toward democracy.
Elections by early 2014 have been promised, and all parties, including the Muslim Brotherhood, could take part.
Or Egypt could become paralyzed and unable to rectify its dire economic situation and restore order, without which no progress is possible.
But Egypt’s internal divisions reveal a deeper awakening in the region that has its own significance.
Lessons about government, governance, and democracy that took the West centuries to learn are being taken in at extraordinary speed.
It is now clear that the status quo in the region will not hold.
The idea of “strong man” government – a regime that maintains order, and that the rest of the world likes to deal with because it is predictable – has gone.
It doesn’t matter whether the “strong man” is a psychopath, like Saddam Hussein, or a moderate, like Hosni Mubarak, who kept peace in the region.
This is the twenty-first century, and ordinary people want to shape their country’s politics.
The choice is between evolution and revolution.
Evolution, if attainable, is clearly preferable.
Frankly, Syria would have been better for it.
People have had a taste of politics conducted by firestorm.
Across the region, there is fatigue with the wildness and disorder that politics conducted by firestorm brings.
There is growing recognition that change is best accompanied by stability, and that democracy works only if debate is conducted in an atmosphere in which arguments can be bold, even harsh, but not inflammatory.
There is also a burgeoning acceptance that religious freedom is a necessary part of free and open societies.
The discussion about religion’s role in government and society is now out in the open.
This is enormously important and healthy.
For the first time, there is lively and intelligent debate around this issue, which is at the core of the Middle East’s problems.
Open societies are incompatible with closed economies.
A functioning private sector that creates adequate jobs, and schools that educate the large young population for today’s inter-connected world, are prerequisites of progress.
The Israeli-Palestinian issue is crucial for all the obvious reasons.
But it is also a test of the region’s capacity to forge a different and better future.
If these two peoples can find common ground to create two states, both democratic and free, after decades of bitterness and bloodshed, the region would have an enormously powerful model of hope.
But the opening of the peace talks in Washington, DC, would not have happened without the full engagement of the US and other international partners.
This is the lesson that we should bear in mind as Syria disintegrates before our eyes.
However much we may wish to look away, the consequences of allowing the bloodbath in Syria to take its own course may well be disastrous for the region and for the West’s security.
Surely we can begin to see certain common threads running through the terror attacks of September 11, 2001, Afghanistan, Iraq, the Arab revolutions, Iran, Syria, Egypt, and the spread of terror based on religious extremism.
One concerns how states emerge from years of repression to build institutions capable of responding to the needs of the modern world.
Another – plainly linked – is Muslim-majority countries’ efforts to define the relationship between religion and politics.
The entire world has a massive interest in where these threads lead.
Silent Momentum on Climate Change
NAIROBI – The last two years have been a roller coaster ride in respect to securing a new global treaty to combat climate change.
Some even despair that the window for action is closing fast.
But giving up is not an option.
The latest round of climate negotiations, held last month in Cancún, Mexico, put the world’s efforts on climate change back on track – albeit at a pace and on a scale that will undoubtedly leave many onlookers frustrated.
President Felipe Calderón’s government in Mexico and the Executive Secretary of the United Nations Framework Convention deserve credit for gains in a range of important areas, including forestry, a new Green Fund to assist developing nations, and the anchoring of the emission-reduction pledges made at the December 2009 climate-change conference in Copenhagen.
But, as the UN Environment Program and climate modelers made clear in the run-up to the Cancún meeting, a significant emissions gap exists between what is being promised by countries and what is needed to keep the rise in global temperature below two degrees Celsius, let alone move towards the 1.5-degree threshold needed to protect low-lying island states.
Despite some gains, that gap – which, under the most optimistic scenario, amounts to the combined emissions of all the world’s cars, buses, and trucks – remains firmly in place post-Cancún.
Indeed, no one should underestimate the magnitude of the challenge now facing South Africa, the host of next year’s talks, in terms of midwifing a new legally binding agreement to bridge this gap and securing the finance needed to bring the Green Fund into operation.
Yet, while the official summit in Cancún struggled to a conclusion, an unofficial one being held a few minutes away also concluded.
This parallel summit brought together progressive heads of state, regional and local government, business, and civil society, and underscored just how far and how fast some sectors of society will make the transition to a low-carbon future and build the green and clean-tech economies of the twenty-first century.
Calderón’s policies echo this momentum: by some estimates, he is transforming his country into the world’s fastest-growing wind-power market.
Moreover, Mexico will also phase out old, inefficient light bulbs by 2014.
And it has just retired 850,000 inefficient household refrigerators in favor of modern, energy-efficient models, with millions more earmarked over the coming years.
Mexican homeowners who install energy-saving systems such as solar water heaters are becoming eligible for lower-rate “green mortgages.”
Mexico is not alone in adopting a national strategy for the transition to a low-carbon, resource-efficient green economy.
Uruguay, for example, announced a strategy to generate half its electricity from renewable sources by 2015.
Sixty regional and local governments, responsible for 15% of global greenhouse-gas emissions, are also taking action.
Québec and São Paolo, to cite just two examples, are aiming for cuts of 20% below 1990 levels by 2020.
Big companies, from banks to airlines, are contributing as well.
The US retailer Wal-Mart, for example, plans to cut emissions equivalent to 3.8 million cars, in part by implementing energy-efficiency measures at its Chinese stores.
Indeed, the world is witnessing an extraordinary mobilization of national-level projects and policies that are shifting economies onto a low-carbon path.
In Kenya, a new feed-in tariff is triggering an expansion of wind and geothermal power.
Indonesia is not only addressing deforestation, but will begin phasing out fossil-fuel subsidies for private cars next month.
Many countries and companies are forging ahead, signaling a determination not to be held hostage by the slowest at the official negotiating table.
All this may lead some to wonder why time-consuming international negotiations and UN climate summits are needed at all.
But the fact is that this groundswell has in large part been catalyzed by the existing targets, timetables, and innovative mechanisms of the UN climate treaties, and not least by the momentum generated around the often-criticized 2009 Copenhagen summit.
This momentum would continue to grow with a new global treaty that not only brings certainty to carbon markets and triggers accelerated investments in clean-tech industries, but that also ensures that more vulnerable countries are not marginalized.
The challenge today is to unite these goals in a mutually reinforcing way.
Only then will the world have a fighting chance to keep the global temperature rise in this century under two degrees, build resilience against a changed climate, and truly transform the energy structures of the past – and thus the development prospects for six billion people in the future.
Make Your Own Silicon Valley
SEATTLE – California may be the world’s largest and best-known technology hub, but it is not alone in fostering innovative startups.
In fact, such firms are emerging – almost unnoticed – everywhere, from Asian megalopolises like Singapore and Shanghai to small European cities like Espoo in Finland and Dwingeloo in the Netherlands.
Many international startups – including Sweden’s Spotify, Estonia’s Skype, Israel’s Waze – and, most recently, China’s Alibaba – have gained billion-dollar valuations.
Clearly, the key features of Silicon Valley that foster innovation and entrepreneurship – a dense concentration of human talent, a competitive spirit, easy access to capital, and a supportive regulatory environment – can be replicated in and adapted to a wide variety of contexts.
Indeed, these pillars of creativity and progress have been erected even in countries whose economies, politics, and cultures diverge sharply from those of the United States.
Of course, not every country approaches innovation in the same way.
Finland, for example, owes its dynamic computer-games cluster largely to a student-driven movement in higher education.
Though Rovio Entertainment’s release in 2009 of the popular video game Angry Birds catalyzed an innovation boom in Espoo, it is Aalto University – Finland’s equivalent of Stanford in California – that continues to fuel innovation in the area, by nurturing programmers, designers, and others with the necessary talents.
Aalto students also have launched Europe’s most dynamic startup conference, which will bring together more than 10,000 entrepreneurs and financiers this November.
Moreover, the university’s Startup Sauna seed-accelerator program helps promising early-stage startups take their first steps toward success.
Located on campus, the program’s facilities resemble colorful Google offices, but with a Finnish twist: video conference rooms have been built into sauna-like structures.
Since its establishment in 2010, 126 companies have graduated from Startup Sauna, having raised more than $37 million in funding.
Today, Finland boasts more than 200 gaming startups, which export 90% of their products.
According to Aalto, Finland’s gaming sector experienced 260% revenue growth in 2012-2013, adding 1,000 jobs and $1.5 billion in total value to the Finnish economy just last year.
In the Netherlands, the government has taken the lead in promoting innovative activities.
Two and a half years ago, the Dutch government teamed up with IBM and a group of small and medium-size local businesses to jumpstart a big-data hub in the far-northern village of Dwingeloo, home to the Netherlands Institute for Radio Astronomy.
Like Silicon Valley-based initiatives, the project unites academia, talent-rich local companies, and multinationals behind a common goal – in this case, to build the world’s largest radio telescope.
The device will process and analyze radioactive waves collected from two million individual antennae, enabling researchers to map the shape of the universe by (they hope) 2020.
IBM provides the processing power for the data, while local Dutch companies are building all of the components.
Beyond its own specific objectives, the initiative can help to catalyze a broader transformation of the Dutch tech culture.
Jan de Jeu, Vice President of the University of Groningen, anticipates experts in Dwingeloo and the northern Netherlands training more scientists and IT specialists in the fundamental challenges related to the storage, transfer, and analysis of enormous data sets, thereby creating what de Jeu calls “The Data Industry Valley.”
In Southeast Asia, Hong Kong benefits, first and foremost, from a business culture that is unencumbered by either red tape or corruption.
It takes about two days to set up a new business; taxes are low; and ample co-working spaces are available.
Furthermore, the government-funded Cyberport Incubation Program supports the development of Hong Kong’s information and communications technology industry by providing companies with start-up capital, access to advanced facilities, and training in entrepreneurship, technology, and business development.
As a result, the number of entrepreneurs has grown by 300% in the last three years.
For its part, Singapore is increasingly seeing the effects of a decade of regulatory reforms, including government grants and tax incentives to encourage foreign investment in the technology sector.
In 2002-2009, more than 11,000 startups were established.
Singapore’s social-media startup&nbsp;Bubble Motion (recently rebranded as Bubbly) generated more than 20 million users in its first two years – nearly double the number that Facebook or Twitter accrued in the same period in their history.
It counts influential Silicon Valley firms such&nbsp;as Sequoia Capital, Northgate Capital, and Comcast Ventures as investors.
On mainland China, Alibaba recently made history by raising $25 billion in the world’s largest initial public offering to date.
Company founder Jack Ma said that his ambition is to create a thriving “ecosystem” around the corporate headquarters in Hangzhou.
Alibaba employees, ex-employees, and stockholders already injected more than $6 billion in the local economy in 2013, with Zhejiang University and the Fudi Startup Incubator Centers (founded by a former Alibaba employee) encouraging frenetic startup activity.
California’s enclave of tech companies remains the crown jewel of entrepreneurial ecosystems.
But international innovators are increasingly recognizing that, as valuations in Silicon Valley soar, the real bargains for tech-savvy investors may be found outside of the US.
Socrates in Silicon Valley
LONDON – If Socrates’s gadfly was in Silicon Valley, it would have a lot of lazy horses to sting.
The citizens of the techno-polis appear oblivious to how the outside world’s perception of them has changed, and radically so.
Once universally revered as a hotbed of innovation, the world’s premier technology hub is increasingly viewed with suspicion and resentment.
Yes, Silicon Valley is still admired as a source of invention and creative destruction; but it is also widely viewed as having lost its ethical compass.
With proliferating reports of lax attitudes toward data privacy, wanton disregard for the dignity of the less fortunate, and a growing sense that technology companies are pushing their preferred policy agenda on the rest of the world, discontent and disillusion are rising.
Viewed from outside, the world sees companies that exude a sense of entitlement – for example, by flouting local regulations as they expand into cities around the world, from Berlin to Rio de Janeiro.
Supremely confident in the power of their knowledge and skills, they are convinced that they will guide the world onto the Path of Truth.
This overweening certitude is not new – the United States, after all, was founded on missionary zeal – but the ethical arrogance is.
Of course, not all technology companies should be tarred with the same brush as the main offenders.
But the recent spate of high-profile cases harms the reputation of the sector as a whole.
As the world looks to Silicon Valley and sees an echo chamber of self-righteous conceit, mature and law-abiding technology companies are assumed to be inside it, too.
The cases are becoming legion.
Uber, the data-abusing car-sharing app that spikes prices during peak demand and threatens journalists who write negatively about it, has been banned in Spain, the Netherlands, Thailand, and two Indian cities so far, including New Delhi (after a driver allegedly raped a passenger).
These reports follow the revelation that pictures shared on Snapchat may not be deleted, as promised.
In August, Brazilian authorities banned the social-networking app Secret after the company failed to respond to cyberbullying concerns, with Israel considering a similar move.
The list goes on.
Silicon Valley is risking a backlash that will not do anyone any good.
Its leaders are increasingly out of step with the public’s expectation of ethical and conscientious behavior.
If they fail to generate new ideas and devise novel approaches, their problems will only multiply further.
One thing that would help is fresh blood.
Much of Silicon Valley’s success stems from its tight networks – people who have been successful and support one another.
But history shows that the same structures can also choke off innovation.
Organizations, like species, become inbred and weak, and eventually perish, when they fail to embrace diversity.
Indeed, one of the most revealing facts to come to light about Silicon Valley in recent months is the extreme ethnic and gender imbalance at large technology companies, including Apple, Google, Facebook, and Twitter.
No one is shocked, but clearly something needs to change.
Somehow a place that prides itself on innovation and doing things differently should be doing this differently as well.
Above all, there is value in questioning and challenging the status quo.
Independence in thought and deed is vital for any company to function and to build things that last and contribute to economic growth and prosperity.
In Plato’s Apology, Socrates advocates for the examined life – the habit of rigorous self-reflection and posing hard, heterodox, and possibly upsetting questions.
The tech sector needs to embrace that credo.
Ironically, questioning prevailing wisdom – and thereby inventing radically new solutions – has been Silicon Valley’s modus operandi from the outset.
But it has followed this approach on a macro level and for problems elsewhere in the economy, without examining itself.
Silicon Valley’s citizens must start applying their skill at innovation – and their pride in “breaking things” – to themselves.
The only way to evolve is by adapting to new environmental pressures, and now Silicon Valley – owing in large part to its own behavior – is facing plenty of them.
Unless it changes, it will be overtaken.
The good news is that if any place has proved that it can innovate, it is Silicon Valley.
Now, however, its citizens must recognize that they do not have all the answers; unfortunately, so far at least, there seems to be no awareness among them that there is even a problem.
Like the “skilled craftsmen” described by Socrates, “on the strength of their technical proficiency, they claimed a perfect understanding of every other subject, however important.”
As Plato’s teacher knew – and as every fresh report of the tech sector’s abusive behavior should remind us – a little knowledge can be a dangerous thing.
Silicon Valley Everywhere
CAMBRIDGE – During the last decades of the twentieth century, Silicon Valley was the unparalleled epicenter of high-tech innovation.
Other regions tried to imitate its success, but none succeeded.
France’s Sophia Antipolis, a top-down attempt by the government to create an innovation hub near Cannes, never evolved beyond its origins as a relatively tranquil technology park – notwithstanding its mythological name, California-like weather, and the surrounding area’s unbeatable gastronomy.
In the twenty-first century, however, Silicon Valley’s competition has gotten fiercer – as reflected by the increasing number of locations affixing the chemical element to their names: Silicon Alley (New York), Silicon Wadi (Tel Aviv), Silicon Sentier (Paris), etc.
In London, for example, the emergence of Silicon Roundabout in the late 2000s caught the British government almost by surprise.
Now rebranded Tech City, the innovation hub in the old Shoreditch neighborhood has evolved into one of London’s key economic engines and talent magnets.
Similar scripts are playing out around the world.
In Berlin, a new startup is said to be founded every 20 minutes.
Paris is busy building what will be Europe’s largest incubator at Halle Freyssinet.
And in Tel Aviv, the phrase “Startup Nation” has gone from a political slogan to economic reality.
For the first time, “unicorns” (startups that reach a valuation of more than $1 billion) are no longer the exclusive preserve of the United States – a reality that would have been unthinkable only a few years ago.
A bright generation of global youth – from Mumbai to Prague to Kenya to Singapore – is betting on innovation, and American venture capital funds, sustained by access to cheap financing, are sating their investment appetites overseas.
There are several factors behind this phenomenon.
In a globalized world, capital flows have accelerated and extended their reach.
Innovators around the world are able to muster support from traditional venture capitalists or from crowd-funding platforms such as Kickstarter.
Ideas move even faster – propelled, sustained, and strengthened by the Internet.
And the ability to turn them into reality is keeping pace, as global supply chains and new technologies like 3D printing reduce implementation times.
Meanwhile, the Great Recession that followed the 2008 global financial crisis has disrupted traditional industries, while creating a large surplus of creative talent and affordable workspaces.
As a highly mobile, well educated, risk-taking workforce converges on urban hubs, the excitement of city life, coupled with the availability of co-working spaces and a variety of supporting mechanisms, helps to sustain innovative momentum.
Former New York City Mayor Michael Bloomberg provided what is perhaps the pithiest summary of the attraction of urban life.
Similar policies are now being implemented in many urban areas, in order to attract a critical mass of creative, technologically savvy people.
Cities, as a recent World Economic Forum report highlights, are rapidly becoming not just drivers of innovation, but also testing grounds for new technologies, such as reprogrammable space, self-driving mobility, urban farming, and intelligent street lighting.
Meanwhile, vehicle-hailing apps like Uber and apartment-sharing platforms like Airbnb are demonstrating how cities have become some of the most fertile environments for technological development.
That is yet another reason why many new startups are putting down roots in urban centers.
Most likely, this proliferation of innovation is just the beginning.
As the Internet continues its penetration of all aspects of our lives, we are entering what the computer scientist Mark Weiser has called the era of “ubiquitous computing” – a time when technology is so prevalent that it “recedes into the background of our lives.”
Before long, the digital world and the physical world will be indistinguishable.
The era of “Silicon Everywhere” is upon us – and it is taking shape in the world’s cities.
Depression’s Psychedelic Solution?
ZURICH – According to the World Health Organization, depression affects an estimated 350 million people worldwide, making it one of the most prevalent psychiatric conditions.
But only about half of those who try antidepressant drugs respond to them, and those who do may have to wait several weeks or even months before experiencing relief – a critical failing for people at immediate risk of suicide.
Fast-acting antidepressants are thus urgently needed.
Ketamine – a drug primarily used as an anesthetic in veterinary medicine and as a short-term anesthetic and analgesic in hospitals during surgery or other painful procedures – is currently the rising star of depression research.
It appears to ease depression’s most severe symptoms within minutes or hours, even in patients who have a dismal track record with other treatments.
In the first controlled study, researchers reported a 50% decline in symptoms of depression within two hours of a ketamine infusion, and one-third of patients were virtually symptom-free within a day.
Moreover, patients reported diminished thoughts of suicide a mere 40 minutes after receiving an intravenous infusion of the drug.
In some patients, the effects of a single dose can last more than a week.
Clinicians are not alone in studying ketamine’s potential.
Neuroscientists have hailed it as the first breakthrough in depression-drug research in 50 years.
Unlike conventional antidepressants – which are used to elevate concentrations of the neurotransmitters serotonin, dopamine, or noradrenaline – ketamine influences the glutamate system.
Glutamate, the major excitatory neurotransmitter, plays a central role in mediating nearly all forms of brain function, including learning, memory, cognition, and emotion.
By blocking glutamate from binding to the NMDA receptor, ketamine leads to an augmented glutamate release, which activates other types of glutamate receptors and enhances the function and density of synapses (the junctions between neurons) in areas of the brain where stress or depression has caused cells to atrophy.
Increased synaptic plasticity – the ability of synapses to adjust their strength, which is essential to healthy brain function – could be the neurobiological reason for the apparent therapeutic effect in patients.
But, though ketamine’s promise has stirred excitement among clinicians and neuroscientists, it has also sparked controversy, owing to the drug’s potentially harmful side effects.
Depending on the dose, a patient may experience altered physical, spatial, and temporal states; larger quantities may induce hallucinations and dissolution of the self.
Intriguingly, ketamine’s psychoactive properties may be responsible for its mood-enhancing effect.
Psychedelic and psycholytic treatments – popular in the 1960’s and 1970’s, before research was severely restricted and interest in the clinical use of psychedelics faded – were based on the notion that the drug-induced psychological experience was essential to facilitating the psychotherapeutic process.
According to this view, the altered state of consciousness produced by ketamine – particularly the dissolution of the self’s boundaries and the experience of union with the world – might constitute a profound and meaningful experience for a patient.
Integrating this experience into the psychotherapeutic process might facilitate subsequent behavioral changes.
In other words, drugs like ketamine that quickly increase neuroplasticity might be particularly clinically efficient in combination with psychotherapeutic interventions.
Unfortunately, research on ketamine addicts and those who take it in large doses as a party drug has revealed that its use may lead to learning and perception problems, as well as memory disorders.
Another concern is that ketamine’s benefits may be relatively fleeting.
As a result, ketamine may never develop into an accepted treatment for depression in its current form.
In fact, ketamine’s future as a therapy for depression would be uncertain even if its efficacy were more strongly established.
Because ketamine has been available for decades, there is no patent for it, so pharmaceutical companies have little financial incentive to carry out research on the drug and seek approval for its use as an antidepressant.
Nonetheless, research on ketamine’s chemistry might help to identify mechanisms for addressing treatment-resistant depression that are based on glutamate-driven neuroplasticity.
Indeed, pharmaceutical companies have already begun to investigate other NMDA-receptor antagonists, together with drugs that act on a different part of the glutamate system, as possible treatments for depression.
This research could eventually lead to an entirely new class of antidepressant – and relief for millions of people worldwide.
Financial Regulators’ Fine Mess
WASHINGTON, DC – When an athlete breaks the rules, it is easy to figure out whether the relevant disciplinary body really wants to discourage repeat offenses.
Suspending a player from the sport – as happens in soccer in the case of dangerous fouls – is a real punishment, not only for the individual but also for the team.
Consider the case of Michael Clarke, the captain of the Australian cricket team, who recently threatened bodily harm to an opposing player.
Despite public hand-wringing, Cricket Australia (the governing body) imposed only a small fine (that is, small relative to Clarke’s annual salary).
Whether or not this was appropriate, Cricket Australia was making it clear that such behavior merited only a symbolic punishment.
The recent $13 billion settlement between the US Department of Justice and JPMorgan Chase (JPM), one of the world’s largest international banks, should be viewed the same way.
To the uninitiated, the fine appears significant (which explains all the attention-grabbing headlines), and it certainly has made America’s financial regulators look busy and serious.
But, just like Cricket Australia, the message is clear: There will be no change to business as usual.
JPM was accused of a wide range of illegal activities, including misrepresenting securities to investors and much more.
Better Markets, a pro-financial-reform group, points out that what we know about the settlement suggests that it is largely meaningless. As Dennis Kelleher, head of Better Markets, put it,
“Rather than throwing the book at [JPM] and its executives, the Department of Justice called off a press conference and stopped a lawsuit because the bank’s high profile, politically-connected CEO, Jamie Dimon, personally called the Attorney General and asked him to do so.”
The way in which the settlement was worked out should also give us pause – with Dimon having direct access to US Attorney General Eric Holder, America’s top law-enforcement official.
“Few if any Americans have the ability to even get the AG on the phone,” Kelleher reminds us, “much less the power to get him to stop him from filing a lawsuit that would have revealed to the public the details of JPMorgan’s alleged illegal conduct.”
As a result, we will not learn exactly what was alleged in the case against JPM, including the evidence used.
The level of public scrutiny and concern will subside.
But at least JPM must pay a high price to make the entire matter disappear, right?
Well, no.
A $13 billion “fine” for a company the size of JPM is about as painful as Clarke’s fine is for him – not painful at all.
Clarke earns about $6 million (Australian dollars) per year; in addition to an annual retainer, he receives a $14,000 match fee for every international test match, along with other tour fees and bonuses.
He was fined 20% of the international match fee ($2,800), or about 0.05% of his annual salary.
For anyone with an annual income of $50,000 (which is close to the median for US households), this would be equivalent to a fine of $25.
JPM has a total balance sheet of around $4 trillion, measured using international accounting standards.
As management told shareholders after the settlement was announced, “the Firm is appropriately reserved for all of these matters,” meaning that there would be no material impact on earnings.
And, predictably, “the Firm did not admit any violations of law.”
In fact, while Clark’s paltry fine presumably at least comes out of his own pocket, the penalty levied on JPM is to be paid largely by its shareholders.
And, because there is no market for corporate control over megabanks (because protections provided by regulators prevent hostile takeovers or effective shareholder activism), frustration on the part of JPM’s investors cannot result in a change of management.
But, again, JPM’s shareholders have little cause for concern.
Marianne Lake, JP Morgan’s chief financial officer, has suggested that about $7 billion of the fine is likely to be tax deductible, that is, treated as a form of necessary and usual business expense.
The bank was taxed at an effective rate of 31.3% in the first nine months of 2013, according to the Wall Street Journal, implying a tax break worth around $2.2 billion (which could end up higher).
While JPM is now off the hook, holding individual employees personally accountable for their behavior is still an option.
But no one should hold their breath.
The chances that anyone will be suspended from the industry are minimal, and the impact on management is likely to be nil.
Kelleher sent a forceful letter to Holder, urging full disclosure of all relevant details in the case – and there are many.
Americans owe it to themselves to read it and recommend it to their elected representatives.
Kelleher concludes, “Equal justice for all without fear or favor is the bedrock of our democracy and, indeed, our country.”
Unfortunately, the Department of Justice still seems to believe that very large companies deserve special access and special treatment.
The Temptation of the Central Bankers
WASHINGTON, DC – The banking system has become most central bankers’ Achilles’ heel.
This may seem paradoxical – after all, the word “bank” is in their job description.
But most people currently at the top of our central banks built their careers during the 1980’s and 1990’s, when the threat of inflation was still very real, so this – rather than bank regulation and supervision – remains a major focus of their intellectual and practical concerns.
Moreover, a formative experience for many central bankers over the past half-decade has been the need to prevent a potential collapse of output, including by preventing prices from falling.
They have achieved this goal largely by propping up credit, regardless of what that may do to the banking sector’s structure or incentives.
It is not surprising that today’s central bankers continue to be deferential to those who run large private-sector banks.
Central banks have a great deal of control over an economy’s money supply, and they can affect interest rates across a wide range of loans and securities.
But private-sector banks do the lending, while also bearing responsibility for important dimensions of how financial markets operate.
Thus, keeping global megabanks in business and highly profitable has become a key objective for policymakers in the United States, Europe, and many other countries.
All too often, however, this means that central bankers defer to these firms’ executives.
José De Gregorio, the governor of the Central Bank of Chile from 2007 to 2011, is an important exception.
In How Latin America Weathered the Global Financial Crisis, he combines recent history and personal insight to offer a fascinating account of how to apply a more balanced policy approach – both in emerging markets and more broadly.
(De Gregorio’s book is published by the Peterson Institute for International Economics, where I am a senior fellow, though I was not involved in commissioning or editing his work.)
There is plenty of conventional macroeconomics in De Gregorio’s story, including the value of careful fiscal policy and the advantage of maintaining a flexible exchange rate guided largely by supply and demand in the market.
When countries seem committed to a fixed exchange rate (say, relative to the US dollar), firms and individuals feel encouraged to borrow in foreign currency (like the dollar) in order to lock in what are typically lower interest rates.
But such a perception can easily become a trap.
When capital flows out of the country – as is happening now in some emerging markets – it may be helpful if the central bank allows the currency to depreciate in an effort to boost exports and reduce imports.
But if the country’s borrowers have a lot of dollar-denominated debt, depreciation can be ruinous.
De Gregorio covers all of these issues very well – and also discusses the importance of luck.
Chinese growth remained relatively strong in 2009 and after, which kept the price of commodities high.
This benefited Chile – a major copper producer – and much of Latin America.
But De Gregorio’s analysis of banking is what really stands out.
Here the key issue is leverage, or how much banks are allowed to borrow relative to their equity, and the temptation that policymakers face to allow banks to borrow more, particularly when times are good and asset prices are rising.
Big banks’ executives often want to increase their institutions’ leverage, typically because they have various forms of guarantee – in particular, deposit insurance and access to central-bank financing on advantageous terms.
In addition, the executives’ pay is typically based on return on equity, unadjusted for risk.
The danger for central banks stems from the fact that the implicit subsidies provided to major financial institutions are not measured in any budget.
Moreover, the build-up of risk in the financial system that accompanies higher leverage is both hard to measure and likely to materialize only after a few years (for example, after a governor’s term of office has expired).
De Gregorio’s views differ from those of many of his colleagues in other countries, because he sees clearly the risks in allowing banks to become bigger and apply what he calls “clever” strategies that require a great deal of leverage.
Higher leverage creates macroeconomic risk – not least for fiscal balances when implicit guarantees must be honored.
By keeping banks and other private-sector firms at lower levels of debt, vulnerability to shocks is reduced.
In a boom, this may seem irrelevant; but, as De Gregorio knows, pressure on emerging markets – and richer countries – arises all too often, and frequently at unexpected moments.
Growth based on high leverage typically proves to be illusory.
And yet the illusion continues to entice policymakers.
That is why De Gregorio’s book should be required reading for all central bankers.
The Fed in Denial
WASHINGTON, DC – The United States Federal Reserve System is one of the most powerful governmental organizations in the history of the world.
America’s central bank has control over the supply of dollars, and currently exerts great influence over interest rates, both for short-term and long-term borrowing.
And, though the Fed was partly responsible for the regulatory failures that led to the global economy’s near-meltdown in 2008-2009, post-crisis reform has left it with even greater authority and more responsibility for overseeing the financial system.
That is a worrying outcome, because senior Fed officials seem to have slipped back into their pre-2008 ways, ignoring concerns about dangerous financial-sector behavior – even when those concerns are expressed by members of the US Senate Banking Committee.
This is not only unfortunate; it is also dangerous, because the Fed’s political position is much more precarious than its leadership seems to realize.
In many countries, people on the right of the political spectrum provide a bastion of support for the central bank.
In northern Europe, for example, the European Central Bank’s independence is seen as essential for price stability – and politicians on the right typically attach a higher priority to this goal.
The situation is quite different in the US.
Here, the right, represented by the Republican Party, has long been suspicious of the Fed, reflecting its opposition to a powerful federal government, as well as nostalgia for the days of the gold standard (particularly the version that operated before the Fed was created in 1913).
The Fed as it currently operates is being protected by the left (the Democratic Party).
For example, I recently testified at a hearing of the House Financial Services Committee on Republican-proposed legislation that would impose on the Fed greater limitations on both monetary policy and regulation.
House Democrats oppose the bill and invited me to the hearing, where I explained that the proposed constraints would, in my view, greatly hamper the Fed’s effectiveness – including its ability to help the economy return to full employment and to prevent the financial system from spinning out of control again.
Under current circumstances, the Democrats are strong enough – with control of the Senate and of the presidency – to fend off these assaults.
Consequently, senior Fed and White House officials seem rather confident that nothing dramatic will happen that would undermine the Fed’s independence.
I would not be so sure.
The main problem is that the Fed has not moved with alacrity to implement fully key provisions of the Dodd-Frank financial reforms, which were passed in 2010.
For example, the Dodd-Frank legislation specifies that all large financial institutions should draw up meaningful “living wills” – specifying how they could be allowed to fail, unencumbered by any kind of bailout, if they again became insolvent.
Creating such living wills is not an option; it is a requirement of the law.
Yet, in a recent speech that reviewed the landscape of financial reform, Fed Vice Chairman Stanley Fischer skipped over the requirement almost completely.
Fischer appears to prefer to rely on the resolution powers of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, which is empowered to takeover failing financial institutions, with the expectation that it will impose losses on creditors in such a way that will not cause global panic.
(I am on the FDIC’s systemic resolution advisory committee, but I am not responsible for the agency’s plans or potential actions.)
Unfortunately, as currently constructed, these resolution powers are unlikely to work.
They do not apply across borders, there is not enough loss-absorbing capital in large complex financial institutions, and the funding structure of big bank holding companies remains precarious.
Senior Fed officials emphasize that big banks fund themselves with more equity now than they did in the past.
But the Global Capital Index constructed by Thomas Hoenig, the FDIC’s vice chairman, indicates that the largest US banks are still 95% debt-financed.
With that much leverage, it does not take a lot to create fear of insolvency.
Yet, despite repeated and responsible expressions of concern – including from Senate Democrats – the Fed continues to ignore these profound problems.
If anything, in his most recent speech, Fischer seemed to brush aside any such fears – assuring his audience that there is great social value in continuing to have extremely large financial firms that operate with so very little equity capital (and therefore a great deal of leverage).
This is more than disappointing.
It is profoundly dangerous to the economy. And it imperils the Fed’s future ability to take action as needed.
In recent interviews, including with The New Yorker, Fed Chair Janet Yellen has indicated at least general concerns about financial-sector behavior and the vulnerability of big banks.
But unless the Fed acts on such concerns – including by implementing the requirement that large financial institutions adopt meaningful living wills – its independence will come under even greater pressure.
Are China’s Banks Next?
WASHINGTON, DC – America’s recent bout of dysfunctional politics and the eurozone’s on-again, off-again crisis should, on the face of it, present a golden opportunity to China.
To be sure, the malaise in the United States and Europe is likely to hurt Chinese exports; but, over the long term, China wants to reorient its economy toward domestic consumption.
With the Tea Party wing of America’s Republican Party scaring investors out of the dollar, interest in the Chinese renminbi’s potential as an international reserve currency can only increase.
This will help China to attract more investors seeking to diversify their portfolios.
Chinese government debt will become an important global benchmark asset, which should help its private sector to attract funding on reasonable terms, while the predominance of the US Federal Reserve in determining worldwide monetary conditions would presumably diminish.
The decades-old shift to a multipolar world for manufacturing could thus lead to a more multipolar currency world, with the renminbi as an important player.
But, despite its unique history and current advantages, China harbors a weakness that is quite similar to what has caused so much trouble in the US and Europe: big banks that have an incentive not to be careful.
China’s latest moves suggest that while it may now enjoy some years of greater prominence, its encouragement of its financial institutions to go global is likely to lead to serious trouble.
Ironically, the British government, while no doubt just trying to be hospitable to foreign investors by laying out a red carpet, is helping to set a trap for Chinese financial institutions – and the broader Chinese economy.
By encouraging China to build global financial institutions with light regulation, the United Kingdom is not just inviting irresponsible behavior; it could help to pull an entire economy toward ultimately unproductive and even self-destructive activities.
China has long kept tight control over its main banks.
Credit policies have helped to juice the economy from time to time, but the authorities have also retained the ability to slow things down when warranted.
Banking has become an instrument of economic policy to ensure GDP growth and employment creation, while keeping inflation at an acceptable level.
But the Chinese policy elite are also very taken with the idea that a first-rank country needs a prominent banking system that is active internationally.
There is nothing wrong with this ambition, as long as it is handled with great caution.
Unfortunately, it is now becoming clear that the hard lessons of recent financial crises have been lost on China.
Bankers never like tight regulation – and they particularly do not appreciate being required to fund their operations with more equity relative to debt.
In both good times and bad, their refrain is, “We need lower capital requirements,” meaning they should be allowed to borrow more.
Iceland, Switzerland, and the UK have all learned the hard way that allowing banks to become big relative to their economies brings with it great risks.
Bailouts become more expensive and – as in the case of Iceland – may actually be unaffordable.
Even when, as in the UK, the cost of losses is not completely ruinous, the direct damage to domestic credit and to broader confidence can be enough to hold back the economy for a half-decade or more.
Mervyn King, the former governor of the Bank of England (BoE), is reported to have said, “Banks live globally and die locally.”
In other words, when everything is going well, you may be willing to believe that it does not matter where a particular international bank gets its equity funding and in which jurisdiction its debts are issued.
But when bad things happen and there is pressure on financial markets, with fear of insolvency in the air, it matters a great deal if you have a claim on an insured bank in the United States or on an essentially unregulated offshore subsidiary.
China wants to build up its banks’ international operations.
And the British are welcoming an expansion of these activities in London – offering to treat Chinese banks operating there as branches (subject to Chinese regulation) rather than as subsidiaries (subject to British regulation).
Mark Carney, King’s successor at the BoE, said, “We are open for business,” in terms of providing liquidity loans to backstop big banks.
But UK banks’ assets amounted to eight times the country’s GDP before the crisis and will presumably approach that level again with Carney’s encouragement.
Can the BoE – and the UK Treasury – really provide downside insurance for this full amount, or are the UK authorities set on the path to becoming another Iceland (where the value of bank assets peaked at more than 11 times the country’s GDP)?
The Chinese authorities should take another look at their policies.
China is like Cinderella – finally allowed to attend the ball and given a chance to become a prominent player.
But midnight could come very quickly, and financial crises do not have fairytale endings.
The Future of the Captured State
WASHINGTON, DC – Concerns about state capture are nothing new.
Special interests hold undue sway over official decision-makers in many countries, and regulators are always prone to see the world through the eyes of the people whose activities they are supposed to oversee.
But the rise of finance in industrialized countries has cast these issues in a new, much harsher light.
Before 1939, wages and profits in the financial sector in the United States amounted to less than 1% of GDP; now they stand at 7-8% of GDP.
In recent decades, financial assets have expanded dramatically relative to any measure of economic activity, as life expectancy increased and the post-WWII baby boomers began to think about saving for retirement.
Compared to the size of the US economy, individual banks are now much bigger than they were in the early 1990’s.
(The precise numbers are different in other industrialized countries, but the rise of finance is a general phenomenon.)
The global financial crisis of 2007-2008 and the deep recession that resulted made it plain to see that the financial sector in the US and elsewhere had become too powerful.
Since the 1980’s, a form of “cognitive capture” had occurred, with policymakers becoming convinced that innovation and deregulation could only improve the functioning of both financial intermediation and the broader economy.
The crisis proved this view completely wrong, imposing massive costs – measured in terms of jobs lost, lives disrupted, and increased hardship – on millions of people.
Financial regulation entered a new, much more contested phase in 2010 – at least in the US.
Most officials now concede the existence of systemic risk as a form of “pollution,” meaning that banks and other financial firms do not necessarily internalize the full costs of their structures and activities.
And these costs can be huge – potentially large enough, despite recent reform attempts, to cause Great Depression II (or worse).
Operating big financial firms with small amounts of equity capital and a lot of debt may be in the interest of their managers, but it is definitely not in the interest of the rest of society.
Moreover, providing large implicit subsidies to firms that are too big to fail should not be an attractive policy, because it encourages such firms to take on excessive risk (and to become even bigger).
And yet debate about these issues has remained wide open.
The question is no longer so much one of beliefs.
Now it is simply about money – particularly campaign contributions, but also the revolving door between Washington and Wall Street, as well as the vast pro-megabank interests that pour millions of dollars into think tanks and other, more shadowy organizations.
The Oscar-winning documentary Inside Job raised some sensitivities and led to increased disclosures by some people, including academics, concerning their involvement with the financial industry.
But there remain profound monetary ties between big banks and people who purport to be independent analysts providing expert opinions.
Some officials remain highly captured.
But there is also good news: Other officials are now much more resistant and inclined to push back against the industry.
Well-informed nonpartisan outsiders are increasingly well organized and influential, particularly when they can work closely with pro-reform officials.
The latest indications from the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve – a crucial piece of this puzzle – are encouraging.
For example, new rules for foreign banks operating in the US essentially require them to fund themselves with as much equity as US banks.
But, on the eve of a new presidential campaign, the struggle over this important precinct of the American state remains far from over.
With the exception of the United Kingdom, the extreme free-market view gained less traction in Europe in recent decades than it did in the US; nonetheless, the challenge of implementing financial reforms in the eurozone is actually more difficult.
Governments regard domestic banks as important buyers of sovereign debt.
The banks argue that more effective regulation would limit credit and slow the pace of economic recovery.
As a result, the authorities in Germany and France (as well as Japan) have consistently resisted increasing capital requirements, despite widespread agreement that doing so is an essential part of effective re-regulation.
Their opposition has undermined international efforts to build a more resilient system – and it will likely hamper efforts to put the European economy on a sounder footing.
In other words, key European states remain just as captured by financial interests as the American state ever was.
And the big American banks now want to use the slow pace of change in Europe as a brake on US policy (for example, through the ongoing free-trade negotiations between the European Union and the US).
If the US is to escape the consequences of government capture by big Wall Street banks, it cannot wait for Europe to catch up on regulation, including capital requirements.
Taking Systemic Risk Seriously
WASHINGTON, DC – There are two leading views about the world’s financial system.
The first, heard mostly from executives at leading global banks and their allies, is that the system is safer than it has ever been.
According to this view, the events that led up to the global financial crisis that erupted in 2008 cannot happen again; the reform process has succeeded.
By contrast, a growing group of current and former officials continues to express concern about current and potential future risks in the United States, Europe, and globally.
US Treasury Secretary Jack Lew made such an argument in a recent congressional testimony, in the context of explaining why the Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC) should be allowed to consider whether any kind of firm or activity could pose a risk to the broader system.
And a striking new voice has joined the fray – Kara Stein, a commissioner at the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC).
Stein delivered a far-reaching speech in June, in which she argued that systemic risk must become a more central responsibility for financial-market regulators.
Systemic risk refers to problems that spill across different kinds of firms and markets, often in unexpected ways and sometimes very quickly.
Perhaps the most prominent example from 2008 is the way that the failure of the investment bank Lehman Brothers risked brining about the imminent collapse of the insurer AIG, while also leading to intense pressure on money-market mutual funds.
Jeremy Stein (no relation to Kara Stein), until recently a governor of the US Federal Reserve System, has suggested that forced “fire sales” of assets are one important way that risks are transmitted.
When asset prices fall as a result of such selling, the solvency of other firms can be affected – even if the creditworthiness of the underlying asset has not really changed.
Bank regulators are starting to take these issues more seriously – an encouraging change from the 1990s and early 2000s, when the Fed was among the cheerleaders for unfettered financial innovation, without adequate consideration for systemic risk.
But securities regulators also need to start thinking along the same lines – and this is where Kara Stein wants them to go.
For example, the SEC has traditionally thought about adequate equity capital in a regulated business, primarily as the amount needed to help compensate customers in the event that individual firms fail.
But it would be much better, as Stein suggests, to think about equity capital from a systemic perspective – that is, how much loss-absorption is needed to prevent some form of a cascading confidence crisis.
Similarly, regulators should start to think about how and when the structure of particular financial transactions creates a potential systemic risk.
For example, short-term funding markets involve the supposedly safe business of borrowing against the collateral of tradable securities, which is a mainstay of how broker-dealers finance themselves.
Unfortunately, as we discovered during the financial crisis, such markets can become less liquid or even dry up completely when lenders start to fear unforeseen problems, either with borrowers or with the assets that they pledge as collateral.
The systemic risks in this case do not necessarily lie with an individual firm; rather, the issue is the way in which a particular market has come to operate.
Stein has some detailed and credible ideas about how to make such operations less risky for the system as a whole.
More broadly, however, her point is that we need the FSOC to be able to do its job – to look for and assess all kinds of potential systemic risks.
This needs to be done as a technical matter, not as part of the political process.
Not everyone at the SEC is as sensible as Stein.
There is also some friction among the various regulators in the US, and we surely need more coordination across national borders – including with Europe.
But the real danger is that powerful lobbies, working through members of Congress, are pushing back hard against the FSOC and its mandate.
No one likes scrutiny, of course.
And everyone in the asset-management industry seems to fear being put under the Fed’s microscope, which is what happens if the FSOC determines that a business is systemically important.
The nature of externalities means that financial firms do not care about the costs that they may create for others.