We want to feel good right now.
And that is precisely the sentiment to which democratically elected politicians will cater.
The future will take care of itself.
There is something to be said for this attitude.
The kind of politics that imposes sacrifices for the sake of future utopias has caused immense human suffering in the service of a variety of impossible ideals.
Better, then, to stick to the here and now.
Yet postponing, for the sake of immediate gratification, a certain degree of planning for the future collective good can be as disastrous as indulging in utopian schemes.
Perhaps there are some non-utopian ways of transcending selfish interests and doing what is necessary.
For example, in various countries, voters have been tempted to elect business tycoons: enough with politicians bickering over selfish interests – let the can-do strongmen take charge and run countries like corporations.
Silvio Berlusconi was one such figure.
Mitt Romney, in a milder, less flamboyant manner, has appealed to these sentiments as well: he knew how to run an investment company, so why not the US federal government?
In practice, however, such tycoon politicians have their own interests and gratifications to pursue.
Berlusconi did indeed run Italy the way he runs his companies: like a private fiefdom, promoting cronies, intimidating critics, and paying people vast sums of money in exchange for their slavish devotion.
And, two years after the earthquake in L’Aquila in 2009, which killed hundreds of people, nothing much had been done to reconstruct the city, despite an initial flurry of publicity stunts showing Berlusconi, posing in a fireman’s hat, personally taking charge.
What about the more serious-minded technocrats who run the Leninist-capitalist People’s Republic of China?
The “Chinese model,” combining a capitalist economy with authoritarian government, has frequently been hailed as superior to the messy, dithering, compromising ways of liberal democracies.
With no need to concern themselves about elections, China’s leaders can afford to plan for the longer term and do what is necessary without being impeded by petty selfish interests or a carping press.
These arrangements have indeed made it possible for China to build entire cities in a matter of years, as well as high-speed railways, opera houses, stadiums, industrial parks, massive dams, and whatnot.
Many people have been lifted out of poverty, and those with the right political connections have become enormously rich.
But the lack of transparency in this type of autocracy has also led to massive corruption and huge blunders, not to mention the growing signs of ecological ruin.
Chinese critics of the government, or even those who simply wish to report mistakes or wrongdoing, are silenced with a heavy hand: beatings in police stations, draconian jail sentences, or even murder.
That is what happened to the parents who openly expressed their anger about the ill-constructed school buildings that collapsed in the 2008 Sichuan earthquake, killing their children.
The children died because corrupt local officials had allowed developers to enrich themselves by using inferior building materials.
Despite its flaws, a system in which elected officials are held publicly accountable and can be voted out of office is still preferable to rule by tycoons or technocrats.
And, sometimes, radical changes are made, even in democracies, though a severe crisis often is required to mobilize voters behind a collective push for essential reform, as was true of the Great Depression in the 1930’s, which led to Franklin Roosevelt’s New Deal.
Perhaps Hurricane Sandy will spur US citizens and politicians to take climate change seriously – and to implement public policies aimed at protecting America’s cities and coastlines.
If so, we can only hope that this crisis will not have come too late.
Democracy Begins At Home
The Bush administration has put expansion of democracy at the center of its foreign policy.
This is a far nobler calling than simply expanding American hegemony.
The question is, does Bush really mean it, and does he genuinely understand what democracy means?
The Bush administration praised Saudi Arabia’s municipal elections, but what about the rights of women—including their voting rights?
It welcomed (if it did not actively participate in) the toppling of Venezuela’s democratically elected leader, but it continues to support Pakistan’s military dictator.
It criticizes Russian President Vladimir Putin, but only after he goes against business interests.
And it may raise concerns about media concentration in Russia, but remains silent about media concentration in Italy.
There is a taint of hypocrisy in a more fundamental sense.
The Bush administration is right to emphasize the importance of elections, without which democracy is inconceivable.
But democracy entails more than periodic elections, and the legitimacy of elections depends on the public’s confidence in the electoral process itself.
In this respect, the last two American presidential elections have hardly been models for the world.
Former President Jimmy Carter, whose Atlanta center monitors elections around the globe, has raised questions about whether America’s recent election lives up to the standards the United States should uphold.
Where former President Bill Clinton sought to ensure that all Americans who are entitled to vote are registered to vote, the Republicans have tried to reverse these advances, putting obstacles in the way both of registration and voting.
Modern technology makes it easy to have a paper trail for voting machines, at little cost; yet several states chose not to provide this minimal safeguard.
Beyond elections, citizens can provide an effective check on government only if they are well informed.
That is why right-to-know laws are so important.
Of course, politicians prefer to work in secrecy, without oversight.
No one can imagine hiring a worker, but allowing him not to inform his employer about what he is doing on the job.
Politicians work for the citizenry, which has the right to know what their employees are doing.
Citizens have the right to know how their money is being spent and who is being consulted to form policy.
They have the right to know whether Enron and the oil companies are shaping energy policy.
They have the right to know why America, and the world, was misled by false claims about weapons of mass destruction in Iraq.
My research has focused on the consequences of asymmetries in information for the functioning of the economy.
But a lack of accurate information has equally, if not more, severe consequences for political processes.
The decision to go to war in Iraq is the most dramatic example of this, but there have been many others in America under Bush.
Providing drug benefits under Medicare, America’s health-care program for the aged, may have been the right decision.
But restricting government’s ability to bargain with the drug companies was a pure give-away, and nothing justifies providing grossly distorted information about the costs—now estimated to be in excess of 1.1 trillion over the next decade.
This is three times the amount original projected by the Bush administration.
Today, the Bush administration is engaged in a disinformation campaign about an impending social security crisis.
While something should be done, the magnitude of the problem hardly foreshadows a crisis.
On the contrary, the system could almost surely be put on a solid footing for the next 75 years with a fraction of what was spent on the 2001 and 2003 tax cuts.
Good information requires not just the right to know, but also the right to tell—a diversified media.
There are, as we noted, justified complaints about the lack of diversity in television broadcasting in Russia, yet Bush has not opposed efforts by America’s Federal Communications Commission to weaken laws on media concentration.
Democracy also requires recognizing the rights of individuals.
Undermining any individual’s rights jeopardizes everyone’s rights.
Yet under Bush, the US has undermined basic civil rights, such as habeas corpus, which guarantees individuals recourse to judicial review when the state detains them.
The extended detention of dozens of individuals in Guantanamo—without charge and without trial—is a basic abrogation of this right.
Fortunately, even if Bush does not understand such basic principles, America’s courts do, and they are now, albeit belatedly, forcing his administration to abide by them.
Finally, of what value is the right to vote without recognition of the right to a certain minimal standard of living, as enshrined in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights?
In countries where much of the population lives below subsistence level, buying votes is all too easy.
But the only economic rights the Bush administration recognizes are intellectual property rights, putting the interests of drug companies ahead of those with life threatening diseases, and the free mobility of capital, which has had such devastating effects on many countries.
America’s democracy remains the envy of much of the world, and it is good that the Bush administration now champions the expansion of democracy forcefully.
But the administration would be far more credible, and have far more success, if it took a closer look at home, if it examined its own practices more honestly, and if it engaged in a broader discussion of what democracy really means.
Democracy’s Broken Promises
SANTIAGO – Liberal democracy is under siege.
Populists of the right and left are not only lashing out at globalization or stagnating middle-class incomes; they are calling into question the legitimacy of the institutions of liberal democracy and of the political elites who manage those institutions.
It’s facile to blame the politics of post-truth practiced by populists.
Lies and exaggerations would not work if current democratic practice were without problems.
We must re-examine and, if possible, redress what the Italian democratic theorist Norberto Bobbio called the “broken promises of democracy.”
Anyone who has ever campaigned for office has heard voters’ familiar refrain: “We only see you politicians at election time.”
Politicians seem distant and untrustworthy, citizens tell pollsters.
Populists exploit that gap.
Modern democracy is representative.
When elected representatives spend more time in Parliament than they do interacting with citizens, they are not neglecting their duties; they are doing their job.
But the rhetoric of modern democracy claims otherwise: it emphasizes closeness to voters and their concerns.
When the contrast with reality is too glaring, political leaders’ credibility suffers.
In democratic systems, politicians are agents acting on a mandate from the principals (the voters).
And, as in economics, democracies’ principal-agent problem is a problem because the principal may not be able to distinguish capable agents from inept ones.
And agents may have interests of their own that clash with the principal’s.
As a result, citizens have plenty of reasons not to trust politicians.
Democracies endeavor to ensure by institutional means that the interests of politicians and voters are aligned.
In Britain, the constituencies that elect members of Parliament are relatively small, and in the United States, members of the House of Representatives must seek reelection every two years.
But these solutions are not without their own problems, including parochialism and the risk that the frequency of elections will make politicians beholden not to voters, but to the special interests that finance their campaigns.
Democratic politicians also try to persuade voters that their own interests are aligned with those of the electorate.
Such efforts can be healthy, as when officials disclose the sources of their campaign funds and possible conflicts of interest.
But they can also be unhealthy, as when candidates pander to voters’ fears and resentments.
Indeed, two fascinating recent papers by researchers at Harvard and MIT explain the emergence of populism in terms of politicians’ efforts to signal to voters that they are not beholden to powerful interests.
Thus, although populist policies reduce overall economic welfare, rational voters choose them because they are the price of distinguishing between different types of politicians.
As one of the papers puts it: “once leaders are not necessarily honest, it may be worth hiring those that are incompetent.”
Bobbio emphasizes that lack of trust in democratic politicians also arises from two additional difficulties.
One is that modern societies are pluralistic, with many interests vying to be represented; there is no general will for a politician to represent.
The other is that in a representative democracy there is no binding mandate for the elected politician to act in a certain way.
Once she is elected, it is up to her to decide what the good of society is and which policies will advance it.
The potential for conflict is obvious.
Even in the unlikely event that the interests a politician represents do not clash with one another, there will be no easy agreement about the best policies.
Worse, an able and honest politician may indeed choose the best policies; but, in an environment of imperfect information, she may be unable to persuade voters that she did the right thing.
Suppose that the goal is to create jobs, and that the politician chooses the best policy to achieve that goal.
Then, an external shock causes employment to fall.
Voters can never be sure of what the correct policy was, but they suspect the politician of exaggerating the size of the shock to explain away lost jobs.
All voters know is that they cannot get a job when they want one, and they blame the politician for this.
As societies become more complex and the difficulty of evaluating and choosing policies grows, so will the potential for this kind of tension.
Technocrats endowed with the knowledge needed to make complex policy decisions will rise in social importance but fall in public esteem.
Recall former UK justice minister Michael Gove’s remark in the midst of the Brexit debate: “people in this country have had enough of experts.”
Or, as Bobbio puts it, “technocracy and democracy are antithetical: if the expert is the protagonist of industrial society, this rules out a central role for ordinary citizens.”
Add one final complicating factor: technology vastly increases the speed at which citizens transmit multiple demands.
A town’s mayor will know almost instantly from Twitter and Facebook if rubbish is not collected from a street corner.
And yet modern checks and balances slow down any response.
Suppose the mayor wants to institute a new rubbish collection and disposal system. Detailed environmental impact assessments and lengthy citizen consultations will be required.
In the years that it will take for the new system to be up and running, rubbish will occasionally go uncollected, sharpening – almost by the day – the potential for conflict between what citizens expect and what democracy can deliver.
Perhaps the fault lies not only with the current practice of democracy, but also with the expectations raised by some of democracy’s advocates.
Democracy’s promises have indeed been broken.
“But,” Bobbio asks, “were they promises which really could have been fulfilled?
I would say no.”
The old Churchillian dictum may apply here: democracy is the worst system of government except for all the others.
Under modern representative democracy, people enjoy more personal freedom and more material prosperity than at any other time in human history.
We are closer than ever to fulfilling the values of liberty and dignity for all.
Are those not sufficiently powerful advertisements for liberal democracy?
Democracy Comes Second
Democracy is slowly spreading around the world.
From the Middle East to Latin America and Asia, many autocracies are taking gradual steps towards more democratic and accountable forms of government, or have become fully-fledged and well functioning democracies.
The US administration is determined to consolidate political freedoms in many developing countries under its sphere of influence; indeed, expansion of democracy has become a cornerstone of American foreign policy.
There are many reasons to celebrate the current democratic wave.
Democracy is associated with less injustice and abuse, with basic civic and political freedoms, and with greater sensitivity by governments for the true priorities of its citizens.
But how important is democracy for economic success?
Not much, the empirical evidence suggests.
This might appear surprising.
After all, is it not true that virtually all rich countries have democratic forms of government, while the poorest countries (mainly in Africa) are non-democracies?
Indeed, throughout the world, democracy is strongly correlated with higher per capita income.
But this correlation goes missing when one looks at the dimension of time rather than space.
Countries that become democracies do not, on average, achieve faster economic growth after their political transition; and, vice versa, democracies that fail and relapse into autocracy do not, on average, do worse than before.
The positive correlation between income and democracy that one sees across countries could be due to reverse causation: democracy is more likely to persist as a country grows richer.
It could also be due to special historical or cultural circumstances: some societies are just more successful than others, both in terms of economic development and with regard to their ability to develop and maintain democratic political institutions.
Whatever the reason for the observed positive cross-country correlation between income and democracy, it should not be confused with causality.
Being democratic does not seem important in securing economic success.
Of course, there are many different kinds of democratic transitions, and lumping them all together might be misleading.
An important distinction in practice concerns the interaction between the economic and the political system.
A democracy born in an open economic environment, with a well functioning market system, widespread foreign direct investment, and sizeable international trade, is likely to consolidate economic liberalism, stabilize expectations, and hence lead to more investment and faster growth.
Conversely, if an economy is tightly controlled by the state, has protectionist barriers against foreign imports and capital movements, or relies on rents from exhaustible resources to obtain foreign currency, transition to democracy can be plagued by populism and struggles for redistribution, hurting economic growth. 
Empirical evidence supports the idea that the success of a democracy depends on the openness of the underlying economic system at the time of political transition.
In the post-WWII period, the more successful episodes of democratic transitions have been preceded by widespread economic reforms that extended the scope of the market and facilitated international integration.
Examples include Chile and South Korea in the late 1980’s and Mexico in the mid-1990’s.
Conversely, when democratic transition was attempted in a fragile and closed economic environment, the outcome was much worse.
This applies to the episodes of democratization in Latin America and the Philippines in the mid-1980’s, but also to Turkey in the early 1980’s and Nepal in 1990.
The contrast between China and Russia also fits this pattern very well.
China first opened its economic system to the rest of the world, and only now is it thinking (a bit too slowly) about political reform.
Russia instead jumped into democracy, and only then worried about replacing socialism with a market system.
There was probably no other way to do it in Russia, but the Chinese path seems much more likely to lead to lasting economic success.
This does not mean that democracy is unimportant.
But the sequence of reforms is critical for successful economic development, with economic reforms coming first.
When an open and well functioning market system is in place, democracy has a much better chance to lead to lasting prosperity. 
An important reason for this is that, in order to create a successful market system, the state must respect basic individual rights: the rule of law, private property, and the enforcement of justice.
These fundamental rights are part and parcel of democratic government.
But when it comes to economic development, these fundamental rights are more important than other purely political aspects of democracy, such as universal suffrage and genuine political competition.
This is how the Western world became democratic in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries.
Economic liberalism came first, political liberalism later.
But today’s young democracies have to do everything much faster.
They don’t have the luxury of restricting suffrage to property owners, or to more educated citizens.
Nevertheless, we should remember the lessons of history.
Political reforms are more likely to be successful if they are preceded by economic reforms.
We should insist that Egypt or Pakistan improve their market system, apply the rule of law, and open their economies to international trade and capital movements.
Allowing free elections and true political competition is also critically important, but this should follow economic reforms, not precede them.
Democracy in Distress
PARIS – Is democratic time too slow to respond to crises, and too short to plan for the long term?
At a time of deepening economic and social crisis in many of the world’s rich democracies, that question is highly relevant.
In Italy, for example, Prime Minister Mario Monti has the necessary and legitimate ambition to carry out comprehensive reform.
He is both competent and honest, but faces a quasi-structural impediment: whereas leaders once had three years to convince voters of their policies’ benefits, they now have three hours to convince global financial markets to back their approach.
Caught between Italian legislators who, deep down, do not understand that change and markets in quest of near-immediate certainties, can Monti transcend his natural prudence and act with sufficient clarity and decisiveness?
In the United States, too, the political system is becoming increasingly dysfunctional.
The political philosopher Francis Fukuyama goes so far as to say that “vetocracy” could triumph over democracy, regardless of who wins the 2012 presidential election.
The separation of powers, a principle established by the US founders under the influence of philosophers such as Montesquieu, is leading today to near-paralysis.
Democracies suffer not only from their slow reaction time at moments of crisis, but also from the difficulty that they face in projecting themselves into the future and planning for the long term.
On both sides of the Atlantic, political leaders know what they must do for their countries, but don’t know how to get re-elected if they actually do it.
They seem to be structurally condemned to short-termism.
But it is not because democracies have a “time problem” that their era seems to some to be over.
China is rightly proud to be able to project itself into the twenty-second century.
But China owes that quality of long-term thinking much more to its culture than to the nature of its political system.
Chinese think long term because they are Chinese, not because they are not democrats.
China’s leaders can, of course, react to events without much regard for Chinese public opinion.
After all, the great majority of Chinese do not dream of democracy, even if something like a civil society is emerging, generating new interests and demands that can no longer be totally controlled or manipulated, as in the past.
But that is precisely the weakness of non-democratic regimes in a global age dominated by transparency: Who dreams of becoming a Chinese citizen, or even a citizen of Singapore?
In the aftermath of North Korea’s hereditary succession, strategic thinkers rightly emphasize China’s key role in shaping the peninsula’s future.
But, despite the scenes of hysteria that followed the death of the “Great Leader” Kim Jong-il, most North Koreans probably dream of joining democratic South Korea (even if many South Koreans fear that prospect).
The majority of Chinese may not want to be governed like Westerners, but it would be wrong to assume that their only ambition is to spend like Westerners.
The more successful they are, the more individualistic they will become and the more they will expect the respect and consideration of those who govern them.
By contrast, if China’s economic growth slows, which is likely in the coming years, protest against corruption – a source of fragility for any regime – will escalate.
Indeed, it is important to bear in mind that, ahead of the upcoming Chinese leadership transition, new occupants for only the top two posts have been chosen, and that through a process of gradual anointment by roughly a hundred people at most.
The current crisis in the advanced countries, which may very well lead to a global recession (if it is not already doing so), not only reveals the many maladies of democratic regimes, but also acts as their incubator and accelerator.
And yet the crisis may turn out to have an even greater impact on non-democratic systems that seem to be more efficient, but are in reality much more fragile.
We see this in mounting unrest in both Russia and China.
Contrary to what one might think, democracy is more resilient than the alternatives in the long run.
This will remain true as long as democrats remain convinced of it.
Non-democratic models cannot truly challenge democracy.
Only the misbehavior of democrats can do that.
Bring Back Egypt’s Elected Government
NEW YORK – Putting an end to Egypt’s deepening polarization and rising bloodshed requires one urgent first step: the reinstatement of Mohamed Morsi as Egypt’s duly elected president.
His removal by military coup was unjustified.
While it is true that millions of demonstrators opposed Morsi’s rule, even massive street protests do not constitute a valid case for a military coup in the name of the “people” when election results repeatedly say otherwise.
There is no doubt that Egyptian society is deeply divided along sectarian, ideological, class, and regional lines.
Yet the country has gone to the polls several times since the February 2011 overthrow of Mubarak’s 30-year rule.
The results have demonstrated strong popular support for Islamist parties and positions, though they also make clear the country’s schisms.
In late 2011 and early 2012, Egypt held parliamentary elections.
Morsi’s Freedom and Justice Party, created by the Muslim Brotherhood, secured a plurality, and the two major Islamist blocs together received roughly two-thirds of the vote.
In June 2012, Morsi defeated his rival Ahmed Shafik, Mubarak’s final prime minister, by a margin of 52-48% to win the presidency.
In a national referendum in December 2012, a 64% majority of those voting approved a draft constitution backed by the Muslim Brotherhood (though turnout was low).
The secular argument that Morsi’s lust for power jeopardized Egypt’s nascent democracy does not bear scrutiny.
Secular, military, and Mubarak-era foes of the Muslim Brotherhood have used every lever at their disposal, democratic or not, to block the Islamist parties’ democratic exercise of power.
This is consistent with a decades-old pattern in Egyptian history, in which the Brothers – and Islamist political forces in general – were outlawed, and their members imprisoned, tortured, and exiled.
Claims that Morsi ruled undemocratically stem from his repeated attempts to extricate the popularly elected parliament and presidency from anti-democratic traps set by the military.
After the Islamist parties’ huge victory in the 2011-2012 parliamentary elections, the military leadership and the Supreme Court (filled with Mubarak-era judges) worked to derail the new parliament and prevent it from establishing an assembly to draft a new constitution.
The key action came in June 2012, when the Supreme Court, staffed entirely with Mubarak-era holdovers, nullified the results of the parliamentary elections on specious grounds.
The military was set to reassert full legislative powers.
Morsi’s subsequent victory in the presidential election therefore set up an epic battle over the future of the parliament and the constitution, as Morsi attempted to protect the democratically elected parliament while the military fought to dissolve it.
In the end, Morsi insisted that the elected parliament create a constitutional assembly, which produced the draft approved in the December 2012 referendum.
As is typical of political revolutions, Egypt’s economic situation has gone from bad to worse in the course of these power struggles.
Revolutions tend to confront new governments with steeply rising social demands (for wage increases and higher welfare spending, for example) at a time of capital flight, financial turmoil, and deep disruptions of production.
In Egypt’s case, the crucial tourist sector contracted sharply after the revolution.
Unemployment soared, the currency depreciated, and food prices rose dangerously.
None of this is surprising, and little of it can be managed by a new government that lacks experience, market confidence, and full control of the levers of power.
Historically, outside parties have thus played a decisive role.
Will foreign governments and the International Monetary Fund extend vital finances to the new government, or will they let it flounder and drown in a tsunami of currency depreciation and inflation?
Here, the feckless West – torn between its democratic rhetoric and its antipathy to the Islamists – showed its hand.
The result was equivocation and delay, rather than commitment and assistance.
The IMF has talked with the Egyptian government for two and a half years since Mubarak’s overthrow without so much as lending a single cent, sealing the Egyptian economy’s fate and contributing to public unrest and the recent coup.
It appears from press reports that the West finally gave the green light to the Egyptian military to overthrow Morsi, arrest the Muslim Brotherhood’s leadership, and repress the Islamist rank and file.
US President Barack Obama’s unwillingness to stand up for Egypt’s elected leaders, or even to label their overthrow a “coup” (thereby protecting the continued flow of US funds to the Egyptian military), shows that when push came to shove, the West sided with the anti-Islamists in subverting democracy.
Of course, in classic Orwellian fashion, the West did so in democracy’s name.
The coup and the West’s complacency about it (if not complicity in it) could devastate Egypt.
The Islamists are neither a marginal political group nor a terrorist force.
They represent a large part of Egypt’s population, perhaps half or more, and are certainly the country’s best-organized political force.
The attempt to repress the Muslim Brotherhood and to deny Morsi the presidency to which he was elected will most likely lead to massive violence and the strangulation of democracy, however the West and Egyptian anti-Islamists try to justify their actions.
At this point, the correct course for the West would be to call on Egypt’s military to reinstate Morsi; to offer prompt financing to help stabilize the Egyptian economy; and to support true pluralism, not the kind that reverts to military coups when elections produce inconvenient results.
True pluralism means accepting the strength of Islamist political forces in the new Egypt and other countries in the region.
Short of this, the West will most likely end up as an accomplice to Egypt’s continuing downward spiral into violence and economic collapse.
Democracy in Inaction at the World Bank
James Wolfensohn, the president of the World Bank, has announced his intention to leave, and the search is on for a new head of the world’s most important multilateral organization promoting development.
The choice is especially important now, when poverty in the Third World is finally being recognized as our greatest problem and challenge.
The World Bank’s designation as a “bank” understates its importance and its multifaceted roles.
It does lend money to countries to undertake a variety of projects, and to help them through crises (such as the $10 billion it provided to Korea in 1997-1998).
It has been, and is, playing a vital role in post-conflict reconstruction around the world.
But the Bank also provides grants and low-interest loans to the poorest countries, particularly for education and health, and advises these countries on development strategies.
It has often joined with the IMF in strong-arming countries into accepting this “advice”: unless they do, they will not only be cut off by the IMF and the World Bank, but also by other donors, and capital markets will be discouraged from providing funds.
Sometimes – its critics will say often – the advice provided by the IMF and World Bank is misguided.
This was certainly true in the 1980’s and early 1990’s, when right-wing ideology dominated, producing a one-size-fits-all prescription entailing privatization, liberalization, and macroeconomic stability (meaning price stability), with little attention to employment, equity, or the environment.
The term “bank” is a misnomer in a second sense: while the World Bank refers to its members as “shareholders,” it is hardly a private bank.
On the contrary, the World Bank is a global public institution.
But, while the G-7 countries, which dominate voting at the Bank, all declare their commitment to democracy and good governance – and espouse promoting them as one of their central objectives – there is a yawning gap between what they preach and what they practice.
Indeed, the entire process of choosing these international institutions’ leaders is a historical anachronism that undermines their effectiveness and makes a mockery of the G-7 countries’ commitment to democracy.
This process, established at the outset 60 years ago, is framed by an agreement that an American would lead the World Bank and a European would lead the IMF.
The American president would choose the Bank’s head, and Europe would collectively decide on the IMF leader, with the understanding that the other side would exercise its veto only if a candidate were totally unacceptable.
Within the United States, all major presidential appointments must be ratified by the Senate; even if rejections are rare, the vetting process is important, for the president knows that he can go only so far.
But the presidency of the World Bank is a rare presidential plum – an appointment that is not subject even to Congressional hearings.
How can advice on democratic reforms be taken seriously when the multilateral institutions that offer it do not subscribe to the same standards of openness, transparency, and participation that they advocate?
Why should the search for Wolfensohn’s successor be limited to an American (and especially an American loyal to a particular political party)?
Why is the search process going on behind closed doors?
Shouldn’t these international public institutions be looking for the best-qualified person, regardless of race, religion, gender, or nationality?
The two names that have been floated so far ­– presumably leaked as trial balloons – are particularly disturbing.
To put it bluntly, given the World Bank’s importance, consideration of either putative US candidate, Assistant Defense Secretary Paul Wolfowitz or former Hewlett-Packard CEO Carleton Fiorina, have been highly controversial around the world.
Even if convention allows the American president to appoint the World Bank’s head, the organization’s success depends on the confidence of others.
Neither Wolfowitz nor Fiorina have any training or experience in economic development or financial markets.
Of course, some past appointees turned out to be far better than anticipated; they rose to the occasion, despite qualifications that, in any open and objective selection process, would never even have left them on the short list.
They proved that there is always a chance of outperforming.
But this does not outweigh the risk of underperforming, which is why the best policy is to look for the best candidate.
There are some absolutely first-rate individuals who could step into the job, people who have shown their command of economic development, their intellect and personal integrity, and their political and managerial skills.
Such potential candidates include former Mexican president Ernesto Zedillo, a Yale Ph.D. who now teaches there and has been strongly supported in an editorial in the Financial Times; Arminio Fraga, a Princeton Ph.D. and former head of Brazil’s central bank; and Kemal Dervis, a former World Bank vice-president who has taught at Princeton and successfully managed one of Turkey’s crises as finance minister.
Why should the world settle for anything less than candidates of this caliber?
It is time that the G-7 countries back up their democratic rhetoric with action.
Many stood up to the US as it pushed for the war in Iraq.
They were right to be skeptical about US claims of an imminent danger from weapons of mass destruction.
What is at stake here is no less important: the lives and well being of billions in the Third World depend on a global war on poverty.
Choosing the right general in that war will not assure victory, but choosing the wrong one surely enhances the chances of failure.
Democracy in Tea Party America
BERKELEY – When the French politician and moral philosopher Alexis de Tocqueville published the first volume of his Democracy in America in 1835, he did so because he thought that France was in big trouble and could learn much from America.
So one can only wonder what he would have made of the Republican National Convention in Tampa, Florida.
For Tocqueville, the grab for centralized power by the absolutist Bourbon monarchs, followed by the French Revolution and Napoleon’s Empire, had destroyed the good with the bad in France’s neo-feudal order.
Decades later, the new order was still in flux.
In Tocqueville’s imagination, at least, the old order’s subjects had been eager to protect their particular liberties and jealous of their spheres of independence.
They understood that they were embedded in a web of obligations, powers, responsibilities, and privileges that was as large as France itself.
Among the French of 1835, however, “the doctrine of self-interest” had produced “egotism…no less blind.”
Having “destroyed an aristocracy,” the French were “inclined to survey its ruins with complacency.”
To the “sick” France of 1835, Tocqueville counterposed healthy America, where attachment to the idea that people should pursue their self-interest was no less strong, but was different.
The difference, he thought, was that Americans understood that they could not flourish unless their neighbors prospered as well.
Thus, Americans pursued their self-interest, but in a way that was “rightly understood.”
Tocqueville noted that “Americans are fond of explaining…[how] regard for themselves constantly prompts them to assist each other, and inclines them willingly to sacrifice a portion of their time and property to the general welfare.”
The French, by contrast, faced a future in which “it is difficult to foresee to what pitch of stupid excesses their egotism may lead them,” and “into what disgrace and wretchedness they would plunge themselves, lest they should have to sacrifice something of their own well-being to the prosperity of their fellow-creatures.”
For Tocqueville, France’s sickness in 1835 stemmed from its Bourbon patrimony of a top-down, command-and-control government, whereas America’s health consisted in its bottom-up, grassroots-democratic government.
Give the local community enough control over its own affairs, Tocqueville argued, and one “will see at a glance…the close tie which unites private to general interest.”
It was “local freedom which leads a great number of citizens to value the affection of their neighbors and of their kindred, perpetually brings men together, and forces them to help one another, in spite of the propensities which sever them.”
Nearly two centuries have passed since Tocqueville wrote his masterpiece.
The connection between the general interest and the private interest of individual Americans has, if anything, become much stronger, even if their private interest is tied to a post office box in the Cayman Islands.
Indeed, no private-equity fortunes were made over the past generation without investing in or trading with the prosperous North Atlantic industrial core of the world economy.
But the mechanisms that individuals can use to join with their immediate neighbors in political action that makes a difference in their lives have become much weaker.
If, say, 25% of the 1,000 households in the 30-block Brookside “fiberhood” in Kansas City, Missouri, pre-subscribe, Google will provide all 1,000 with the opportunity to get very cheap, very fast Internet service very soon.
But that is the proverbial exception that proves the rule.
And the Republicans gathered in Tampa to celebrate the rule – to say that the America that Tocqueville saw no longer exists: Americans no longer believe that the wealth of the rich rests on the prosperity of the rest.
Rather, the rich owe their wealth solely to their own luck and effort.
The rich – and only the rich – “built” what they have.
The willingness to sacrifice some part of their private interest to support the public interest damages the souls and portfolios of the 1%.
Perhaps the moral and intellectual tide will be reversed, and America will remain exceptional for the reasons that Tocqueville identified two centuries ago.
Otherwise, Tocqueville would surely say of Americans today what he said of the French then.
The main difference is that it has become all too easy “to foresee to what pitch of stupid excesses their egotism may lead them” and “into what disgrace and wretchedness they would plunge themselves.”
Democracy on the Nile?
The surprise decision by Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak to propose a constitutional amendment that would allow direct and competitive presidential elections may be a giant step for democracy in Egypt and the Arab World.
Westerners used to pluralistic democracy may find it hard to understand what a potentially huge shift this will be in a country accustomed to military rule for over 50 years.
Under the current system, Egyptian citizens can only show up on the day of a presidential referendum every six years and say yes or no to the single name that appears on the presidential ballot.
This explains why someone like Mubarak always received over 90% of the vote, albeit amid indifferent turnout.
Syrian and Iraqi strongmen have done even better with this system, no doubt because they demanded that the names and addresses of voters be put at the bottom of each ballot.
Many people have long argued that democratization in the Middle East will not get far until Egypt becomes fully engaged in the process.
Egypt could not truly set out on a path of democratization without first amending its constitution – to downsize the Pharaonic powers of its president and set limits on his term in office.
Mubarak, after all, is already in his 24th year as president. So the announcement that he wants competitive presidential elections is an important first step.
The regime may assume that it will be able to use the process to its own advantage, but events may not be that easy to control once people begin to feel empowered.
The democratic genie is out of the bottle.
In any case, Egypt is not the only country in this troubled region that is now embarking on the road of democracy.
Turkey at one end of the Middle East and Morocco at the other are already well on their way.
The real groundswell this time seems to have come from the close timing and positive outcomes of recent elections in Iraq, Palestine, and to a lesser degree in Saudi Arabia.
The unprecedented demonstrations against Syria’s occupation of Lebanon following the assassination of its former prime minister, Rafiq al-Hariri, show no signs of abating.
Egyptian opposition groups, too, have staged increasingly bold marches and other forms of civil disobedience in the last few weeks.
The catalyst for their anger was the arrest and detention of the ailing opposition leader Ayman Nour at the end of January.
The government’s heavy-handed behavior reinvigorated the homegrown “Kifaya” (Enough) movement, which has demanded an end to the Mubarak regime.
Suddenly the popular wisdom that Egyptians are passive and afraid to act did not seem to be holding up.
An alliance of local, regional, and international forces is uniting against tyranny-as-usual on the banks of the Nile.
The recent wave of popular pressure appears to have shaken the regime.
Only a month ago, Mubarak dismissed demands for constitutional reform as “futile.”
But, whatever combination of events brought about his change of heart, election initiative should be welcomed.
It is a necessary – but insufficient – first step for overhauling Egypt’s stagnant political system.
Egyptians are already wary of token reforms à la Tunisia, where longstanding President Zine El Abidin Bin Ali created a caricature of a constitutional amendment that appeared to open the door for competitive presidential elections, but then staged a sham contest with a few handpicked “opponents.”
In previous Tunisian presidential referenda, Bin Ali routinely received 99% of the vote; he now got 96%.
Let us hope that Mubarak is more serious about electoral reform.
As a measure of sincerity, he needs to order the immediate release of Ayman Nour and take steps to terminate the 24-year-long state of emergency, which effectively prevents political campaigning from taking place.
Mubarak should also endorse a limit of no more than two successive five-year terms for any president.
Equally necessary are confidence-building measures, including open and equal access to the media, which are now state-controlled.
I have announced that I intend to contest this upcoming presidential election as a way of opening debate on these essential reforms.
But I would gladly go back to my life as a private citizen once guaranteed a free and open election this fall.
If seriously implemented, these steps will transform Mubarak’s legacy.
Along with events in Lebanon, Iraq, and Palestine, it may well usher in an Arab spring of freedom, one long overdue.
Democracy Promotion Reconsidered
Cambridge – President George W. Bush was famous for proclaiming the promotion of democracy a central focus of American foreign policy.
He was not alone in this rhetoric.
Most American presidents since Woodrow Wilson have made similar statements.
So it was striking when Secretary of State Hillary Clinton testified to Congress earlier this year about the “three D’s” of American foreign policy – defense, diplomacy, and development.
The “D” of democracy was noticeable by its absence, suggesting a change in policy by Barack Obama’s administration.
Both Bill Clinton and George W. Bush frequently referred to the beneficial effects of democracy on security.
They cited social science studies that show that democracies rarely go to war with each other.
But, more carefully stated, what scholars show is that liberal democracies almost never go to war with each other, and it may be that a liberal constitutional culture is more important than the mere fact of elections.
While elections are important, liberal democracy is more than “electocracy.”
Elections in the absence of constitutional and cultural constraints can produce violence, as in Bosnia or the Palestinian Authority.
And illiberal democracies have fought each other, as Ecuador and Peru did in the 1990’s.
In the eyes of many critics at home and abroad, the Bush administration’s excesses tarnished the idea of democracy promotion.
Bush’s invocation of democracy to justify the invasion of Iraq implied that democracy could be imposed at the barrel of a gun.
The word democracy came to be associated with its particular American variant, and took on an imperialist connotation.
Moreover, Bush’s exaggerated rhetoric was often at odds with his practice, giving rise to charges of hypocrisy.
It was far easier for him to criticize Zimbabwe, Cuba, and Burma than Saudi Arabia and Pakistan, and his initial criticism of Egypt was soon toned down.
There is a danger, however, in over-reacting to the failures of the Bush administration’s policies.
The growth of democracy is not an American imposition, and it can take many forms.
The desire for greater participation is widespread as economies develop and people adjust to modernization.
Democracy is not in retreat.
Freedom House, a non-governmental organization, listed 86 free countries at the beginning of the Bush years, and a slight increase to 89 by the end of his term.
Democracy remains a worthy and widespread goal, but it is important to distinguish the goal from the means used to attain it.
There is a difference between assertive promotion and more gentle support of democratization.
Avoiding coercion, premature elections, and hypocritical rhetoric should not preclude a patient policy that relies on economic assistance, behind-the-scenes diplomacy, and multilateral approaches to aid the development of civil society, the rule of law, and well-managed elections.
Equally important to the foreign-policy methods used to support democracy abroad are the ways in which we practice it at home.
When we try to impose democracy, we tarnish it.
When we live up to our own best traditions, we can stimulate emulation and create the soft power of attraction.
This approach is what Ronald Reagan called the “shining city on the hill.”
For example, many people both inside and outside the United States had become cynical about the American political system, arguing that it was dominated by money and closed to outsiders.
The election of Barack Hussein Obama in 2008 did a great deal to restore the soft power of American democracy.
Another aspect of America’s domestic practice of liberal democracy that is currently being debated is how the US deals with the threat of terrorism.
In the climate of extreme fear that followed the attacks of September 11, 2001, the Bush administration engaged in tortured legal interpretations of international and domestic law that tarnished American democracy and diminished its soft power.
Fortunately, a free press, an independent judiciary, and a pluralist legislature helped to hold for such practices up public debate.
Obama has proclaimed that he will close the Guantánamo Bay detention facility within a year, and he has declassified the legal memos that were used to justify what is now widely regarded as torture of detainees.
But the problem of how to deal with terrorism is not just a matter of history.
The threat remains alive, and it is important to remember that people in democracies want both liberty and security.
In moments of extreme fear, the pendulum of attitudes swings toward the security end of that spectrum.
Abraham Lincoln suspended the right of habeas corpus – the principle that detainees are entitled to challenge their detention in a court of law – during the Civil War, and Franklin Roosevelt interned Japanese-American citizens during the early days of World War II.
When some of the Bush administration’s more reasonable members are asked today how they could have taken the positions they did in 2002, they cite the anthrax attacks that followed 9/11, the intelligence reports of an impending attack with nuclear materials, and the widespread fear of a second attack against the American people.
In such circumstances, liberal democracy and security are in tension.
Terrorism is a form of theatre.
It invokes its effects not by sheer destruction, but by dramatizing atrocious acts against civilians.
Terrorism is like Ju-jitsu.
The weaker adversary wins by leveraging the power of the stronger against itself.
Terrorists hope to create a climate of fear and insecurity that will provoke us to harm ourselves by undercutting the quality of our own liberal democracy.
Preventing new terrorist attacks while understanding and avoiding the mistakes of the past will be essential if we are to preserve and support liberal democracy both at home and abroad.
That is the debate that the Obama administration is leading in the US today.
Democracy, Responsibility, and Honor
Hardly a day goes by on which we do not hear of a government minister somewhere resigning his or her office.
In a sense, this is hardly surprising.
After all, the twenty-five member states of the European Union alone employ hundreds of ministers between them - and even more if junior ministers are included.
But why do ministers resign?
More interestingly still: why do some not resign although there seem to be compelling reasons for some to do so?
In the absence of empirical research, generalizations must be guesswork.
Ministers frequently resign because they find themselves involved in scandals, often connected in recent times with financing political parties.
In Italy, one encounters several ghosts of such past misdeeds.
Sometimes ministers resign for what they call "personal reasons."
Such reasons may conceal more compelling factors, as the recent resignation of American CIA Director George Tenet suggests.
But Tony Blair lost one of his best and most loyal cabinet friends, Alan Milburn, because he genuinely wanted to spend more time with his family.
Blair also lost his ministers of foreign affairs and of development assistance, Robin Cook and Clare Short, respectively.
In their case, it was a serious policy disagreement - over the Iraq war - that made them go, and Mr. Cook certainly remains a politician-in-waiting.
Yet Geoff Hoon, Prime Minister Blair's defence minister, as well as his American counterpart, Donald Rumsfeld, remain in office.
Neither, to be sure, is clearly involved in a manifest scandal, nor do they disagree with the policies set by their leaders.
On the contrary, they not only support these policies but stubbornly defend even their aberrations, like the mistreatment of prisoners of war.
These ministers institute investigations, they move generals sideways or even into premature retirement, they haul perpetrators before military tribunals; but they apparently see no reason to respond to those members of Congress or Parliament, let alone of the public, who wonder whether it is not time for the ministers themselves to go.
The case of crimes in Iraq is particularly dramatic, but less obvious cases make the same point.
The German minister of transport, for example, presided over a catastrophic and costly failure of a road toll system that he had proudly announced.
But even he may stay in office to try again, having blamed others - in this case private companies - for the debacle.
If something unacceptable happens without a minister's direct involvement, he or she can get away with it, or so it seems, by pointing a finger at the bureaucrats or contractors who are responsible for implementing an approved policy.
Was it always thus?
One would like to think not.
In any case, two ethical concepts come to mind, neither of which is much in vogue these days when talking about government: responsibility and honor.
Both values are, or at least used to be, part of the ethics of governance.
Responsibility concerns the fact that ministers are accountable for everything that happens within their sphere. In fact, they alone are accountable in the strict sense.
In parliamentary systems, they can and must appear before the elected representatives of the people and explain what happened.
Because they alone are directly accountable, it is not enough for a minister to point to and name the miscreants in any particular case.
Civil servants cannot defend themselves in the same way; they have to be defended by their ministers.
If something of such severity has happened that a minister finds it impossible to defend them, they may have to pay the penalty, but the minister still must assume responsibility.
It is proper to assume that Secretary Rumsfeld did not condone, let alone order, the abuse of Iraqi prisoners.
There may be the vexing question of whether instructions or reports passed over his desk that contained relevant information.
But, either way, the minister is ultimately and uniquely responsible for what happened under his command.
He cannot escape this responsibility even if the perpetrators are identified and prosecuted.
This is where the second ethical concept, honor, comes into play.
This may seem an old-fashioned term. What it says in Rumsfeld's case is that there may be no legal or constitutional obligation for a responsible minister to resign over the Iraqi abuse scandal; but once upon a time it would have been regarded as a matter of honor that he does resign.
Such a step not only demonstrates that the minister in question is fully aware of the burden of his responsibility, but also that he puts the integrity of democratic institutions above his personal interest, let alone the electoral prospects of those whom he served.
Democracy is a precious but also a precarious set of values.
If we want to persuade others to subscribe to it, we do well to demonstrate that we not only believe in elections and majorities but also in the virtues of responsibility and honor.
Democracy’s Burning Ships
CHICAGO – Since the late 1970’s, the academic diffusion of game theory has led macroeconomists to emphasize the importance of “commitment,” a strategy that aims to enhance long-term economic outcomes by restricting policymakers’ discretion.
The idea seems counterintuitive: How can less produce more?
While not historically accurate, one of the best examples of a strategic commitment is provided by the legend of Hernán Cortés, according to which, in his quest to conquer Mexico, he decided to burn the ships that had brought his expedition from Spain.
At first, this might seem like a crazy move: Why intentionally destroy the only possible way out in case of defeat?
Cortes allegedly did it to motivate his troops.
With no escape route, soldiers were highly motivated to win.
Alexander the Great is said to have done something similar when conquering Persia.
To produce its benefit, a commitment strategy should be credible – that is, it cannot be reversed quickly.
In this sense, Cortés’s strategy was perfect: in case of defeat, the Spanish would have no time to rebuild the burned ships.
To work properly, a commitment strategy should also be costly in case of failure: had Cortés lost, no Spanish soldier would have escaped alive.
It is precisely this cost that helped motivate his soldiers.
The problem is that we are bound to hear about only the successful historical examples of such a strategy.
Had Cortés’s strategy failed, he would have gone down in history – if he was remembered at all – as an arrogant fool who thought that he could defeat a great empire.
One of the earliest applications of this strategy to economic policy is in the design of central banks.
Monetary policymakers, the argument goes, should be independent from the political system, because, when elections near, politicians will likely pressure them to “buy” temporarily higher employment at the cost of permanently higher inflation.
To prevent this inefficient trade off, governments should tie central bankers’ hands by insulating them from political influence.
Many macroeconomists attribute the sustained decline in inflation since the early 1980’s to the widespread use of this strategy.
And, encouraged by its success, policymakers started applying it elsewhere.
Financial liberalization was sold as a commitment to follow market-friendly policies.
If a future government deviated from the policy, capital flight would bring it to its knees.
The same applies to extensive government borrowing from abroad, to currency boards, even to currency unions.
The creation of the euro is nothing but an extreme form of commitment: European governments tried to lash themselves to the German mast of fiscal discipline.
The diffusion of these mechanisms raises the issue of democracy.
When Cortés allegedly burned the Spanish ships, he did not take a poll.
Had he done so, he might have won (the strategy was clever), but it was not a foregone conclusion.
But even if the commitment strategy produced beneficial incentives, it might not have been worth the risk.
Perhaps Cortés, blinded by his dreams of glory, was ready to sacrifice his troops even when the odds of victory were too slim.
Nowadays, fortunately, democratically elected governments make these decisions, which thus should reflect the people’s will.
Yet, given their nature, these decisions deserve special scrutiny.
After all, they are – by design – irreversible decisions that tie the hands of future governments, which makes them tantamount to constitutional norms.
As such, they should not be subject to the same approval process as normal legislation.
This problem is particularly severe when the up-front action that seals the commitment has short-term benefits that are more attractive than burning the ship.
When a government starts to borrow abroad or chooses to enter a currency union, these benefits take the form of reduced interest rates.
Thus, the immediate benefits become more politically salient than potential future costs.
By using this strategy, a Machiavellian government can induce a reluctant electorate to accept a policy that is contrary to its will.
Many people would say that this is exactly the point.
For southern European countries, joining the euro was – explicitly or implicitly – a way to force their citizens to accept a degree of fiscal discipline that they were incapable of adopting on their own.
But was this a democratic decision, or one that an “enlightened” elite forced upon its unwitting citizens?
I fear that the latter is true – hence the growing resentment against the European Union.
To add insult to injury, current European leaders do not “own” their past decisions.
They do not admit that they or their predecessors are the ones who burned the ships.
They blame Europe.
The result is that the euro, sold as a way to integrate Europe further, is tearing it apart.
Democratic Hysteria
BERKELEY – In the political impasses that recently paralyzed the world’s two largest democracies, India and the United States, both countries’ usually clear-sighted leaders, to paraphrase William Butler Yeats, lacked all conviction, while the misguided and the shallow were full of passionate intensity.
Indeed, that passion shows little sign of waning.
In the US, the economically illiterate, seeing misery all around from lost jobs, foreclosed homes, and the ever more apparent decline in America’s international status, are distilling their frenzy from obsolete advocates of fiscal rectitude, while clutching their Bibles and espousing a juvenile understanding of the US constitution.
But their efforts are only digging a bigger hole for the US economy, making recovery much more difficult.
Even their tax-averse sponsors, while appreciative of the rabble’s efforts to protect their wealth, are now fearful of the impact of these wayward ideas on the investment climate and equity prices.
President Barack Obama, elected with a great deal of goodwill and hope in 2008, is now caught like a deer in the headlights.
He knows that what the economy needs in the short run is different from what needs to be done to manage public debt in the long run, but he is unable to provide decisive leadership.
His misguided efforts at compromise only fuel his opponents’ frenzy.
In India, Prime Minister Manmohan Singh, who once enjoyed a strong reputation for integrity and intelligence, has been similarly paralyzed, acting erratically in the face of an equally demagogic populist movement – the anti-graft crusade led by a fasting activist, Anna Hazare – which just ended in a frantic and uneasy compromise.
Hazare, egged on by a flag-waving and indignant urban middle class and sensation-seeking media, tries mightily to claim Mahatma Gandhi’s mantle; he is good at mimicking Gandhi’s piety, but lacks his root wisdom.
Low-level corruption (the police, courts, and government clerks) has always been widespread in India.
The type of corruption that has increased in recent years is partly a consequence of rapid economic growth.
Public resources, like land, minerals, and hydrocarbons, and the telecommunications spectrum, have shot up in value, and in the scramble to control them, businessmen seek shortcuts.
Another reason for rising corruption is the soaring expense of elections, with politicians raising money from business as part of a quid pro quo.
Both India and the US have little public financing of elections, and large business donations that are legal in the US are often illegal (and hence given underhandedly) in India.
But, instead of addressing the structural causes of rising corruption, India’s anti-graft movement bemoans a supposed weakening of ethical values and demands additional agencies with draconian powers to monitor and punish.
The urban middle classes, impatient with the slow processes of democracy, latch on to holy men and their magic potions.
Just as in the US, public rage is somehow directed away from the rich bribe-givers and onto venal politicians.
In both countries, the long-run implications of such angry populist movements for the health of democratic institutions need to be pondered.
This is particularly true for India, where elections are vigorous and common people participate in them more enthusiastically than in the US, but other democratic institutions remain weak and sometimes dysfunctional, and the judiciary is too slow and occasionally corrupt.
To loud cheers from the crowds, the populists damn elected politicians as thieves and looters, but in the process disparage the institutions and processes of representative government.
In the not-too-distant past, widespread denigration of this sort in Africa, Latin America, and other parts of South Asia often made it easier for populist authoritarianism to take hold.
Indeed, the widely heard slogan “Anna is India, India is Anna” reminds some of the dark days of Indira Gandhi’s emergency rule in 1975-1977, when her followers raised the slogan of “Indira is India”.
But the slogan-mongers overlook India’s extreme diversity.
Many members of ethnic minorities, including the country’s 150 million Muslims, openly oppose the Hazare movement.