In practice, however, peer pressure has become peer collusion.
When EU leaders met last spring to assess progress, they pitifully recognized that the Lisbon Strategy’s goal was unlikely to be met.
The best that they could do now would be to dump the pretense of a strategy and carry on with the other business.
Unfortunately, the host of the 2000 summit was José Manuel Barroso, then Prime Minister of Portugal and current President of the European Commission, who has staked his presidency on the Lisbon Strategy.
Expect him to push on hopelessly.
One of the few good ideas contained in the Lisbon Strategy was to remove barriers to trade in services.
Intra-European competition in services is restricted by innumerable national regulations that, for instance, strictly determine the requirements for becoming a hairdresser or a plumber.
One of the defining features of the past decades is the sharp increase in services productivity in the US; none of that happened in Europe.
Guess why.
Because services account for 70% of European GDP, the potential impact from enhanced competition is substantial.
But removing protection is always politically difficult.
The European Commission submitted a proposal in 2005 – just as the constitution was being put up for a vote.
Not surprisingly, the proposal was quickly shelved.
Now, with countless private interest groups trying to water it down into irrelevance, the battle will be firmly on the EU’s agenda in 2006.
At the same time, Europe is again blocking progress in the Doha round of world trade talks, with the farmers’ lobby fighting to preserve its subsidies.
Many governments are so fearful of their farmers that they see no other option than to hold their ground, no matter what.
Europe has agreed to a single trade policy.
When disagreements run as deep as they do on agriculture, there can be no give-and-take of the kind that allows for successful negotiations.
There is little reason for optimism.
And what next for the ECB, which has just nudged up interest rates by 0.25%, after 30 months on hold.
Experts can disagree about whether the move was premature, but no one agrees with the many political leaders who have argued that the tiny hike will derail the timid resumption of economic growth.
The sharpness of political attacks on the ECB might trigger dangerous talk about restricting its independence.
While such a move is out of the question – it would require a change in the European Treaty – the noise is unhealthy.
It distracts the ECB, adds to the impression that Europe is bad, and, more importantly, will be used by ineffective governments as a scapegoat for their failings.
Expect more ECB-bashing.
Is Europe stuck?
The current team of leaders has been an enormous disappointment.
But as they fade away, there could be some light at the end of the tunnel.
In Germany, Chancellor Angela Merkel is obviously more positive on Europe and more pro-reform than her predecessor, but she is tied up in a grand coalition.
In France, President Jacques Chirac, the epitome of a leader captured by his lobbies, is staggering impotently toward the end of his term in 2007.
The two frontrunners to succeed him, Dominique de Villepin and Nicolas Sarkozy, both in government, compete on a reformist agenda, but pre-election years do not encourage bold moves.
Meanwhile, Italy must decide whether it replaces Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi, who displayed no interest in reform and European affairs, with the cautious Romano Prodi, the former European Commission President.
Tony Blair, once an ardent pro-European (at least by Britain’s undemanding standards), might finally have to cede power to Gordon Brown, who is famously cold to European integration.
Fortunately, Britain has always been an outsider.
In the end, whatever light there is, it may not shine until 2007, after the French elections.
What Next in Afghanistan?
BERLIN – Afghanistan’s future does not look good.
The Taliban are gaining military and political strength, and President Hamid Karzai is losing support at home and internationally due to his administration’s rampant corruption and the obvious fraud committed in his re-election.
Weariness with the war is spreading in the United States, where President Barack Obama finds it difficult to decide about an increase in troops, as demanded by his own generals.
European NATO members with troops in Afghanistan would prefer to withdraw them today rather than tomorrow.
The West seems to have lost its orientation in the Hindu Kush – that “graveyard of empires,” as it was called after the British disaster in January 1842, when only one man survived an expedition 16,000.
What, many people are asking, is NATO really fighting for in Afghanistan?
Europe remains silent on that question and has only one aim: to get out.
In the US, the debate about the purposes being served in Afghanistan is at least still taking place.
Follow it, and you will conclude that, ultimately, the war is all about the American superpower’s military victory over the Taliban, so that it can finally withdraw its troops – for a second time.
The source or meaning of the conflict in Afghanistan is impossible to find in the country itself.
Afghanistan is the battlefield, but the causes of the wars that have devastated it since the mid-1970’s were and are still to be found beyond its borders.
So an exclusively “Afghan solution” is not possible.
Three dates are central to understanding today’s Afghan quagmire: 1989, 2001, and 2003.
In 1989, when the Cold War ended, the Red Army had already withdrawn from the country, thereby admitting its defeat.
Following the Soviet Union, the US withdrew from the conflict, too, and at that moment, the second Afghan war started – a proxy war between regional neighbors over power in the Hindu Kush, disguised as a civil war.
Supported by Saudi Arabia, Pakistan sought strategic depth against its arch-enemy India with the help of militant religious students from Afghan refugee camps. These “Taliban” were created and equipped by the Pakistani secret service, the ISI.
Iran defended its own interests and those of the Shia minority in the west of the country.
And in the north, the Tajik Northern Alliance and Abdul Rashid Dostum’s Uzbek militia were supported and equipped by Afghanistan’s northern neighbors and Russia.
In the shadow of this second Afghan war, Osama bin Laden established his terrorist organization in Taliban-ruled Afghanistan: Al Qaeda, which, on September 11, 2001, carried out its terrible terrorist attack on the US.
A month later, the current war in Afghanistan started.
In March 2003, George W. Bush launched his invasion of Iraq, not only squandering America’s military strength, but also connecting all the individual crises between the eastern Mediterranean and the Indus Valley.
As a result of America’s foreign-policy folly, Iran became the central geo-political player in the entire region, linking the western and eastern part of this long belt of instability.
So, those who are grappling with the Afghan riddle today should consider, first and foremost, the regional realities: can the West afford to withdraw?
If so, we should pull out of Afghanistan immediately.
If not, we should stop discussing an “exit strategy.”
The cost of the West’s retreat from this troubled region is predictable, since we must deal with several threats that endanger Western security, and that would not disappear with withdrawal from Iraq and Afghanistan: terrorism, Islamist radicalism, nuclear threats (Pakistan, Iran), proxy wars and regional conflicts (Israel-Palestine, Iraq, Afghanistan, and Kashmir), and looming disintegration (Iraq, Afghanistan, Pakistan, and in the longer term in the Persian Gulf and the Arabian Peninsula).
This means that we cannot talk about withdrawing our troops, but only of redrawing the battle line farther West.
It is extremely doubtful that such a step would bring more security.
On the other hand, the West’s strategy in Afghanistan up to now has also yielded little progress, only strengthening the Taliban day by day.
So what should we do?
First, we need to define a clear political goal: a stable status quo in Afghanistan that will prevent the country from again becoming a battlefield of regional interests and an organizational base for Al Qaeda.
Without a sufficient military presence, as well as improved and reinforced reconstruction efforts, this goal is not attainable.
Second, a renewed regional consensus on Afghanistan’s future would also help avoid further destabilizing nuclear-armed Pakistan.
This requires that Pakistan’s and Iran’s interests be included in this consensus, as well as India’s, Saudi Arabia’s and probably also China’s. (The Kashmir conflict must, indirectly, play a role in this settlement, but the difficulties of including it should not be underestimated.)
Forging this consensus will not be an easy diplomatic task.
But it is feasible and should be the goal of a new conference on Afghanistan.
Third, a parallel effort at crisis containment – and perhaps even at finding solutions – is needed for the wider Middle East, Iraq, the Persian Gulf, and Iran.
It’s an equation with very many known unknowns, but if we do not try at least to mitigate these issues, the known unknowns will continue challenging all partial solutions.
But the big question remains whether the US and its European allies still have the strength, perseverance and far-sightedness for such an undertaking.
There are good reasons to doubt this.
The alternative would be a chaotic and dangerous future in this large hot spot.
Afghanistan may seem far away, but its chaos and violence are in fact just next door.
What Now In the Middle East?
The political and security situation in the vast region between the Indus Valley and the shores of the Eastern Mediterranean is a cause for grave concern.
When the US intervened militarily in Iraq in 1991, the intention was to effect fundamental change in the entire region.
Today it is clear that hardly any aspect of this policy has succeeded. Even the success of free elections in Iraq is threatening to divide rather than unite the country.
The existing power relations in the Middle East have indeed been permanently shaken and, indeed, revolutionized.
The effect however, has not been a domino-like democratization; instead we are threatened with a domino effect of descent into chaos.
The decision to go to war against Iraq to liberate Kuwait, back in 1991, marked the beginning of America’s role as the sole hegemonic military power in the region.
The decision to go to war against Iraq for a second time, and then to occupy the country in March 2003, transformed this hegemony into direct US responsibility for the future of the Middle East.
Two outcomes could flow from America’s adopted role as the decisive power in the Middle East.
Were the US to succeed in using its military strength, it would create a new, democratic Middle East.
But were it, despite its military might, to fail, it would create a power vacuum and destabilize the region.
The second scenario – which was foreseeable from the outset – has now become a reality.
The very character of the war in Iraq has been transformed from a democratizing mission into a stabilizing mission high in casualties and in cost.
Instead of the intended radical realignment of power relations in the region, the aim is now to simply maintain the status quo.
The most the US can hope at this point is a withdrawal that saves face.
The recent elections in America were a referendum on the war in Iraq.
Their result in fact set a timetable for the “Iraqisation” and US withdrawal – before the next presidential election.
Behind the all-too-foreseeable end of the American stabilizing mission lurks a civil war in Iraq, which threatens to turn into an Arab-Iranian proxy war for dominance in Iraq, the Gulf, Lebanon, the Palestinian territories, and beyond.
Moreover, there is an acute risk that the power vacuum created in Iraq will fuse the Israeli-Arab conflict, Iraq, and Afghanistan into one regional mega-crisis.
In light of America’s impending withdrawal, the regional powers are reassessing their interests and objectives.
Iran, Syria, Saudi Arabia, Egypt, Jordan, Pakistan, Turkey, and Israel will be the main players.
With the Iraq war, the US has lost its unilateral-power position in the Middle East, and elsewhere.
In the future, various global powers will be active in the Middle East – primarily the US, Russia, China, India.
Let’s hope Europe is amongst them, because its security is defined there.
So at stake is no longer just Iraq, but rather the future of the entire region.
We can count ourselves lucky if the emerging chaos can be contained in Iraq.
Washington’s realization that Iraq can no longer be won or even stabilized unless the regional framework changes, has come late – perhaps too late.
The US will have to find agreement with its allies and enter into direct talks with all the other players to try and achieve a new regional consensus.
If this policy shift had taken place a year ago or even early last summer, the prospects would have been better.
And with every passing day, America’s position in the region is weakening further and the chances of a successful new political strategy become more remote.
The greatest danger stems from Iran, the clear beneficiary of the Iraqi power vacuum.
Iran harbors hegemonic ambitions which it seeks to realize by means of its military potential, oil and gas reserves, its nuclear program, its influence over Shiites throughout the region, and its efforts to upset the status quo within the Arab Muslim world.
Yet Iran is also relatively isolated.
Its only allies in the region are Syria and Hezbollah.
What’s more, it is threatened by a de-facto anti-Iranian coalition of all other regional powers, united by their fear of Iranian ascendancy.
If the West – America and Europe – act swiftly, decisively, and with a joint strategy, there remains a chance to stabilize the situation.
But to achieve this, it will be necessary to offset, or at least balance, the interests of the most important actors in the region.
This means a strategy based on political leverage not a threat of military intervention or regime change.
In their stead must come, on the one hand, direct talks, security guarantees, and support in political and economic integration.
More Europe!
The rejection of the European Union’s Constitution by French and Dutch voters forces us to think well beyond that treaty.
That much is clear from the current debate on the Community budget.
The naysayers’ victories show that sovereignty-based arguments that oppose any kind of European political union are on the march.
Euroskeptics, it seems, are gaining ground everywhere, and a kind of xenophobia is on the rise.
But xenophobia and sovereignty were not the primary impulses that propelled the “no” votes.
Above all, the “no” votes in France and Holland – and rising discontent in other member states, such as Germany – are the result of the inability of national governments and the Union to respond effectively to the problems that most concern citizens.
Not only anti-Europeans rejected the constitution; far from it.
Many Europeans are, in fact, calling on the EU to act to reduce unemployment and to intervene decisively in the international arena.
Many interpreted Europe’s internal division over the war in Iraq, with ordinary citizens overwhelmingly opposed to military intervention, as a sign of the Union’s weakness.
But the answer to such doubt and dismay is more Europe, not less.
The European Council’s summit on June 16-17 should give a clear sign that it recognizes this.
Most supporters of the Constitution believe that it will not only help build a citizens’ Europe, but also create better conditions for European economic development, and for the EU to act globally.
They are right.
It would be imprudent to assume that the French and Dutch “no” votes were not about discontent with Union policies; but that anger was directed against the French and Dutch governments, not Europe itself.
The fact is that citizens in every EU member country are increasingly aware that national policies are determined by decision making at the European level, over which they have little influence.
The European Constitution has little to do with this, but referenda are never confined to the actual questions put to voters.
Instead, they provide opportunities for citizens to express what they feel about the choices their governments make, particularly within the EU framework.
The 2004 elections for the European Parliament had already shown that the level of discontent with the Union was high.
Voters heavily punished almost all national governments.
Yet nobody thought that that election had changed the course of Europe.
Above all, the French and Dutch referendums confirmed that politics in the Union is now conducted “on the street,” and that it is no longer possible to “construct” Europe at a distance and by stealth.
This means that EU governments must respond to popular anxieties and make the Union more transparent and democratic.
This would be a lot easier with the Constitution in place, but there are measures that can and should be adopted now to make that possible.
First, the community budget should be structured so that it has a significant impact on growth and employment (a return to the voluntarism of the Delors Packages, now applied to the Lisbon Strategy).
Second, European governments must show a real commitment to act together.
A key opportunity presents itself with the celebration of the tenth anniversary of the Barcelona Declaration to define a common position to support democratic change in the Mediterranean by ceasing to back the political status quo there.
Finally, Council meetings should be open when legislative matters are at stake, so that citizens can know who voted for what and according to which criteria.
All of this can be decided at the next European Council, even before the constitutional problem is resolved.
This kind of action is more likely to win back a skeptical citizenry than any information campaign, however well designed.
At the same time, it is necessary to solve the Constitutional deadlock.
As already proposed by the Convention, this would mean separating constitutional matters per se from Union policy.
The real innovations are found in Part I and II of the proposed Constitution, in the definition of the normative and political identity of the Union, its competences, the new institutional balance – including the creation of a European Minister of Foreign Affairs – and, last but not least, the introduction of a Bill of Rights.
The part that was actually rejected and raises the most concerns among citizens of the member States is in Part III, which focuses on Union policies such as the Common Market, competition policy and the Common Agricultural Policy.
So the first and second parts could be ratified without new negotiations and could form the basis for the new Treaty, so that the Treaty of Nice would still apply; and the debate on the European social model would continue.
It is essential to reaffirm the normative essence of the Constitutional Treaty to protect the greatest achievement of the Constitutional Convention.
Diversity and inclusiveness, through the integration of European democracies with a common project, remains Europe’s great gift to the world.
It is what has made Europe an “international public good” to use former Brazilian foreign minister Celso Lafer’s felicitous turn of phrase.
Such a Europe is better placed to contribute to a fairer international order than the narrow, bitter Europe the xenophobes have in mind.
For Europe to remain a promise for the world, it must thrive as a public good for all its citizens.
Europe and Europeans cannot wait for a new treaty to show that the Union is able to fulfill that promise.
What Nuclear Energy Renaissance?
ZURICH – Repeatedly in recent years there have been calls for a revival of civilian nuclear power.
Yet that renaissance never seems to come. 
On a worldwide scale, nuclear energy is thus only a small component of the global energy mix, and its share, contrary to widespread belief, is not on the rise.
During 2009, for example, nuclear power plants provided 2,560 TWh(e) (2,560 billion kWh) of electric energy, about 1.6% lower than during 2008 and almost 4% lower than during the record year of 2006, when 2,658 TWh(e) were produced.
Early results for the first four months of 2010 for the OECD countries, collected by the International Energy Agency indicate that so far the 2010 results are as low or lower than during the last year.
During the next five years, on average, roughly 10 new nuclear reactors are expected to become operational every year. But this assumes that all of them are constructed according to schedule, and the nuclear industry has rarely met its promised construction deadlines.
According to the World Nuclear Association (WNA), 17 new reactors should have become operational between 2007 and 2009. But only five came onstream during this period – three in 2007 and two in 2009.
Moreover, four reactors were de-commissioned during 2009, and a larger number of reactors in Japan and Germany are not in use, owing to various technical stoppages.
At least one hundred older and smaller reactors will most likely be closed over the next 10-15 years.
Furthermore, during the past 10 years, only about two-thirds of worldwide demand for nuclear fuel – about 68,000 tons of natural uranium equivalent are needed for 2010 – was met from resources obtained from mining.
The remaining 20,000 tons came from so-called secondary uranium sources – mainly inventories held by utilities and governments, re-processed nuclear fuel, and stockpiles of depleted uranium.
The supply from these sources will drop by roughly 10,000 tons at the end of 2013, when the Megatons to Megawatt Program between Russia and the United States – which recycles highly-enriched uranium from Russian nuclear warheads into low-enriched uranium for nuclear power plants – comes to an end.
Current projections indicate that uranium shortages in the coming years can be avoided only if existing and new uranium mines operate according to plan.
Indeed, extrapolations of global supply that foresee an increase in uranium mining are based on claims about the ability to expand output in Kazakhstan.
So far, uranium mining in Kazakhstan has increased roughly as expected, from 4,357 tons in 2005 to 8,521 tons in 2008 to 14,000 tons in 2009.
These numbers indicate that the EU, currently producing about 1/3 of the world’s nuclear electric energy, is heading for a reduction in nuclear-energy production of up to 20% over the coming 10 years.
One can also expect that the current worldwide economic crisis will not help to accelerate the construction of nuclear power plants and new uranium mines.
In summary, the hard facts about nuclear energy are inconsistent with the possibility of a worldwide renaissance of nuclear energy.
Indeed, they point toward a continuing slow phase-out of civilian nuclear energy in most of the large OECD countries.
It thus seems unavoidable that energy consumers, especially in many rich countries, will have to learn to exchange their current worries about the distant future consequences of global warming for the reality of energy shortages during periods of peak demand.
Such shortages could result either in chaotic supplies and power outages or in a coordinated policy of energy rationing.
In the absence of nuclear-energy revival, most of us will be forced to reduce our direct energy consumption.
Let us hope that we can learn to adapt to simpler – though perhaps still satisfying – lifestyles.
What Reset Button?
MOSCOW – The emergence of a Kremlin leader, President Dmitri Medvedev, without a KGB background, combined with the economic crisis, has inspired talk that when Barack Obama visits Moscow, America’s president will be seeing a country on the verge of a new political thaw, a revived perestroika .
But pushing the “re-set button” on US-Russia relations may be harder than Obama and his team imagined.
Russian (or Soviet) leaders opt for perestroika or a thaw only when forced to do so by dire conditions that threaten the regime’s survival.
An atmosphere of mortal fear, mutual suspicion, and hatred among the Communist elite was the catalyst for Nikita Khrushchev’s post-Stalin thaw.
For Mikhail Gorbachev in the 1980’s, the catalyst for his perestroika was the USSR’s growing economic paralysis.
For both men, the goal of clinging to power was a top priority.
Changing the system and easing their grip on power was a risky move that could undermine their authority.
But the risks of inertia seemed to be even higher. In the end, having opted for change, both were forced to leave their posts prematurely, against their will.
As he revived centralized Kremlin control over Russian politics and public affairs, Vladimir Putin has been concerned primarily with minimizing challenges to state power, which he concentrated in his own hands.
To this end, he stripped the political system of competition, emasculated state institutions, marginalized the opposition, and basically eliminated public participation.
His power-building project was facilitated by high oil prices, but came at the cost of a steady deterioration in the quality of governance and abandonment of the goal of modernization.
With policymaking fully nontransparent and reduced to a very closed circle, and implementation delegated to an unaccountable bureaucracy, the inevitable result of Putin’s political model was pervasive corruption.
The desire to avoid public discontent and ensure social stability led to a suspension of reform.
Instead of creating incentives that would unleash public energies, the government pushed citizens farther and farther from politics and policymaking, thereby deepening social apathy and atomization.
Moreover, the opportunity provided by the oil boom was wasted.
Indeed, today Russia risks lagging even further behind the developed countries.
Its economy remains undiversified and uncompetitive, and its contribution to global technological progress is minuscule.
Worse still, economic growth based on exports of natural resources has proved unsustainable.
When oil prices were high and growing, the government could compensate for poor performance by throwing money at problems.
Today, with oil prices dramatically reduced, this largesse is no longer available, and economic experts agree that the growth potential of Russia’s petro-economy has been exhausted.
Despite all this, the situation is not sufficiently dire to push Russia’s leaders to open at least some channels of genuine public participation and yield any of their power.
The price of oil, at around $70 a barrel, may be half of what it was a year ago, but up from around $40 earlier this year.
Nor does the Russian economy’s contraction and the expected deepening of poverty (the World Bank’s report released in late June was grimmer about Russia than its previous report) presage an immediate catastrophe.
And, unlike in the late 1980’s and 1990’s, Russia is not indebted to foreign banks or international organizations, though it plans to resume foreign borrowing next year.
So the government will prefer to muddle through the crisis, rather than risk any decisive reform.
The goal of clinging to power remains the priority, and risk-aversion the main guideline.
The ruling elite are known to be torn by disputes and rivalries.
Just recently, two of Putin’s deputies gave interviews to two Western media outlets offering what sounded like starkly opposite visions for Russia’s development.
But such disputes never spill over into the broad public sphere; members of the elite are primarily concerned about social and political stability and would not stir the public by seeking support for an alternative policy course.
These delaying tactics are enabled by a lack of pressure from below.
Russians may be concerned by growing unemployment and reduced incomes, but this is not manifesting itself in any drive to organize or try to effect political change.
The public below, just like the leaders above, cherish political stability; the popularity ratings of both Prime Minister Putin and President Dmitri Medvedev remain above 70%.
Disgruntlement over the increasingly authoritarian governance may be common among business circles, elements of the neutered political opposition, liberal intellectuals, and even part of the bureaucracy.
But these forces are too timid and fragmented, with no drive for political action.
The current government’s tactic of muddling through without changing the political system or the structure of the economy is fraught with the risk of gradual decline.
To the Kremlin’s rulers, this may seem an acceptable cost for retaining power, but postponing reform will only aggravate Russia’s countless problems.
Besides, muddling through may prove unaffordable even in the short run, if oil prices decline again.
A dramatic curtailment of state resources may eventually push the government toward modernization, but it might also produce an uglier shift— toward harder political crackdown, economic nationalism and an essentially isolationist course.
This would be catastrophic for Russia— to say nothing of relations with the US.
What Role for the State?
WASHINGTON, DC – The financial crisis of 2008 has spurred a global debate on how much government regulation of markets – and what kind – is appropriate.
In the United States, it is a key theme in the upcoming presidential election, and it is shaping politics in Europe and emerging markets as well.
For starters, China’s impressive growth performance over the last three decades has given the world an economically successful example of what many call “state capitalism.”
Brazil’s development policies have also accorded a strong role to the state.
Questions concerning the state’s size and the sustainable role of government are central to the debate over the eurozone’s fate as well.
Many critics of Europe, particularly in the US, link the euro crisis to the outsize role of government there, though the Scandinavian countries are doing well, despite high public spending.
In France, the new center-left government faces the challenge of delivering on its promise of strengthening social solidarity while substantially reducing the budget deficit.
Alongside the mostly economic arguments about the role of government, many countries are experiencing widespread disillusionment with politics and a growing distance between citizens and government (particularly national government).
In many countries, participation rates in national elections are falling, and new parties and movements, such as the Pirate Party in Germany and the Five Star Movement in Italy, reflect strong discontent with existing governance.
In the US, the approval rating of Congress is at a record-low of 14%.
Many there, such as my colleague Bruce Katz at the Brookings Institution, believe that the only solution is to bring a larger share of governance and policy initiation to the state and municipal level, in close partnership with the private sector and civil society.
But that approach, too, might have a downside.
Consider Spain, where too much fiscal decentralization to regional governments contributed significantly to weakening otherwise strong public finances.
A crucial problem for this global debate is that, despite the realities of twenty-first-century technology and globalization, it is still conducted largely as if governance and public policy were almost exclusively the domain of the nation-state.
To adapt the debate to the real challenges that we face, we should focus on four levels of governance and identify the most appropriate allocation of public-policy functions to them.
First, many policies – including support for local infrastructure, land zoning, facilitation of industrial production and training, traffic ordinances, and environmental regulations – can largely be determined at the local or metropolitan level and reflect the wishes of a local electorate.
Of course, defense and foreign policy will continue to be conducted primarily at the second level – the nation-state.
Most nation-states maintain national currencies, and must therefore pursue fiscal and economic policies that support a monetary union.
As the eurozone crisis has starkly reminded us, decentralization cannot extend too far into the budgetary sphere, lest it threaten the common currency’s survival.
The US system is manageable, because the American states are largely constrained to running balanced budgets, while the federal government accounts for most fiscal policy.
Moreover, banking regulation and deposit insurance are centralized in the US, as they must be in a monetary union.
The eurozone has finally recognized this.
So, governance at the nation-state level remains hugely important and is intimately linked to monetary sovereignty.
The key problem in Europe today is whether eurozone members will advance towards something resembling a federal nation-state.
Unless they do, it is difficult to see how the common currency can survive.
There is also a third, regional or continental, level of governance, which is most advanced in the European Union (and is being tested in Latin America, Africa, and Asia) and can be very useful.
Customs unions, free-trade areas, or a single market, as in Europe, allow greater mobility of goods and services, which can lead to benefits from economies of scale that remaining trade impediments at the global level do not permit.
Europe’s borderless Schengen Area is another example of regional supra-national governance.
There are also aspects of infrastructure that can best be addressed at the continental level.
Finally, there is the global level.
The spread of infectious disease, global trade and finance, climate change, nuclear non-proliferation, counterterrorism, and cyber security are just some of the issues that require broad international cooperation and global governance.
In today’s interdependent world, the debate about the role of public policy, the size and functions of government, and the legitimacy of public decision-making should be conducted with the four levels of governance much more clearly in focus.
The levels often will overlap (infrastructure and clean energy issues, for example), but democracy could be greatly strengthened if the issues were linked to the levels at which decisions can best be taken.
As Pascal Lamy, the director of the World Trade Organization, has said, it is not only the “local” that has to be brought to the “global”; the inherently “local” political sphere has to internalize the global or regional context.
That is a huge challenge for political leadership and communication, but, if it is not met, democracy and globalization will be difficult to reconcile.
How to conduct democratic debate with reference to these local, national, continental, and global levels, and to structure a political space that better reflects economic and social space, will be the great challenge of the decades ahead.
What’s Holding Back the World Economy?
NEW YORK – Seven years after the global financial crisis erupted in 2008, the world economy continued to stumble in 2015.
According to the United Nations’ report World Economic Situation and Prospects 2016, the average growth rate in developed economies has declined by more than 54% since the crisis.
An estimated 44 million people are unemployed in developed countries, about 12 million more than in 2007, while inflation has reached its lowest level since the crisis.
More worryingly, advanced countries’ growth rates have also become more volatile.
This is surprising, because, as developed economies with fully open capital accounts, they should have benefited from the free flow of capital and international risk sharing – and thus experienced little macroeconomic volatility.
Furthermore, social transfers, including unemployment benefits, should have allowed households to stabilize their consumption.
But the dominant policies during the post-crisis period – fiscal retrenchment and quantitative easing (QE) by major central banks – have offered little support to stimulate household consumption, investment, and growth. On the contrary, they have tended to make matters worse.
In the US, quantitative easing did not boost consumption and investment partly because most of the additional liquidity returned to central banks’ coffers in the form of excess reserves.
The Financial Services Regulatory Relief Act of 2006, which authorized the Federal Reserve to pay interest on required and excess reserves, thus undermined the key objective of QE.
Indeed, with the US financial sector on the brink of collapse, the Emergency Economic Stabilization Act of 2008 moved up the effective date for offering interest on reserves by three years, to October 1, 2008. As a result, excess reserves held at the Fed soared, from an average of $200 billion during 2000-2008 to $1.6 trillion during 2009-2015.
Financial institutions chose to keep their money with the Fed instead of lending to the real economy, earning nearly $30 billion – completely risk-free – during the last five years.
This amounts to a generous – and largely hidden – subsidy from the Fed to the financial sector.
And, as a consequence of the Fed’s interest-rate hike last month, the subsidy will increase by $13 billion this year.
Perverse incentives are only one reason that many of the hoped-for benefits of low interest rates did not materialize.
Given that QE managed to sustain near-zero interest rates for almost seven years, it should have encouraged governments in developed countries to borrow and invest in infrastructure, education, and social sectors. Increasing social transfers during the post-crisis period would have boosted aggregate demand and smoothed out consumption patterns.
Moreover, the UN report clearly shows that, throughout the developed world, private investment did not grow as one might have expected, given ultra-low interest rates.
In 17 of the 20 largest developed economies, investment growth remained lower during the post-2008 period than in the years prior to the crisis; five experienced a decline in investment during 2010-2015.
Globally, debt securities issued by non-financial corporations – which are supposed to undertake fixed investments – increased significantly during the same period.
Consistent with other evidence, this implies that many non-financial corporations borrowed, taking advantage of the low interest rates. But, rather than investing, they used the borrowed money to buy back their own equities or purchase other financial assets.
QE thus stimulated sharp increases in leverage, market capitalization, and financial-sector profitability.
But, again, none of this was of much help to the real economy.
Clearly, keeping interest rates at the near zero level does not necessarily lead to higher levels of credit or investment.
When banks are given the freedom to choose, they choose riskless profit or even financial speculation over lending that would support the broader objective of economic growth.
By contrast, when the World Bank or the International Monetary Fund lends cheap money to developing countries, it imposes conditions on what they can do with it.
To have the desired effect, QE should have been accompanied not only by official efforts to restore impaired lending channels (especially those directed at small- and medium-size enterprises), but also by specific lending targets for banks.
Instead of effectively encouraging banks not to lend, the Fed should have been penalizing banks for holding excess reserves.
While ultra-low interest rates yielded few benefits for developed countries, they imposed significant costs on developing and emerging-market economies.
An unintended, but not unexpected, consequence of monetary easing has been sharp increases in cross-border capital flows.
Total capital inflows to developing countries increased from about $20 billion in 2008 to over $600 billion in 2010.
At the time, many emerging markets had a hard time managing the sudden surge of capital flows. Very little of it went to fixed investment.
In fact, investment growth in developing countries slowed significantly during the post crisis period.
This year, developing countries, taken together, are expected to record their first net capital outflow – totaling $615 billion – since 2006.
Neither monetary policy nor the financial sector is doing what it’s supposed to do.
It appears that the flood of liquidity has disproportionately gone toward creating financial wealth and inflating asset bubbles, rather than strengthening the real economy.
Despite sharp declines in equity prices worldwide, market capitalization as a share of world GDP remains high.
The risk of another financial crisis cannot be ignored.
There are other policies that hold out the promise of restoring sustainable and inclusive growth.
These begin with rewriting the rules of the market economy to ensure greater equality, more long-term thinking, and reining in the financial market with effective regulation and appropriate incentive structures.
But large increases in public investment in infrastructure, education, and technology will also be needed.
These will have to be financed, at least in part, by the imposition of environmental taxes, including carbon taxes, and taxes on the monopoly and other rents that have become pervasive in the market economy – and contribute enormously to inequality and slow growth.
The views expressed here do not reflect the views of the United Nations or its member states.
What Should Bretton Woods II Look Like?
NEW YORK – For those of us who have long claimed that the world’s international financial architecture needed deep reform, the call for a “Bretton Woods II” is welcome.
Of course, similar calls were made after the Asian and Russian crises of 1997-1998, but were not taken seriously by the rich industrial countries.
Now that these countries are at the center of the storm, perhaps they will now be serious.
Two fundamental problems exist with the call for reform.
First, it lacks content: it is unclear what any eventual Bretton Woods II discussions will be about.
Second, the process started the wrong way, by excluding most countries from the talks.
It is obviously good for the G-7 or a subset of G-7 members to show leadership, but no fundamental reform can occur without an inclusive process that gives both industrial and developing countries, and both large and small countries an adequate voice.
Global institutions, not ad hoc groups of countries, must be at the center of the reform effort.
The clearest issue right now is correcting the deficit of regulations that characterizes global financial markets.
Discussion must start by agreeing on regulatory principles .
An obvious one is that regulations must be comprehensive, to avoid the massive loopholes that led to the current turmoil.
Regulations should also have a strong counter-cyclical focus, preventing excessive accumulation of leverage and increasing capital and provisions (reserves) during booms, as well as preventing asset price bubbles from feeding into credit expansion.
Reliance on financial institutions’ internal models, the major focus of the Basel II agreement on banking regulation, should be discarded.
That strategy has now been exposed as perilous, and the use by financial institutions of similar risk models can lead to greater instability.
Any new regulatory system should be based on a well functioning network of national and regional authorities (still missing in the European Union) and include truly international supervision of financial institutions with a global reach.
Most agree that the International Monetary Fund should not be at the center of the regulatory system.
The Bank for International Settlements and the Basel Committee are better placed, but a fundamental reform is needed to broaden their membership and to avoid a major problem of the Basel Committee: its lack of representation of developing countries.
Three central issues of IMF reform should also be taken on board.
The first is the need for a truly global reserve currency, perhaps based on the IMF Special Drawing Rights (SDRs).
This would overcome both the inequities and the instability that is inherent in a global reserve system based on a national currency.
Today’s system is plagued by cycles of confidence in the dollar and by periodic shocks due to American policies that are adopted independently of their global impact and thus imposed on the rest of the world.
The second issue is the need to place the IMF, not the G-7 – or any other “G” – at the center of global macroeconomic policy coordination.
This is the only way to give developing countries a voice.
The multilateral surveillance on global imbalances that the Fund launched in 2006 was an interesting step in this direction, but it has lacked commitment by the parties, as well as teeth.
The third issue is developing countries’ major demand.  The IMF should lend during balance-of-payments crises rapidly and without overburdening conditions, particularly when the source of the crisis is a rapid reversal of capital flows or a sharp deterioration in the terms of trade.
This would make the IMF more like a central bank, providing liquidity in an agile way, just as advanced countries’ central banks have been providing funds on a massive scale recently.
In the case of the IMF, the financing for such liquidity could be counter-cyclical issues of SDRs.
In all these areas, the IMF should make more active use of regional institutions.
For a decade, I have proposed that the IMF of the future should be seen as the apex of a network of regional reserve funds – that is, a system closer in design to the European Central Bank or the United States Federal Reserve system.
A similar institutional design could be adopted for prudential policies.
A denser network of institutions seems better adapted to a heterogeneous international community, and it is likely to provide better services and give a stronger voice to smaller countries.
Finally, one major deficiency of the current international financial architecture is the lack of an institutional framework – i.e., a court similar to those created to manage bankruptcies in national economies – to manage debt overhangs at the international level.
The current system relies on ad hoc mechanisms, which generally operate too late, after high indebtedness has already imposed devastating effects.
The only regular institutional mechanism is the Paris Club, which deals exclusively with official financing.
Bretton Woods II should resolve this problem by creating an international debt court.
The current financial crisis has made the need for reform of the international financial architecture patently clear.
But any summons to a “Bretton Woods II” conference must be concrete in its content.
A global system for prudential regulation and supervision; a revamped IMF managing a global reserve currency, coordinating global macroeconomic policy, and providing agile credit lines; and an international debt court – all of these must be on the agenda.
What’s Left of Confucianism?
BEIJING – The Chinese government’s very public display of compassion and transparency in response to the devastating earthquake in Sichuan province appears to have strengthened its authority and its bonds with ordinary Chinese people.
The government and army worked hand in hand with legions of volunteers and private networks to rescue quake victims.
Even die-hard cynics were won over by Prime Minister Wen Jiabao’s emotional comforting of the survivors.
But heroic rescue efforts will not be able to help the government forever, so it is worth asking what can provide long-term political legitimacy.
After all, communism has lost its capacity to inspire the Chinese.
So what should replace it?
Most Westerners think the answer is liberal democracy, as did many Chinese liberals in the twentieth century.
But there is another answer, which takes the form of the old and venerable tradition of Confucianism, which is being revived by government officials, critical intellectuals, and ordinary citizens.
The opening ceremony of the Olympic games will highlight this revival: it will feature not quotes from Marx, but sayings from the Analects of Confucius.
Such sayings as “The world’s peoples are all brothers” and “Isn’t one of life’s greatest pleasures to have friends visiting from afar?” will be beamed to billions worldwide, expressing the best that Chinese culture has to offer.
Here, however, we run into trouble.
Ever since the Han dynasty (more than 2,000 years ago), Chinese governments have manipulated the most prominent political interpretations of Confucianism for their own purposes.
Confucianism has been combined with Legalism, China’s other main political tradition, to justify such practices as blind obedience to the ruler, subordination of women, and the use of harsh punishments.
The “official” Confucianism being revived today may be less dangerous – it emphasizes social harmony, meaning the peaceful resolution of conflicts – but it remains a conservative morality.
But there is another interpretation of Confucianism – let’s call it “left Confucianism” – that stresses intellectuals’ obligation to criticize bad policies, obliges governments to provide for the people’s material well-being and support those without key family relations, and calls for governments to adopt a more international-minded outlook and to rely on moral power rather than military might to pursue political aims.
It leaves open basic metaphysical commitments and takes a plural and tolerant view of religious life.
It emphasizes equality of opportunity in education as well as meritocracy in government, with leadership positions being distributed to the community’s most virtuous and qualified members.
Such values owe their origin to the “original Confucianism” of Confucius, Mencius, and Xunzi, which existed before Confucianism became established as state orthodoxy.
In imperial times, the critical tradition was carried forward by such scholars as Huang Zongxi.
Today, new Confucian leftists such as Gan Yang are calling for the creation of a “Confucian socialist republic.”
Confucian scholars such as Jiang Qing openly acknowledge that their interpretation of Confucianism most closely parallels socialist ideals: not the “actually existing socialism” in today’s China, but the socialist ideals defended by Karl Marx and others.
This Confucian tradition aims to influence contemporary politics, but it also remains separate from state power and orthodoxy, always ready to point to the gap between ideals and reality.
Indeed, left Confucianism’s departure from the status quo is precisely the point: it is meant to provide a moral standard for social critics and to inspire visions of a more desirable political future.
Unlike communism, it offers a future that derives its legitimacy from tradition and building upon what the past has to offer – including the socialist tradition – rather than destroying it.
Thus, left Confucians favor institutional reform, arguing that the long-term stability and legitimacy of political institutions requires that they be founded on Chinese traditions.
Jiang Qing advocates a tri-cameral legislature – a democratically elected People’s House representing the common people’s interests, a House of Exemplary Persons to secure the good of all those affected by government policies, including foreigners and minority groups, and a House of Cultural Continuity that would maintain China’s various religions and traditions.
Such concrete proposals for political reform inspired by Confucian values can rarely be published in mainland China.
In fact, there are fewer constraints imposed on public discussion of liberal-democratic institutions precisely because few Chinese are inspired by Western-style liberal democracy.
Today, the most viable alternative to China’s political status quo is left Confucianism.
What’s Stopping Women?
PRINCETON – When I wrote the cover article of the July/August issue of The Atlantic, entitled “Why Women Still Can’t Have It All,” I expected a hostile reaction from many American career women of my generation and older, and positive reactions from women aged roughly 25-35.
I expected that many men of that younger generation would also have strong reactions, given how many of them are trying to figure out how to be with their children, support their wives’ careers, and pursue their own plans.
I also expected to hear from business representatives about whether my proposed solutions – greater workplace flexibility, ending the culture of face-time and “time machismo,” and allowing parents who have been out of the workforce or working part-time to compete equally for top jobs once they re-enter – were feasible or utopian.
What I did not expect was the speed and scale of the reaction – almost a million readers within a week and far too many written responses and TV, radio, and blog debates for me to follow – and its global scope.
I have conducted interviews with journalists in Britain, Germany, Norway, India, Australia, Japan, the Netherlands, and Brazil; and articles about the piece have been published in France, Ireland, Italy, Bolivia, Jamaica, Vietnam, Israel, Lebanon, Canada, and many other countries.
Reactions differ across countries, of course.
Indeed, in many ways, the article is a litmus test of where individual countries are in their own evolution toward full equality for men and women.
India and Britain, for example, have had strong women prime ministers in Indira Gandhi and Margaret Thatcher, but now must grapple with the “woman-as-man” archetype of female success.
The Scandinavian countries know that women around the world look to them as pioneers of social and economic policies that enable women to be mothers and successful career professionals, and that encourage and expect men to play an equal parenting role.
But they are not producing as many women managers in the private sector as the United States is, much less at the top ranks.
The Germans are deeply conflicted.
One major German magazine decided to frame my contribution to the debate as “career woman admits that it’s better to be home.”
Another (more accurately) highlighted my emphasis on the need for deep social and economic change to allow women to have equal choices.
The French remain studiously aloof, even a little disdainful, as befits a nation that rejects “feminism” as an anti-feminine American creation and manages to produce a leader who is simultaneously as accomplished and as elegant as Christine Lagarde, the head of the International Monetary Fund.
Of course, the example of her predecessor, Dominique Strauss-Kahn, and other stories about French male behavior that would count as clear sexual harassment in the stodgy US, suggest that perhaps a bit more feminisme a la Française is in order.
Beyond Europe, Japanese women lament how far they must still go in a relentlessly male and sexist culture.
The Chinese now have a generation of educated, empowered young women who are not sure whether they want to marry at all, owing to the constraints that a husband (and a mother-in-law) would place on their freedom.
Brazilian women point with pride to their president, Dilma Rousseff, but also underscore how much discrimination remains.
In Australia, with its robust work-life debate, women point to the success of Julia Gillard, the first woman prime minister, but note that she has no children (nor does German Chancellor Angela Merkel, the first woman to lead her country).
The global nature of this debate demonstrates at least three important lessons.
First, if “soft power” means exercising influence because “others want what you want,” as Joseph Nye puts it, then women the world over want what American feminists began fighting for three generations ago.
Second, Americans, not surprisingly, have much to learn from other countries’ debates, laws, and cultural norms.
After all, women have ascended the political ladder faster in many other countries than they have in the US.
Indeed, the US has never had a woman president, Senate majority leader, Secretary of the Treasury, or Secretary of Defense.
Those are just the most extreme cases of physical violence that many women face.
Worldwide, more than a billion women confront grinding and overt gender discrimination in education, nutrition, health care, and salaries.
Women’s rights are a global issue of the highest importance, and it is necessary to focus on the worst violations.
Still, consider a recent matter-of-fact report from a sober and respected US magazine.
In an article on “Women in Washington,” the National Journal observed that women in the US capital have come a long way, but “still face career barriers, and often the biggest one is having a family.”
If “having a family” is still a career barrier for women, but not for men, that, too, is a matter of women’s rights (and thus of human rights).
In the global debate about work, family, and the promise of gender equality, no society is exempt.
What’s the Beef in South Korea?
NEW YORK – At the outset of the ongoing violent protests in South Korea over imported beef from the United States, the entire cabinet of South Korean President Lee Myung-bak offered to resign.  Last week, President Lee fired three of them.
But beef, it turns out, represents just the tip of the iceberg of grievances against President Lee.
Only four months in office, his approval rating is down to single digits.
Lee won the December 2007 election with 48.7% of the vote, having run on the “747” platform, promising 7% annual GDP growth, per capita income of $40,000, and to make Korea the world’s seventh largest economy (up from 13th currently).
During his inauguration speech, he vowed to revive the economy, strengthen relations with the US, and deal with North Korea.
So what went wrong?
The economy is slowing – the Bank of Korea cut its growth forecast for this year to 4.7%, while the OECD expects only 4.3% growth – inflation is rising, and some are concerned that Lee’s policies are too geared toward foreign investors and big business.
Lee also must confront factors beyond his control, such as soaring oil prices and the global credit crunch.
Beyond the economy, Lee has been faced with charges of appointing officials with questionable ethics and of heavy-handed leadership (his nickname is “Bulldozer”), which is reflected in efforts to push through a controversial cross-country canal system and an unpopular proposal to privatize the healthcare system.
Furthermore, Lee’s hard-line approach to North Korea – very different from that of his predecessors – has resulted in a popular backlash.
To be sure, as North Korea seemingly snubbed the international community in recent years, there was considerable popular discontent with the previous two administrations’ “sunshine” policy, which emphasized peaceful cooperation prior to eventual Korean unification.
But now, with the North’s destruction of key elements of its nuclear program, international negotiations appear to be bearing fruit, and Lee’s tougher stance has gained less approval than might have been anticipated when he came to office.
The combined effect of these developments has been to erode Lee’s reputation precipitously.
Now, on top of everything, comes the beef controversy.
In April, on his first foreign trip following his inauguration, Lee traveled to the US.
On the eve of the visit, his government agreed to lift the five-year-old ban on US beef imports as part of efforts to improve bilateral ties following years of up-and-down relations during former President Roh Moo-hyun’s administration.
While most in the West applauded Lee’s visit, the reaction in Korea was significantly more negative.
Many in Korea viewed the beef decision as having been hastily taken, and without appropriate consultation of all relevant parties.
In addition, significant segments of the population saw the agreement as Lee selling out or kowtowing to the Americans.
The public reaction began with a demonstration in Seoul on May 2 in which hundreds of teenagers held a candlelight vigil.
Soon, tens of thousands of Koreans joined the protests.
Lee seems to have misjudged the strength of his election victory and the currents of opinion in several important ways.
Given the nationalist sentiments motivating the beef protesters, the strength of opposition forces, and widespread hostility to opening and privatizing the South Korean economy further, Lee, whose authoritarian style of management reminds many of the era of military rule, will now need to move forward carefully.
Lee must reach out to the opposition, both within his party and outside it, to build agreement or negotiate compromise on the contentious issues that his administration faces.
He must reach out to the people of Korea and demonstrate that he is willing to listen to their concerns and act accordingly.
Finally, he must act on his campaign promises to build a more prosperous and confident Korea.
The upside of all this political turmoil is that it demonstrates the vigor of Korean democracy.
Lee’s task now is to discover how best to take advantage of this new political activism.
He has faced political adversity before, and he will again.
And, with approval ratings in the single digits, there’s nowhere to go but up.
What’s Wrong with Ethnic Profiling?
It is counter-productive in the campaign against terrorism.
But police officers across Europe continue to use it.
The inefficiency of ethnic profiling was highlighted in early May, when the British government released figures showing that, of the more than 117,000 police stops made between 2007 and 2008, only 72 led to an arrest for terrorism-related offences.
Other major European countries do not collect data on police stops broken down according to the targets’ ethnic or religious background.
But private research and anecdotal reports provide a frighteningly similar picture.
A massive data-mining exercise in Germany from 2001 to 2003 trawled through personal information on 8.3 million people and failed to find a single terrorist.
Stops and searches conducted under counter-terrorism powers in Europe have produced few terrorism charges and no convictions.
Separate studies in Britain, the Netherlands, Sweden, and the United States have concluded that ethnic profiling wastes time and resources.
As a new report by the Open Society Justice Initiative shows, by targeting ethnic minorities, police alienate some of the very people on whom they depend for cooperation and intelligence.
And by pre-selecting fixed categories of people for heightened scrutiny, the authorities overlook those who do not fit the profile.
A young Spanish man who is a member of an ethnic minority group put it this way: “I worry when I go on the street that the police will stop me and ask me for my papers because of the color of my skin, by my tone of skin, by my way of walking.”
Given its failings, why is ethnic profiling so widespread?
The answer is simple.
When the police use ethnic profiling, they project an image of being tough on crime and terrorism.
This appeases public opinion, which demands robust anti-terrorism action.
Following the September 2001 attacks in New York, and again after the bombings in Madrid in 2004 and London in 2005, law-enforcement authorities across Europe launched mass-arrest operations, undertook widespread surveillance of mosques, carried out stops and searches of people who appeared to be Muslim, and used other intrusive measures that disrupted the lives of – and in many cases humiliated – law-abiding European citizens.
As public anxiety has abated, and senior officials have felt less pressure to show that they are doing something, the most flagrant abuses have declined.
But such practices are still being applied to a lesser degree, and they can be pulled out of the arsenal whenever political or social conditions dictate.
Fortunately, some of Europe’s leaders recognize the problem.
In late April, the European Parliament issued a report highlighting the danger that unrestricted data mining that relies on racial, ethnic, or national origin would subject innocent people to arbitrary stops, travel restrictions, and bans on employment or banking.
The report called for legislation to protect against ethnic profiling.
The solution is not to ignore the threat of terrorism, but to address the threat more intelligently.
Over the past two years, a project that our organization undertook with police forces and civil-society groups in Hungary and Spain found that, when stops were systematically monitored and data publicly reported, the proportion of stops that produced an arrest or other law-enforcement outcome actually increased. Police work became more efficient.
This makes sense.
When officers are required to articulate grounds for suspicion, they are more likely to rely on behavioral factors rather than prejudice.
In the future, the European Union and its member states should fund more collaboration between police and minority communities.
The EU should combat radicalization by addressing exclusion, not by conflating conservative religious faith with terrorism.
And it should make clear that police may not use ethnic, racial, or religious stereotypes.
By treating people as suspicious purely because of who they are, how they look, or where they pray, rather than what they do or have done, ethnic profiling threatens the very ethos of the EU, a union firmly rooted in values of liberty, democracy, and respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms.
What’s Wrong with Transformational Leadership?
CAMBRIDGE – This year’s presidential campaign in the United States has been marked by calls from Barack Obama’s would-be Republican challengers for a radical transformation of American foreign policy.
Campaigns are always more extreme than the eventual reality, but countries should be wary of calls for transformational change.
Things do not always work out as intended.
Foreign policy played almost no role in the 2000 US presidential election.
In 2001, George W. Bush started his first term with little interest in foreign policy, but adopted transformational objectives after the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks.
Like Woodrow Wilson, Franklin Roosevelt, and Harry Truman before him, Bush turned to the rhetoric of democracy to rally his followers in a time of crisis.
Bill Clinton had also talked about enlarging the role of human rights and democracy in US foreign policy, but most Americans in the 1990’s sought normality and a post-Cold War peace dividend rather than change.
By contrast, Bush’s 2002 National Security Strategy, which came to be called the Bush Doctrine, proclaimed that the US would “identify and eliminate terrorists wherever they are, together with the regimes that sustain them.”
The solution to the terrorist problem was to spread democracy everywhere.
Bush invaded Iraq ostensibly to remove Saddam Hussein’s capacity to use weapons of mass destruction and, in the process, to change the regime.
Bush cannot be blamed for the intelligence failures that attributed such weapons to Saddam, given that many other countries shared such estimates.
But inadequate understanding of the Iraqi and regional context, together with poor planning and management, undercut Bush’s transformational objectives.
Although some of Bush’s defenders try to credit him with the “Arab Spring” revolutions, the primary Arab participants reject such arguments.
Bush was described by The Economist as “obsessed by the idea of being a transformational president; not just a status-quo operator like Bill Clinton.”
Then-Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice praised the virtues of “transformational diplomacy.”
But, while leadership theorists and editorial writers tend to think that transformational foreign-policy officials are better in either ethics or effectiveness, the evidence does not support this view.
Other leadership skills are more important than the usual distinction between transformational and “transactional” leaders.
Consider President George H.W. Bush, who did not do “the vision thing,” but whose sound management and execution underpinned one of the most successful US foreign-policy agendas of the past half-century.
Perhaps genetic engineers will one day be able to produce leaders equally endowed with both vision and management skills; comparing the two Bushes (who shared half their genes), it is clear that nature has not yet solved the problem.
This is not an argument against transformational leaders.
Mohandas Gandhi, Nelson Mandela, and Martin Luther King, Jr., played crucial roles in transforming people’s identity and aspirations.
Nor is this an argument against transformational leaders in US foreign policy.
Franklin Roosevelt and Truman made crucial contributions.
But, in judging leaders, we need to pay attention to acts of both omission and commission, to what happened and to what was avoided, to the dogs that barked and to those that did not.
A big problem in foreign policy is the complexity of the context.
We live in a world of diverse cultures, and we know very little about social engineering and how to “build nations.”
When we cannot be sure how to improve the world, prudence becomes an important virtue, and grandiose visions can pose grave dangers.
In foreign policy, as in medicine, it is important to remember the Hippocratic Oath: first, do no harm.
For these reasons, the virtues of transactional leaders with good contextual intelligence are very important.
Someone like George H. W. Bush, unable to articulate a vision but able to steer successfully through crises, turns out to be a better leader than someone like his son, possessed of a powerful vision but with little contextual intelligence or management skill.
Former Secretary of State George Shultz, who served under Ronald Reagan, once compared his role to gardening –“the constant nurturing of a complex array of actors, interests, and goals.”
But Shultz’s Stanford colleague, Condoleezza Rice, wanted a more transformational diplomacy that did not accept the world as it was, but tried to change it.
As one observer put it, “Rice’s ambition is not just to be a gardener – she wants to be a landscape architect.”
There is a role for both, depending on the context, but we should avoid the common mistake of automatically thinking that the transformational landscape architect is a better leader than the careful gardener.
We should keep this in mind as we assess the current US presidential debates, with their constant reference to American decline.
Decline is a misleading metaphor.