This is particularly the case when naïve assistance serves to reinforce a dysfunctional status quo.
Although Deaton supports select initiatives, particularly for delivering medical and technological knowledge, he questions whether the vast majority of aid passes the basic Hippocratic litmus test of “first do no harm.”
For starters, assessing and implementing aid policy requires developing tools to gauge accurately where need is greatest.
Economists have developed some useful indicators, but they are vastly less precise than politicians and the media seem to understand.
Most experts agree, and Deaton concurs, that at least a billion people on the planet live in desperate circumstances resembling conditions that prevailed hundreds of years ago.
Our failure to alleviate their plight is morally reprehensible.
But where, exactly, are the greatest concentrations of poor people?
Data are hard to come by and even harder to interpret.
Attempts to convert national incomes into a common denominator are fraught with complications.
To take one prominent example, there is a 25% margin of error on purchasing-power-parity comparisons between GDP in the United States and China.
In other words, we cannot say whether Chinese output today equals 55% of US GDP or 92%.
So much for precise forecasts of the date when China will overtake the US as the world’s largest economy; we won’t even know for sure when it happens!
This problem is hardly unique to comparisons of China and the US; it applies with perhaps even greater force when comparing incomes of the poor in Mumbai with those of the poor in Freetown.
Another major problem is measuring progress in a given country over time.
How can one compare cost-of-living indices in different periods when new goods are constantly upending traditional consumption models?
Consider the impact of cell phones in Africa, for example, or the Internet in India.
Deaton goes on to offer a revealing critique of some of the most hyped and fashionable approaches to improving aid.
For example, the “hydraulic model” of aid – the idea that if we simply pumped in more aid, better results would gush out – ignores the fact that funds are often fungible.
Even if aid is narrowly targeted at say, food or health, a government can simply economize on expenditures that it might have made anyway and redirect them elsewhere – for example, to the military.
Direct delivery of medical help is one of the best options, but it still can be a huge drain on already-scarce local resources – hospitals, doctors, and nurses.
An influx of Western NGOs often bids talent away from nascent businesses that could help the country long after the NGOs reset their priorities and move on.
Indeed, there is a striking parallel between the problems caused by aid inflows and the “natural resource curse” (or “Dutch disease” as it is termed in Western countries), whereby inflows into one economic sector – typically oil or minerals – drive up economy-wide prices (including the exchange rate), rendering other sectors uncompetitive.
Moreover, a great deal of this aid is delivered in kind and for strategic reasons, often supporting ineffective and kleptocratic governments.
Deaton observes that, in general, Western countries developed without receiving any aid. (Perhaps America’s post-World War II Marshall Plan in Europe is an exception, but that aid was intended more for reconstruction than for development.)
China and India, too, have succeeded in lifting hundreds of millions of people out of poverty with relatively little Western aid (particularly China).
Deaton argues that aid providers must be extremely careful not to interfere with political and social forces that, over time, can generate organic – and therefore more lasting – internal change.
Another intellectually fashionable approach is to conduct small randomized trials to examine, say, the effectiveness of school-attendance incentives or immunization campaigns.
Deaton rightly argues that this approach, now enshrined in World Bank procedures, is of very little use for understanding how to help a country develop more broadly.
The results are often specific to a particular country’s circumstances, and there is no reason to presume that they would scale up when fully confronted with a developing country’s governance problems.
The fact that people in several African countries appear to be worse off now than in 1960 is far more related to despotism and internal conflict than it is to the effectiveness of aid-delivery programs.
Despite these caveats, Deaton’s message is fundamentally positive.
For most of mankind, now is a better time than ever before to be alive.
The path to development remains for others to follow.
Highly targeted Western aid and advice can help, but donors must take more care not to stand in the way of the beneficiaries in assisting them.
A Tear for Argentina
CAMBRIDGE – Argentina’s latest default poses unsettling questions for policymakers.
True, the country’s periodic debt crises are often the result of self-destructive macroeconomic policies.
But, this time, the default has been triggered by a significant shift in the international sovereign-debt regime.
The shift favors hardline creditors in bond issuances governed by US law.
With emerging-market growth slowing, and external debt rising, new legal interpretations that make debt future write-downs and reschedulings more difficult do not augur well for global financial stability.
There are no heroes in this story, certainly not Argentina’s policymakers, who a decade ago attempted unilaterally to force a massive generalized write-down on foreign bondholders.
Economists who trumpeted the “Buenos Aires consensus” as the new way to run economies also look foolish in hindsight.
The International Monetary Fund has long recognized that it made one too many loans to try to save Argentina’s unsustainable dollar peg as it collapsed back in 2001.
This is not the first time that an Argentine default has upended international capital markets.
According to the tabulation that Carmen Reinhart and I compiled in our 2009 book This Time is Different, Argentina has defaulted on seven previous occasions – in 1827, 1890, 1951, 1956, 1982, 1989, and 2001.
Argentina may be almost as famous for its defaults as it is for its soccer teams, but it is hardly alone.
Virtually every emerging-market country has experienced recurrent sovereign-debt problems.
Venezuela is the modern-day record holder, with 11 defaults since 1826 and possibly more to come.
Back in 2003, partly in response to the Argentine crisis, the IMF proposed a new framework for adjudicating sovereign debts.
But the proposal faced sharp opposition not only from creditors who feared that the IMF would be too friendly to problem debtors, but also from emerging markets that foresaw no near-term risk to their perceived creditworthiness.
The healthy borrowers worried that creditors would demand higher rates if the penalties for default softened.
Recently, as an outgrowth of a reconsideration of the IMF’s lending to the periphery of Europe (and Greece in particular), the Fund has advanced another approach to debt rescheduling, one that might be easier to implement.
The IMF now recognizes that the bulk of its financing was effectively being used to allow short-term creditors to exit loss-free.
As a result, there was not enough money left over to help soften budget cuts necessitated by the sudden stop in foreign funding.
The experience of the recent eurozone crisis stands in sharp contrast to the Latin American debt crisis in the 1980s, when banks were not allowed to exit precipitously from their loans.
If the new proposal is adopted, the IMF would conditionally refuse funds to countries carrying debt burdens that Fund staff determine are most likely unsustainable; creditors would first have to agree to a “reprofiling” of debt.
Reprofiling is a euphemism for debt restructuring, which allows countries to borrow from existing creditors for longer periods and at lower interest rates than they would be able to do on the open market.
Although it is far from clear how easily the IMF could hold the line against hard-bargaining creditors, the new policy, if adopted, would toughen the Fund’s approach to cases where it finds itself repeatedly throwing good money after bad.
At present, the United States seems reluctant to go along with the IMF’s proposal.
Evidently, US authorities believe that in some situations geopolitics trump economics (reflected, for example, in the IMF’s recent re-entry into Ukraine after a string of failed programs).
This American resistance is unfortunate.
It would be far better if the US found ways simply to organize outright grants in exceptional cases like Ukraine, rather than design the international financial system around them.
Given the recurring complications of adjudicating sovereign-debt contracts in foreign courts, and the world’s inability to organize a credible and fair procedure for foreign bankruptcies, perhaps the best idea is to steer the bulk of international debt flows through debtor-country courts.
Jeremy Bulow and I made a proposal along these lines 25 years ago; it is still the right approach.
In this scenario, countries interested in borrowing large amounts from abroad would need to develop institutions that made the promise to repay credible.
By and large, experience supports this method.
Indeed, the huge expansion in emerging-market domestic-debt issuance in recent years has helped reduce market tensions (though continuing reliance by corporates on foreign debt still leaves many countries vulnerable).
But domestic borrowing is not a panacea.
To believe that any country issuing debt in its own currency is risk-free as long as the exchange rate is flexible is astonishingly naive.
For one thing, there is still inflation risk, particularly for countries with weak fiscal institutions and heavy debt burdens.
Nonetheless, Argentina’s latest debt trauma shows that the global system for sovereign-debt workouts remains badly in need of repair.
Deepening domestic debt markets – and perhaps change along the lines proposed by the IMF – is sorely needed.
Alasan Pembenar bagi Pembakaran Gading Gajah
JOHANNESBURG – Kenya siap memusnahkan seluruh timbunan gading gajah di negaranya.
Lebih dari 100 ton “emas putih” – baik hasil tindak pidana (disita dari pemburu liar dan penyelundup) dan alami (akibat kematian) – akan dibakar pekan ini.
Di Cina – negara konsumen dan penimbun gading terbesar di dunia – harga terakhir yang diketahui adalah $1.100 per kilogram, sehingga nilai total benda yang dibakar bernilai sekitar $110 juta. 
Bagi sebagian besar pakar ekonomi, pemusnahan objek yang bernilai tinggi dianggap haram.
Tapi setiap negara mempunyai alasan yang masuk akal – bahkan bagi negara miskin seperti Kenya – untuk memusnahkan kekayaan nasionalnya sampai dimakan api.
Pertama, pemusnahan timbunan ini akan memperkuat kredibilitas kampanye untuk menurunkan permintaan di Asia Timur yang diakui sebagai penyebab utama masalah pemburuan liar.
Penurunan permintaan ditujukan untuk melemahkan pasar dengan mengubah selera konsumen.
Ketika harga turun, berkurang pula insentif bagi pemburu liar untuk membunuh gajah.
Akan tetapi bila negara menyimpan timbunan tersebut, ibarat mengirimkan pesan bahwa mereka mungkin menjual gading gajah di masa depan.
Sikap ini akan mengurangi kredibilitas dalam upaya penurunan permintaan; jika terdapat potensi legalisasi penjualan gading di kemudian hari, segala stigma terkait dengan konsumsi gading akan terhapus.
Mereka yang mendukung penjualan gading gajah internasional yang sah dan tunduk pada peraturan berpendapat bahwa upaya penurunan permintaan dapat berjalan berdampingan dengan pembatasan pasokan yang sah.
Namun argumentasi ini memiliki kelemahan yang berbahaya: pendukungnya berasumsi bahwa adanya kartel yang legal – termasuk skema pengaturan pasokan – akan menghilangkan suplier yang ilegal melalui pasokan gading ke pasar dengan harga lebih murah.
Asumsi ini sangat meragukan.
Jumlah gading yang diperdagangkan melalui mekanisme legal tidak akan cukup untuk membanjiri pasar dan menekan harga.
Sesungguhnya, meskipun perdagangan legal melemahkan upaya penurunan permintaan, harga jual gading tetap tinggi dan melestarikan praktik pemburuan liar.
Beberapa negara di Afrika berpendapat bahwa negaranya harus diperbolehkan melakukan perdagangan gading melalui penjualan satu kali dan berdasarkan CITES untuk  mendanai upaya konservasi guna mempertahankan populasi gajah dalam tingkatan yang wajar.
Namun, selain dari rendahnya kemungkinan di beberapa negara dimana pendapatan yang dihasilkan dari penjualan ini akan disalurkan untuk tujuan tersebut, jumlah pemasukan yang akan diperoleh pun masih belum jelas.
Berdasarkan aturan di dalam CITES, pemerintah diperbolehkan menjual hanya kepada pemerintah lain.
Namun harga yang dikehendaki pemerintah di negara lain mungkin hanya sepersepuluh harga ilegal.
Bahkan pemerintah hanya boleh menjual gading gajah yang diperoleh secara alami, bukan hasil sitaan dari pemburu liar atau penyelundup.
Cina dan Amerika Serikat sedang dalam proses penetapan larangan perdagangan gading domestik, sehingga calon pembeli gading di Afrika masih belum jelas.
Vietnam dan Laos adalah salah satu calon kuat, namun keduanya juga bagian dari “segitiga emas” yang memiliki reputasi buruk dimana perdagangan satwa dan tumbuhan liar dan produk-produk terkait terus tumbuh.
Kemungkinan adanya pergeseran dari perdagangan gading secara sah ke pasar dengan pengaturan yang lemah menyerukan pentingnya aksi gabungan secara global, dipimpin oleh pemerintah negara-negara di Afrika melalui koalisi seperti Elephant Protection Initiative, bersama negara-negara seperti Cina.
Pengamanan – dibandingkan pembakaran – timbunan adalah pilihan yang tidak efisien.
Penyimpanan timbunan menghabiskan biaya administratif dan operasional yang besar dan seringkali sia-sia.
Pengelolaan inventori pun membutuhkan sumber daya manusia yang banyak dan teknologi yang tidak sederhana.
Gading gajah harus disimpan dalam ruang ber-AC agar tidak retak atau mudah patah (faktor penting untuk meningkatkan harga jualnya).
Mengingat rendahnya kemungkinan penjualan gading di masa depan, biaya yang dikeluarkan untuk penyimpanan dan pengamanannya kemungkinan besar tidak bisa diperoleh kembali.
Sementara itu, sindikat kriminal hanya perlu menyuap beberapa pejabat setempat agar bisa mengakses objek-objek itu lagi.
Selain itu, terdapat opportunity cost yang tinggi dalam investasi penyimpanan timbunan.
Keterbatasan sumber daya manusia dan keuangan yang dialokasikan dalam manajemen timbunan ini bisa menjadi lebih efisien jika dialihkan ke upaya pelestarian lanskap (yang ke depannya bisa swadaya melalui pembayaran jasa-jasa ekosistem).
Terakhir, pembakaran gading gajah bernilai jutaan dolar AS memiliki efek simbolik yang sangat kuat.
Tindakan ini mengirimkan pesan jelas bahwa gading itu hanya milik gajah dan tidak untuk dimiliki orang lain.
Tindakan ini juga menyatakan sikap bahwa gajah lebih berharga dalam keadaan hidup daripada mati.
Sesungguhnya nilai seekor gajah adalah simbolik.
Gajah adalah spesies kunci bagi pelestarian ekosistem penting.
Namun ganasnya pemburuan liar semakin menghabisi populasi gajah di Afrika dan membunuh sekitar 30.000 ekor gajah setahun.
Pemburuan liar juga berdampak buruk bagi masyarakat, hanya menguntungkan bagi sejumlah pihak namun merugikan sebagian besar warga.
Riset terkini menunjukkan bahwa cagar alam (kawasan khusus untuk konservasi tumbuhan dan satwa liar) di bagian utara Kenya adalah bentuk perlindungan lanskap (dan gajah) yang sangat efektif, apabila insentif yang tepat bisa disediakan.
Hal ini penting sebab di negara-negara seperti Kenya dan Tanzania, mayoritas tumbuhan dan satwa liar hidup di luar wilayah yang ditetapkan sebagai kawasasan konservasi.
Kenya layak dipuji atas keputusan yang bijak dan efisien ini.
Negara-negara tetangga serta negara lain di bagian selatan patut mencontoh Kenya.
Idealnya, semua negara sebaran (range-state) harus memusnahkan timbunan di masing-masing negara untuk mengatasi persoalan aksi bersama secara regional.
Tindakan ini akan mengirimkan sinyal yang tegas ke pasar global bahwa gading gajah bukan komoditi yang bisa diperjual-belikan, baik sekarang atau di masa depan.
A Massacre in Africa
LONDON – Why is it that schools and schoolchildren have become such high-profile targets for murderous Islamist militants?
The 147 students killed in an attack by the extremist group Al-Shabab at a college close to Kenya’s border with Somalia are only the latest victims in a succession of outrages in which educational institutions have been singled out for attack.
Last December, in Peshawar, Pakistan, seven Taliban gunmen strode from classroom to classroom in the Army Pubic School, executing 145 children and teachers.
More recently, as more than 80 pupils in South Sudan were taking their annual exams, fighters invaded their school and kidnapped them at gunpoint.
Their fate has been to join the estimated 12,000 students conscripted into children’s militias in the country’s escalating civil war.
Every day, another once-vibrant Syrian school is bombed or militarized, with two million children now in refugee camps or exiled to makeshift tents or huts.
And next week will mark the first anniversary of the extremist group Boko Haram’s night-time abduction of 276 schoolgirls from their dormitories in Chibok, in Nigeria’s northern Borno state.
With continued assaults on local schools, Boko Haram has escalated its war against education – making the last two years Nigeria’s worst in terms of the violation of children’s rights.
In the past five years, there have been nearly 10,000 attacks on schools and educational establishments.
Why is it that schools, which should be recognized as safe havens, have become instruments of war, and schoolchildren have become pawns in extremists’ strategies?
And why have such attacks been treated so casually – the February abduction in South Sudan elicited barely any international comment – when they in fact constitute crimes against humanity.
In the depraved minds of terrorists, each attack has its own simple logic; the latest shootings, for example, are revenge by Al-Shabab for Kenya’s intervention in Somalia’s civil war.
But all of the recent attacks share a new tactic – to create shock by exceeding what even many of the most hardened terrorists had previously considered beyond the pale.
They have become eager to stoke publicity from the public outrage at their methods, even transmitting images of their crimes around the world.
But there is an even more powerful explanation for this spate of attacks on children.
A now-common extremist claim is that education is acculturating African and Asian children to Western ways of thinking (Boko Haram in the local Hausa dialect means “Western education is a sin”).
Moreover, extremists like Boko Haram and Al-Shabab calculate that they can attack schools with impunity.
Hospitals tend to be more secure, because the Geneva Conventions give them special protection as safe havens – a fact often recognized by even the most murderous of terrorist groups.
Until recently, we have done far too little to protect schools and prevent their militarization during times of conflict.
But, just as wars should never be waged by targeting hospitals, so combatants should never violate schools.
Once slow to respond, the world is now acting.
Thirty countries have recently signed up to the Lucens or Safe School guidelines, which instruct their military authorities how to prevent schools from being used as instruments of war.
When law and order break down, people need not only material help – food, shelter, and health care – but also hope.
There is no more powerful way to uphold the vision of a future free from conflict than by keeping schools running.
Pagar yang Baik Melindungi Spesies
NAIROBI – Negara-negara di Afrika seringkali dikritik karena gagal mengatasi tantangan-tantangan lingkungan hidup.
Para pengamat sering mengutip terjadinya penurunan luas habitat sehubungan dengan pertumbuhan populasi, degradasi lahan, dan industrialisasi.
Lalu ada satu tuduhan yang paling sering diungkapkan: bahwa kenaikan perburuan liar membuat spesies seperti gajah dan badak punah.
Meskipun demikian, di Kenya, program konservasi yang inovatif dan mendalam sedang dilakukan.
Dimulai di pegunungan Aberdare di pusat Kenya, “Rhino Ark,” awalnya dibentuk untuk melindungi badak hitam yang hampir punah dari para pemburu yang merusak, dan didukung oleh orang-orang yang dulunya mungkin menentang pendiriannya: komunitas lokal di beberapa daerah pertanian paling produktif di negara ini.
Pada tahun 1988, para ahli konservasi memutuskan akan membiayai dan membuat sebuah pagar listrik untuk melindungi area Taman Nasional Aberdare yang berbatasan dengan lahan pertanian skala kecil.
Pagar tersebut dirancang untuk menghindari penyusupan dari populasi manusia dan berkurangnya habitat taman nasional tersebut.
Tapi pagar ini juga melindungi para petani yang tanamannya sering dirusak oleh gajah atau satwa liar lainnya yang menyerang lahan mereka.
Para petani lokal menyambut baik inisiatif ini, yang mempengaruhi keputusan mereka untuk menambah panjang pagar untuk mengelilingi keseluruhan perimeter di kawasan Aberdare.  
Pegunungan Aberdare, yang terdiri dari hutan adat dan penampungan air yang vital seluas 2.000 km persegi, juga berfungsi sebagai sebuah taman nasional dan sangat penting bagi Kenya.
Empat dari sungai-sungai terbesar di negara tersebut, mengalir ke utara, barat, timur, dan selatan, bermula dari pegunungan ini dan menyediakan air serta listrik bagi tujuh kota besar, termasuk ibu kota Kenya, Nairobi.
Di bagian lereng gunung yang lebih rendah, empat juta petani memanfaatkan tanah subur dan curah hujan tinggi.
Sedangkan 30% produksi teh dan 70% kopi di Kenya dihasilkan di bukit di kaki gunung dan lereng tinggi.
Selama 21 tahun, pagar di sekitar Aberdares dibuat dengan susah payah dan didukung sebagian besarnya oleh sektor swasta di Kenya, donator perorangan, dan kegiatan pengumpulan dana yang inovatif seperti Rhino Charge, sebuah acara motor off-road yang berhasil menangkap imajinasi publik Kenya dan mengumpulkan lebih dari $1 juta setiap tahunnya.
Namun, saat pagar yang sudah sepenuhnya dialiri listrik ini selesai pada tahun 2009, pemerintah yang saat itu dipimpin oleh Presiden Mwai Kibaki, telah menjadi mitra penting bagi Kenya Wildlife Service (KWS) dan Kenya Forest Service (KFS) yang terlibat secara mendalam di dalam proyek ini.
Dengan dukungan pemerintah Kenya, Rhino Ark telah dapat mengalihkan perhatiannya ke kawasan hutan lain yang mulai mengalami degradasi – seperti Gunung Eburu di Kompleks Hutan Mau, yang memiliki pemandangan Danau Naivasha di bawahnya, dan Gunung Kenya, sebuah World Heritage Site yang terkena dampak besar dari konflik antar manusia dan satwa liar.
Pagar Gunung Ebru sepanjang 45 kilometer telah selesai dibuat tahun lalu.
Pagar Gunung Kenya, sepanjang 450 kilometer, akan lebih panjang dari proyek Aberdares dan kini mengalami kemajuan pesat, sekarang pembangunan sudah mencapai 80 kilometer.
Tentu saja, pembangunan pagar hanya sebuah permulaan.
Pagar-pagar ini harus dipelihara dan dikelola (misalnya beberapa pos pagar di Aberdares sudah harus diganti), koridor satwa liar harus dibuat, dan komunitas lokal membutuhkan dukungan.
Semua area harus tetap diawasi melalui patroli udara dan darat (dengan berjalan kaki) di sepanjang garis pagar – tindakan ini merupakan sebuah proses monitoring dengan dampak biaya yang besar.
Namun manfaat-manfaat yang dihasilkan pun signifikan.
Pagar-pagar ini membuat petugas selalu waspada akan kejadian perburuan liar – khususnya gajah, badak, dan spesies yang sangat langka seperti kijang Gunung Bongo, yang sekarang hanya ada di Aberdares, Gunung Kenya, dan Kompleks Hutan Mau, termasuk Gunung Eburu.
Komunitas lokal terlibat dalam pemeliharaan seluruh area pagar dan kawasan hutan.
Sebagai hasilnya, mereka menjadi pelindung pagar, menjaga agar pagar tersebut tidak ditumbuhi tanaman dan memperbaiki kerusakan yang disebabkan oleh satwa liar dan faktor lainnya – serta mempelajari keahlian-keahlian baru selama berjalannya proses.
Tujuan jangka panjangnya adalah perlindungan hutan kritis ini selamanya.
Untuk mencapai tujuan tersebut, dana abadi (endowment funds) tengah dibentuk sebagai kerjasama publik dan swasta, menyatukan Rhino Ark, KWS dan KFS, dan perwakilan dari komunitas lokal.
Perjanjian perwaliamanatan/akta trust (trust deeds) dibuat di tingkat lokal dan mengelola dana-dana yang pada akhirnya akan dipakai untuk membiayai pemeliharaan pagar.
Aberdare Trust Deed mulai berlaku sejak bulan Oktober lalu.
Para petani yang bekerja keras di daerah ini sekarang dapat melihat nilai tambah dari hidup berdampingan dengan pagar ini.
Semenjak selesainya pembangunan pagar Aberdares, nilai tanah petani lokal meningkat empat kali lipat.
Mereka dapat mengerjakan ladangnya dengan damai untuk pertama kalinya selama lebih dari satu abad, anak-anak mereka dapat berjalan kaki dari dan menuju sekolah tanpa takut diserang satwa liar, dan pendidikan konservasi kini menjadi bagian dari kurikulum.
Pelajaran utamanya sangat lugas: Pagar yang baik akan bermanfaat bagi semuanya.
Kerry and Europe
Those whom the gods would destroy, they grant their wishes.
Those in Europe and around the world who yearn for a victory by John Kerry in the US presidential election ought to keep that bit of ancient Greek wisdom in mind.
During the Cold War, America was the natural leader of the Atlantic community, but the price of this leadership was that the US had to accept the autonomy and influence of its European allies.
After the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, President Bush embarked on a unilateral foreign policy.
The traditional Atlantic alliance was replaced by what the US called "coalitions of the willing," where "the mission determines the coalition," not historic alliances.
This policy divided Europe. It has also fueled deep divisions in the US presidential campaign, with one of the most potent arguments used by Kerry being that he will restore trust between America and its allies; that as president he will recruit international help in Iraq.
America undoubtedly needs more allies to bring Iraq's chaos under control and to build an Iraqi state that is seen as legitimate both by Iraqis and the world.
Allies are seen as an answer to America's twin credibility and legitimacy deficits in its occupation of Iraq.
But can a Kerry-led US get a fresh start in Europe?
Will a President Kerry really be able to rally allies to America's side?
Iraq's mayhem has hardened the antagonism of countries like France and Germany, which led the opposition to the war in the first place.
Even countries that rallied to Bush's call for help, like my homeland, Poland, are now wary of their involvement.
Consider the attitudes of France and Germany.
Their leaders can scarcely hold their tongues, so badly do they want a Kerry victory.
But they are not going to change their policy to help Kerry win, and they won't change even if he does.
As a gesture intending to boost Kerry's chances, German Defense Minister Peter Struck suggested that his country might reconsider its position on troops in Iraq.
But Chancellor Gerhard Schröder instantly shot down that trial balloon, declaring: "To be clear, we will send no troops to Iraq."
Actually, Germany, like most European countries, is politically and logistically unable to send meaningful military forces to Iraq.
France, which did ponder sending 15 000 soldiers to Iraq had the UN given its blessing to the war, is as clear as Schröder.
According to Michel Barnier, France's Foreign Minister, "Neither today, nor tomorrow," will French troops be sent.
Both countries firmly believe that military success in Iraq is impossible.
So will transatlantic relations remain as poisoned as they are now if Kerry wins?
Is Texas swagger merely to be replaced by the distinguished disdain of a Boston Brahmin?
This is probably too pessimistic.
Europe cannot give an openly negative answer to Kerry's request for help, because that would be a slap in the face to the most pro-European American likely to be elected president anytime soon.
Such a rejection would not only put transatlantic relations even more at risk than they are today; it would also put relations
So some compromise must be found should Kerry win.
Fortunately, one is possible.
The first part is purely face-saving: both parties must simply declare their good will.
Today, European leaders are unlikely to throw even that slender lifeline to Bush.
The reality behind such a declaration is that Europe would deliver low-level military and economic involvement in Iraq.
Most European leaders understand the tiny wiggle room that Kerry will have if elected.
The near certainty that the House of Representatives will be in Republican hands, and perhaps the Senate, too, means that America's Congress will pounce on any supposed attempt by Kerry to "sell out" Bush's war.
So Kerry may put even more pressure on Europe to help out in Iraq than the unilateralist Bush ever did.
But there is a second, more fundamental, part to any viable compromise: a redefinition of transatlantic relations.
The key point here is joint recognition that a fundamental transatlantic community of values exists, and that both sides need each other.
That transatlantic community must jointly feel responsible for maintaining peace and stability in the world.
The US must accept this principle, and recognize that Europe is a partner, not merely a servant, whether willing or unwilling, of American orders.
If burdens are to be shared, decisions must be shared as well.
This will require that America recognize the validity of Europe's view of the Israel-Palestinian conflict as the major roadblock toward a peaceful Middle East. Europe, for its part, must not only show that it feels responsible for the world, but that it is ready and willing to act accordingly by contributing in a significant way to reconstructing Iraq.
Europe's military means may be limited, but it has important experience in peacekeeping and "state building" that can be brought to bear.
Is Europe really ready to undertake such an effort if its wish for a Kerry victory comes true?
Kerry vs. Bush: Will Reason Prevail?
With over 1,000 US deaths in Iraq, and the huge pressures that the occupation of that benighted country has put on American troops around the world, it is clear that - for the first time in decades - foreign policy issues may determine the outcome of a US presidential election.
Ordinary Americans are asking themselves the same questions that people around the world are asking: how should America's global supremacy be used?
What price must be paid for that supremacy to be maintained?
What limits on the use of US military power are acceptable or necessary?
These have long been dominant questions in America's strategic debate. But, after the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, they became confused with another debate, one far more important for a US electorate that feels threatened: how can alliances and multilateral institutions protect Americans?
John Kerry's great virtue has been to resist confusing the demand for security and peace with the hegemonic impulses of America the hyper-power.
Nationalist and neo-conservative currents within the Bush administration believe that unilateral action best serves US interests because it handcuffs American power the least.
On this view, the security of the US can be guaranteed through energetic military action, with or without allies.
Hence the Bush administration's tendency to weaken the ties of America's permanent alliances, including those that NATO represents.
Unilateral announcement of troop reductions in Europe and Asia, where US forces primarily serve (as in South Korea) to dissuade aggression, can only be seen as a corollary of this tendency.
The Bush doctrine's bedrock notion is that of "pre-emptive war," a doctrine that lacks international legitimacy and that therefore can usually count on only a limited number of allies.
The idea behind pre-emptive wars is that American force should be projected through high-tech, blitzkrieg type wars waged from US soil, or from the soil of uncritical allies.
On this view, NATO is merely to serve as a means to mobilize Europeans to tackle the inevitable postwar stabilization and reconstruction missions - obviating the need for the US to place its forces under NATO command.
This is what happened in Afghanistan.
But as NATO's Secretary General has said, if it is the mission that defines the coalition, then NATO - a permanent alliance - is no longer needed.
John Kerry is focused upon the same type of security problems as Bush. This leaves many observers skeptical about the possibility for real change.
Where he differs fundamentally from Bush is in his belief that resolving international problems that affect the US almost always calls for the support of others. He therefore considers the revival of America's alliances to be a key foreign policy priority, and he has proposed that US forces in Iraq should be integrated into a NATO operation, as long as this remains under US command.
Acting jointly means that the US will have to take into account other interests and views - views that may not always be in harmony with its own.
America will have to accept a world that is regulated not by the US unilaterally, but by global institutions and permanent alliances.
And the norms and rules that govern international institutions constitute a boundary on American power - and thus as a check on its hegemony.
Kerry and a growing number of Americans recognize that accepting limits on US power and the use of military force are a precondition for America's ultimate security, that what binds can also strengthen, and that such limits will reinforce America's ability to tackle the crisis in Iraq.
Kerry knows that in most cases military power alone cannot be decisive, as there are other dimensions of power - so-called "soft power" - that are essential to resolving crises and establishing peace.
These dimensions include international legitimacy, values (including tolerance), and public opinion.
The coming US election recalls a famous debate described by Thucydides in his History of the Peloponnesian War, concerning how Athens should respond to the revolt of Mytilene.
The vote supported those who felt that "those who make wise decisions are more formidable to their enemies than those who rush madly into strong action."
Let us hope that reason also prevails this time round.
Stop Subsidizing Climate Change
LONDON – Next week, governments will gather in Warsaw, Poland, for a crucial round of climate negotiations, with both expectation and ambition running at an all-time low.
But it does not have to be like this: The Warsaw meeting provides an opportunity to galvanize action on one of the most potent forces driving climate change – the billions of dollars spent by governments on fossil-fuel subsidies.
The Warsaw talks are a staging post on the route to the 2015 United Nations climate summit in Paris, at which governments will seek to forge an agreement that prevents dangerous climate change, defined as global warming of more than two degrees Celsius.
Failure would expose future generations to catastrophic climate risks, while trapping millions of people in poverty as a result of more frequent, intense, and protracted droughts, floods, and storms.
Basic carbon arithmetic illustrates the scale of the problem.
According to the most recent assessment of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), we are on a trajectory toward exhausting the twenty-first century’s entire carbon budget by 2030.
So, can we head off the impending collision between the energy systems driving the global economy and our planet’s ecological limits?
The necessary innovations are emerging.
Recent developments in wind, solar, tidal, bio-energy, geothermal, and fuel-cell technology are transforming the scope for low-carbon energy production.
Aside from saving the planet, these technologies could open up new investment opportunities, deliver affordable energy, and sustain growth.
But that potential will be realized only if governments actively pursue green industrial policies.
They need to align the goal of avoiding dangerous climate change with disincentives for carbon-intensive energy – including taxes, carbon markets, and support for green alternatives.
Fossil-fuel subsidies have the opposite effect.
They actively promote carbon-intensive energy and deter green investment.
According to the International Energy Agency, governments pumped $523 billion into fossil-fuel subsidies in 2011.
From a climate-change perspective, this is a world turned upside down: for every $1 in support for renewable energy, another $6 promotes carbon-intensive fuels.
Most fossil-fuel subsidies can be traced to developing countries, where they drain budgets and provide transfers to wealthy households.
But rich countries operate their own subsidies, which average $7 for every ton of CO2 they emit.
Research by the United Kingdom’s Overseas Development Institute that examined tax and consumer subsidies provided by governments in 11 OECD countries found support equivalent to $72 billion, or around $112 per adult.
It is difficult to think of a more irresponsible use of public money.
The inconsistencies between climate goals and energy policies are becoming increasingly stark.
Germany is providing lavish support for the construction of new coal plants.
Britain offers generous tax concessions for oil and gas exploration, including bumper deals for companies involved in fracking.
The United States spends heavily to subsidize gasoline and other fossil fuels.
In all of these cases, bold climate-change targets are being undermined by business-as-usual subsidies.
Carbon markets could provide a corrective to fossil-fuel subsidies, but they are not doing so.
The European Union claims the mantle of global leadership on climate change, yet its leaders have allowed the price of carbon in the EU’s Emissions Trading Scheme to collapse, owing to reckless over-supply of carbon credits.
By contrast, South Korea has signaled that it will enforce a greenhouse-gas cap that is projected to push prices to 20 times the EU level by 2017 – and green-energy investment there is booming.
With energy prices moving center stage, there is a danger that already-weak incentives for investment in low-carbon energy will be further undermined.
Across Europe, calls for “affordable energy” are fast becoming a euphemism for increased fossil-fuel subsidies and a rollback of commitments on green energy.
Recent debates in the UK illustrate the emerging fault lines.
Five years ago, Britain broke the international mold by enacting legislation mandating an 80% cut in greenhouse-gas emissions by 2050.
Today, political leaders openly attack “burdensome” green taxes.
The government has delayed setting a decarbonization target for electricity generation, there is uncertainty over pricing for green energy sources, and the Green Investment Bank is under-financed.
Unsurprisingly, investment in renewable energy has fallen to a four-year low.
Expecting the Warsaw climate negotiations to deliver a major breakthrough would be a triumph of hope over evidence.
Yet the talks provide a platform for practical action – and for governments to demonstrate leadership by example.
The G-20 countries, which have already agreed, in principle, to phase out fossil-fuel subsidies, should seize the moment.
They could hold a “side-summit” in Warsaw at which they set a schedule for translating principle into practice.
The target should be full elimination of all fossil-fuel subsidies by 2020.
Rich G-20 countries could go further and faster.
They should pledge to eliminate all subsidies by the time they arrive at the UN’s COP 21 climate-change summit in Paris in 2015, starting next year with the withdrawal of all support for gasoline and for coal, oil, and gas exploration.
And they should divert part of the savings into energy cooperation aimed at supporting low-carbon transitions in developing countries.
Eliminating fossil-fuel subsidies would be just one small step on the road to a global climate agreement.
On one hand, capitalism offers the best safeguard of individual freedom, choice, and entrepreneurial initiative.
On the other hand, unregulated markets fail to achieve two central goals of any civilized society: “The outstanding faults of the economic society in which we live are its failure to provide for full employment and its arbitrary and inequitable distribution of wealth and incomes.” This suggested an active role for government, which dovetailed with important strands of left-wing thought.
Until The General Theory was published in 1936, social democrats did not know how to go about achieving full employment.
Their policies were directed at depriving capitalists of the ownership of the means of production.
How this was to produce full employment was never worked out.
There was an idea, originally derived from Ricardo and Marx, that the capitalist class needed a “reserve army of the unemployed” to maintain its profit share.
If profits were eliminated, the need for that reserve army would disappear.
Labor would be paid what it was worth, and everyone willing to work would be able to find a job.
But, apart from the political impossibility of nationalizing the whole economy peacefully, this approach suffered from the fatal flaw of ignoring the role of aggregate demand.
It assumed that demand would always be sufficient if profits were eliminated.
Keynes demonstrated that the main cause of bouts of heavy and prolonged unemployment was not worker encroachment on profits, but the fluctuating prospects of private investment in an uncertain world.
Nearly all unemployment in a cyclical downturn was the result of the failure of investment demand.
Thus, the important thing was not to nationalize the capital stock, but to socialize investment. Industry could be safely left in private hands, provided the state guaranteed enough spending power in the economy to maintain a full-employment level of investment.
This could be achieved by monetary and fiscal policy: low interest rates and large state investment programs.
In short, Keynes aimed to achieve a key social democratic objective without changing the ownership of industry.
Nevertheless, he did think that redistribution would help secure full employment. A greater tendency to consume would “serve to increase at the same time the inducement to invest.”
Today, ideas about full employment and equality remain at the heart of social democracy.
But the political struggle needs to be conducted along new battle lines.
Whereas the front used to run between government and the owners of the means of production – the industrialists, the rentiers – now, it runs between governments and finance.
Such measures as the efforts by the European Parliament to regulate the derivatives market or the British government’s ban on short selling in the wake of the financial crisis or the demand to caps bankers’ bonuses &#160;are contemporary expressions of the wish to reduce the power of financial speculation to damage the economy.
The new focus on the need to tame the power of finance is largely a consequence of globalization.
Capital moves across borders more freely and more quickly than goods or people do.
Yet, while large global firms habitually use their high concentration of financial resources to press for further de-regulation (“or we will go somewhere else”), the crisis has turned their size into a liability.
Being too big to fail simply means being too big.
Keynes saw that “it is the financial markets’ precariousness which creates no small part of our contemporary problem of securing sufficient investment.”
That rings truer today – more than 70 years later – than in his own day. Rather than securing investment for productive sectors of the economy, the financial industry has become adept at securing investment in itself.
This, once again, calls for an activist government policy.
Yet, as Keynes would have argued, it is important that the expansion of government involvement is informed by sound economics rather than political ideology, social democratic or otherwise.
State intervention needs to bridge gaps that the private sector cannot reasonably be expected to do on its own.
The current crisis has shown with utmost clarity that private markets are unable to self-regulate; domestic regulation is therefore a key area in which government has a role to play.
Similarly, time-inconsistency issues prevent large international firms from compartmentalizing their markets. Re-erecting barriers to capital flows in the form of international taxes, thereby cordoning off crises before they turn global, is therefore another task for government.
Keynes’s main contribution to social democracy, however, does not lie in the specifics of policy, but in his insistence that the state as ultimate protector of the public good has a duty to supplement and regulate market forces.
If we need markets to stop the state from behaving badly, we need the state to stop markets from behaving badly.
Nowadays, that means stopping financial markets from behaving badly.
That means limiting their power, and their profits.
Keynes’s General Theory at 80
LONDON – In 1935, John Maynard Keynes wrote to George Bernard Shaw: “I believe myself to be writing a book on economic theory which will largely revolutionize – not, I suppose, at once but in the course of the next ten years – the way the world thinks about its economic problems.”
And, indeed, Keynes’s magnum opus, The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money, published in February 1936, transformed economics and economic policymaking.
Eighty years later, does Keynes’s theory still hold up?
Two elements of Keynes’s legacy seem secure.
First, Keynes invented macroeconomics – the theory of output as a whole.
He called his theory “general” to distinguish it from the pre-Keynesian theory, which assumed a unique level of output – full employment.
In showing how economics could remain stuck in an “underemployment” equilibrium, Keynes challenged the central idea of the orthodox economics of his day: that markets for all commodities, including labor, are simultaneously cleared by prices.
And his challenge implied a new dimension to policymaking: Governments may need to run deficits to maintain full employment.
The aggregate equations that underpin Keynes’s “general theory” still populate economics textbooks and shape macroeconomic policy.
Even those who insist that market economies gravitate toward full employment are forced to argue their case within the framework that Keynes created.
Central bankers adjust interest rates to secure a balance between total demand and supply, because, thanks to Keynes, it is known that equilibrium might not occur automatically.
Keynes’s second major legacy is the notion that governments can and should prevent depressions.
Widespread acceptance of this view can be seen in the difference between the strong policy response to the collapse of 2008-2009 and the passive reaction to the Great Depression of 1929-1932.
As the Nobel laureate Robert Lucas, an opponent of Keynes, admitted in 2008: “I guess everyone is a Keynesian in a foxhole.”
Having said this, Keynes’s theory of “underemployment” equilibrium is no longer accepted by most economists and policymakers.
The global financial crisis of 2008 bears this out.
The collapse discredited the more extreme version of the optimally self-adjusting economy; but it did not restore the prestige of the Keynesian approach.
To be sure, Keynesian measures halted the global economy’s downward slide.
But they also saddled governments with large deficits, which soon came to be viewed as an obstacle to recovery – the opposite of what Keynes taught.
With unemployment still high, governments returned to pre-Keynesian orthodoxy, cutting spending to reduce their deficits – and undercutting economic recovery in the process.
There are three main reasons for this regression.
First, the belief in the labor-market-clearing power of prices in a capitalist economy was never wholly overturned.
So most economists came to view persistent unemployment as an extraordinary circumstance that arises only when things go terribly wrong, certainly not the normal state of market economies. The rejection of Keynes’ notion of radical uncertainty lay at the heart of this reversion to pre-Keynesian thinking.
Second, post-war Keynesian “demand-management” policies, credited with having produced the long post-1945 boom, ran into inflationary trouble at the end of the 1960s.
Alert to a worsening tradeoff between inflation and unemployment, Keynesian policymakers tried to sustain the boom through incomes policy – controlling wage costs by concluding national agreements with trade unions.
Income policy was tried in many countries from the 1960s to the end of the 1970s.
At best, there were temporary successes, but the policies always broke down.
Milton Friedman provided a reason that jibed with growing disenchantment with wage and price controls, and that reasserted the pre-Keynesian view of how market economies work.
Inflation, Friedman said, resulted from attempts by Keynesian governments to force down unemployment below its “natural” rate.
The key to regaining stable prices was to abandon the full-employment commitment, emasculate the trade unions, and deregulate the financial system.
And so the old orthodoxy was reborn.
The full-employment target was replaced by an inflation target, and unemployment was left to find its “natural” rate, whatever that was.
It was with this defective navigational equipment that politicians sailed full steam ahead into the icebergs of 2008.
The final reason for Keynesianism’s fall from grace was the rightward ideological shift that began with British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher and US President Ronald Reagan.
The shift was due less to rejection of Keynesian policy than to hostility toward the enlarged state that emerged after World War II.
Keynesian fiscal policy was caught in the crossfire, with many on the right condemning it as a manifestation of “excessive” government intervention in the economy.
Two final reflections suggest a renewed, if more modest, role for Keynesian economics.
An even bigger shock to the pre-2008 orthodoxy than the collapse itself was the revelation of the corrupt power of the financial system and the extent to which post-crash governments had allowed their policies to be scripted by the bankers.
To control financial markets in the interests of full employment and social justice lies squarely in the Keynesian tradition.
Second, for new generations of students, Keynes’s relevance may lie less in his specific remedies for unemployment than in his criticism of his profession for modeling on the basis of unreal assumptions.
Students of economics eager to escape from the skeletal world of optimizing agents into one of fully-rounded humans, set in their histories, cultures, and institutions will find Keynes’s economics inherently sympathetic.
That is why I expect Keynes to be a living presence 20 years from now, on the centenary of the General Theory, and well beyond.
Keynes versus the Classics: Round Two
Unfortunately “this sanitized vision of the economy led most economists to ignore all the things that could go wrong.”
So now economists will have to accept “the importance of irrational and often unpredictable behavior, face up to the often idiosyncratic imperfections of markets and accept that an elegant economic ‘theory of everything’ is a long way off.”
Rather than defend that theory, Cochrane admits that “asset prices move more than reasonable expectations of future cash flows.” Unfortunately, “no theory is particularly good at that right now.”
But it’s theoretical nihilism, Cochrane argues, to ascribe these excessive fluctuations to “irrationality” as Krugman does.
What Krugman is really after (“though he can’t quite come out and say this”) is for the government to “take charge of the allocation of capital.”
And the one thing we do know is that however badly asset markets behave, government control “has always been much worse.”
Cochrane’s heaviest punching is reserved for Krugman’s support for President Barack Obama’s fiscal stimulus.
He invokes the hoary old “Ricardian equivalence theorem,” revived by the Harvard economist Robert Barro, according to whom “debt-financed spending can’t have any effect, because people, seeing the higher future taxes that must pay off the debt, will simply save more.
They will buy the new government debt and leave all spending decisions unaltered.”
In short, Krugman “has absolutely no idea about what caused the crash, what policies might have prevented it, and what policies we should adopt going forward” – except that the government should now spend money like a drunken sailor.
Far from having too much math, economists need more, in order to “keep the logic straight.”
On the stimulus, though, Krugman achieves a knock-out punch. The view that extra government spending “crowds out” an equal amount of private spending, so that its net stimulus effect is zero, would be true only if the economy were at full employment.
Indeed, the Chicago School tacitly assumes that economies are always at full employment.
They are unfazed by the fact that America’s economy has shrunk by 4% in the last year and that over 6 million people have been added to the unemployment rolls.
To Chicago economists, an increase in the number of idle workers represents a voluntary choice for leisure.
In a concession to commonsense, they concede that people may make mistakes and, to that extent, a stimulus may be beneficial.
But they insist that the only stimulus that will work is printing money.
This will drive down interest rates and lead to an economic rebound.
Against this view, Keynes pointed out that interest-rate reductions may not do the job, because at zero or near-zero rates investors hoard cash rather than lend it out.
Hence, as he put it in 1932, there may be “no escape from prolonged and perhaps interminable depression except by direct state intervention to promote and subsidize new investment” – which is what the Obama administration is rightly doing.
On the question of what caused the crash, the debate is more even.
Krugman is hampered by the fact that he attributes the crash to “irrationality,” which, as Cochrane points out, is no theory.
This is because Krugman refuses to take seriously Keynes’s crucial distinction between risk and uncertainty.
In my view, Keynes’s major contribution to economic theory was to emphasize the “extreme precariousness of the basis of knowledge on which our estimates of prospective yield have to be made.”
The fact of their ignorance forces investors to fall back on certain conventions, of which the most important are that the present will continue into the future, that existing share prices sum up future prospects, and that if most people believe something, they must be right.
This makes for considerable stability in markets as long as the conventions hold .
But they are liable to being overturned suddenly in the face of passing bad news, because “there is no firm basis of conviction to hold them steady.”
It’s like what happens in a crowded theater if someone shouts “Fire!”
Everyone rushes to get out.
This is not “irrational” behavior.
It is reasonable behavior in the face of uncertainty.
In essence, this is what happened last autumn.
Chicago School economics has never been more vulnerable than it is today – and deservedly so.
But the attack on it will never succeed unless policy Keynesians like Krugman are willing to work out the implications of irreducible uncertainty for economic theory.
Khrushchev’s Secret Speech and End of Communism
In history, some events at first appear insignificant, or their significance is hidden, but they turn out to be earthshaking.
Such a moment occurred 50 years ago, with Nikita Khrushchev’s so-called “Secret Speech” to the Twentieth Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union.
It ranks, I believe, just below the Bolshevik Revolution of 1917 and the start of Hitler’s War in 1939 as the most critical moment of the twentieth century.
At that moment, the communist movement appeared to be riding the tide of history, and not only for those in the Soviet Union.
In the mid-1950’s, communism was on the offensive in Europe, as well as in the emerging Third World.
Capitalism seemed to be dying.
All of communism’s imperfections were deemed temporary, just bumps on the way to the just society that was then being born.
A third of humanity saw the Soviet Union as leading the world toward global socialism.
The Twentieth Congress put an end to that.
It was a moment of truth, a cleansing from within of the brutality of Stalinism.
Khrushchev’s speech to the Congress inspired doubt and second thoughts throughout the worldwide Communist movement.
Khrushchev’s motives as he took the podium on the morning of February 25, 1956, were, in his mind, moral ones.
After his ouster from power, in the seclusion of his dacha, he wrote: “My hands are covered with blood.
I did everything that others did.
But even today if I have to go to that podium to report on Stalin, I would do it again.
One day all that had to be over.”
Khrushchev had, of course, been an intimate part of Stalin’s repressions, but he also didn’t know half of what was going on.
The whole Stalinist system of government was built on absolute secrecy, in which only the General Secretary himself knew the whole story.
It wasn’t terror that was the basis of Stalin’s power, but his complete monopoly on information.
Khrushchev, for example, was stunned when he discovered that in the 1930’s and 1940’s, some 70% of Party members were annihilated.
Initially, Khrushchev didn’t plan to keep his denunciation of Stalin a secret.
Five days after the Congress, his speech was sent to all the leaders of the socialist countries and read at local party meetings across the Soviet Union.
But people didn’t know how to discuss it.
And with good reason, for the problem with the de-Stalinization process was that, although the truth was partly revealed, no answer regarding what to do next was offered.
After the Congress, it became clear that the communist gospel was false and murderously corrupt.
But no other ideology was offered, and the crisis – the slow rot of the system that became clear during the era of stagnation under Leonid Brezhnev – that began with Khrushchev’s speech lasted another 30 years, until Mikhail Gorbachev took up his mantle of change.
The doubts inspired at the Congress may have been inchoate, but they nonetheless sowed genuine unrest.
In the first of the protests that rocked the communist world in 1956, huge crowds in Georgia demanded that Khrushchev be fired and Stalin’s memory reinstated.
An uprising in Poland and the far more tumultuous Hungarian Revolution argued for the opposite.
The Poles demanded communism with a human face, and the Hungarians, after Imre Nagy sought to reform communism, ended up wanting no communism at all.
All of these protests were brutally crushed, which resulted in many West European Communists leaving the Party in utter disillusion.
Khrushchev’s speech also ignited the feud between Mao’s China and the USSR, for it allowed Mao to claim the crown of world revolutionary leadership.
Worried by the protests, Khrushchev tried to cool off the anti-Stalin campaign.
The release of the Gulag prisoners that followed his speech continued, but it was done in silence.
Party membership was restored to purge survivors, and they received new jobs, but they were forbidden from discussing the horrors that they had endured.
That silence lasted until 1961, when Khrushchev permitted new revelations of Stalin-era crimes.
These were publicly reported and discussed on TV and radio.
Stalin’s body was removed from Red Square, Stalin monuments were destroyed, and cities restored their original Soviet names.
Stalingrad became Volgograd.
The idea of the Gulag entered our literature with Alexander Solzhenitsyn’s One Day in the Life of Ivan Denisovich.
This second anti-Stalinist campaign lasted two years, which was not nearly enough to change the country’s mentality.
The Twentieth Congress shattered the world Communist movement, and it turned out to be impossible to cement the cracks.
The Soviet Union and other socialist countries faced a crisis of faith, as the main threat to communism was not imperialism, or ideological dissidents, but the movement’s own intellectual poverty and disillusion.
So, although it is common today in Russia to blame Gorbachev and Boris Yeltsin for the collapse of the USSR, it is both useless and unfair to do so.
The system was dead already, and it is to Yeltsin’s great credit that he was able to bring Russia out of the ruins in one piece.
Although Russia’s future is uncertain, its history is becoming clearer, in part because we now know that the Twentieth Party Congress started the process that brought about the end of Soviet despotism.
Kicking the Oil Habit
Chancellor Angela Merkel has made addressing climate change a high priority on Germany’s agenda for its EU and G-8 presidencies that begin in January.
Here is a concrete proposal, one general enough for world leaders to consider and accept, and clear enough for other governments and businesses to grasp: simply set a date, at the next G-8 summit, by which oil-powered cars would no longer be licensed in major industrialized countries.
Such a decision would have a strongly positive economic and geopolitical impact.
The real cause of today’s worries over energy is not the decline in world oil reserves, but rather that domestic oil production by the top consumers – Europe, the United States, and China – will decline at the very moment that growing Asian demand strains the market.
Available reserves will increasingly be concentrated in the Middle East simply because supplies in all other regions will be depleted sooner.
Moreover, the main oil exporters are unwilling to subordinate their investment policies to market requirements.
Saudi Arabia seeks to run its oil production independently, while Iran scares off potential investors with bureaucratic hurdles and corruption.
Iraq suffers from a lack of security, and foreign investors in Russia are thwarted at every turn.
Those four states contain half of the world’s proven oil reserves and two-thirds of what could potentially be exported.
All this, not production costs, lies at the heart of high oil prices and the scramble for oil contracts in Central Asia and Africa.
To believe that high oil prices are good because they serve the environment ignores some basic facts of international politics.
First, in many of the poorest African and Asian countries, oil imports account for a significantly higher share of national expenditure than in industrialized countries, which means that economic growth and social development are being imperiled, while new debt crises loom.
Rents from oil production impede reforms in the major exporting countries.
Thanks to their lubricated financial strength, regimes like those in Venezuela and Iran increasingly feel unconstrained by international rules.
Latecomers among consuming nations, such as China, mimic the former habits of the industrialized West, with their long record of overlooking human rights abuses in order to secure lucrative deals with authoritarian, oil-rich regimes.
Only the world’s political and economic heavyweights, the main industrialized countries that remain by far the biggest consumers of hydrocarbons, can initiate change on a global scale.
Change must begin in the transport sector, which accounts for more than half of current oil consumption – a share that is likely to rise in the future.
The G-8 countries should therefore agree to no longer license any new, oil-powered cars from 2025 onwards.
This decision would not be directed against individual mobility, but against the dissipation of a scarce resource that is more urgently needed to produce synthetic materials.
Political leaders should not privilege any particular technology.
Instead, they should provide the automobile industry with incentives to develop alternative technologies that rely on bio-mass fuel, ethylene, hydrogen, and even natural gas during a transition period.
Countries that lead the way politically will, as a collateral benefit, provide domestic industries with a leading position in energy technology, ensuring future markets.
The expected significant reduction of CO2-emissions could eventually bring about the breakthrough that is needed in international climate policies.
But economic development comes into play as well: curing our “addiction” to oil would leave more of it to poorer, less developed, and newly industrializing countries, as well as pushing down prices and easing geopolitical energy competition.
Geopolitically, the benefits would similarly obvious, as the ability of major oil exporters to blackmail industrialized countries would be significantly reduced.
This could increase the bargaining power of the international community in the Middle East, and might strengthen those social forces in countries like Saudi Arabia, Iran, and Russia that seriously wish to promote political and economic reform from within.
As a technologically advanced and major automobile-producing country, Germany is well placed to bring about such an initiative.
Merkel, who holds a doctorate in physics and started her political career as an environment minister – presiding in 1995 over the first conference of the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change – may have more credibility in addressing the issue than any of her EU and G-8 colleagues.
Now is the time for a bold act of leadership.
Kick-Starting Employment
BERKELEY – Unemployment is currently rising like a rocket, because businesses that normally would be expanding and hiring are not, and those businesses that would normally be contracting and shedding workers are doing so very rapidly.
Businesses that ought to be expanding and hiring cannot, because the depressed general level of financial asset prices prevents them from borrowing money or selling bonds on profitable terms.
In response, central banks should purchase government bonds for cash in as large a quantity as needed to push their prices up as high as possible.
Expensive government bonds will shift demand to mortgage or corporate bonds, pushing up their prices.
Even after central banks have pushed government bond prices as high as they can go, they should keep buying government bonds for cash, in the hope that people whose pockets are full of cash will spend more of it, and that this will directly pull people out of joblessness and into employment.
In addition, governments need to run extra-large deficits.
Spending – whether by the United States government during World War II, following the Reagan tax cuts of 1981, by Silicon Valley during the late 1990’s, or by home buyers in America’s south and on its coasts in the 2000’s – boosts employment and reduces unemployment.
And government spending is as good as anybody else’s.
Finally, governments should undertake additional measures to boost financial asset prices, and so make it easier for those firms that ought to be expanding and hiring to obtain finance on terms that allow them to expand and hire.
It is this point that brings us to US Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner’s plan to take about $465 billion of government money, combine it with $35 billion of private-sector money, and use it to buy up risky financial assets.
The US Treasury is asking the private sector to put $35 billion into this $500 billion fund so that the fund managers all have some “skin in the game,” and thus do not take excessive risks with the taxpayers’ money.
Private-sector investors ought to be more than willing to kick in that $35 billion, for they stand to make a fortune when financial asset prices close some of the gap between their current and normal values.
If the fund does well over the next five years – returns profits of 9% per year –private investors get a market rate of return on their very risky equity investment and the equivalent of an “annual management fee” equal to 2% of assets under management.
If the portfolio does less well – profits of 4% per year – the managers still get a healthy but sub-market return of 10% per year on their equity.
And if the portfolio does badly – loses 1% per year – they lose roughly 70% of their investment.
Those are attractive odds.
Time alone will tell whether the financiers who invest in and run this program make a fortune.
But if they do, they will make the US government an even bigger fortune.