Meeting best practices could unlock huge value: as it stands, the price tags for similar projects can vary by 50-100% from country to country.
“Kicking the can down the road” is not a viable strategy for dealing with the world’s infrastructure needs.
It’s up to us to avoid leaving a legacy of deferred costs and deteriorating fundamentals for the next generation.
The money is available.
Let’s put it to use.
Scotching the Eurozone
LONDON – Which of the following events is more likely to happen this year: Scotland votes to secede from the United Kingdom in its September referendum, or at least one country decides to leave the eurozone?
Conventional wisdom suggests that Scottish independence is possible, albeit not very likely, while any country’s departure from the single currency is fanciful.
But the decisions that Scotland would have to make about its monetary arrangements in the months following a vote for independence are at least as likely to be confronted by some eurozone countries over the next couple of years.
In fact, there is a natural link between the two situations.
An independent Scotland’s continued use of the British pound – the Scottish government’s official position – could be approached in two ways.
The first possibility, which First Minister Alex Salmond appears to have in mind, would entail a monetary union under a central bank accountable both to Scotland and the rump UK.
But the UK government could – and undoubtedly would – veto any such adaptation of the Bank of England’s responsibilities for monetary policy, financial stability, and banking supervision.
Any other conceivable model of monetary union – including one based on a central bank as unaccountable as the European Central Bank – would be subject to the same rejection.
As the journalist Martin Wolf noted recently, “the rest of the UK has surely not escaped the horrors of the eurozone only to create similar horrors for itself at home.”
The alternative for a fully sovereign Scotland would be to continue using the pound without retaining any influence over interest rates or the exchange rate.
This was the path taken by the Irish Free State (later the Republic of Ireland), which used the sterling-pegged “Irish pound” (the punt) for several decades.
Even if the UK disapproved of the arrangement, it could not stop Scotland from adopting it – much as the European Union deplores but cannot stop Montenegro’s unilateral use of the euro.
While the decision would have a significant political downside – that is, immediately diluting Scotland’s newly acquired sovereignty – its economic implications are mixed.
Borrowing the credibility of an established monetary authority – especially one that issues a global reserve currency – would be tactically advantageous for a post-independence Scotland; but the new country would be exposed to the risk of an inflation shock and sterling crisis stemming from the Bank of England’s expansionary monetary policy.
From a fiscal perspective, the case is similarly balanced.
The interest-rate premium that the market would inevitably demand from a young sovereign like Scotland could be minimized by issuing debt in sterling, thereby protecting investors from additional devaluation risk.
But, without its own currency-issuing central bank, Scotland would forego seigniorage (profits from central-bank operations that typically benefit the national treasury).
Perhaps more important, it would have no lender of last resort capable of stabilizing the banking and financial system in a crisis.
All things considered, an independent Scotland would be best served by issuing its own national currency from the outset, empowering the National Bank of Scotland to set interest rates according to domestic economic conditions.
By allowing for exchange-rate flexibility, this approach would also enable the central bank to avoid the twin hazards that arise in a currency union: undervaluation, which produces inflationary pressure, and overvaluation, which demands wrenching internal devaluations (driving down real wages).
To see just how difficult the latter can be, consider the eurozone.
The agony of internal devaluation in the currency union’s weaker economies is increasingly driving voters and financial markets alike to call for a return to their national currencies – a trend that may well come to a head in May’s European Parliament election.
Italy is perhaps the prime candidate to lead an exit from the eurozone, though a political shock could also arise in France, spurring it to negotiate with Germany the dissolution of the monetary union.
But, regardless of who leaves first, any countries trading in the euro for their defunct national currencies would, like an independent Scotland, have to determine the right degree of exchange-rate flexibility.
For example, while a fully floating currency would create a beneficial combination of discipline and flexibility, it might best be delayed in favor of an adjustable (“crawling”) peg to some anchor currencies.
This would buy time to build credibility and, more important, to help keep public debt under control.
An instructive precedent is Slovakia, whose “velvet” divorce from the Czech Republic at the beginning of 1993 led to the creation of a new national currency.
The Slovak koruna was initially kept within pre-defined fluctuation bands around target parities with the Deutsche Mark and the US dollar, before moving to a fully floating exchange rate in 1998.
Furthermore, Slovakia, unlike most of its regional peers, has fulfilled its legal obligation to join the eurozone – an obligation that an independent Scotland would have to take on when, as expected, it sought EU membership.
But a sovereign Scottish government might try to negotiate an exemption to this rule – and, in so doing, join the tide of other European countries seeking a way out of the great blunder that Europe’s monetary union has turned out to be.
Bringing China into the Climate Change Fold
POZNAN – The current economic crisis cast a pall over climate change talks held this month in Poland.  While negotiators hoped for concrete progress towards an international climate agreement, the world’s two largest polluters were distracted – the US with preventing a collapse of the financial system in the midst of a presidential transition, China with a slowdown in domestic investment and weakening foreign demand for its manufactured goods.
With American home values and retirement savings falling and Chinese unemployment numbers rising, observers worry that neither America nor China will have much appetite to cut emissions.
The paradox here is that the crisis presents a unique opportunity for the United States and China to strike a deal that would lay the groundwork for a global climate agreement.
Indeed, one of the main goals of the most recent biannual meeting of the US/China Strategic Economic Dialogue (held the week before the climate talks began) was to begin work under the “Ten Year Energy and Environment Cooperation Framework” created earlier this year.  
This bilateral initiative comes on the heels of a decade in which America abstained from international efforts to address climate change, concerned that if it acts but China doesn’t, the world will fail to meet its emission-reduction targets and US industry will be disadvantaged.
China has countered that its historic and per capita emissions remain well below US levels, and that to cap aggregate national emissions at the same level as the US would imply a personal carbon budget in San Francisco five times greater than in Shanghai.
The Strategic Economic Dialogue sidestepped this disagreement on burden sharing and focused instead on what the two countries have in common.
Both depend on imported oil for transport and on domestic coal for power generation.
Both have strong state-level governments and balkanized regulatory and energy supply systems.
But the structure of the two countries’ economies, and what drives their energy needs – and thus greenhouse gas emissions – are very different.  It is this difference that offers the best chance for addressing climate change head-on.
Economically, the US and China are mirror images, opposite sides of a massive global imbalance.
Americans spend too much and save too little, leaving a $250 billion trade deficit financed by other countries.
Much of this credit comes from China, where firms and citizens save too much and consume too little, leaving a surplus of both goods and capital that flows abroad.
This macroeconomic imbalance is reflected in the two countries’ carbon footprints.
In the US, more than 70% of CO2 emissions come from consumer-related activities, whether gas-guzzling SUVs or power-hungry McMansions.
In China, more than 70% of emissions come from industry. Steel production alone consumes 18% of the country’s energy resources, nearly twice as much as all Chinese households.
The chemical industry consumes more energy than all private transportation, and aluminum production rivals the commercial sector in terms of electricity demand.
In terms of brokering a climate deal, this imbalance is good news.
It suggests a framework for reducing emissions that respects the development needs of China’s households, addresses US firms’ competitiveness concerns, and adheres to the principle of “common but differentiated responsibilities” embedded in international negotiations.
In recognition of its outsized historic and per capita emissions, the US should agree to economy-wide emissions reductions in line with domestic climate legislation currently being considered.
China should be excused of consumer-related obligations for the time being, but assume commitments on industrial production based on the recognition that effectively reducing emissions in these sectors requires coordinated international action.
China’s leaders are already eager to rein in energy- and pollution-intensive industry for reasons of national security, air and water quality, and simple economic efficiency.
Production of steel, cement, chemicals, paper, and aluminum alone account for nearly half of China’s energy needs and generate nearly half of the air pollution that claims over 300,000 lives and costs the economy close to $100 billion each year.
Yet these five industries combined employ only 14 million people out of a total labor force of 770 million and fewer people than they did a decade ago.
For a country in an employment crisis, investing in energy-intensive industry is a losing strategy.
Using climate policy to discipline these industries would help rebalance the economy while taking a bite out of China’s emissions.
If China imposes a carbon price for its energy-intensive manufacturing industries, the US won’t need to do so at its border, lowering risks to the international trading system on which both countries rely.
The current crisis is already unwinding some of the imbalances that drive both countries’ energy and environment challenges.
US oil demand has fallen 8% as consumers tighten their belts, and electricity demand in China is down by 10% as energy-intensive industries cut production.
A smart response to the crisis can perpetuate these trends.
Future US consumption will be greener, and the cost of climate policy reduced, if the US recovery package includes money to weatherize homes, upgrade the electricity grid, and help the auto industry improve fuel efficiency.
If China consolidates its energy-intensive manufacturing, thereby freeing up investment capital for lighter manufacturing and services, then it will emerge from the crisis with a growth model that pollutes less and employs more.
If the US and China can find agreement on these issues in the midst of crisis, they will pave the way for success when climate negotiators meet again next year in Copenhagen.
Bringing Down the Wall
A quiz for history buffs.
Twenty years ago – on June 4, 1989 – three events shaped a fateful year.
Which do you remember most vividly, and which most changed the world?
a) The bloody denouement of the protests on Tiananmen Square.
b) The death of Iran’s revolutionary cleric, Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini.
c) The Polish elections.
Few would answer c).
The victory of the famed opposition trade-union movement, Solidarity, in Eastern Europe’s first free election since 1946 was eclipsed by the violent crackdown in Beijing and Khomeini’s tumultuous passing.
Yet no single event did more to bring down communism in Europe – and thus to re-shape the post-war international order.
The next few months will bring all sorts of commemorations of communism’s end, particularly of the fall of the Berlin Wall in November 1989.
To many, it was a glorious moment, emblematic of the West’s victory in the Cold War, and one that seemed to come out of the blue.
But if you watched the Eastern Bloc’s disintegration from the ground, you would know that the process was far longer and more complex than most people realize.
The Polish election was a point of no return, the moment when forces for change became irreversible.
They gathered momentum after a summer of labor strikes, when Poland’s communist chief, General Wojciech Jaruzelski, concluded that the country’s economic troubles were too grim to face alone.
Why not enlist the help of Poland’s opposition, he reasoned, if not to solve the problems, then at least to share the blame for them?
And so, after six months of bargaining, a historic deal was struck.
Poland would hold free and fair parliamentary elections, and Solidarity would compete.
It never occurred to the ruling communists (or to Solidarity) that they might lose.
Never in their wildest dreams did they imagine being driven from power altogether.
Yet that is what happened.
In retrospect, it is astonishing that there should have been any doubt.
Solidarity’s campaign was all chutzpah.
An iconic campaign poster captured the public mood: a picture of a gun-slinging Gary Cooper as the sheriff in the classic western High Noon .
June 4 was the day of reckoning in Dodge City East.
On that bright Sunday morning, as spring turned to summer, voters wasted little time in dispatching Poland’s communists to the abattoir.
On their dying day, Poland’s communists managed one last perversity, a final and unwitting act of utter self-humiliation.
They devised an electoral system whereby Poles would not vote for candidates of their choice, but would cross out those they did not want – which is to say, each and every communist.
Everywhere you looked, people were excising hated autocrats.
Here, at long last, was Poland’s long-awaited popular uprising, revenge for December 1980, when Jaruzelski declared martial law, banned Solidarity, and threw its leaders in jail.
Revolution by deletion!
The pen, at last mightier than the sword, became a weapon of glorious retribution, wielded with style.
Some voters slashed their ballots boldly, decapitating the old regime with flourishing strokes.
Others savored the moment, perhaps puffing a cigarette as they reveled in this or that deletion.
“Oh yes, he jailed my cousin.” Pfft!
“Oh, that sponging apparatchik, living high on our penury.” Pfft!
Pfft!
By contrast, the communists’ campaign was all but invisible.
In all of Warsaw, only a couple government candidates bothered to put up posters.
Most counted on the party’s media monopoly to carry their message, such as it was: “Vote Lezek, a good communist.”
To their credit, the regime accepted its inevitable loss with remarkable grace.
At three p.m. on the day after the vote, Jaruzelski summoned top party officials.
“Our defeat is total,” he told them.
“A political solution will have to be found.”
By that, he meant no violence and no doctoring the ballot count.
The communists would have to live with the result.
Twenty years later, I remain mystified.
Those of us covering Eastern Europe knew that Solidarity would win.
We knew, too, that its peaceful victory would be a lesson for the rest of the bloc.
For anti-communists everywhere, the Polish election was extraordinarily encouraging.
Thanks to Poland, what only days before had seemed impossible was, suddenly, possible.
There were other signs.
In May, Hungarian reformers began tearing down the fence along their border with Austria – a hole in the Iron Curtain.
In Moscow, Mikhail Gorbachev spoke of a “Common European House” and repudiated the interventionist Brezhnev Doctrine.
Yet when the Wall tumbled down, experts and world leaders alike were unanimous.
“We never saw it coming,” they confessed.
The Cold War had lasted so long that change seemed unimaginable until freedom burst forth.
Bringing It All Back Home
PARIS – Global policymakers regularly congratulate themselves on having avoided the policy errors of the 1930’s during the financial crisis that began in 2008.
Led by US Federal Reserve Board Chairman Ben Bernanke, an economic historian of the Great Depression, they remembered the ideas of John Maynard Keynes and loosened monetary and fiscal policy to avoid the worst.
We are still coping with the budgetary consequences, especially in Europe, but it is true that the world did not end in 2008.
Monetary tightening was not the only major policy error of the 1930’s; so was a retreat into protectionism, symbolized by the Smoot-Hawley tariff increases at the beginning of that decade.
Historians continue to debate the centrality of the Smoot-Hawley law itself, but the subsequent tariff war certainly damaged trade and economic growth, making a bad situation worse.
Today’s statesmen like to say that they have avoided the protectionist error as well, but is that true?
Certainly I do not expect a tariff war to break out in the near term, but there are dangerous indicators of trade trouble ahead.
The Doha round of global free-trade talks has been abandoned, and the World Trade Organization is now languishing by the lake in Geneva, uncertain of its future.
Perhaps Doha was unlikely to achieve much in the current circumstances, but the absence of any continuing dialogue on world trade – at worst, a useful safety valve – adds a new level of risk.
While people are talking, they are less likely to act precipitately.
In the financial arena, there are many signs of a revival of nationalistic approaches to regulation and currency policy.
The crisis challenged the Washington Consensus, which assumed that the world was moving gradually towards free movement of capital and market-determined exchange rates.
Several countries – including Brazil, South Korea, and Turkey – have now imposed capital controls of various kinds.
Even the International Monetary Fund, long the embodiment of the Washington Consensus, has acknowledged that “capital controls are a legitimate part of the toolkit to manage capital flows in certain circumstances.”
American Congressmen view the Chinese as archetypal currency manipulators, but the Swiss have introduced a firm cap on the franc’s appreciation.
These early signs of deglobalization of financial markets have their parallels in commercial banking, with some of the biggest global institutions retrenching rapidly.
Citibank and HSBC had gone further than most in developing a global footprint; indeed, one can hardly get on a plane nowadays without being reminded that the latter is “the world’s local bank.”
But both are closing down in many countries.
Likewise, many other European banks are cutting back their overseas business sharply.
The impact is particularly vivid in trade finance, where European banks have been major participants in Asia.
Now they are in rapid retreat from that market, creating a worrying gap that Asian banks are seeking to fill.
There is more to come.
As they struggle to raise new capital, European banks and insurers are likely to be forced to sell overseas assets.
If this were simply a sign of a new, tighter focus on viable long-term strategies, it might be regarded it as a benign development.
But there are indications that the process is being driven by regulatory change, and in some cases by regulatory protectionism.
Banks are overseen by a “home” regulator in their country of incorporation, and by a series of “host” regulators where they operate.
“Home” regulators and lenders of last resort are increasingly worried about their potential exposure to losses in banks’ overseas operations.
As Mervyn King, the Governor of the Bank of England, acutely observed, “banks are global in life, but national in death.”
In other words, home authorities are left to pick up the tab when things go wrong.
Host regulators are increasingly nervous about banks that operate in their jurisdictions through branches of their corporate parent, without local capital or a local board of directors.
So they are insisting on subsidiarization.
From the banks’ perspective, that means that capital is trapped in subsidiaries, and cannot be optimally used across its network.
So banks may prefer to pull out instead.
A particular version of this phenomenon is at work in the European Union.
In the single financial market, banks are allowed to take deposits anywhere, without local approval, if they are authorized to do so in one European country.
Yet when the Icelandic banks failed, the British and Dutch authorities had to bail out local depositors.
Now regulators are discouraging such cross-border business, leading to a process with the ugly new name of “de-euroization.”
We can only hope that it does not catch on.
Regulators, recognizing the risks of allowing financial deglobalization to accelerate, have been seeking better means of handling the failure of huge global banks.
If banks can be wound up easily when things go wrong, with losses equitably distributed, regulators can more easily allow them to continue to operate globally and efficiently.
So a major effort to construct a cross-border resolution framework is under way.
But it is uphill work, and Daniel Tarullo, a governor of the Federal Reserve, has acknowledged that “a clean and comprehensive solution is not in sight.”
Does all of this amount to a serious threat to the benefits of globalization?
The cautious answer would be that it is too early to say.
Perhaps we are just seeing the beginnings of a changing of the guard, and that HSBC and Citibank will be replaced as global players by China’s ICBC, Brazil’s Itau Unibanco, or Russia’s Sberbank.
But it may be that we are seeing a revival of a less benign Keynesian doctrine: “ideas, knowledge, science....should of their nature be international.
But let goods be homespun wherever it is reasonably and conveniently possible and, above all, let finance be national.”
Bringing the UK to Europe’s Core
BRUSSELS – The European Union’s core countries these days, besides the original six founders, are the 15 member states that make up the European Monetary Union.
They have converging economies and coordinated monetary and fiscal policies.
The big outsider is the United Kingdom.
British EMU membership remains very desirable.
If the EU is to progress beyond the limits of a common economic and monetary policy and develop a defense and security policy along with a common foreign policy, the UK must be on board.
Exchange-rate fluctuations between sterling and the euro disturb market forces among member states, and at times even have a negative impact in London.
In the long run, the UK risks serious isolation if the euro zone starts to exert even greater power.
But other European countries must also understand British arguments in favor of the UK maintaining its own currency, given London’s importance as an international financial center as well as its privileged relations with more than 50 Commonwealth countries.
The euro zone should therefore offer the UK an honorable compromise in which Britain would be allowed to become a full member of the EMU and take a seat in all of its institutions like the European Central Bank and the ministerial Eurogroup, while also being able to keep the pound in its relations with third countries. 
The euro would, however, have to be accepted as legal tender in the UK, alongside the pound, and in the commonwealth countries, and this would demand close cooperation between the Bank of England and the ECB.
Such a compromise would increase the EMU’s weight both inside and outside Europe.
A Europe built around such a core corresponds to what I call a “Saturn model,” with a huge planet in the middle, surrounded by rings, converging sooner or later in the center.
The outer circles are the transition countries, while the rings around the center would be EU countries that still refuse to join the EMU, or do not yet fulfill all the conditions, like Romania and Bulgaria, or eventually the western Balkan countries and Turkey.
The Saturn model puts the present fierce debate on enlargement and the borders of Europe into a totally different context, because the core countries would no longer find themselves being asked to accept a Europe divided into different classes of member states.
The positioning of EU countries on the rings around the core would be transitory, with the aim being to facilitate overall convergence.
Given the impact of globalization and the direct challenge to the EU implied by competition from countries like China and India, the European economy needs to become more innovative.
Economic and social reform policies throughout Europe would be strengthened if the EU authorities were able to coordinate them, and EU enlargement, together with the further development of its internal market of almost half a billion consumers, could powerfully stimulate economic activity.
The accession of Spain and Portugal was a vivid example of that in the 1980’s, and it is an argument that should be considered with respect to such a populous country as Turkey.
Europe has been unifying gradually for 50 years now, and we can reasonably look forward to further inter-continental cooperation and integration, not least because of scientific and technological developments.
At the same time, we can expect a growing Atlantic community as successive rounds of trade liberalization make it easier to develop a free-trade area between the EU and the United States.
Europe’s own experience has taught us that a customs union must be the first step, and that sooner or later the more intense economic cooperation that a customs union imposes will compel its members to establish an economic community that has all the characteristics of a unified internal market.
But, of course, this can only function smoothly if exchange-rate fluctuations between its members’ currencies have been eliminated.
Although an Atlantic Monetary Union (between the US and the EU) is a long-term prospect, it should be considered as a grand design for the future.
Europe’s leaders and their voting publics now have a choice between the Europe of the past and of the future.
The Europe of the past began with the Schuman Plan, which sowed the seeds of today’s EU, and concluded when the Cold War ended.
It was an era of integration based on the heroic drive to reconcile post-war Germany and France and establish a 
 Pax Europea
 , as well as the threatened expansion of the Soviet Union.
But after the implosion of communism, the situation in Europe was more or less reversed: the defensive demarcation of borders has been replaced by the removal of frontiers across the Continent.
However, while General de Gaulle once spoke of a Europe stretching from the Atlantic to the Urals, defining Europe in purely geographical terms omits other criteria – including the European social model and the scale of values on which it is based – of what it means to “belong” to Europe.
Instead, the vocation of Europe in the course of the twenty-first century should be to become the lever of step-by-step inter-continental convergence and unification.
Europe must be reinvented for this purpose, and broadening the EMU’s reach is the right place to start.
Ferguson’s cause is American neo-conservatism, coupled with a relentless aversion to Keynes and Keynesians.
His latest defense of fiscal austerity came immediately after the United Kingdom’s recent election, when he wrote in the Financial Times that, “Labour should blame Keynes for their defeat.”
Ferguson’s argument amounts to that of a brutal disciplinarian who claims vindication for his methods by pointing out that the victim is still alive.
In pleading on behalf of British Chancellor of the Exchequer George Osborne, he points out that the UK economy grew by 2.6% last year (the “best performing of the G-7 economies”), but ignores the damage that Osborne inflicted on the economy en route to this recovery.
There is now much agreement about this damage.
The Office of Budget Responsibility, the independent agency set up by Osborne to assess the government’s macroeconomic performance, has just concluded that austerity reduced GDP growth by 2% from 2010 to 2012, bringing the cumulative cost of austerity since 2010 to 5% of GDP.
Simon Wren-Lewis of Oxford University estimates that the damage might be as high as 15% of GDP.
In a recent poll of British economists by the Centre for Macroeconomics, two-thirds agreed that austerity had harmed the UK economy.
Moreover, Britain is not alone.
In its October 2012 World Economic Outlook, the IMF admitted that, “fiscal multipliers were underestimated across the world.”
In plain English: the forecasters underestimated the extent of spare capacity and hence the scope for fiscal expansion to raise output.
Was it an honest mistake?
Or was it because the forecasters were in thrall to economic models that implied that economies were at full employment, in which case the only result of fiscal expansion would be inflation?
The claim that “Keynes is to blame” for Labour’s election defeat is peculiarly odd.
After all, the one thing Labour’s leadership tried hardest to do in the campaign was to distance the party from any “taint” of Keynesianism.
Perhaps Ferguson meant that it was Labour’s past association with Keynes that had damned them – “their disastrous stewardship before and during the financial crisis,” as he puts it.
In fact, Labour’s most recent governments were determinedly non-Keynesian; monetary policy was geared to hitting a 2% inflation target, and fiscal policy aimed at balancing the budget over the business cycle: standard macro-economic fare before the recession struck.
The most damning charge against their stewardship is that they embraced the idea that financial markets are optimally self-regulating – a view that Keynes rejected.
Keynes was not to blame for Labour’s defeat; in large part, Scotland was.
The Scottish National Party’s crushing victory left Labour with only one seat in the country.
There are no doubt many reasons for the SNP’s overwhelming triumph, but support for austerity is not one of them.
(The Conservatives did as badly as Labour.)
Nicola Sturgeon, First Minister of Scotland and leader of the SNP, attacked the “cozy consensus” around fiscal consolidation in Westminster.
One might conclude that all of this is history: the voters have spoken.
But it would be a mistake to accept the Conservative narrative as the last word.
It is basically a tissue of propaganda, with little support in theory and destructive effects in practice.
This might not matter so much had there been a change of government.
But Osborne is back as Chancellor, promising even tougher cuts over the next five years.
And fiscal austerity is still the reigning doctrine in the eurozone, thanks to Germany.
So the damage is set to continue.
In the absence of a compelling counter-narrative, we may be fated to find out just how much pain the victims can withstand.
The Eclipse of British Reason
BERLIN – When placed under too much strain, chains tend to break at the weakest link.
Figuratively speaking, the same applies to the European Union.
So the entire world quite naturally assumed that any process of EU disintegration would start primarily in the crisis-ridden European south (Greece, first and foremost).
But, as British Prime Minister David Cameron has now demonstrated, the European chain is most likely to break not at its weakest link, but at its most irrational.
The United Kingdom – the homeland of pragmatism and realism, a country of unflappable principles and unmatched adaptability that stoically gave up its empire after successfully defending Europe’s freedom against Nazi Germany – has now lost its way.
More precisely, it has been led astray by the Conservative Party’s ideological fantasy that certain EU powers can and should be returned to British sovereignty.
The UK’s national interests have not changed, and no fundamental shifts within the EU have worked against those interests.
What has changed is Britain’s domestic politics: a prime minister too weak to control his roughly 100 anti-European backbenchers (call them the “High Tea Party”) in the House of Commons, and a Conservative establishment wary of the UK Independence Party’s rise, which could cost the Tories enough votes on the right to give Labour an electoral advantage.
Cameron claims that he does not want the UK to leave the EU.
But his strategy – “renegotiation” of EU membership, followed by a British referendum on the new agreement – is the product of two illusions: first, that he can ensure a positive outcome, and, second, that the EU is able and willing to give him the concessions that he wants.
In fact, there is good reason to believe that such a course would take on a dynamic of its own, possibly leading to an unintended British exit from the EU.
That would be a severe setback for the EU; for the British, blundering through history, it would be a veritable disaster.
While Britain surely would survive outside the EU, the quality of its existence is another matter.
By exiting the EU, the UK would severely damage its economic interests, losing both the single market and London’s role as a financial center.
An exit would also harm Britain’s geopolitical interests, both in Europe (where, ironically, it favors EU enlargement) and, worldwide, in its global standing and special relationship with the United States (which has made clear its preference for a European UK).
Unfortunately, Cameron’s track record in European politics does not inspire confidence in his ability to manage a different outcome.
When, in 2009, he ordered the Conservative MEPs to withdraw from the European People’s Party, the Europe-wide grouping of center-right political forces, he merely deprived the Tories – now consigned to sit with the sectarians and obscurantists – of any influence in the European Parliament.
By weakening the UK’s position within the EU, he ended up strengthening the Euro-skeptics within his party.
But, while Cameron should know from grim experience what is looming, it seems that he has abandoned rational considerations.
Indeed, the belief that the EU would renegotiate Britain’s membership terms – which assumes, further, that Germany would not object – borders on magical thinking.
Such a precedent would be applicable to the other member states, which would mean the end of the EU.
With all due respect to the UK, dismantling the EU as the price of its continued membership is an absurd idea.
Cameron should recognize that his strategy cannot be allowed (even if he fears that a few cosmetic corrections to the treaty won’t help him at home).
In the meantime, the Tories risk losing their way on a crucial issue – reform of the relationship between the eurozone and non-euro EU members – if they try to use it as leverage to renegotiate the various European treaties.
Britain knows that the euro’s survival requires much closer political integration, and also that London’s role as a financial center – as important for the UK as the nuclear industry is for France and the auto industry is for Germany – would be greatly damaged if the euro should fail.
Although no one should expect the British to join the euro any time soon, political leadership within the EU requires the acumen to take account of the central interests of one’s own country and those of the other member states without indulging in threats.
This, however, requires an adequate understanding of those interests and a willingness to cooperate on the basis of mutual trust, which should be a given within the European family.
Speeches, particularly when delivered by leaders of great nations, can be useful, irrelevant, or dangerous.
Cameron’s long-planned speech on Europe was postponed time and again.
Perhaps he should have taken that as a sign that he should rethink his position.
He still can, before it is too late.
The best starting point would be a re-reading of Winston Churchill’s famous speech in Zurich in 1946.
“We must build a kind of United States of Europe,” urged Britain’s greatest twentieth-century statesman.
That remains our task – and Britain’s – to this day.
Brittle Britain
LONDON – Which European country faces the greatest risk of political instability and financial turmoil in the year ahead?
With less than a week to go before the British general election on May 7, the answer is both obvious and surprising.
Once a haven of political and economic stability amid the turmoil of the euro crisis, the United Kingdom is about to become the European Union’s most politically unpredictable member.
Indeed, continuity is the one election outcome that can almost certainly be excluded.
Unless opinion polls are inaccurate to a degree unprecedented in British history, the two parties comprising the government coalition, Prime Minister David Cameron’s Conservatives and the Liberal Democrats, have almost no chance of winning a combined parliamentary majority.
One possibility – with a probability slightly above 50% according to the polls – is that Britain, the birthplace of Thatcherism and the EU’s standard-bearer of neoliberal economics, will soon have a Labour-led government committed to the biggest tax-raising program since the 1970s.
Moreover, because of the peculiarities of the British electoral system and the rise of Scottish and Welsh nationalism, a Labour government’s survival would depend on the support of parties with even more radical economic agendas and dedicated to dismantling the UK.
Another scenario – almost as probable as a Labour-led coalition – is a weak and unstable Conservative government.
To judge by the opinion polls, Cameron’s best hope is to win more parliamentary seats than Labour and try to form a minority government, which could survive as long as the other parties failed to unite against it.
This might be possible, because the Liberal Democrats and Scottish Nationalist Party may see benefits in allowing a weak Conservative government to remain in power, at least for a while.
But a minority Conservative government would create additional uncertainties and risks.
Cameron would be more vulnerable than any leader in postwar British history to blackmail by his own party’s dissidents and extremists, who see it as their historic mission to pull Britain out of the EU.
And a minority government would be unable to pass any controversial legislation that the Scottish Nationalists opposed.
Moreover, Britain’s political institutions might be unable to cope.
The UK’s unwritten constitution is based entirely on tradition and precedent.
That arrangement has always presupposed strong governments with clear mandates.
The constitution is so poorly adapted to coalitions and minority governments that some legal scholars question whether the Queen should address Parliament on behalf of “her” new government if there is a risk that it will be toppled within a few weeks or months.
And yet, although the electoral arithmetic makes a stable centrist government – one that could maintain Britain’s current policies on taxes, economic management, and Europe – almost impossible to imagine, continuity is the outcome that most international business leaders and politicians seem to expect.
The clearest evidence of this can be seen in financial markets.
Although the pound has declined by about 10% from its peak of $1.70 last September, sterling weakness has simply reflected the dollar’s strength.
In the same period, sterling has risen almost 10% against the euro, while British share prices have hit all-time highs and government bonds have generated better returns in Britain than in the United States, Germany, or Japan.
What accounts for this apparent indifference – also evident among European politicians – to the looming political risks in Britain?
Many international observers believe that politics simply no longer matters much in Britain, because the economy is fundamentally sound and growing at a fairly healthy pace.
But this is a dangerously complacent argument.
Yes, Britain recorded the fastest economic growth among the major OECD countries in 2014 and has an unemployment rate of only half the EU average.
But these favorable indicators obscure a source of enormous risk: one of the world’s largest external deficits, financed last year by foreign-capital inflows totaling $160 billion.
The current-account gap, at 5.5% of GDP, is by far the highest among the major OECD countries and is at a level long associated – both in the UK and elsewhere – with the onset of financial crises.
As long as Britain was a haven of political stability and tax policies favorable to foreign investors, it had no problem attracting capital inflows.
But the impending shifts in Britain’s politics and its EU relations are bound to draw attention to the economy’s extreme dependence on foreign finance.
A Labour government, wielding tax proposals specifically designed to hit private foreign investors, would certainly discourage inflows.
But international investors might be equally put off by a weak Conservative government dominated by the party’s Europhobe wing.
In either case, GDP growth is likely to slow as business confidence, consumption, and house prices suffer – either from new taxes under Labour or from uncertainties about EU membership under the Conservatives.
Another reason why international observers may be ignoring such obvious risks is that they have been preoccupied with more dramatic events in Greece and Ukraine.
Politicians, financial analysts, and political commentators have limited time and attention.
They tend to focus on whatever seems to be the biggest and most urgent story, and British politics has not been it.
Then again, many apparently sophisticated analysts may simply be in a state of psychological denial.
Surveys of business and financial opinion in Britain show clear majorities in these groups expecting a sudden swing toward the Conservatives in the closing days of the election campaign, resulting in a stable coalition government and continuity in economic and political conditions.
Such a last-minute shift in voting intentions is possible, but the time for it is running out.
In fact, British public opinion has remained uncannily stable, not only during the official election campaign, but throughout the past 12 months.
There are simply no rational grounds for expecting either the Conservatives or Labour to achieve the decisive victory needed to form a stable government.
The upcoming election will therefore mark the beginning, not the end, of a period of uncertainty for British politics, economics, and finance.
No amount of lingering faith in stability will change that.
Britain’s Failed Human Rights Revolution
LONDON – The budget-cutting austerity program of Britain’s new coalition government has been claiming all the headlines, but David Cameron’s cabinet is breaking with its Labour predecessor in another key area as well: human rights.
Indeed, the human-rights experiment that Tony Blair’s Labour government brought to Britain has failed.
Faulted by some for its inability to prevent “illiberal” anti-terrorism measures, the Human Rights Act is criticized by just as many others for hampering counter-terrorism policy.
Indeed, many people mock the very notion of human rights, which is seen as leading to “loony” concessions that favor criminals and terrorists.
Overall, the reaction of both press and public is one of disillusion and/or cynicism.
Britain famously has no written constitution, or, until recently, anything resembling a modern Bill of Rights. Instead, we have Magna Carta and cricket.
The concept of universal human rights is literally foreign – enshrined in the broad-brush principles of the European Convention on Human Rights, whose court sits in Strasbourg.
Until recently, anyone who wished to bring a human-rights case against the British government had to go to France.
Times changed when Tony Blair came to power in 1997.
With fanfare and idealism – reflected in the slogan “Rights Brought Home” – the Human Rights Act came into effect in 2000.
But the high-minded liberalism of the then-elite had a practical point as well: should the government have any soiled linen, it should be laundered in British courts rather than be aired before a panel of international judges.
Yet the Act is unloved by the British public, which never engaged with the process.
As Tony Blair’s wife, Cherie Booth, herself a human rights lawyer, lamented, “the majority of people feel that human rights are not relevant to their lives.”
There is a lesson here: if it’s not broken, don’t fix it. Put another way, actions speak louder than words.
When compared with human-rights abuses that truly affect humanity, the complaints dealt with by the British courts are small beer.
Which child goes to what school or what public housing is offered to which asylum seeker will be of concern to many people (and views will differ). But using the broad brush of “human rights” to resolve such issues trivializes the concept.
It also inhibits proper debate.
After all, what responsible public body wants to be accused of violating human rights?
Indeed, the threat of human-rights litigation has made providers of public services overly cautious and defensive.
This has led the popular press to howl that we now live in a costly, bureaucratic, and inefficient “human rights culture” – a charge with profound political resonance.
Before he became Prime Minister, Cameron called for the Human Rights Act to be replaced with something more “British.”
Paradoxically, some deem human rights to be wholly inefficacious where their recognition is most required. Many MPs who backed the incorporation of the European human-rights convention into British law came to view formal recognition of human rights as a grave inconvenience when faced with Al Qaeda-inspired terrorism.
In short, having brought rights home, the Blair government ended up trying to hide them under the sofa.
This conundrum is symbolized by the debate over detaining terrorism suspects without charge or trial.
Initially, Blair attempted to force through detention without charge for up to 90 days. Parliament settled on 28 days – still the longest such period in the Western world.
So much, then, for Article 6 of the European Convention, which provides that everyone charged with a criminal offense has the right “to be informed promptly” of the nature of the accusation against him.
So much, also, for Magna Carta, which provides that “No freeman shall be taken or imprisoned…but by lawful judgment of his peers, or by the law of the land.”
Blair’s behavior is not unique.
The fact is that any piece of legislation purporting to embody human rights is entirely vulnerable to a political system in which parliament is supreme.
The Human Rights Act must inevitably yield to subsequent legislation.
All legislation is passed by a simple majority.
And judges cannot strike down legislation.
The result?
Rights brought home one day; detention for a month without charge the next.
Indeed, even when the cause of human rights is being advanced, the Human Rights Act is now overlooked.
In May, in his first major policy speech, Deputy Prime Minister Nick Clegg announced the sweeping away of the “Big Brother” state that Blair had constructed: no more ID cards or national identity register, new restrictions on the storage of DNA, tighter regulation of the closed-circuit television surveillance that had made the British the most monitored people on earth, and so on.
All this and not one mention of “human rights” – an absence that reflects the political sensitivity of human rights in Britain today, and that tacitly acknowledges that when the stakes are high, the Human Rights Act cannot be relied upon.
Where, then, does that leave the Cameron government’s supposed extirpation of Big Brother?
One way forward would be to go further than Blair by ring-fencing certain principles and creating some form of constitutional court to defend them.
But the cost of such rigid rules may be high, and their effectiveness, as witnessed by the vagaries of the United States’ record on human rights, is less fool-proof than is sometimes imagined.
So, perhaps in a mature democracy, human rights should be dignified by actions rather than words.
Instead of introducing more legislation that is tainted both in the popular imagination and in its utility, Britain could, after all, trust its constitution to act as and when required to safeguard liberty and fair play.
For good or ill, democratic sentiment will win out, and Britain’s human-rights record, while imperfect, remains strong.
Britain’s Path of Denial
SANTIAGO – Visit London nowadays and you will notice something strange going on: the worse the British economy tanks, the more fervently Prime Minister David Cameron’s ministers and Tory economists insist that draconian spending cuts are good for economic growth.
Some observers see this as an act of faith (presumably in the virtues of the unfettered market).
Others, such as the economist Paul Krugman, see it as an act of bad faith: the Tories just want smaller government, regardless of the consequences for growth.
The question remains whether there is a non-faith-based argument for cutting back spending to stimulate an economy.
The answer is yes.
In fact, there are two.
Academic research has shown them at work in the past – for example, in Ireland and Denmark during the 1980’s.
Unfortunately for the Tories, neither case for stimulative spending cuts fits Britain’s predicament today.
One argument emphasizes the links between fiscal and monetary policy.
In a country with large fiscal deficits, the central bank may have to keep interest rates high to control inflation.
In this scenario, budget cuts create room for interest rates to fall.
If the country has a floating exchange-rate regime, the currency depreciates, too.
Both of these changes are good for demand and growth.
If their combined impact more than outweighs the initial contractionary effect of expenditure cuts, then the economy may well pick up after a round of fiscal tightening.
But little effort is needed to see that this not the British story today.
The Bank of England’s policy interest rate has remained just above zero for more than two and a half years.
Regardless of the government’s fiscal-policy stance, this interest rate cannot move below zero.
The second case for expansionary fiscal contraction is subtler.
In an economy in which public debt is growing quickly, the longer fiscal adjustment is put off, the larger and costlier it will have to be.
Households and companies understand this and cease to consume or invest in anticipation of the painful spending cuts and tax hikes to come.
So, the argument goes, a courageous Tory government that cuts spending today spares citizens that future pain.
Then, feeling richer and brimming with optimism, the private sector goes on a spending spree and the economy booms.
Put differently: without the budget cuts, Britain would have been Spain – or perhaps even Portugal or Greece.
With the budget cuts in place and the markets reassured, Britain no longer risks resembling an unruly Mediterranean country.
Thus, Britons will soon start spending again and economic growth will ensue.
So far, so good – except that this story, too, does not apply to Britain.
There is no sign of a crisis narrowly averted.
Ten-year yields on British government bonds were at historic lows long before Cameron took office.
If a crisis was imminent, the markets clearly took no notice.
And if the coalition government’s budget cuts had improved expectations about future output, that greater confidence would have shown up in higher equity prices – but there is no evidence of this, either.
In short, private demand in Britain is flatlining rather than surging.
Add to the mix the collapse in public-sector demand that comes from deep budget cuts, and you have all the ingredients necessary for prolonged stagnation.
And stagnation, if not worse, is precisely what recent British economic reports are showing.
The longer this goes on, the more serious the problem will become.
The long-term unemployed will drop out of the labor market.
Firms that invest little will become uncompetitive.
In the jargon of economists, low demand will engender low supply, making a non-inflationary recovery even more difficult to achieve.
What is to be done in Britain?
With the eurozone tumbling from crisis to crisis, salvation will not come from abroad.
At home, all that is left is unconventional monetary policy.
The Bank of England recently injected an additional £75 billion into the economy via so-called quantitative easing.
Now, that is real cash, not just an act of faith.
Britain Votes and Reality Waits
LONDON – I don’t mean to sound as though I am bragging, but the last time the Conservative Party won an election in Britain was 1992, when John Major was Prime Minister. The chairman of the party at the time, running the winning campaign, was me.
We won the election, but I lost my own race for a parliamentary seat and was sent off to Hong Kong as the colony’s last British governor.
So I wasn’t around when the Conservative Party, losing the will to govern, tore itself apart in the mid-1990’s over Britain’s role in Europe.
As Winston Churchill said, the problem with committing political suicide is that you live to regret it.
Despite piloting the economy through a post-recession recovery, Major lost to Tony Blair in 1997, ending 18 years of Conservative government and bringing a 13-year Labour run, which will probably end when Britain votes for a new government on May 6.
Blair took over a strong economic legacy, and, to be scrupulously fair, he didn’t wreck it.
He and his finance minister, Gordon Brown, stuck to their predecessors’ public-spending plans, for example.
In Labour’s first nine years of governing, public expenditure as a proportion of GDP was lower than in the comparable Conservative period.
Then we fell into the usual British trap.
Brown, who became prime minister in 2007, let spending and borrowing rip, so that when the global crash hit Britain was already suffering from a structural fiscal deficit and a credit bubble.
The country was worse prepared for disaster than most others.
As a result, whoever wins the election will have an awful job cutting the country’s budget deficit – 12% of GDP – and setting the economy back on the road to sustainable recovery.
The Conservatives should triumph under a young leader, David Cameron, who has hauled them back onto the middle ground of politics where elections are usually won.
Labour, under Brown, is unpopular, with the economy in deep trouble and a general sense that the party has run out of ideas.  The Liberal Democrats under Nick Clegg have surged remarkably, and may even push ahead of Labour in the popular vote.  But the structure of the British election is such that a victory for them is almost a statistical impossibility.
Indeed, the opinion polls remain tight.
Much will depend on the outcome of TV debates between the leaders, which are being held for the first time in a British election campaign, and which have thus far contributed mightily to the Liberal Democrat surge.
Each leader has been carefully groomed to avoid the sort of gaffes that could cost his party the election, and thus far, not one has shot himself in the foot.
If Clegg’s job is almost impossible, Cameron’s job is also much harder than it should be because the British electoral system is tilted heavily against the Conservatives.
The more Labour-oriented parts of the United Kingdom – Wales, Scotland, and urban England – are over-represented.
Electorates in constituencies where Labour is usually dominant are smaller, and district boundaries take insufficient account of population shifts.
Thus, more votes are needed to elect a Conservative than a Labour MP.
In the last election, Labour got 3% more of the popular vote than the Conservatives, but gained 150 more seats.
The situation is a bit fairer today, but Cameron still has a steep hill to climb if he is to win.
I think he will do so – not least because the most potent electoral argument today is “time for change.”
Voters tend to get rid of governments once the incumbents have lost their most precious attribute: the benefit of the doubt.
Labour seems to be in that situation today.
But, whatever the outcome, a new government will face a daunting challenge – challenges that will be even more daunting in the case of a “hung parliament,” which will require either a coalition government or minority government to be formed after the vote.
It is not just that tough measures will be required to rein in public spending for years to come. More worrying is that many voters seem to be in denial about that fact.
They are likely to find that economic reality, once all the electioneering is over, is a very cold shower indeed.
As a tribal Conservative, albeit it with pretty moderate tendencies and a deep suspicion of ideology, I naturally want Cameron to win.
He is clever, decent, and strong. I think he will make a good prime minister.
But I don’t envy him the job.
It will require leadership skills of a high order to persuade voters that in order to prevent national decline we must curb our appetite for more and more public spending.
The old laws of household economics still apply.  You can’t spend more than you earn – even in the so-called new economy of the twenty-first century.
I suspect that other countries will have to learn that lesson as well.
In Europe, it is not just Greece that is in a mess.
The public finances of Spain and Portugal are somewhat sounder, but those countries face huge problems in increasing their competitiveness within the eurozone.
In Spain, for example, wages have risen too fast, and productivity has lagged.
We should be on the lookout for political fireworks over the next few years in many European countries as people are forced to confront some uncomfortable verities.
It won’t only be in Britain that politics, from time to time, becomes a bit too exciting.
Deserting the Battle for Britain
SAINT PIERRE D’ENTREMONT, FRANCE – In the sad state of affairs following the Brexit vote in the United Kingdom, former “Remainers” – those who wished to stay in the EU – seem to have given up altogether on fighting for the future of their country.
Worse still, many seem to have accepted the fundamental premise of the anti-EU “Leave” campaign: that there are too many Europeans in Britain.
This has changed the terms of the debate for the worse, and has led to hopelessly wishful thinking: Perhaps the UK won’t actually lose much market access if it imposes immigration restrictions on EU nationals.
Perhaps the EU itself will abandon free labor mobility in an attempt to appease the UK.
Perhaps the EU will make special exceptions to protect the British university sector, or treat the UK like Liechtenstein, a microstate with access to the single market.
In fact, with Remainers accepting the argument that Britain should keep Europeans out, the UK – or at least England and Wales, if pro-EU Scotland and Northern Ireland leave – is headed for a “hard” Brexit, not just from the Union, but from Europe’s single market.
If this happens, it will cost the country dearly.
The full extent of the fallout is unknown, but we can expect it to be painful for many people and damaging to many institutions.
Is there any merit to the claim that the UK has become flooded with newcomers from other EU member states?
The following chart shows the percentage of EU immigrants in each EU country.
The UK is at the upper end of the distribution, but it is on par with many other EU members, and it is far from having the most EU immigrants per capita.
In fact, the share of EU immigrants in the total population is twice as high in Ireland.
As British policymakers navigate the post-Brexit landscape, they should consider the Irish example, given the similarities between the two countries.
Ireland and the UK both have housing shortages, especially around metropolitan centers such as Dublin and London.
And they both have public services that leave something to be desired – in fact, Ireland’s are much worse than Britain’s.
While the Irish are not British, they are closer culturally than other Europeans.
As we saw in 2008, when Irish referendum voters refused to ratify the Treaty of Lisbon, there is a potential anti-immigrant voting bloc in the poorer parts of Dublin.
These are the same kind of voters who turned out for the UK’s Brexit referendum – poorer people who have not felt the gains from globalization.
The question, then, is why the Irish haven’t developed UK levels of animosity toward EU immigrants, especially given the appalling way in which the country was treated by European institutions in the wake of the 2008 financial crisis.
Surely, the British media bear considerable responsibility for the difference.
Ireland has nothing like the mendacious, jingoistic gutter press that thrives in the UK.
Much of the blame, however, lies with British political leaders.
One the one hand, there are those who have made careers out of attacking the EU, often on entirely specious grounds.
On the other, there are lukewarm Remainers, such as former Prime Minister David Cameron, who never made a strong case for continued membership in the EU.
Now, even committed Remainers are failing to make the case for continued two-way labor mobility between the UK and the EU, and for membership in the European Economic Area (EEA).
Ireland hasn’t had this problem.
Notably, Sinn Féin, Ireland’s nationalist party and the former political arm of the Irish Republican Army, has not indulged in the kind of xenophobic rhetoric used by the UK Independence Party.
In fact, to its immense credit, Sinn Féin has gone out of its way to adopt a progressive stance on the issue of immigration from the EU and elsewhere.
Many commentators have correctly pointed to the economic effects of globalization to explain anti-immigrant sentiment.
The fact that globalization produces both winners and losers certainly explains much of the anti-globalization backlash now apparent in the UK and elsewhere.
But other things matter, too, such as cultural chauvinism.
Put plainly, English animosity toward the presence of fellow Europeans has a lot to do with some of the worst aspects of English society.
Addressing shortfalls in public services can help to mitigate economic concerns about immigration, and about globalization more generally.
Just as important, former Remainers must continue to explain to the English why the free exchange of goods, services, and people with Europe is good for Britain.
The UK voted to leave the EU, but Brexit comes in two flavors: membership in the EEA, with access to Europe’s single market and free movement of people, or an exit from the single market, followed by unpredictable trade negotiations.
There is still a huge amount to play for: we don’t know which of these two outcomes English voters would choose.
Unfortunately, it looks as though the UK is now headed for the second option – a “hard” Brexit – by default.
For Remainers not to make the case for EEA membership, when they had previously been in favor of remaining in the EU, is an astonishing abdication of responsibility.
A British Bridge for a Divided Europe
LONDON – The European Union has never been very popular in Britain.
It joined late, and its voters will be asked on June 23 whether they want to leave early.
The referendum’s outcome will not be legally binding on the government; but it is inconceivable that Britain will stay if the public’s verdict is to quit.
Over the years, the focus of the British debate about Europe has shifted.
In the 1960s and 1970s, the question was whether Britain could afford not to join what was then the European Economic Community.
The fear was that the United Kingdom would be shut out of the world’s fastest-growing market, and that its partnership with the United States would be at risk as well: The Western alliance would consist of two pillars, and Europe, not a shrunken Britain, would be one of them.
Today, it is the enfeeblement, not power, of Europe, that drives the UK debate.
The British perceive themselves as doing rather well, whereas Europe is doing badly.
Indeed, ever since the 2008 crash, the EU has been identified with failure.
Outside Britain and Germany, there has been almost no economic growth.
It cannot defend its frontiers against terrorists (“Europe is not safe,” proclaims Donald Trump).
Its institutions lack legitimacy.
Made up of 28 quasi-sovereign members, it cannot act, but only issue intentions to act.
No wonder there is a move afoot to reclaim national sovereignty, where some decision-making power still resides.
The EU’s fate has become hopelessly entangled with that of its most vulnerable feature: the 19-member eurozone, the single-currency heartland of economic stagnation.