In this new era of “vetocracy” in Europe, the diplomacy that underpinned the creation of the enlightened and forward-looking European project cannot function, leaving the EU ungovernable.
Now that the Euroskeptics have gotten their way in the UK, vetocracy will become stronger than ever.
Direct votes on issues like trade rules or immigration policy will gut Europe’s representative democracy, just as direct votes on membership threaten to gut the EU itself.
In a popular novel by the Nobel laureate José Saramago, the Iberian Peninsula breaks off from the European mainland and drifts away.
With a tsunami of plebiscites bearing down on the continent, this may turn out to be a prescient metaphor.
The Economic Consequences of Brexit
LONDON – Those campaigning for Britain to exit the European Union claim that doing so would make their country both freer and richer.
They assert that after “Brexit”, the UK could quickly negotiate a bespoke agreement with the EU that offers all the benefits of free trade without the costs of EU membership; strike better trade deals with other countries; and reap huge benefits from scrapping burdensome EU regulations.
But this is a delusion.
In fact, Brexit would entail big economic costs for Britain.
The uncertainty and disruption of drawn-out and doubtless acrimonious divorce proceedings would depress investment and growth.
Permanent separation would reduce trade, foreign investment, and migration, hurting competition, productivity growth, and living standards.
And “independence” would deprive Britain of influence over future EU reforms – notably, the completion of the single market in services – from which it would benefit.
The London School of Economics’ Centre for Economic Performance calculates that the long-term costs to Britain of lower trade with the EU could be as high as 9.5% of GDP, while the fall in foreign investment could cost 3.4% of GDP or more.
Those costs alone dwarf the potential gains from Brexit.
Britain’s net contribution to the EU budget amounted to only 0.35% of GDP last year, and scrapping EU regulation would bring limited benefits, because the UK’s labor and product markets are already among the freest in the world.
The exit process would generate prolonged uncertainty. Officially, it is meant to take two years.
But it would probably take much longer.
In the 1980s, it took three years to negotiate the exit of Greenland (population: 50,000), and the only controversial issue was fish.
Extricating Britain (the EU’s second-largest economy, with a population of 64 million) would be far more complex.
Moreover, any agreement on a new economic relationship with the UK would require unanimity among the EU’s 27 remaining members.
And Britain would also have to renegotiate – from scratch – the 50-plus trade deals that the EU has with other countries.
All of this would take a long time.
In the meantime, Britain’s trading rules and domestic regulations would be up in the air. Investment and employment decisions would be postponed or canceled.
The pound would plummet. The foreign investors financing Britain’s current-account deficit – which hit 7% of GDP in the final quarter of last year – might drive up the risk premium on UK assets or, worse, pull out.
All of that would weaken economic growth, jeopardizing the government’s fiscal plans.
Once the agreements were made, Britain would have worse access to both EU and global markets.
Economically, the least painful option would be to seek membership of the European Economic Area, along with Norway, Iceland, and Liechtenstein.
That would provide almost full access to the single market (with opt-outs from EU agriculture and fisheries policies), albeit with customs controls and other trade barriers such as rules-of-origin requirements.
Politically, though, EEA membership would be a raw deal. Britain would have to comply with single-market rules and legislation in areas such as consumer protection, the environment, and social policy – rules that it would have no say in creating.
It would also have to contribute to the EU budget, without receiving any spending in return.
And it would have to allow EU citizens free entry, a political bugbear for most Brexit supporters.
Given that the key motivation for Brexit is to restore the country’s supposedly lost sovereignty, a deal that gives the UK no say, but requires that it pay and obey, would be deeply unpalatable.
Trading with the EU according to World Trade Organization rules, as the United States and China do, would involve the fewest political constraints.
Britain would be free to keep out hard-working, taxpaying EU migrants. But this would entail reciprocal EU controls on UK migrants, harming Britons twice over.
This approach would also entail import tariffs on British goods – including a 10% duty on its car exports to the EU – as well as non-tariff barriers.
UK-based financial institutions would lose their passport to export freely to the EU.
And without full access to the $16 trillion EU single market, with its 500 million consumers, foreign investment would drop.
Intermediate options, from the Swiss to the Canadian model, are scarcely more appealing.
Brexit supporters claim that Britain could strike its own special deal, cherry picking the provisions it likes.
The UK would have the whip hand, they argue, because it buys more from the EU than it sells in return.
But this, too, is a delusion.
The US also has a trade deficit with the EU, yet it doesn’t get to dictate terms in the negotiations over the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership.
Moreover, exports to the EU, at 13% of GDP, matter more to the UK than exports to Britain (just 3% of GDP) do to the EU.
In short, the EU would call the shots – and doubtless be tough with the UK.
Many economic actors – from German car manufacturers to French farmers to financial centers around the EU – would want to hamper their British competitors.
For their part, EU governments would want to punish Britain, not least because they know that a velvet divorce with Britain would bolster anti-EU parties, such as France’s far-right National Front, which has already called for a referendum on EU membership.
Britain’s new trade deals with non-EU countries would also probably involve worse terms.
While the UK wouldn’t be hamstrung by protectionist interests in the EU, its smaller economy, largely open markets, and desperation for deals would weaken its clout.
Indeed, the US has stated that it has no immediate interest in negotiating a trade deal with Britain.
And the protectionist tone of the current US presidential election campaign suggests that the next few years will not see much trade liberalization.
Thinking through all the economic implications of Brexit is complicated.
But the bottom line is simple: Leaving the EU would make Britain much worse off.
Brexit and the Future of Europe
NEW YORK – Britain, I believe, had the best of all possible deals with the European Union, being a member of the common market without belonging to the euro and having secured a number of other opt-outs from EU rules.
And yet that was not enough to stop the United Kingdom’s electorate from voting to leave.
Why?
The answer could be seen in opinion polls in the months leading up to the “Brexit” referendum.
The European migration crisis and the Brexit debate fed on each other.
The “Leave” campaign exploited the deteriorating refugee situation – symbolized by frightening images of thousands of asylum-seekers concentrating in Calais, desperate to enter Britain by any means necessary – to stoke fear of “uncontrolled” immigration from other EU member states.
And the European authorities delayed important decisions on refugee policy in order to avoid a negative effect on the British referendum vote, thereby perpetuating scenes of chaos like the one in Calais.
German Chancellor Angela Merkel’s decision to open her country’s doors wide to refugees was an inspiring gesture, but it was not properly thought out, because it ignored the pull factor.
A sudden influx of asylum-seekers disrupted people in their everyday lives across the EU.
The lack of adequate controls, moreover, created panic, affecting everyone: the local population, the authorities in charge of public safety, and the refugees themselves.
It has also paved the way for the rapid rise of xenophobic anti-European parties – such as the UK Independence Party, which spearheaded the Leave campaign – as national governments and European institutions seem incapable of handling the crisis.
Now the catastrophic scenario that many feared has materialized, making the disintegration of the EU practically irreversible.
Britain eventually may or may not be relatively better off than other countries by leaving the EU, but its economy and people stand to suffer significantly in the short to medium term.
The pound plunged to its lowest level in more than three decades immediately after the vote, and financial markets worldwide are likely to remain in turmoil as the long, complicated process of political and economic divorce from the EU is negotiated.
The consequences for the real economy will be comparable only to the financial crisis of 2007-2008.
That process is sure to be fraught with further uncertainty and political risk, because what is at stake was never only some real or imaginary advantage for Britain, but the very survival of the European project.
Brexit will open the floodgates for other anti-European forces within the Union.
Indeed, no sooner was the referendum’s outcome announced than France’s National Front issued a call for “Frexit,” while Dutch populist Geert Wilders promoted “Nexit.”
Moreover, the UK itself may not survive.
Scotland, which voted overwhelmingly to remain in the EU, can be expected to make another attempt to gain its independence, and some officials in Northern Ireland, where voters also backed Remain, have already called for unification with the Republic of Ireland.
The EU’s response to Brexit could well prove to be another pitfall.
European leaders, eager to deter other member states from following suit, may be in no mood to offer the UK terms – particularly concerning access to Europe’s single market – that would soften the pain of leaving.
With the EU accounting for half of British trade turnover, the impact on exporters could be devastating (despite a more competitive exchange rate).
And, with financial institutions relocating their operations and staff to eurozone hubs in the coming years, the City of London (and London’s housing market) will not be spared the pain.
But the implications for Europe could be far worse.
Tensions among member states have reached a breaking point, not only over refugees, but also as a result of exceptional strains between creditor and debtor countries within the eurozone.
At the same time, weakened leaders in France and Germany are now squarely focused on domestic problems.
In Italy, a 10% fall in the stock market following the Brexit vote clearly signals the country’s vulnerability to a full-blown banking crisis – which could well bring the populist Five Star Movement, which has just won the mayoralty in Rome, to power as early as next year.
None of this bodes well for a serious program of eurozone reform, which would have to include a genuine banking union, a limited fiscal union, and much stronger mechanisms of democratic accountability.
And time is not on Europe’s side, as external pressures from the likes of Turkey and Russia – both of which are exploiting the discord to their advantage – compound Europe’s internal political strife.
That is where we are today.
All of Europe, including Britain, would suffer from the loss of the common market and the loss of common values that the EU was designed to protect.
Yet the EU truly has broken down and ceased to satisfy its citizens’ needs and aspirations.
It is heading for a disorderly disintegration that will leave Europe worse off than where it would have been had the EU not been brought into existence.
But we must not give up.
Admittedly, the EU is a flawed construction.
After Brexit, all of us who believe in the values and principles that the EU was designed to uphold must band together to save it by thoroughly reconstructing it.
I am convinced that as the consequences of Brexit unfold in the weeks and months ahead, more and more people will join us.
European Integration With or Without Britain
WASHINGTON, DC – When British Prime Minister David Cameron agreed with the European Union in February on revised terms for the United Kingdom’s membership, he insisted that the EU be recognized officially as a “multi-currency union.”
With clear limits on European integration in place, on currency and other issues, Cameron believed that he would be able to win a popular majority in favor of the deal – and thus of remaining in the EU – when the UK holds its referendum on June 23.
Yet, rather than providing such clarity, the pact uses contorted language to avoid such an official declaration – and the explanations that would have to come with it.
To be sure, the February decision did give Cameron enough to enable him to campaign against Brexit.
By specifying that the UK and Denmark are under no obligation to adopt the euro, Cameron’s counterparts did effectively confirm the EU’s status as a multi-currency union.
But the decision also reiterated the goal of creating an EU “whose currency is the euro,” and reaffirmed treaty provisions stipulating that other non-euro states, such as Bulgaria and Poland, must adopt the euro when they meet the pre-determined conditions.
(Sweden has no permanent opt-out, and does meet the conditions for euro adoption, yet somehow manages to avoid joining the monetary union.)
That ambiguity was born of an unwillingness – or inability – to provide a clear description of how a multi-currency union will function in the long term.
It is a tough question – one that will have to be addressed, regardless of the referendum’s outcome.
After all, if British voters choose to leave the EU, a similar problem would arise in any post-“Brexit” negotiation to keep the UK in the single market.
There is now a general consensus that, over time, the eurozone will need to build more integrated economic governance systems.
Indeed, most economists agree that any monetary union needs not only a banking union, which is now being established in the eurozone, but also greater fiscal-policy coordination, to compensate for the lack of independent monetary policies and flexible exchange rates.
Politicians, too, support the shift toward greater fiscal integration – at least those who represent the moderate mainstream.
Germany’s conservative finance minister, Wolfgang Schäuble, France’s center-left Economy Minister Emmanuel Macron, and Italy’s centrist Finance Minister Pier Carlo Padoan, have all called for versions of a common eurozone finance minister.
Where the disagreement lies is in the form integration should take.
Germany considers fiscal coordination to be critical to enforcing firm rules of conduct, while France and Italy would like to include more mechanisms for common risk management, such as Eurobonds or cost sharing for unemployment insurance.
Clearly, a balance will need to be struck.
To satisfy Germany, stronger fiscal rules must form the foundation of greater integration.
But such rules must entail greater counter-cyclicality and more symmetry, forcing surplus and deficit countries alike to reduce imbalances.
Moreover, the framework will need to support more effective risk sharing and a distinct eurozone budget, as the southern member states demand.
Institutional and legal changes, including the establishment of some kind of eurozone parliament and treasury, will also be needed, in order to provide legitimacy to the endeavor.
Achieving all of this is essential to enable the EU to function as an effective multi-currency union.
Cameron, like his predecessor Gordon Brown, who was present at the euro’s creation, but kept the UK out, recognizes the need for further eurozone integration, if only because the UK has an interest in better economic performance in its most important export market.
But engaging effectively with a more deeply integrated eurozone, without joining it, will be no easy feat.
To be successful, the UK will need to pursue two key objectives.
First, it must establish strong cooperation with the EU on other key issues, such as security, foreign, and climate policy.
Second, it must ensure that an increasingly integrated eurozone does not gain the authority to make unilaterally fiscal and regulatory decisions that, by reshaping the single market or the financial sector, have significant implications for the UK.
The eurozone, for its part, must regard British interests in the integration process, without allowing the UK to slow it down.
While issues relating to eurozone integration and the multi-currency union have not been central to the Brexit debate, which has tended to focus on immigration, they remain vital to the future of the EU, with or without the UK.
Though Britain’s continued EU membership is not fundamentally incompatible with a more integrated eurozone, creating institutions that can support a permanent multi-currency union – essentially, as I have argued, two Europes in one – will be politically and legally challenging.
In its failure to put forward a clear vision, the deal announced in February did not set a strong precedent for overcoming these challenges.
If Europe is to make genuine progress toward greater stability and prosperity, it will need to ensure transparency and legitimacy every step of the way.
Only with a clear political vision and institutions that can steer policy during crises and in normal times alike will the EU be able to prosper again.
If the UK stays, the EU must urgently work out how a legitimate multi-currency union will function, instead of reverting to business as usual.
If the UK leaves, the same basic problems must be solved, with the difference, however, that the UK will have lost all leverage.
From Brexit to the Future
NEW YORK – Digesting the full implications of the United Kingdom’s “Brexit” referendum will take Britain, Europe, and the world a long time.
The most profound consequences will, of course, depend on the European Union’s response to the UK’s withdrawal.
Most people initially assumed that the EU would not “cut off its nose to spite its face”: after all, an amicable divorce seems to be in everyone’s interest.
But the divorce – as many do – could become messy.
The benefits of trade and economic integration between the UK and EU are mutual, and if the EU took seriously its belief that closer economic integration is better, its leaders would seek to ensure the closest ties possible under the circumstances.
But Jean-Claude Juncker, the architect of Luxembourg’s massive corporate tax avoidance schemes and now President of the European Commission, is taking a hard line: “Out means out,” he says.
That kneejerk reaction is perhaps understandable, given that Juncker may be remembered as the person who presided over the EU’s initial stage of dissolution.
He argues that, to deter other countries from leaving, the EU must be uncompromising, offering the UK little more than what it is guaranteed under World Trade Organization agreements.
In other words, Europe is not to be held together by its benefits, which far exceed the costs.
Economic prosperity, the sense of solidarity, and the pride of being a European are not enough, according to Juncker.
No, Europe is to be held together by threats, intimidation, and fear.
That position ignores a lesson seen in both the Brexit vote and America’s Republican Party primary: large portions of the population have not been doing well.
The neoliberal agenda of the last four decades may have been good for the top 1%, but not for the rest.
I had long predicted that this stagnation would eventually have political consequences.
That day is now upon us.
On both sides of the Atlantic, citizens are seizing upon trade agreements as a source of their woes.
While this is an over-simplification, it is understandable.
Today’s trade agreements are negotiated in secret, with corporate interests well represented, but ordinary citizens or workers completely shut out.
Not surprisingly, the results have been one-sided: workers’ bargaining position has been weakened further, compounding the effects of legislation undermining unions and employees’ rights.
While trade agreements played a role in creating this inequality, much else contributed to tilting the political balance toward capital.
Intellectual property rules, for example, have increased pharmaceutical companies’ power to raise prices.
But any increase in corporations’ market power is de facto a lowering of real wages – an increase in the inequality that has become a hallmark of most advanced countries today.
Across many sectors, industrial concentration is increasing – and so is market power.
The effects of stagnant and declining real wages have combined with those of austerity, threatening cutbacks in public services upon which so many middle- and low-income workers depend.
The resulting economic uncertainty for workers, when combined with migration, created a toxic brew.
Many refugees are victims of war and oppression to which the West contributed.
Providing help is a moral responsibility of all, but especially of the ex-colonial powers.
And yet, while many might deny it, an increase in the supply of low-skill labor leads – so long as there are normal downward-sloping demand curves – to lower equilibrium wages.
And when wages can’t or won’t be lowered, unemployment increases.
This is of most concern in countries where economic mismanagement has already led to a high level of overall unemployment.
Europe, especially the eurozone, has been badly mismanaged in recent decades, to the point that its average unemployment is in double digits.
Free migration within Europe means that countries that have done a better job at reducing unemployment will predictably end up with more than their fair share of refugees.
Workers in these countries bear the cost in depressed wages and higher unemployment, while employers benefit from cheaper labor.
The burden of refugees, no surprise, falls on those least able to bear it.
Of course, there is much talk about the net benefits of inward migration.
For a country providing a low level of guaranteed benefits – social protection, education, health care, and so forth – to all citizens, that may be the case.
But for countries that provide a decent social safety net, the opposite is true.
The result of all this downward pressure on wages and cutbacks in public services has been the evisceration of the middle class, with similar consequences on both sides of the Atlantic.
Middle- and working-class households haven’t received the benefits of economic growth.
They understand that banks had caused the 2008 crisis; but then they saw billions going to save the banks, and trivial amounts to save their homes and jobs.
With median real (inflation-adjusted) income for a full-time male worker in the US lower than it was four decades ago, an angry electorate should come as no surprise.
Politicians who promised change, moreover, didn’t deliver what was expected.
Ordinary citizens knew that the system was unfair, but they came to see it as even more rigged than they had imagined, losing what little trust they had left in establishment politicians’ capacity or will to correct it.
That, too, is understandable: the new politicians shared the outlook of those who had promised that globalization would benefit all.
But voting in anger does not solve problems, and it may bring about a political and economic situation that is even worse.
The same is true of responding to a vote in anger.
Letting bygones be bygones is a basic principle in economics.
On both sides of the English Channel, politics should now be directed at understanding how, in a democracy, the political establishment could have done so little to address the concerns of so many citizens.
Every EU government must now regard improving ordinary citizens’ wellbeing as its primary goal.
More neoliberal ideology won’t help.
And we should stop confusing ends with means: for example, free trade, if well managed, might bring greater shared prosperity; but if it is not well managed, it will lower the living standards of many – possibly a majority – of citizens.
There are alternatives to the current neoliberal arrangements that can create shared prosperity, just as there are alternatives – like US President Barack Obama’s proposed Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership deal with the EU – that would cause much more harm.
The challenge today is to learn from the past, in order to embrace the former and avert the latter.
Brexit and the Future of Europe
PARIS – No one yet knows when the United Kingdom will present an agenda for negotiating its withdrawal from the European Union.
But it is already clear that Brexit will reshape the map of Europe.
And, especially given Britain’s stunning unpreparedness for the consequences of its own decision – its strategy, priorities, and even its timetable remain uncertain – that means that the EU must start figuring out how to make the best of it.
Here’s how.
Let’s start with the only certainties: the Brexit negotiations will be long, complex, and acrimonious, and the divorce will have far-reaching geopolitical effects.
The immediate impact is a halt to 60 years of integration momentum.
Europe will suffer in the short and medium term as well, as considerable political energy is likely to be devoted to Brexit for the next five years, at a time when the EU needs the strength to confront internal and external dangers.
Over the longer term, Brexit is likely to accelerate Europe’s exit from the top table of global decision-making.
Britain will not escape these consequences.
Whereas it can leave the EU, it cannot relocate away from Europe.
That is why, though Britain’s European partners did not choose Brexit, they must manage its consequences successfully, which requires balancing two priorities.
Their tactical goal must be to reach a deal with the UK that maintains the integrity of the EU.
The strategic goal is to preserve Europe’s prosperity and influence.
It is with these ideas in mind that I, together with several European colleagues – all of us acting in an individual capacity – recently co-authored a paper proposing a concept for Europe in 10-20 years: a continental partnership that would create a new basis for continued economic, foreign policy, and security cooperation with the UK.
The basic economic idea is a template for a relationship that is considerably less deep than EU membership, but rather closer than a free-trade agreement.
If adopted, Britain and the EU could not only preserve their economic ties, but also provide a new model for the future relationship between the EU and neighbors that will not join it anytime soon: Norway, Switzerland, Turkey, Ukraine, and eventually southern Mediterranean countries.
Any proposal regarding the future of the EU-UK relationship must start from an interpretation of the Brexit referendum’s meaning.
Ours assumes that UK voters rejected both the legal impossibility of limiting inflows of workers from the EU and the principle of pooled sovereignty.
These two political constraints should be taken as a given.
The first implies that a lasting arrangement between Britain and the EU cannot include free movement of labor.
The second rules out participation in a common polity, and thus implies that any cooperation must be based on intergovernmental agreements.
The first constraint is a serious stumbling block, because the EU is based on the free movement of goods, services, capital, and workers.
The UK’s European partners adamantly claim that these four freedoms are indivisible, and that if Britain wants to maintain free access to the continental market for its data processing and financial services, it must accept unlimited access to its labor market for Polish or Irish workers.
Freedom of movement of workers is undoubtedly integral to the EU.
Indeed, the fundamental right to settle and earn one’s living in another country without asking for permission does not exist anywhere else in the world.
For millions, this right most fully embodies what the EU stands for.
But Britain has made its choice, and the right question to ask now is whether strong economic links can be preserved without free movement of labor.
From an economic standpoint, the answer is yes: a deeply integrated market for goods, services, and capital does not require full labor mobility.
What is needed is only enough temporary mobility to accompany the integration of services markets.
In other words, freedom of movement of workers is politically essential within the EU, but economically dispensable when dealing with third countries.
An economic agreement with Britain does not need to include it.
The second constraint is of a different nature.
Unlike a market for nails or screws, a market for financial or information services must be based on detailed legislation that ensures fair competition and protects customers.
A large part of the EU’s task is to prepare this legislation.
So the question here is how British producers can retain access to the EU market (and vice versa) if they are no longer party to the legislation.
Solving this conundrum would be one of the main purposes of the continental partnership.
Through it, Britain would participate in a multilateral process of consultation on draft EU legislation and would have the right to raise concerns and propose amendments, so that the outcome of the process would remain as far as possible consensual.
Both sides would be politically committed to listening to the other.
The EU, however, would have the final say, so that its laws would apply and be enforced.
To enjoy full access to the EU market, Britain would need to agree on a package of policies essential to the proper functioning of an integrated market: competition rules, consumer protection, and fundamental social rights, for example, and perhaps also minimum tax rules to avoid distortions of the type recently exemplified by Apple’s practices.
Britain would also need to contribute to the EU budget, from which development funds (the counterpart to single-market access) are delivered.
Some object that the deal would be too harsh for Britain to accept.
But would the UK be better off losing access to the market of its main trading partner?
Others worry that the EU would surrender its decision-making powers were it to consult with outsiders.
But how would the few without a vote – Britain and others – dominate the many with a vote?
Still others claim that such an arrangement would concede too much to Britain, compelling other countries to aim at a similar status and causing the EU to unravel.
But why would an EU member be better off abiding by rules and paying into the EU budget without having a vote on the design of policies?
And, far from undermining European integration, a continental partnership could support the consolidation of the EU’s core.
True, there would be a price to pay for everyone.
But it would be far lower than the price, in terms of lost prosperity and diminished global influence, of failing to create a continental partnership.
Brexit and the Balance of Power
CAMBRIDGE – Britain joined what became the European Union in 1973.
This year, on June 23, it will hold a referendum on whether to leave.
Should it?
Current polls show a closely divided electorate.
Prime Minister David Cameron claims that the concessions he has won from Britain’s EU partners should lay to rest popular concerns about a loss of sovereignty to Brussels and an influx of foreign workers from Eastern Europe.
But Cameron’s Conservative Party and his own cabinet are deeply divided, while London’s populist mayor, Boris Johnson, has joined the supporters of British exit.
The question of the costs and benefits of British membership in the EU divides the British press as well.
Many mass-circulation publications support “Brexit,” whereas the financial press supports continued membership.
The Economist, for example, points out that some 45% of British exports go to other EU countries, and that the atmosphere for negotiating a post-Brexit trade deal would likely be frosty.
Moreover, the EU has made clear to non-members such as Norway and Switzerland that they can have full access to the single market only if they accept most of its rules, including the free movement of people, and contribute to the EU budget.
In other words, a Britain outside the Union would gain little in terms of “sovereignty”; on the contrary, it would lose its vote and influence over the terms of its participation in the single market.
Meanwhile, rival financial centers such as Paris and Frankfurt would seize the chance to establish rules that would help them win back business from London.
Another complication is political: the rise of nationalism in Scotland and the effect of Brexit on the survival of the United Kingdom.
In 2014, Scotland voted in its own referendum to remain in the UK; but the nationalists won almost all of Scotland’s seats in the general election eight months later.
With Scottish opinion much more pro-European than in England, many believe that Brexit would lead to another referendum on independence.
Cameron could be remembered as the prime minister who helped break up the UK (and possibly Europe).
In the United States, President Barack Obama’s administration has stated clearly its belief that Britain and Europe are both stronger together.
Illusions of a special relationship with the US replacing the influence of Europe are mistaken.
But the British people will weigh whether to support Brexit, and an American hand on the scale could be counter-productive.
At the same time, in the words of Douglas Alexander, the former Labour shadow foreign secretary, “since the end of World War II, America has been the system operator of international order built on a strong, stable Transatlantic Alliance supported by the twin pillars of NATO and the EU.
If Britain leaves the EU, America’s closest ally would be marginalized….and the whole European project at risk of unraveling at precisely the time new economic and security threats confront the West.”
It is no wonder that Vladimir Putin’s Kremlin would welcome Brexit and meddles in European countries’ domestic politics to try to weaken the EU.
The geopolitical consequences of Brexit might not appear immediately.
The EU might even temporarily pull together.
But there would be damage to Europe’s sense of mission and its soft power of attraction.
Ensuring financial stability and managing immigration would be much more difficult as well.
In addition to a revival of Scottish separatism, Britain’s inward turn in recent years could accelerate.
And over the longer run, the effects on the global balance of power and the liberal international order – in which Britain has a strong national interest – would be negative.
When it acts as an entity, Europe is the largest economy in the world, and its population of nearly 500 million is considerably larger than America’s 325 million.
It has the world’s largest market, represents 17% of world trade, and dispenses half of the world’s foreign assistance.
It also has 27 universities ranked in the top 100 worldwide, and its creative industries contribute about 7% to its GDP.
American per capita income is higher, but in terms of human capital, technology, and exports, Europe is very much an economic peer.
In terms of military expenditure, Europe is second only to the US, accounting for 15% of the world total, compared to 12% for China and 5% for Russia.
Of course, that number is somewhat misleading, given Europe’s lack of military integration.
France and Britain are the two major sources of European expeditionary power.
European and US resources are mutually reinforcing.
Direct investment in both directions is higher than with Asia, and US-European trade is more balanced than US trade with Asia.
At the cultural level, Americans and Europeans share the values of democracy and human rights more with each other than with any other world regions.
Faced with a rising China, a declining but risk-inclined Russia, and the prospect of prolonged turmoil in the Middle East, close transatlantic cooperation will be crucial to maintaining a liberal international order over the long term.
Recognizing that Brexit, by weakening both Europe and Britain, would make a disorderly international system more likely, should tip the balance in favor of maintaining the status quo.
Brexit’s Impact on the World Economy
LONDON – The febrile behavior of financial markets ahead of the United Kingdom’s referendum on June 23 on whether to remain in the European Union shows that the outcome will influence economic and political conditions around the world far more profoundly than Britain’s roughly 2.4% share of global GDP might suggest.
There are three reasons for this outsize impact.
First, the “Brexit” referendum is part of a global phenomenon: populist revolts against established political parties, predominantly by older, poorer, or less-educated voters angry enough to tear down existing institutions and defy “establishment” politicians and economic experts.
Indeed, the demographic profile of potential Brexit voters is strikingly similar to that of American supporters of Donald Trump and French adherents of the National Front.
Opinion polls indicate that British voters back the “Leave”campaign by a wide margin, 65% to 35%, if they did not complete high school, are over 60, or have “D, E” blue-collar occupations.
By contrast, university graduates, voters under 40, and members of the “A, B” professional classes plan to vote “Remain” by similar margins of 60% to 40% and higher.
In Britain, the United States, and Germany, the populist rebellions are not only fueled by similar perceived grievances and nationalist sentiments, but also are occurring in similar economic conditions.
All three countries have returned to more or less full employment, with unemployment rates of around 5%.
But many of the jobs created pay low wages, and immigrants have recently displaced bankers as scapegoats for all social ills.
The degree of mistrust of business leaders, mainstream politicians, and expert economists is evident in the extent to which voters are ignoring their warnings not to endanger the gradual restoration of prosperity by upending the status quo.
In Britain, after three months of debate about Brexit, only 37% of voters agree that Britain would be worse off economically if it left the EU – down from 38% a year ago.
In other words, all the voluminous reports – by the International Monetary Fund, the OECD, the World Bank, and the British government and the Bank of England – unanimously warning of significant losses from Brexit have been disregarded.
Rather than trying to rebut the experts’ warnings with detailed analyses, Boris Johnson, the leader of the Leave campaign, has responded with bluster and rhetoric identical to Trump’s anti-politics: “Who is remotely apprehensive about leaving?
Oh believe me, it will be fine.”
In other words, the so-called experts were wrong in the past, and they are wrong now.
This kind of frontal attack on political elites has been surprisingly successful in Britain, judging by the latest Brexit polling.
But only after the votes are counted will we know whether opinions expressed to pollsters predicted actual voting behavior.
This is the second reason why the Brexit result will echo around the world. The referendum will be the first big test of whether it is the experts and markets, or the opinion polls, that have been closer to the truth about the strength of the populist upsurge.
For now, political pundits and financial markets on both sides of the Atlantic assume, perhaps complacently, that what angry voters tell pollsters does not reflect how they will actually vote.
Analysts and investors have consistently assigned low odds to insurgent victories: in late May, betting markets and computerized models put the probabilities of Trump’s election and of Brexit at only around 25%, despite the fact that opinion polls showed almost 50% support for both.
If Brexit wins on June 23, the low odds accorded by experts and financial markets to successful populist revolts in America and Europe will immediately look suspect, while the higher probabilities suggested by opinion polls will gain greater credibility.
This is not because US voters will be influenced by Britain; of course they will not be.
But, in addition to all the economic, demographic, and social similarities, opinion polling in the US and Britain now face very similar challenges and uncertainties, owing to the breakdown of traditional political allegiances and dominant two-party systems.
Statistical theory even allows us to quantify how expectations about the US presidential election should shift if Brexit wins in Britain.
Suppose, for the sake of simplicity, that we start by giving equal credibility to opinion polls showing Brexit and Trump with almost 50% support and expert opinions, which gave them only a 25% chance.
Now suppose that Brexit wins.
A statistical formula called Bayes’ theorem then shows that belief in opinion polls would increase from 50% to 67%, while the credibility of expert opinion would fall from 50% to 33%.
This leads to the third, and most worrying, implication of the British vote.
If Brexit wins in a country as stable and politically phlegmatic as Britain, financial markets and businesses around the world will be shaken out of their complacency about populist insurgencies in the rest of Europe and the US.
These heightened market concerns will, in turn, change economic reality.
As in 2008, financial markets will amplify economic anxiety, breeding more anti-establishment anger and fueling still-higher expectations of political revolt.
The threat of such contagion means a Brexit vote could be the catalyst for another global crisis.
This time, however, the workers who lose their jobs, the pensioners who lose their savings, and the homeowners who are trapped in negative equity will not be able to blame “the bankers.”
Those who vote for populist upheavals will have no one but themselves to blame when their revolutions go wrong.
The Trade Costs of Leaving the EU
BRUSSELS – The “Brexiteers” – those who want Britain to leave the European Union – argue that their goal would be virtually cost-free and have no effect on the United Kingdom’s global trade.
They are wrong.
On June 23, when voters in Britain cast their ballots in the referendum on the question, they need to consider what is actually involved in leaving the EU – and how the free-trade benefits they now enjoy (and take for granted) could be maintained after Brexit.
Start with the basics. Leaving the EU means that the UK would exit the EU’s Customs Union, which is the basis for cross-border free trade among the EU’s 28 members (and establishes a common external tariff vis-à-vis third countries).
It also means exit from the Single Market – the basis for the free movement of goods and services among EU members.
By definition, non-members of the EU cannot belong to the Single Market.
So what would happen next?
During the two-year period before Britain’s withdrawal takes final effect, there would be UK-EU negotiations on many points – sovereignty, the legal order, immigration, finances, and economic matters.
The assumption is that a crucial goal for Britain would be to negotiate a trading relationship as close as possible to the free-trade relationships that exist today.
That is easier said than done. The best result would be if all players agreed to maintain the free trade already achieved, with the UK setting a new external tariff on a duty-free basis, applicable to all comers.
This is what happened in the 1970s after Britain and Denmark left the European Free Trade Association: Free-trade agreements were negotiated among EFTA members and between them and the EU (or the EEC as it was then known).
But Brexiteers should realize that there is no guarantee that this would happen again – and, in any case, there would be complications.
While this solution would be good for the 45% of British exports that are sold in EU markets, it would reduce protection for British industries to zero.
Under the rules of the World Trade Organization, the same import duties must be applied to all WTO participants – which means that if Britain’s imports from the EU are duty-free, its imports from the rest of the world must be, too.
The alternative would be for UK exporters to accept the EU’s common external tariff, and for the UK to create its own import tariff, applied to all imports, including from the EU.
Because the common tariff is at a relatively low level on industrial and fishery products, this might not be an insuperable barrier for UK exports, and it would allow some flexibility in protecting UK companies from imports.
The potential pitfall is that any British tariff increase above the EU level would expose the UK to claims for compensation from third countries in the WTO.
The bigger question that the Brexiteers need to answer is how to secure a high level of access to the EU’s internal market.
This is vitally important for Britain’s service industries, particularly for the City of London’s exports of financial services.
There is only one precedent for non-EU members being able to negotiate access to the internal market equivalent to that enjoyed by EU members. This is the European Economic Area agreement concluded with the EU by Norway, Iceland, and Liechtenstein in 1992.
In the view of many observers, including me, access to the Single Market through the EEA is no longer available. But what if we’re wrong?
The point is that such a deal would go against all the instincts (and rhetoric) of the Brexiteers, because it would mean accepting the EU’s “four freedoms”: not just the free movement of goods, services, and capital – but of people, too.
That would be hard to square with the Brexit objective of “controlling our borders.”
The Brexiteers would also blanch at Britain’s obligation under an EEA-type agreement to continue contributing to the EU budget.
Of course, there could be specific arrangements for particular sectors.
But it seems unlikely that such arrangements would be possible in financial services and the major professional services (including doctors, architects, and lawyers), which are important for Britain’s competitors in Europe.
Indeed, it is possible that the EU would adopt a tough mercantilist stance: If you want privileged access, you should stay in the club.
The final consequence of Brexit is that the UK would lose its free-trade arrangements with third countries under the many trade agreements that the EU has signed since 2000.
Replacing these agreements with bilateral deals would take time.
There is no guarantee that the EU would agree to an interim continuation of free trade, and it seems certain that UK exports would face higher tariffs than its former EU partners in those third countries (placing British exporters at a competitive disadvantage).
It’s a big stretch for the Brexiteers to ask us to believe that the world’s most prominent leaders, European or not, have all got the impact of Brexit wrong.
In the trade debate, we have had the International Monetary Fund, US President Barack Obama, and the OECD – quite apart from the UK Treasury – telling Britons that a vote to leave would be bad for the economy.
It is not much of a reply to argue that the OECD is “in the pay of the EU” or that Obama is anti-British because he had a Kenyan father in British colonial days.
Economic forecasting is an uncertain science.
But when almost all projections point in the same direction – that Brexit would be hugely damaging to the UK – it is time to decide what is credible and what is not.
Will America Win or Lose From Brexit?
WASHINGTON, DC – The British vote to leave the European Union has shaken world financial markets.
The immediate and medium-term prospects for economic growth in the United Kingdom are severely diminished, and the impact on the rest of Europe will be negative.
Some of the obvious political winners from Brexit are people who do not like Western Europe and what it stands for.
Ironically, the United States – Europe’s greatest ally and the EU’s largest trading partner – may also end up as a beneficiary, though not if Donald Trump, the presumptive Republican nominee, wins the presidential election in November.
Britain has a population of just over 65 million people and what was, at least until Thursday, the world’s fifth-largest national economy, with annual GDP totaling nearly $3 trillion.
In the context of a $75 trillion global economy, Britain’s is a relatively small, open one that relies heavily on foreign trade – annual exports are typically in the range of 28%-30% of economic activity.
That is now likely to change.
The EU accounts for about half of Britain’s exports, and the prospects for continued full market access are dim.
Trade in goods may be affected, but the impact on exports of services – including financial services – will be more severe.
In principle, Britain could now negotiate a great deal of market access, but this would almost certainly require accepting rules made in Brussels – which is just what the British voted against.
Growth in the UK will consequently be lower and for a long period of time.
The direct impact on the world economy is likely to be limited by the fact that other countries will to some extent gain from Britain’s loss.
For example, the UK was until recently one of the top destinations for foreign direct investment, precisely because companies saw it as a good base from which to sell into the rest of Western Europe.
The UK’s attractiveness – and the creation of good jobs that resulted from it – will now decline.
The big political loser is obviously the EU itself, which, without one-sixth of its current GDP, will fall in the economic rankings from just below the US to around – or some would say below – the level of China (measured using current exchange rates).
The precise policy reaction of EU leaders is unclear; but, given the inept way the eurozone crisis has been handled since 2010, a return to more dynamic growth seems unlikely.
A weaker Europe is bad for the world – and people like Vladimir Putin who hold democracy in contempt are undoubtedly smiling today.
But many authoritarian regimes are funded by the export of natural resources.
Slower global growth and consequently lower oil prices are not good for countries such as Putin’s Russia and Iran.
And China remains an economy where growth is very much based on the export of manufactured goods to richer countries, so a slowdown in the UK and the EU does not favor the Chinese, either.
In geopolitical and economic terms, the US is potentially the biggest winner from the disintegration of the EU.
The US rose to global predominance as Europeans fought one another and their empires declined.
The post-1945 US role was challenged first by the Soviet Union, which, for a time, posed a real technological challenge.
Today, Russia has a small – and shrinking – economy and a population in decline.
Next up was 1980s Japan, with its innovative management practices and well-run companies.
Japan is much richer than Russia today, but it, too, remains mired in economic malaise and may be trapped in a perpetual downward demographic spiral.
Leaders of the EU have, in recent times, seen themselves as a rival to the US on the global stage.
The question now is which parts of Europe will stick together and on what basis.
Prosperity is based on people and ideas.
Who can attract the most talented people, educate them and their children, and give as many individuals as possible the opportunity to work productively?
The US has some serious problems, but absorbing immigrants and encouraging creativity have been among its main strengths for more than 200 years.
The UK has also been a relatively open society in recent decades, and many of its younger people would like that to continue.
But older people, living outside large urban areas, have voted instead to build barriers and – to a significant extent – attempt to close off the country from the rest of the world.
The politics of the US presidential election are obviously quite different from those of the UK’s Brexit debate.
But Trump is offering a strikingly similar vision to that of Nigel Farage, head of the UK Independence Party – and on Friday both of them seemed equally delighted with the outcome of the referendum.
The choice that Americans will make in November now comes into clearer focus.
Will voters heed the siren song of Trump – and do great damage to the US economy and to the world by embracing a self-destructive effort to wall themselves off from the world?
Or will they choose prosperity and a leading global role?
Brexit’s Questions for Europe
MADRID – In three months, British citizens will have to decide whether or not to remain in the European Union.
But they are not the only ones who must consider their political future.
The upcoming referendum also poses two important questions for the rest of Europe.
The first question is which outcome Europeans would and should prefer.
Some have already written off the United Kingdom, claiming that a partner that would consider leaving is not the kind of partner they want, anyway.
Whether or not one shares this opinion, the point is worth studying.
Indeed, it would be naive not to ask whether retaining a member that is challenging the very principle of European integration would really be in the EU’s best interests.
The reality is that the British public debate on sovereignty will not end when the votes are counted.
After all, even if the majority says “yes” to the EU, a share of the population – a substantial one, according to the polls – will remain convinced that Brexit would have been much better for the UK.
Given this, debates and negotiations involving the UK and its European partners will continue to feature deep disagreements over the restrictions and conditions that accompany membership in the EU.
For years to come, the British will demand a constant drumbeat of reaffirmation that they made the right choice.
This is an important consideration that should not be dismissed out of hand.
But it should not lead the rest of Europe to favor Brexit.
Indeed, if the majority of British voters decided to abandon the EU, everyone would suffer the consequences.
For starters, Brexit would deal a major economic blow to the UK and the EU alike.
But that is not all.
It would also weaken the security, foreign policy, and international standing of both parties.
In the face of a large-scale migration crisis, conflict on Europe’s borders, and the brutality of the Islamic State – security threats that affect all Europeans, and that cannot be confronted by any country alone – the need for a common EU foreign and security policy is clearer than ever.
Yet European countries continue to struggle to reach consensus on foreign-policy measures – a failure that is undermining their international influence.
Indeed, after spending several years focused on coping with economic crises, the EU’s influence and leadership in certain international decision-making arenas have waned.
Meanwhile, member countries – including the UK, Europe’s greatest military power, which has traditionally been committed to international-minded policies – have been downsizing their defense expenditures.
By intensifying doubts about European integration, Brexit would further reduce the willingness of EU members to cooperate, resulting in the deterioration of both their security and their remaining international influence.
For Europe, the loss of such an important security partner would clearly be detrimental.
But the UK ��� left to confront global threats on its own, with less means and fewer partners – would be more vulnerable as well.
The second question that the referendum poses for Europeans is the same one that the British are addressing: Is EU membership worthwhile?
Centrifugal forces in the EU are stronger today than ever before, not only across the English Channel, but throughout the continent.
Many countries have political movements and parties – some stronger than others – that are seeking to “recover” elements of sovereignty, to the detriment of common action.
Some governments have even taken unilateral measures contrary to EU decisions.
Simply put, the lack of solidarity among member states has fueled efforts to weaken the values and principles on which the EU was founded, with many favoring a view that holds out the nation-state as the solution to every problem.
Brexit would reinforce this trend, bolstering Europe’s nationalist and Euroskeptic forces.
With a presidential election in France and federal elections in Germany next year, the potential political boost to anti-European forces could have serious long-term consequences.
In this sense, Germany’s recent regional elections should serve as a warning.
Let us be clear: The view driving these movements – that the EU is at the root of Europe’s myriad problems, from economic hardship to the refugee crisis, and that withdrawal (or unilateral action) is the only way to resolve them – is patently false.
The problems we are facing did not arise because of European integration.
Global economic challenges and the flood of migrants and asylum-seekers will continue to reach Europe’s borders, whether it is united or not.
What matters is how Europe responds to them.
The rationale for integration is that collective action is far more effective than unilateral efforts.
Of course, it would not take long for the folly in the nationalistic approach to become apparent.
But the damage caused by then could be severe.
Given this, campaigns for European integration should not be limited to a rote affirmation of the benefits the EU has brought to its members, much less to efforts to appease Euroskeptics.
Rather, the EU should be reaffirmed as an attractive political project.
This delicate moment for the EU demands decisive progress toward a more effective, more integrated, and more desirable union.
Brexit in Context
MILAN – I do not believe that foreigners contribute usefully by issuing strong opinions about how a country’s citizens, or those of a larger unit like the European Union, should decide when faced with an important political choice.
Our insights, based on international experience, may sometimes be helpful; but there should never be any confusion about the asymmetry of roles.
This is particularly true of the British referendum on whether to remain in the EU.
Just days before the vote, the outcome is too close to call, and there appear to be enough undecided voters to tip it either way.
But, with political and social fragmentation extending well beyond Europe, outsiders may be able to add some perspective on what is really at issue.
First, it will come as no surprise that, in terms of the distribution of income, wealth, and the costs and benefits of forced structural change, growth patterns in most of the developed world have been problematic for the past 20 years.
We know that globalization and some aspects of digital technology (particularly those related to automation and disintermediation) have contributed to job and income polarization, placing sustained pressure on the middle class in every country.
Second, Europe’s ongoing crisis (more like a chronic condition) has kept growth far too low and unemployment – especially youth unemployment – unacceptably high.
And Europe is not alone. In the United States, while the formal unemployment rate has fallen, large-scale failures in terms of inclusiveness have fueled disenchantment – on both the left and the right – at growth patterns and policies that seem to benefit those at the top disproportionately.
Given the magnitude of recent economic shocks, developed countries’ citizens might be less unhappy were there evidence of a concerted effort – based on genuine burden sharing – to address these issues.
In the context of Europe, that would mean a multinational effort.
But, for the most part – and again throughout the developed world – effective responses have been missing.
Central banks have been left largely alone with objectives that exceed the capacity of their tools and instruments, while elements of the elite wait for a chance to blame monetary policymakers for weak economic performance.
In the face of non-monetary policy responses that are somewhere between deficient and non-existent relative to the magnitude of the challenges we face, the natural response in a democracy is to replace the decision-makers and try something different.
After all, democracy is a system for experimentation, as well for the expression of citizens’ will.
Of course, the “new” may not be better and could be worse – perhaps significantly worse.
Third, the EU is confronting, in more severe form, a problem facing much of the developed world: powerful forces operating beyond the control of elected officials are shaping citizens’ lives, leaving them feeling powerless.
But while all countries must deal with the challenges of globalization and technological change, important elements of governance in the EU are beyond the reach of democratic institutions, at least those that people understand and relate to.
This is not to say that local governance is problem-free.
It isn’t. Corruption, special interests, and sheer incompetence are common problems.
From a strictly economic point of view, the risks for both the United Kingdom and the rest of the EU are almost entirely on the downside.
But if that was all there was to the issue, the outcome would be a foregone conclusion in favor of staying.
The real issue – effective and inclusive self-governance – is not an easy one to tackle anywhere, because forces such as technological disruption do not respect national boundaries.
In part, Britons are voting on whether their capacity to navigate in these turbulent waters is enhanced or diminished by continued EU membership.
But a more fundamental question of political identity is also at stake – just as it was in Scotland’s independence referendum in 2014.
Some Britons (perhaps even a majority), and many other EU citizens, still want future generations to think of themselves as Europeans (albeit with a proud British, German, or Spanish origin), and are prepared to take another shot at reforming Europe’s governance structures. And they are right to think that the world would be a far better place with a united, democratic Europe as a major force for both stability and change.
That is my hope, though it may border on wishful thinking.
Regardless of the outcome of the Brexit referendum (like many outsiders, I hope Britain votes to stay and advocates for reform from within), the British vote, along with similar strong centrifugal political trends elsewhere, should bring about a major rethink of European governance structures and institutional arrangements. The goal should be to restore a sense of control and responsibility to the electorates.
That would be a good outcome in the long run.
It would require inspired leadership from all corners of Europe – including government, business, organized labor, and civil society as well as a renewed commitment to integrity, inclusiveness, responsibility, and generosity.
That is a tall order; but it is not an impossible one to fill.
Britain’s Moment of Truth
BRUSSELS – Britain’s vote to leave the European Union has put the country’s role in Europe in limbo.
Every day that passes deepens the impasse between the United Kingdom and the EU and makes the future more uncertain.
The EU leadership would like to move the process along and has called on the UK to immediately take steps to do so, as outlined in Article 50, the member-withdrawal provision of the Treaty of Lisbon.
The UK side is in disarray and first must choose a new leader now that Prime Minister David Cameron has announced his resignation.
But most British politicians have come to accept the outcome of the “Brexit” referendum, and that the will of the voters must now be carried out in a manner that best upholds Britain’s national interests.
Because the EU’s internal market has always been a key priority for the UK, one widely discussed option, which has cross-party support, is the so-called the “Norway model”: membership in the European Economic Area (EEA).
Under the EEA arrangement, Norway (along with Iceland) has full, unfettered access to the EU’s single market, including for financial services.
But access to the internal market also requires EEA members to accept full freedom of movement not only for goods, services, and capital, but also for workers.
Would the Norway option be better for Britain than full EU membership?
A simple thought experiment might help: go back four decades and assume that France had vetoed UK membership in the EU, and that the UK had joined the EEA instead.
Under this scenario, the Brexit referendum would have been on whether the UK should remain in the EEA.
Would the arguments offered by this hypothetical “Leave” campaign have been any different?
The real Leave campaign’s arguments focused on three issues: the UK’s contributions to the EU budget, free movement for workers, and national sovereignty.
Let’s consider them in turn.
The Leave campaign argued that the money the UK contributes to the EU budget as a member state could be better spent at home.
This same argument would apply against EEA membership.
In fact, the UK’s financial contribution to the EU is actually smaller, relative to its national income, than Norway’s under the EEA.
The Leave campaign also claimed that free movement of labor heightens the supposed dangers of terrorism and higher unemployment for British workers.
But the provisions governing labor mobility in the EU apply to Norway and all EEA countries as well.
To the extent that freedom of movement was the key reason for leaving the EU, the Norway model would be equally unacceptable.
This brings us to the Leave campaign’s third argument and central theme: “getting back control” of the rules and regulations governing Britain’s economy.
This objective would be an even stronger argument against EEA membership than it was against EU membership.
Under the EEA, the UK would still have to abide by the rules and regulations set in Brussels, but it would have far less say in their creation than it does as an EU member.
In fact, within the EU, Britain had considerable influence over financial services, the most important industry in its economy.
“Getting back control” was also directed against the EU Court of Justice in Luxembourg, whose judgments, by convention, have precedence over judgments by national courts.
But the EEA also has its own court, whose judgments are binding on EEA member states.
In short, all the arguments against EU membership also apply, often with even more force, against EEA membership.
Still, some countries do choose this option.
The Norwegians have consistently preferred to remain in the EEA, and have voted more than once, by large majorities, against joining the EU.
Denmark has been a similar case since 1992, when Danish voters rejected eurozone membership under the Maastricht Treaty.
Now, the Danish krone is so tightly linked to the euro that Denmark’s central bank has effectively lost its independence.
By joining the euro, Denmark would at least have gained a seat at the table.
The Swiss rejected even EEA membership in a referendum; however, to do business with the EU on the level it wanted, the Swiss government later had to accept most of the EEA rules anyway, including the free movement of people and contributions to the EU budget.
As these real-world examples show, no country that wants to benefit from the European project has been able to have its cake and eat it.
Open borders and economic integration require common rules.
A “spaghetti bowl” of different à la carte arrangements would not work for a continent of more than 30 small and medium-size countries and more than 500 million people.
The EU provides this set of common rules, buttressed by common institutions that give every country, even the smallest, a say.
This is the balancing act of sovereignty in Europe: Each state remains formally sovereign, but if it wants to prosper economically, it must accept the common norms and regulations that enable Europe’s intensive cross-border division of labor.
Of course, Europe is more than just a free-trade area; it is also a hub of shared social and cultural life.
This is why freedom of movement is so appealing, not only from an economic point of view.