To officials in Brussels, the eurozone is the EU.
Only Britain and Denmark have been allowed to opt out.
The other members, including Sweden, are expected to join when they meet the criteria.
The eurozone was to be the engine of political union.
But the engine has stalled.
To be sure, the 2008 crisis started with the banking collapse in the US.
Legitimacy thus still resides at a level of political authority that has lost those attributes of sovereignty (such as the ability to alter exchange rates) from which legitimacy derives.
Meanwhile, promises of action continue to flow.
The so-called Five Presidents’ Report calls for “completing Europe’s economic and monetary union” as a prelude to “political union.”
But is that the right sequence?
Historically, political union precedes economic and monetary union.
As Otmar Issing, a former ECB chief economist, never tires of pointing out, without a sovereign, the process of transferring competences – including monetary policy – to ever higher levels will create a huge legitimacy deficit.
The EU has tried to achieve political union incrementally, because it was impossible to start with it.
Indeed, barely hidden in the “European project” was the expectation that successive crises would push political integration forward.
This was certainly Jean Monnet’s hope.
The alternative – that the crises would have the opposite effect, leading to the breakup of the economic and monetary union – was never seriously confronted.
Few people in the UK would welcome a rapid move toward a political union, assuming this means filling in the gaps in sovereignty that have crippled the eurozone.
Indeed, in the deal that Prime Minister David Cameron negotiated with European heads of government as a condition of remaining in the EU, Britain is specifically exempted from commitment to “ever closer political union.”
Yet, without a political union, it is hard to see how the eurozone can be made to work.
The eurozone is therefore likely to break up into more compatible parts, after further failed efforts to muddle through.
One can imagine a northern single-currency area, with enough sovereignty (provided by Germany or, more plausibly, by Germany and France acting together) to make it work, linked by free trade to a southern area that is not subject to the northern bloc’s monetary and fiscal rules.
Specifically, members of the southern bloc would have fixed, but adjustable, exchange rates with one another and with the northern union.
The southern bloc, however, would lack a member with the weight and prestige to counterbalance Germany.
That member could only be Britain.
And this is the main argument against pulling out of the EU: By staying in, Britain would be able to ensure that, if and when the eurozone’s breakup comes, the process is not too messy, and will at any rate preserve something of the spirit of the EU’s founders.
Britain has much to fear from an acrimonious divorce, as it will inevitably be swept into its turbulent wake.
It has always been part of Britain’s role to act as a bridge between different worlds. It can play this role in the two Europes of the future, but only by not cutting itself off from the one Europe that currently exists.
Britain’s Silent Election
LONDON – Other people’s elections are usually baffling and boring, which is certainly true of the United Kingdom’s coming vote on May 7; indeed, many Britons share the sentiment.
The longest election campaign in UK history has been strikingly short of focus.
Nonetheless, the campaign contains three important pointers for other Western democracies.
The first pointer is that Bill Clinton’s famous campaign slogan from 1992 – “It’s the economy, stupid” – is itself stupid, or at least insufficient.
If it was the economy that would decide Britain’s election, Prime Minister David Cameron would be leading a much more confident campaign.
For the past 18 months or so, the UK has had Europe’s fastest-growing economy, and at times has even outpaced the United States.
The unemployment rate, now 5.6%, has fallen to less than half that of the eurozone.
But favorable economic indicators have made little difference to the standing of Cameron’s Conservatives in opinion polls, and have done nothing to save their coalition partner, the centrist Liberal Democrats, from a severe slump.
Too many voters, it seems, still do not feel better off, and for good reason: average incomes have barely begun to rise, following seven painful years.
So the right slogan in this campaign might be, “It’s the living standards, stupid.”
Or, more accurately (though more cumbersomely): “It’s the perception of future living standards, stupid, and the perception of fairness surrounding those prospects.”
Either way, the point is straightforward: statistical recovery is not enough.
This seems to be why, although it has only a small lead of 2-4 percentage points in the polls, the center-left Labour Party has had the best of the campaign.
Labour’s leader, Ed Miliband, was widely derided last year as weak, unconvincing, and unlikeable; but, perhaps benefiting from low expectations, he has looked steadily more credible and statesmanlike as the campaign has gone on.
The second pointer is that foreign affairs, though rarely a major factor in any country’s national elections, can contribute to a general sense of unease about political leadership.
It had been widely assumed that the UK’s continued membership in the European Union would be a leading campaign issue, given the rise of the UK Independence Party and Cameron’s pledge that, if re-elected, he would hold a referendum on the question by 2017.
Indeed, Cameron’s promise is arguably the most consequential issue at stake in the British election: if he remains Prime Minister, there will be a referendum; if Miliband takes over, there will not be.
Britain’s strategic future rests on this choice.
Yet there has been near-silence on this choice.
Both UKIP and its charismatic leader, Nigel Farage, have slipped in opinion polls and have struggled to get attention.
More important, Cameron has said almost nothing about either Europe or immigration; and, though Miliband’s clearly stated pro-EU stance has endeared his candidacy to many business leaders, he, too, has played down the issue.
Perhaps this reflects my own bias, but I suspect that this evasiveness on the part of Britain’s main political parties has weakened support for them, by diminishing their status as valid representatives of the country.
Voters may not list Europe or foreign affairs among the main issues that concern them.
But the daily news about migrants dying in the Mediterranean, the war in Ukraine, Greece’s possible default, the turmoil in Syria, Iraq, Yemen, Libya, and Gaza, Iran’s nuclear program, and more heighten voters’ awareness that their country needs to be defended robustly, by a government with a coherent foreign policy.
And yet Britain’s defense forces are weaker than at any time since the 1930s.
The general perception is that Britain’s voice in international affairs is less influential than at any time since then, too.
Whatever voters think Britain’s foreign and defense policy should be, they believe their country should have one.
The final pointer of the UK election may partly reflect the vacuum in national leadership that such silence epitomizes.
Whatever the result of the election, the most striking phenomenon will be the rise of regionalism, most notably a surge in support for the pro-independence Scottish National Party (SNP).
No one can predict whether the SNP might end up in the paradoxical position of joining a coalition with Labour to govern a country that it was campaigning to leave in last September’s independence referendum.
But the SNP’s likely electoral gain is too large to be explained by secessionist sentiment alone.
The party appears to be attracting many people who voted against independence but who want more regional autonomy and a stronger voice for Scotland in the Westminster Parliament.
The absence of a broader “feel good” factor from economic recovery, resentment of economic inequality, mistrust of national political leaders, and greater faith in localism: these are the main features of Britain’s election campaign.
Whether or not they make Miliband the next prime minister (in a coalition with the Liberal Democrats, the SNP, or both), they are likely to characterize elections elsewhere as well in the years ahead.
The Bookies and the British Election
LONDON – I used to be considered a pretty good forecaster of British and other countries’ elections.
I was, after all, once a party chairman.
I can now confess my method.
It was not based on any novel political insight.
I did not have a magic algorithm relating economic factors to voting intentions – though I do think that there is some correlation between net disposable income and how people normally vote.
But my own technique, which I still use, has proved more reliable than even poring over the political entrails in every constituency.
What I do is not very sophisticated: I watch the bookmakers’ odds.
Doing so proved invaluable as recently as the Scottish independence referendum last September.
Two days before the count, bookmakers were paying out to gamblers who had bet that Scotland would vote “No” to independence.
Guess which way Scotland actually voted.
My method is based largely on the observation that you rarely hear of a poor bookie.
So I apply the American writer Damon Runyon’s famous adage: “The race is not always to the swift, nor the battle to the strong, but that’s the way to bet.”
The problem now is that the British general election in May is too close to call.
So the bookmakers have 2:5 odds on no party gaining an outright majority, and 10:11 on either Labour or the Conservatives winning the largest number of seats.
So I cannot predict the outcome, and neither can the masters of the universe in the City of London, who always become jittery in the face of political uncertainty.
What I can do is try to explain why that uncertainty exists.
First, as in many other democracies, support for the United Kingdom’s two main political parties is declining.
When I first became interested in politics, nearly 50 years ago, Labour and the Conservatives attracted some 90% of the popular vote.
In May, their combined share will be about 65% to 70%.
There are several reasons for this.
One is the decline of the traditional working class and the growth of a more affluent middle class, underpinned by changes in occupation and housing.
Trade-union membership and public-sector employment have fallen.
The number of people joining political parties has dropped sharply as ideological identification with either the left or the right has waned.
Add to this the rise of populist and nationalist parties in Britain, partly a consequence of the political and economic alienation that have resulted from globalization and economic troubles, and Labour and the Conservatives are fighting over dwindling support.
The latest polls indicate 34% support for Labour, and 32% for the Conservatives.
Labour’s popularity has been trending down from the high 30s over the last couple of years; the Conservatives have remained stuck at around 30%.
Several factors make predicting the outcome even more problematic.
For starters, the electoral system is tipped sharply in Labour’s favor.
It takes more votes to elect a Conservative than a Labour MP, owing to the over-representation of urban Britain and some majority-Labour parts of the country.
As a result, psephologists calculate that the Conservatives have to win at least 4% more of the popular vote than Labour in order to win more seats.
Second, the anti-immigration, anti-European UK Independence Party (UKIP) takes more votes – perhaps as much as 50% – from the Conservatives than it does from the Labour party.
It looks as though UKIP’s support may have peaked, and that some of the air is escaping from the party’s tires.
But no one really knows how much damage UKIP will do to the Conservatives’ chances.
Third, on the other side of the fence, the Scottish National Party appears to be attracting a large number of former Labour supporters.
Many working-class voters in western Scotland used to vote for the SNP in Scottish Parliament elections, but would drift back to Labour in UK general elections.
But some believe that this pattern has been disrupted, owing to a sense that Labour has taken its traditional supporters for granted.
Ed Miliband, the Labour leader, seems to be just as unpopular in Scotland as his Conservative counterpart, Prime Minister David Cameron.
Leadership is an area where the Conservatives are already ahead in opinion polls.
They have a substantial lead on economic issues as well, as the news continues to support the party’s contention that the recovery in growth and employment, along with low inflation, are now benefiting the entire country.
Conservatives will hammer away on the economy, as they did in 1992, the last time that they won an election outright.
Labour, for its part, will seek to focus voters’ attention on issues that are thought to be toxic for the government, like the National Health Service.
With the campaign already underway, no one should expect the main protagonists to depart significantly in the weeks ahead from the themes that they have already espoused.
What happens if the outcome matches the bookies’ predictions?
There will presumably be months of attempts to build coalitions out of improbable alliances; then maybe there will be another election (assuming Parliament can change the law mandating its five-year term).
I hope it does not come to that, and that when the battle smoke clears, Cameron will be left – as he deserves to be – the only man standing.
But before I place that bet, I will consider what the bookies have to say.
Lies, Damn Lies, and the British Election
LONDON – Democratic elections cannot be described as competitions aimed at revealing which candidates tell the unvarnished truth.
Most politicians try to avoid telling outright lies; they bob and weave like prizefighters when faced with questions that might ensnare them in outright mendacity.
But they invariably exaggerate what they have to offer, as well as the perils that would result should their opponents win.
It is understandable that politicians should talk up their own vision of the future and talk down what others have to say.
All of this is most credible if it does not go too far, and if it bears some resemblance to what the same politicians have achieved when they have been in power.
Voters normally spot political Pinocchios and the lengthening of politicians’ noses a mile off.
But they also do not expect their elected representatives to be saints.
They are prepared to give some the benefit of the doubt (by far the most important attribute any political leader can possess).
My guess is that on polling day, Prime Minister David Cameron will emerge holding this asset.
Voters also have a gut instinct – usually, though not always, correct – that parties of the traditional left will tax and spend more, and that those of the right will do the opposite.
The way voters respond reflects the way they perceive recent history and what they want for themselves and their families in the future.
I subscribe to the view that they normally get these judgments right.
This year, however, the British electorate must navigate more than the ordinary amount of election-time dissimulation.
As voters head to the polls on May 7, their would-be elected officials are asking them to believe three great falsehoods, each of which is dangerous in its own way.
The first two falsehoods – deceptions as large as I can remember witnessing during an election campaign – are being peddled by the country’s two most successful populist parties: the United Kingdom Independence Party (UKIP) and the Scottish Nationalist Party (SNP).
UKIP’s rapid rise has been built on the promise of a return to a British past that never was: mostly white, God-fearing, law-abiding, culturally insular, and narrowly focused on its own national interests.
It is a vision that appeals mainly to those who are suspicious of modernity and hostile toward globalization.
The danger is that UKIP’s two primary policy prescriptions – an end to immigration and withdrawal from the European Union – are incompatible with economic prosperity.
In order for Britain to continue to thrive outside the EU, it would have to open its economy even further, not only to worldwide trade and investment, but also to increased immigration flows.
Following UKIP’s suggestion to close the country off from the world would result only in greater poverty – above all for British workers.
The SNP, too, has built its campaign around a core of dishonesty that, unfortunately, explains a good part of its success.
In addition to appealing to an unpleasant undercurrent of Scottish Anglophobia, the SNP promises its electorate the prospect of policies that are far to the left of anything that Labour’s prime ministerial candidate, Ed Miliband, could possibly deliver.
To make matters worse, the increase in welfare spending that the SNP is promising Scotland’s voters would have to be paid for primarily by taxpayers in England.
Regardless of which party – Labour or Conservative – wins the largest number of seats in Parliament, its constituents would of course include many English voters, who would never agree to the SNP’s policy priorities.
As far as falsehoods go, this is a dangerous one; it once again threatens the constitutional integrity of Britain, just eight months after Scotland voted to stay part of the United Kingdom by a margin of 10%.
But it is the last deception that is the most widespread – and probably the most dangerous of all.
National politicians’ campaign rhetoric embodies the delusional belief that the UK can exercise the same degree of control over global events that might have been possible 50 years ago.
For better or worse, that simply is not true.
The UK no longer wields the international influence it once did; indeed, Britons hardly seem to be bothered by their country’s downgraded importance – or even very much aware of the implications.
National sovereignty is becoming an ever more elusive concept.
Britain’s economic prospects increasingly depend on events beyond its shores, whether just across the English Channel or in China or California.
Environmental hazards blow in on the wind.
Swelling migration pressures threaten to overwhelm any pretense at border controls.
Security concerns increasingly implicate foreign and domestic policies simultaneously.
A recent political cartoon showed British bombers taking off on a mission, with one pilot saying to the others, “It seems a long way to go to bomb a few young men from South London.”
Addressing the challenges that we Britons face will first require acknowledging our limited control over their root causes.
The country is in desperate need of leadership with the courage to be candid with voters, by explaining to them clearly and soberly that the UK can no longer solve its problems alone.
In an increasingly dangerous, ever-more interconnected world, Britain cannot afford to make its most important collective decisions based on delusions.
The British electorate would be better served if their politicians had the courage to serve up some uncomfortable truths – or at least not to deal in dangerous deceit.
The British Leadership Disease
LONDON – Ethical political leadership is in short supply worldwide, from the United States to Turkey to the Philippines.
But perhaps the most striking instance of dishonest leadership has been in the United Kingdom, where the Brexit referendum and its aftermath have caused more instability than Britain experiences in a typical decade.
In just the first couple of weeks after the referendum, David Cameron, the prime minister who brought about the vote, resigned, and his Conservative successor, Theresa May, appointed a new Cabinet.
Though some of the Brexiteers – most notably former London Mayor Boris Johnson – are now in the government, none of those who led the campaign to leave the European Union are ultimately responsible for carrying it out.
May herself supported the “Remain” campaign.
Meanwhile, the opposition Labour Party has fallen into disarray.
Almost the entire Shadow Cabinet has resigned, having lost confidence in party leader Jeremy Corbyn, and efforts to challenge him have been exceptionally acrimonious, with Corbyn supporters even throwing a brick through the window of one of his rivals' constituency office.
And the post-referendum turmoil runs deeper.
The number of reported hate crimes since the referendum has soared by 500%, amid a lowering mood of social, political, and economic uncertainty and discontent.
More than £100 billion ($131 billion) was wiped off the FTSE 100 in the first ten minutes of trading after the result was announced, while the pound has plumbed a 35-year low against the US dollar.
One of the most striking lessons of the British case – and many others – is that promising efforts to hold business leaders to account and ensure that companies behave ethically have not carried over to our political systems.
Our elected leaders, often among the first to demand sound strategy, succession planning, and accountability in the private sector, have spectacularly failed to practice what they preach.
We expect business leaders to plan for the certainty of uncertainty and to manage risks properly.
In the past year, companies big and small in the UK, elsewhere in the EU, and around the world have held countless meetings and high-level planning sessions to prepare for a Brexit vote.
When the results came in, it seemed that the only people who hadn’t planned for the “Leave” campaign’s victory were those who led it.
Indeed, according to a recent report by Parliament’s foreign affairs select committee, Cameron’s “considered view not to instruct key departments including the Foreign Office to plan for the possibility that the electorate would vote to leave the EU amounted to gross negligence.”
The only UK political leader who quickly stepped forward with a clear and decisive strategy was Scotland’s first minister, Nicola Sturgeon.
Her plan is to hold another referendum on Scottish independence and rejoin the EU.
And it was an unelected Canadian, Mark Carney, the governor of the Bank of England, whose authoritative reassurance helped to calm the markets.
In 2015, Carney came under fire for forming a committee to carry out forward planning for the possibility of Brexit.
And in early July, he was called to testify before the House of Commons Treasury Committee, accused of leaning toward “Remain” in the run-up to the referendum, simply because he presented a bleak (and accurate) assessment of the economic consequences of a Leave victory.
When Nigel Farage, one of the Leave campaign’s most vociferous and extreme leaders, decided to step down as leader of the UK Independence Party on July 4, he said, “I want my life back.”
If that sounds familiar, it is because Tony Hayward, then-CEO of BP, used the same phrase when talking about the impact – on him – of the 2010 oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico.
When Hayward said it, the condemnation was swift.
His words conveyed a complete lack of empathy for the people who were actually affected by the spill.
Likewise, Farage, having helped drive Britain to disaster, blithely walked away when the destination was reached.
As mortifying as it is to see Johnson appointed Foreign Secretary, given his history of lying, xenophobic statements, and insulting remarks about other world leaders, at least he will bear the stain of Britain’s catastrophe publicly.
The deeper problem in the UK is that there is no alternative.
The Labour Party is simply too divided to take power.
If Corbyn were a CEO who lost the confidence of his entire executive team and board, he would be forced to resign or be fired.
If a CEO can’t command the respect of his leadership team, he can’t lead the company to success, even if most of the employees think he’s great.
The same is true of political parties, though they often take longer to act, causing the enterprise – in this case, the UK – to flounder.
With very few exceptions, the Brexit vote has brought out the worst in Britain’s leaders.
If a CEO lied to investors and consumers as much as Farage, Johnson, and Michael Gove lied to UK voters, the consequences would be swift and painful, both from regulators and the market.
They could not simply resign and move on, much less receive a future role in the organization (and certainly not a senior post).
They would be fined (or worse), professionally ostracized, and sent packing to Florida.
When we can hold our business leaders to account more effectively than we can our elected political leaders, we should worry for the future – and not just in the UK.
If it can happen here – in the homeland of Edmund Burke and Tony Benn – it truly can happen anywhere.
Britain in Search of a Country
LONDON – The Brexit vote has smashed much of the infrastructure of Britain’s economic and political relations with Europe and the world.
Those who campaigned for the United Kingdom to leave the European Union, largely on the basis of lies and delusion, have no idea what to do next.
They are destroyers, not creators.
But now that we Brits have broken all the crockery in the shop, we have to piece together our national interest from the shards.
All of us, led by a new and clever prime minister, Theresa May (who campaigned to stay in Europe), must do all we can to save our country from isolation and decline.
May has moved quickly to put in place a team to manage Britain’s divorce from the EU.
It includes Boris Johnson as Foreign Secretary, who will need no reminder of the old adage that diplomats are supposed to go abroad to lie for their country.
His challenge will not only be his cavalier attitude to the truth, but also his record of insulting many of those – including US President Barack Obama and his possible successor, Hillary Clinton – with whom he will need to do business.
But more important than the team is the nature of the game they have to play.
“Brexit means Brexit,” May has said.
But what does that mean for our trade relations and our immigration policy?
Are we committed to seeking access to Europe’s single market on something like our current terms?
Will we be able to secure “passporting” rights for our banks and financial services, so that they can stay in Britain while operating in the rest of Europe?
How can we secure any of these objectives without, like Norway or Switzerland, accepting the single market’s rules?
A key issue in answering these questions will be what we can negotiate concerning the free movement of labor.
At the moment, our attitude to trade and migration seems to be encapsulated in one simple but contradictory slogan: “Open for business, but closed for foreigners.”
I hope – and suspect – that some flexibility will be possible in this area.
Brexit not only diminishes Britain; to a lesser extent, it also diminishes the EU.
Other European countries should want to make Britain’s exit as easy and friendly as possible.
Yet, over the next year or so, several of our former colleagues may recognize that they, too, want some form of emergency brake on migration flows from one EU country to another.
When this happens, it should be possible to offer Britain a better deal, without destroying the integrity of the EU’s treaties and policies.
This would not pander to the sort of racism that was a shameful feature of some of the “Leave” campaigning in Britain – and which has left a harmful residue of hostility to foreigners of every hue.
Reported instances of hate crime have risen sharply.
Now, “Leave” campaigners of course deny that this has anything to do with them.
Some even argue that they never called for limiting immigration, just for “taking control” of our own borders.
That is a mendacious and hypocritical cop-out.
No one was saying, “We want to take control of our own borders so that we can have the same number of migrants.”
And the cruder Brexiteers were explicit that they would deny entry to the rapists, criminals, and fast-breeding foreigners (Turks in particular) who would otherwise flood the land.
This was nasty, Trump-like stuff.
At best, the “Leave” campaign’s more intelligent leaders looked the other way when the slime was being stirred.
But they knew what was happening.
“Are you thinking what we’re thinking?” a 2005 Conservative poster campaign asked.
What some are thinking is that Brexit is a license to abuse men, women, and children who live and work here.
And what they are doing has left a deep stain on our honor and national reputation.
Removing it will in some respects be the most important task for May, who expresses what surely is a sincere desire to unite the nation.
It won’t be easy.
During the referendum campaign, nationalism aroused not only racist instincts, but also populist conspiracy theories that derided experts and the institutions that house them.
The integrity of government departments like the Treasury, the independent Bank of England, and our great universities came under attack, as did Parliament itself, partly because the overwhelming majority of MPs favored remaining in the EU.
Yet it is these institutions, carefully built over decades and longer, which provide the backbone of our society.
Edmund Burke, whose thought has profoundly shaped the UK’s political system, would have been appalled at the Brexiteers’ casual disregard for any sense of national continuity – and mortified by their willingness to put such a decision to a referendum.
The cry from the “Leave” campaign was “We want our country back.”
For the rest of us, the question remains: Will it still be a country with a tolerant and plural society, proud of its institutions and its constitutional traditions, and admired for its values throughout the world?
Two Europes in One
WASHINGTON, DC – Informal discussions on the United Kingdom’s relationship with the European Union are now underway.
With a referendum on the UK’s continued EU membership set to take place before the end of 2017, the talks are the first step toward negotiating changes which, EU leaders hope, will convince British voters to choose Europe.
And changes will certainly be needed.
Indeed, as Prime Minister David Cameron is well aware, given the current dynamic of the UK’s relationship with the EU, British voters would undoubtedly choose to leave the EU.
But Cameron also knows that he must handle the negotiations with care.
If he asks for more than the EU can accommodate, he will look as if he caved in.
If he asks for too little, Britain’s Euroskeptics will have more fuel for their campaign against continued membership.
Likewise, if EU leaders give Cameron too much – allowing the UK to reap the benefits of membership, without shouldering the same responsibilities as its partners – their populations could turn on them.
But if they give too little, they could lose the UK as a partner.
Beyond such tactical matters, the UK and its European partners must address long-term issues relating to the changing shape of the eurozone.
The euro crisis has given rise to a consensus that, in order to function effectively, the eurozone must pursue further integration.
Specific proposals include a designated eurozone budget, increased fiscal-policy coordination among members, and a eurozone finance minister.
For the UK, which opted out of the euro, this is a cause for concern, as it could leave the country on the sidelines of major decision-making processes – especially if the necessary shift toward weighted majority voting removes the need for unanimity in more areas.
Cameron already has pressed for an “emergency brake” mechanism to slow down decisions on issues that are important to the non-euro countries.
Clearly, the need for much greater eurozone integration must be balanced against some countries’ strong desire to preserve more national sovereignty than is feasible in the monetary union.
The best way to do this would be to divide Europe into two groups.
Inclusion in one or the other would be based not on the potential “speed” of integration, but on a country’s permanent (or at least long-term) decision on adopting the euro.
Of course, to some extent, this is already the EU’s fundamental structure.
But establishing this categorical division – beginning with, as the UK has requested, an explicit recognition that the EU is a multi-currency union – would allow for the creation of a decision-making framework that better protects both group’s interests.
The non-euro group – including Britain, Denmark, Sweden, Poland, and some other Eastern European countries – would continue to elect representatives to the European Parliament and participate fully in EU institutions. Meanwhile, the euro group would pursue far greater fiscal integration, in addition to their current cooperation.
To ensure democratic legitimacy and satisfy national constitutional courts (not least Germany’s), a second European parliament would have to be established to serve as the eurozone’s legislative branch.
This new eurozone parliament could be formed either by a subset of members of the larger European Parliament, or by some combination of representatives from the European Parliament and national parliaments.
The proposed finance minister, responsible for overseeing fiscal policy in the monetary union, would be responsible to the eurozone parliament.
Full realization of this vision would require either a change to the existing European treaties or, more feasible, agreement by eurozone members on a new treaty, like the “fiscal compact” that entered into force in 2013.
In the meantime, Article 136 of the existing Treaty on the Functioning of the EU would allow for some preliminary steps, such as the designation of votes at the European Council that are reserved for eurozone countries only.
Establishing “two Europes in one,” rather than a “two-speed Europe,” would allow Europe to organize itself in a lasting way.
The more federal eurozone would be embedded in a larger union that cooperates on defense, foreign policy, climate-change measures, and migration policy.
Free movement of European citizens within the EU would be upheld.
This system would allow those who do not wish to share monetary sovereignty, or engage in the kind of fiscal cooperation that must eventually come with it, to make that choice.
At the same time, it would avoid the complications of having multiple Europes – an option that may be attractive to veteran Eurocrats from a purely functional perspective, but soon becomes hopelessly complicated.
A political system’s clarity and comprehensibility, together with its voluntary nature, are essential to democratic legitimacy.
Of course, this process will be long, and many details remain to be worked out.
But important progress can be made by the time the UK’s referendum is held – if, that is, EU leaders begin pursuing this goal in earnest now.
The talks being held now are an opportunity that neither side can afford to miss.
The Digital Road From Poverty
COPENHAGEN – Where should the global community focus its attention over the next 15 years?
Health, nutrition, and education may seem like obvious choices; more surprisingly, there is a strong case for making broadband access a top priority.
Consider this simple fact: Tripling mobile Internet access over the next 15 years could make the developing world $22 trillion richer.
Such improvement in the lives and earning potential of poor people could indirectly help with the other challenges; after all, more prosperous people tend to be healthier, better fed, and more highly educated.
This discussion matters, because the world’s 193 national governments will meet at the United Nations in September to finalize a list of development targets for the world to meet by 2030.
My think tank, the Copenhagen Consensus, has asked 60 teams of economists, including several Nobel laureates, to investigate which targets would do the most good for every dollar spent, to help this meeting make the best choices.
In a new analysis, Emmanuelle Auriol and Alexia Lee González Fanfalone of the Toulouse School of Economics suggest that broadband could be one of the best investments for the future.
Clearly, the rapid rollout of broadband services has transformed the lives of people in the industrialized world; there is every reason to expect that developing countries could benefit at least as much.
Access to market information, for example, can ensure that farmers selling their surplus crops are not cheated by unscrupulous traders, and that fishermen can land their catch at the port offering the best price.
A McKinsey report estimates that bringing mobile broadband in the developing world to the levels of the industrial world could add $400 billion annually to global GDP and create more than ten million jobs.
Similarly, the World Bank has shown that a 10% increase in broadband penetration increased GDP growth by 1.4% in low- to medium-income countries.
This implies that closing the persistent digital divide between the world’s developed and developing regions could give a big boost to development.
For example, mobile broadband penetration stands at 83% in the former, but only 21% in the latter.
While governments in Europe and elsewhere continue to invest in faster and better broadband, the biggest benefits will always come from providing Internet access to people who do not already have it, most of whom live in developing and emerging countries.
In fact, developing countries can leap-frog the developed world by going straight to mobile broadband, thereby avoiding the need for expensive fiber-optic cables for the “last mile” – or access point – of the network.
Mobile phone use is already spreading rapidly in developing countries, making old-style fixed infrastructure unnecessary; data services can use the same system.
In China, three-quarters of Internet users get online via mobile phones already; in Ethiopia and Uganda, four out of five do.
Thus, given the pervasiveness of mobile telephony and recent technological advances in mobile networks, rolling out mobile broadband seems a cost-effective solution.
The study by Auriol and Fanfalone shows that increasing mobile broadband about three-fold in developing regions – from 21% to 60% – will cost a substantial $1.3 trillion, as a significant amount of extra infrastructure is needed to establish about three billion more Internet connections.
But it will also increase GDP growth.
By 2020, the benefits would be almost $500 billion annually, and would continue to rise each year.
Over the coming decades, the total benefit would reach about $22 trillion.
As a result, every dollar spent on mobile broadband in the developing world would yield an estimated gain of $17.
That looks like a really smart investment.
Of course, broadband is such an important enabling technology that it is difficult to predict its full economic impact, which will vary with local circumstances.
What the Auriol-Fanfalone study does show, though, is that rolling out Internet access is money very well spent.
Jobs are created directly in the organization providing the network and indirectly in the supply chain.
Once in place, broadband helps create more jobs in the wider economy.
Companies become more efficient and innovative.
All of these factors increase the pace of economic growth.
Apart from the direct effects on economic growth and job creation, broadband can have some other very important benefits for Least Developed Countries.
Nine hundred million people live in LDCs, and, as Pantelis Koutroumpis of Imperial College London points out, only 6.7% are Internet users.
On the other hand, almost 60% of these people use a mobile phone.
They could profit from smartphones with simple adaptations that can be used in a range of health-screening tests (for example, for cardiovascular disease, HIV and other pathogens, or malaria), with the results being sent straight to hospitals for an immediate response.
The potential benefits of mobile broadband for LDCs extend even further.
Internet access could provide educational material and improve schooling.
And it could enable real time, on-demand transport services for remote areas.
With the Internet now such an important resource in the modern world, broadband has become a vital technology, promising to boost economic growth, lift people out of poverty, and improve their health, nutrition, and education.
When governments finalize the next set of global development targets, there is now a strong case for broadband access to be among them.
Europe’s Broadband Battle
LONDON – Among the many challenges facing the new European Commission is determining how to provide ultra-fast broadband Internet access to all 500 million European Union residents without raising taxes or bankrupting Europe’s telecommunications companies.
This imperative has led many to demand larger contributions from Internet giants like Google, Netflix, and Facebook, which are frequently criticized for failing to pull their weight – and even lambasted as “free-riders,” intent on pillaging European assets and markets.
Is this criticism warranted?
In a word: no.
The reality is that major Internet companies – most of which are based in the United States – are already contributing billions of dollars to establish and maintain the networks and data centers that are essential to the Internet’s functioning.
In fact, these companies directly invested more than €75 billion ($100 billion) in Internet infrastructure over the last three years, with spending up by about 10% annually over this period.
Moreover, they participated in consortia that invested more than €500 million in laying a trans-Pacific submarine fiber optic cable, which has been operational since 2010, and an 8,300-kilometer (5,200-mile) cable from Southeast Asia to Japan that came on-stream last year.
But it is Europe that has received the lion’s share of global investment in Internet infrastructure – €25 billion, or nearly one-third of the total, in the last three years.
Google recently announced the construction of a new €600 million data center in the Netherlands, and is already investing heavily in data centers in Hamina, Finland, and St. Ghislain, Belgium.
And Facebook has already established its own data center in Luleå, Sweden.
These facilities and networks – along with the broadband networks on which telecommunications companies spend billions – form the foundations of the Internet.
By investing in them, America’s Internet giants are providing tangible benefits for European consumers and companies.
Encouraging this investment should be the European Commission’s main concern.
For example, these companies’ European data centers contribute to the economies of the regions where they operate, providing jobs to local residents.
At the same time, they facilitate the smooth exchange of content, enabling European consumers to make the most of their Internet connections.
Likewise, Internet companies’ investments in content-delivery networks and Internet exchange points enable them to carry their own traffic close to consumers, handing it off to EU telecoms in places like London, Paris, and Frankfurt.
In doing so, they can help Internet service providers to cut costs and enable them to invest in the “last mile” access networks that they own and operate, thereby improving the Internet experience that they offer to consumers.
In the longer term, as Europe becomes increasingly fertile ground for digital content and applications, this infrastructure will enable Europeans to distribute their creations globally.
In other words, the structures that companies like Google and Facebook are building today will help to open new markets for European innovators, entrepreneurs, and companies, whose success will directly benefit Europe’s economy.
Instead of wasting energy and resources fighting one another, Europe’s telecoms and Internet giants from the US and elsewhere, together with the public sector, should recognize their shared interest in delivering fast, affordable broadband Internet to all EU residents.
The Internet has always been a collaborative endeavor, and it must remain so, with each actor playing its role.
Throughout the process, creative solutions will be paramount, and Internet companies’ contributions will be invaluable.
After all, they are seasoned innovators, as exemplified by Google’s collaboration with Vodafone in New Zealand and Telefónica in Chile to deliver broadband to rural areas through atmospheric balloons.
For its part, the European Commission must not allow pressure from vested interests to drive it toward confrontation.
Instead, EU leaders should remain focused on the interests of Europe’s millions of Internet users.
Only by adopting a balanced, fact-based approach and an emphasis on cooperation can they deliver consumer benefits, investment, jobs, and growth in Europe’s Internet sector.
Janji-janji pada Anak-anak Suriah yang Tidak Ditepati
LONDON – Jika Anda pernah kehilangan harapan, apalagi kehilangan kepercayaan akan pentingnya prinsip pantang menyerah, ingatkanlah diri Anda kembali atas cerita Mohammed Kosha.
Sebagai seorang pengungsi berumur 16 tahun yang tinggal di Lebanon, Mohammed telah mengatasi berbagai macam halangan yang mungkin tak pernah terpikirkan oleh kita, untuk meneruskan pendidikannya.
Para pemimpin dunia harus belajar dari kisah Mohammed.
Empat tahun yang lalu, Mohammed dan keluarganya lari dari rumah mereka di kota Darya, daerah pinggiran kota Damaskus, untuk melarikan diri dari serangan kekuatan bersenjata Suriah yang terus terjadi.
Mohammed kehilangan satu tahunnya di Sekolah Dasar di kota asalnya karena terlalu berbahaya untuk pergi ke sekolah. Lalu, ia tidak bersekolah lagi selama setahun saat keluarganya sampai di Lebanon, di mana mereka tinggal saat ini.
Hidup Mohammed berubah saat pemerintah Lebanon membuka sekolah negeri-sekolah negeri di negara tersebut untuk para pengungsi.
Kelas-kelas tersebut tidak hanya penuh; namun juga dilakukan dalam Bahasa Inggris, artinya, ia harus belajar bahasa baru.
Namun, Mohammed menangkap kesempatan untuk belajar, lalu mempelajari pelajaran-pelajaran tersebut dengan tekun.
Bulan lalu, dengan mengatasi hambatan-hambatan yang ada, ia mendapatkan nilai kedua tertinggi dalam ujian sekolah menengah Brevet Lebanon.
Dan ini bukan akhir dari cerita.
Mohammed tahu bahwa pendidikan adalah kunci untuk membangun masa depan yang lebih baik.
Dalam kata-katanya, “Belajar memberikan kita harapan.”
Seandainya para pemimpin dunia memiliki sedikit saja dari kebijaksanaan Mohammed ini.
Namun sudah ada beberapa tanda-tanda baik.
Dalam sebuah pertemuan di London  pada bulan Februari, para donor internasional mengakui pentingnya pendidikan bagi para pengungsi, dan berjanji untuk menyekolahkan semua anak pengungsi Suriah pada akhir tahun 2017.
Mereka bahkan berjanji untuk menyediakan dana sebesar $1.4 miliar untuk mencapai tujuan tersebut.
Ini adalah sebuah janji yang ambisius kepada sekelompok anak-anak yang sangat rentan.
Hari ini, sekitar satu juta anak-anak pengungsi Suriah berusia 5-17 –sekitar setengah dari jumlah keseluruhan – tidak bersekolah.
Lalu, sebagian besar yang bersekolah akan drop out sebelum memulai sekolah menengah mereka.
Dalam ruang generasi sekolah dasar yang tunggal, Suriah telah mengalami apa yang mungkin merupakan kemunduran pendidikan terbesar dalam sejarah.
Tingkat anak-anak Suriah yang bersekolah sekarang ini di bawah rata-rata kawasan sub-Sahara Afrika.
Namun saat ini, hanya enam bulan kemudian, janji pendidikan untuk semua pengungsi akan diingkari, dan menghapus harapan jutaan orang Suriah.
Hanya 39% dari $662 juta bantuan pendidikan darurat yang direncanakan oleh lembaga-lembaga kemanusiaan Perserikatan Bangsa-Bangsa berhasil didanai.
Selanjutnya, seperti yang dicatat di dalam laporan Theirworld yang diterbitkan hari ini, hanya sebagian dari $1.4 miliar yang dijanjikan di London telah disalurkan.
Karena komunitas internasional melalaikan tanggung jawabnya, tetangga-tetangga Suriah telah lanjut melakukan upaya-upaya yang luar biasa untuk mengatasi masalah di atas.
Lebanon, Yordania, dan Turki (dengan jumlah yang lebih sedikit) telah membuka sekolah-sekolah negeri mereka untuk para pengungsi Suriah.
Namun, sistem-sistem pendidikan di negara-negara tersebut, yang sudah terbatas bahkan sebelum krisis, tidak dapat menangani beban yang terpaksa harus mereka panggul.
Para pengungsi Suriah saat ini adalah sepertiga dari semua siswa sekolah negeri Lebanon.
Ini seperti sistem sekolah dasar Amerika tiba-tiba menyerap semua anak-anak Meksiko.
Jumlah guru, kelas, atau buku teks pelajaran tidak cukup untuk menyampaikan pendidikan yang layak untuk anak-anak pengungsi.
Konferensi bulan Februari seharusnya menghasilkan solusi yang akan meringankan beban para negara tetangga Suriah.
Pemerintah-pemerintah negara penerima pengungsi telah melakukan bagiannya, yakni, mempersiapkan rencana mereka dari awal dalam menyampaikan pendidikan universal mereka kepada anak-anak pengungsi.
Lalu mereka bekerja dengan para donor untuk membuat strategi yang komprehensif guna menjangkau semua anak yang tidak bersekolah dan meningkatkan kualitas pendidikan.
Namun demikian, karena komunitas internasional gagal untuk melakukan apa yang mereka janjikan, proses ini pun terhambat dan mungkin dapat membalikkan keadaan.
Lebih dari 80.000 pengungsi Suriah yang sedang bersekolah di Lebanon saat ini beresiko kehilangan tempat mereka.
Konsekuensi kemanusiaan dari krisis pendidikan di antara para pengungsi Suriah terlihat jelas.
Terlihat dari banyaknya pekerja anak yang memetik sayur di Lembah Bekaa Lebanon atau bekerja di pabrik-pabrik pembuatan pakaian di Turki, di mana setengah juta pengungsi tidak bersekolah.
Hal ini juga tercermin dari aliran keluarga pengungsi yang terus melakukan perjalanan berbahaya ke Eropa, didorong oleh harapan mereka bahwa anak-anak mereka akan mendapatkan kesempatan-kesempatan pendidikan di sana.
Namun, banyak pemerintah Eropa yang terus berinvestasi pada kawat berduri dan rumah-rumah tahanan, dibandingkan dengan investasi untuk sekolah dan guru.
Ada sebuah alternatif – namun waktu terus berderu.
Bulan depan, PBB dan Amerika Serikat akan mengadakan satu ronde lagi pertemuan puncak pengungsi.Saat ini, pemerintah dapat menanggalkan janji mereka yang terus diulang dan retorika mereka di negara masing-masing.
Mereka harus membawa rencana-rencana konkrit untuk menyalurkan $1.4 miliar yang telah mereka janjikan.
Masyarakat internasional juga harus memikirkan ulang perihal cara penyaluran bantuan tersebut.
Krisis Suriah tidak akan selesai dalam waktu dekat.
Daripada menyalurkan bantuan melalui permohonan kemanusiaan tahunan yang kekurangan dana dan tidak dapat diandalkan, donor-donor perlu untuk menyediakan pendanaan multi-tahun yang dapat diperkirakan, seperti yang telah dilakukan oleh Inggris.
Secara umum, Uni Eropa dan Bank Dunia harus melebarkan dan menggiatkan dukungan mereka terhadap pendidikan.
Tentu saja, lebih banyak pendanaan donor untuk pendidikan hanyalah sebagian dari cara yang ada.
Ada lebih banyak cara yang dapat dan seharusnya bisa dilakukan oleh para pemerintah penerima pengungsi, walaupun dibutuhkan usaha yang lebih besar.
Sebagai awalnya, mereka harus bekerja untuk mengatasi masalah perbedaan bahasa yang dihadapi oleh anak-anak Suriah.
Mereka juga dapat mengatasi masalah kurangnya guru melalui rekrutmen guru-guru pengungsi Suriah.
Yang paling penting, para pemerintah penerima pengungsi dapat membantu para pengungsi untuk lebih percaya diri dan dapat berdiri sendiri, yaitu dengan meningkatkan status hukum mereka dan memperluas hak mereka untuk bekerja.
Akhir kata, respon yang tepat terhadap krisis pendidikan di antara pengungsi harus melibatkan pendekatan yang lebih baik terhadap pembagian beban.
Sebelum menuju pertemuan puncak PBB bulan depan, para pemerintah harus meninjau janji-janji yang telah mereka buat di konferensi London.
Dan mereka harus mengingat ucapan Nelson Mandela: “Janji-janji pada anak-anak tidak boleh diingkari.”
America’s Enduring Leadership
WASHINGTON, DC – Many observers have cited the crisis in Ukraine as yet another example of American retrenchment and declining global influence.
Some have also interpreted it as evidence of a Russian-led effort to mobilize the major emerging economies – Brazil, India, and China – against the West.
While there is a kernel of truth in both narratives, each is a gross exaggeration, as is the notion that America’s capacity to shape a secure and prosperous international system is in decline.
The US has had a rough few years. After two long, draining wars, its withdrawal from Afghanistan is inching along slowly.
In Syria, Russian and Chinese intransigence have frustrated its efforts to find a diplomatic solution.
And China’s growing assertiveness in the South and East China Seas is threatening US regional dominance, while raising the risk of a crisis with America’s close ally Japan.
Meanwhile, many of America’s European allies are mired in economic malaise.
And, though the US economy is recovering from the global financial crisis, America’s treasury and reputation has been dealt a severe blow.
Nonetheless, the US remains the most influential global actor – not least because of the strong alliances that it maintains.
All of the attention given to China’s economic rise – and, to a lesser extent, that of India and Brazil – has overshadowed the success of US allies like South Korea, Turkey, Indonesia, and Germany.
In fact, the vast majority of the world’s strongest economies are allied with the US.
Moreover, far from coalescing into a united anti-Western bloc, the emerging powers remain sharply divided.
There are far more overlapping interests between the established and the emerging powers than the “West versus the rest” narrative suggests; indeed, the rising powers often share as many interests with their Western counterparts as they do with each other.
Given this, even the economic powerhouses that are not US allies do not want to upend the existing world order, but rather to gain more space within it, such as through increased authority in international institutions.
After all, they rose precisely by integrating themselves into the global economic system.
Even China, which arguably seeks to curtail US leadership in some domains, has no choice but to cooperate with the US and its allies on many foreign-policy issues.
China can challenge American leadership only if others follow it, and so far it has found few takers.
Only Russia has sought to play a more destabilizing role – during the global financial crisis, in Syria, and now in Ukraine.
To be sure, the emerging powers do share a strong inclination toward rivalry – or at least toward autonomy – which is rooted in what might be called the “psychology of rise.”
But they know that an excessively aggressive stance toward the US would undermine their interest in a stable global economy and the safe passage of their goods and energy through international sea and air routes.
This is particularly true for China, because its domestic stability and international influence depend largely on its ability to maintain rapid economic growth, which demands ever-larger quantities of imported energy and other natural resources.
To ensure unimpeded access to these critical resources, China needs stability in the countries from which it can extract them, in the markets in which it can invest, and in the routes linking China to its suppliers.
But China’s capacity to maintain these conditions is extremely limited – and in some cases (as in the Persian Gulf), it is heavily dependent on US military power.
In short, striking a balance between the impulse toward rivalry and incentives encouraging restraint is the most important dynamic in contemporary international affairs.
And, for now, the global balance is tipping toward restraint.
Of course, the US will invariably face new challenges, all of which are on vivid display in Ukraine.
Countries will be torn between retaining their security ties to the US and building new economic linkages with China.
The complex global systems in which America’s interests are enmeshed will test US diplomacy.
Perhaps the most dangerous challenge is the prospect of emerging powers leaning increasingly toward autonomy, instead of alliance.
China and India may not have been happy about Russia’s actions in Ukraine, but none of the emerging economies could bring itself to vote against Russia in the United Nations General Assembly, even though the vote was ultimately meaningless.
(China took the strongest position in the Security Council by abstaining.)
They are not sticking with Russia; but they are not joining a Western effort to isolate Russia, either.
Ultimately, however, the world’s relentless evolution plays to America’s most important strength: its unique ability to build broad and disparate coalitions.
The range of alliances and relationships that the US has created, including with several of the rising powers, far surpasses that of any other global actor – and will continue to do so for the foreseeable future.
This is perhaps the most enduring feature of American power.
There is no denying that the US no longer enjoys the unrivaled hyperpower status that it did at the end of the Cold War.
But, for the time being, the international system remains America’s to lead.
Menuju Afghanistan yang Mandiri
KABUL – Konferensi Brussels tentang Afghanistan (Brussels Conference on Afghanistan) pekan ini menandai peluang penting pembangunan roadmap masa depan Afghanistan.
Meski jalur yang dirintis Afghanistan saat ini sudah membuahkan hasil, jalan menuju kemakmuran masih panjang, terutama karena kelemahan dalam penyaluran bantuan dan tata kelola pemerintahan dalam negeri.
Sejak Presiden Ashraf Ghani terpilih di tahun 2014, aliran bantuan ke Afghanistan berkurang secara signifikan.
Bantuan yang diterima tidak disalurkan melalui tindakan yang mendukung pembangunan negara, yang mana donor-donor asing umumnya menghindari (bypassing) pemerintah Afghanistan, dengan tujuan membiayai proyek-proyek terpisah.
Sejak 2002 hingga 2010, sekitar 82% dari dana bantuan sebanyak 56 miliar dolar AS yang dikucurkan ke Afghanistan dihabiskan melalui lembaga non-pemerintah.
Pendekatan tersebut memiliki dasar pembenar.
Para donor meyakini bahwa pemerintah Afghanistan terlampau lemah dan korup untuk memakai dana bantuan secara efektif.
Anggapan mereka tidak sepenuhnya salah: korupsi dan nepotisme masih merajalela di negara tersebut.
Kondisi ini sebagian diwariskan oleh mantan Presiden Hamid Karzai.
Selama masa jabatannya, tahun 2004 hingga 2014, Karzai mengganti posisi paling senior di pemerintahan pusat, serta provinsi, demi memperoleh dukungan politik, dan seringkali memberi kekebalan hukum pada pejabat yang korup.
Walaupun mengalami tantangan semacam itu, bantuan yang dikirimkan melalui pemerintah telah memupuk perekonomian dalam negeri dan perkembangan lembaga-lembaga negara.
Akan tetapi, fokus pada pemberian bantuan melalui lembaga non-pemerintah telah menjadikan sektor swasta yang mengurusi barang publik, yang menurut kacamata fiskal, tumbuh lebih besar dari pemerintah Afghanistan itu sendiri.
Ini melemahkan efektivitas lembaga-lembaga negara, menambah biaya (sebab harus melalui sejumlah pengelolaan menurut perjanjian), dan kadang memperparah korupsi.
Permasalahan lain sehubungan dengan bantuan kepada Afghanistan adalah alokasinya.
Pada kurun waktu 2002 hingga 2010, para donor menyalurkan lebih dari setengah dana bantuan kepada sektor keamanan.
Bantuan pembangunan juga cenderung dialirkan untuk pemenuhan tujuan militer, terutama di wilayah-wilayah rentan.
(Meski demikian, sejak kepergian sebagian besar tentara asing selama dua tahun terakhir, kondisi keamanan terus memburuk).
Sementara itu, hanya 3% dana bantuan dikeluarkan untuk pendidikan.
Tentu tidak mengejutkan, 40% anak-anak usia sekolah dasar dan menengah pertama mengalami putus sekolah.
Total perkiraan belanja pemerintah Afghanistan untuk lima tahun ke depan (2017-2021) berjumlah 60 miliar dolar AS.
Namun secara rata-rata terdapat kesenjangan pembiayaan sebanyak 74% setiap tahunnya.
Pemerintah Afghanistan diharapkan mengisi kesenjangan ini melalui bantuan asing.
Mengarahkan Afghanistan menuju kemandirian mengharuskan kedua pihak, yakni pemerintah setempat dan para donor untuk mengubah arah kemudinya.
Pertama, donor harus menyalurkan porsi bantuan lebih besar melalui anggaran dan sistem nasional yang dimiliki pemerintah Afghanistan.
Sesungguhnya ini bukan gagasan baru.
Pada tahun 2010, ketika diselenggarakan pertemuan International Conference on Afghanistan di Kabul, para donor meraih kesepakatan dengan pemerintah Afghanistan untuk mengalirkan setidaknya 50% bantuan pembangunan (di luar belanja militer) ke dalam anggaran negara dan berupaya meningkatkan keselarasan belanja off-budget dengan prioritas nasional.
Namun persetujuan tersebut kurang berhasil menjadikan kapasitas fiskal pemerintah lebih besar dibandingkan sektor swasta dalam hal penyediaan layanan (hanya beberapa yang memenuhi atau melebihi target).
Faktanya, 75% total bantuan pembangunan yang disalurkan ke Afghanistan seharusnya dialirkan melalui anggaran dan sistem nasional.
Tindakan ini bisa dan harus dicapai pada akhir 2018.
Tentunya pendekatan tersebut hanya akan sukses jika pemerintah memperbaiki penyelenggaraan layanan publik, termasuk peningkatan kualitas aparatur negara dan pembebasan dari tekanan politik.
Berita bagusnya adalah pemerintah di bawah kepemimpinan Ghani sudah mengakui masalah-masalah yang ditimbulkan dari korupsi, nepotisme, dan kelemahan lembaga, dan berjanji akan memberantas itu semua.
Namun sejauh ini progresnya masih lamban.
Pemerintah Ghani bisa mempercepat jalannya progres dengan memperkenalkan sistem rekrutmen dan promosi aparatur negara yang lebih mengandung meritokrasi.
Kebijakan nihil toleransi terhadap korupsi – terutama di badan peradilan dan kementerian seperti keuangan, perdagangan, pertambangan, kepolisian, kesehatan, dan pendidikan – sangat esensial.
Selain itu, untuk meningkatkan akuntabilitas dan pendapatan negara, sistem perpajakan perlu melalui reformasi dan penguatan.
Warga negara Afghanistan, melalui organisasi masyarakat sipil, dan donor-donor asing bisa memainkan peran penting dalam mendorong pemerintah menyelesaikan reformasi tersebut.
Gambaran ini akan menjadi utuh ketika pemerintah dan para donor menyalurkan bantuannya melalui investasi pada program-program yang memiliki sasaran jangka panjang.
Walaupun upaya-upaya jangka pendek diperlukan untuk meningkatkan kestabilan, dampaknya akan redup dengan cepat tanpa program jangka panjang yang diarahkan pada penguatan kelembagaan dan memberikan landasan untuk berfungsinya ekonomi yang dinamis.
Investasi modal manusia patut diprioritaskan, terutama pendidikan dan kesehatam, serta sektor yang menghasilkan lapangan kerja seperti pertanian.
Pengembangan sektor energi dan infrastruktur juga penting, sebab keduanya akan menyokong pertumbuhan manufaktur dan menghasilkan pendapatan negara yang sangat dibutuhkan.
Meskipun tantangan yang dihadapi Afghanistan sangat berat, bukan berarti tidak dapat ditanggulangi.
Perbaikan pemberian dan alokasi bantuan, dikawinkan dengan reformasi tata kelola pemerintahan secara menyeluruh dan investasi cerdas, akan melancarkan jalan Afghanistan menuju kesejahteraan.
Setelah dilanda perang dan ketidakstabilan selama puluhan tahun, jelas bahwa ini juga harapan semua warga di dunia.
Bubble Spotting
NEW HAVEN – People frequently ask me, as someone who has written on market speculation, where the next big speculative bubble is likely to be.
Will it be in housing again? Will it be in the stock market?
I don’t know, though I have some hunches. It is impossible for anyone to predict bubbles accurately.
In my view, bubbles are social epidemics, fostered by a sort of interpersonal contagion.
A bubble forms when the contagion rate goes up for ideas that support a bubble. But contagion rates depend on patterns of thinking, which are difficult to judge.
Big speculative bubbles are rare events.
(Little bubbles, in the price of, say, individual stocks, happen all the time, and don’t qualify as an answer to the question.)
And, because big bubbles last for many years, predicting them means predicting many years in the future, which is a bit like predicting who will be running the government two elections from now.
But some places appear a little more likely than others to give rise to bubbles.
The stock market is the first logical place to look, as it is a highly leveraged investment – and has a history of bubbles.
There have been three colossal stock-market bubbles in the last century: the 1920’s, the 1960’s, and the 1990’s.
In contrast, there has been only one such bubble in the United States’ housing market in the last hundred years, that of the 2000’s.
We have had a huge rebound from the bottom of the world’s stock markets in 2009.
The S&amp;P 500 is up 87% in real terms since March 9 of that year.
But, while the history of stock-market prediction is littered with too much failure to try to decide whether the bounceback will continue much longer, it doesn’t look like a bubble, but more like the end of a depression scare.
The rise in equity prices has not come with a contagious “new era” story, but rather a “sigh of relief” story.
Likewise, home prices have been booming over the past year or two in several places, notably China, Brazil, and Canada, and prices could still be driven up in many other places.
But another housing bubble is not imminent in countries where one just burst. Conservative government policies will probably reduce subsidies to housing, and the current mood in these markets does not seem conducive to a bubble.
A continuation of today’s commodity-price boom seems more likely, for it has more of a “new era” story attached to it.
Increasing worries about global warming, and its effects on food prices, or about the cold and snowy winter in the northern hemisphere and its effects on heating fuel prices, are contagious stories. They are even connected to the day’s top story, the revolutions in the Middle East, which, according to some accounts, were triggered by popular discontent over high food prices – and which could themselves trigger further increases in oil prices.
But my favorite dark-horse bubble candidate for the next decade or so is farmland – and not just because there have been stories in recent months of booming farmland prices in the US and the United Kingdom.
Of course, farmland is much less important than other speculative assets.
For example, U.S. farmland had a total value of $1.9 trillion in 2010, compared with $16.5 trillion for the US stock market and $16.6 trillion for the US housing market.
And large-scale farmland bubbles are quite rare: there was only one in the US in the entire twentieth century, during the great population scare of the 1970’s.
But, farmland, at least in certain places, seems to have the most contagious “new era” story right now.
It was recently booming, up 74% in real terms in the US in the decade ending with its price peak, in 2008.
And the highly contagious global-warming story paints a scenario of food shortages and shifts in land values in different parts of the world, which might boost investor interest further.
Moreover, people nowadays easily imagine that the housing and farmland markets always move together, because prices in both boomed in recent memory, in the early 2000’s.
But, from 1911 to 2010 in the US, the correlation between annual real growth of prices for homes and farmland was only 5%, and the latest data on farm prices have not shown anything like the decline in home prices.