The ASCE calculates that the US needs about $1.7 trillion of investment in surface-transportation infrastructure through 2020 to achieve a passing grade.
It projects an investment shortfall of about 50% based on current funding levels.
Most economists agree that underinvesting in infrastructure is economically unwise and fiscally irresponsible.
In a 2013 survey of economists by the University of Chicago, 75% of the respondents agreed that, “because the US has underspent on new projects, maintenance, or both, the federal government has an opportunity to increase average incomes by spending more on roads, bridges, railways, and airports.”
From a macroeconomic perspective, investing in infrastructure is a “twofer”: It strengthens productivity and competitiveness in the long run and boosts demand and creates jobs in the short run.
According to the Congressional Budget Office, infrastructure spending is one of the most cost-effective forms of federal government spending in terms of the number of jobs created per dollar allocated.
The HTF is funded by the federal gasoline tax, which is the federal government’s single most important source of transportation funding.
The tax has been stuck at 18.4 cents per gallon in nominal terms since 1993.
Meanwhile, the costs of building and maintaining highway and transit systems have increased significantly, and rising fuel efficiency has reduced gasoline tax revenues per mile driven.
As a result, the purchasing power of the federal gas tax declined by about 30% from 1997 to 2011.
Since 2008, Congress has been filling the yawning HTF gap by providing $54 billion from general revenues.
But makeshift solutions have become more contentious and harder to find, culminating in this year’s gimmick-ridden ten-month patch.
The CBO recently estimated that the HTF gap will widen to $172 billion over the next decade.
An increase in the federal gasoline tax, with a built-in inflation adjustment, would be the easiest and most effective way to increase revenues for federally funded investment in transport infrastructure.
Even Thomas Donohue, President of the anti-tax US Chamber of Commerce, calls an increase in the gas tax the simplest and most straightforward way to finance a long-term highway transportation bill.
In a recent survey, more than half of the respondents expressed a willingness to pay more for gasoline to finance improvements in roads, bridges, and mass transit.
The CBO estimates that an increase of ten cents a gallon would be required in 2015 simply to offset the last 16 years of inflation and fuel-efficiency gains and to maintain current (inadequate) funding levels.
A considerably larger hike would be needed to prevent the underinvestment predicted by the ACSE.
But, with a mid-term congressional election in November, there is strong opposition to such an increase, both in Congress and President Barack Obama’s administration.
That is entirely understandable.
I was Chair of the Council of Economic Advisers in 1994, when President Bill Clinton successfully championed the last gas-tax increase, of just 4.3 cents per gallon.
Some of his “politically naive” economic advisers, including me, advocated a much larger increase, phased in gradually over five years, on both fiscal and environmental grounds.
Clinton’s Republican opponents characterized the increase as the “largest ever increase in taxes on the middle class.”
That misleading claim contributed to the Democrats’ deep mid-term election losses that year.
In lieu of raising the gas tax, Obama has proposed a four-year $302 billion plan to close the existing HTF funding gap, and boost HTF spending by $20 billion a year above current levels.
His plan, which relies on using transitional corporate tax revenues raised in conjunction with corporate tax reform, has virtually no chance of becoming law this year.
Nor does his oft-repeated proposal for a federal infrastructure bank to attract more private funds for infrastructure projects.
Confronted with implacable Republican opposition, Obama is relying on what the administration calls a “pen and phone” strategy – combining the bully pulpit and executive orders – to move forward on several fronts, including infrastructure.
At the urging of his 2011-2012 Council on Jobs and Competitiveness, he signed several executive orders to modernize and expedite the interagency review-and-permitting processes for high-priority federal infrastructure projects.
Moreover, Obama recently announced the creation of the Build America Transportation Investment Center to provide technical assistance to state and local officials seeking private-sector partners to support transport infrastructure.
With similar offices, Canada and the United Kingdom have far surpassed the US in attracting private capital for such projects.
A pen-and-phone strategy may be the only way to make any progress on addressing America’s infrastructure needs in a mid-term election year.
But Obama alone does not have the power to stanch the HTF’s bleeding or to reverse years of underinvestment.
That will require congressional action and additional revenues.
The Government as Venture Capitalist
BERKELEY – The American public’s attitude toward government, especially toward the federal government, recalls a classic scene in Monty Python’s “Life of Brian.”
“What have they ever given us in return?” fulminates John Cleese, playing a Judean revolutionary.
“The aqueduct,” concedes a sheepish co-conspirator. “And sanitation,” says a second, as others pipe up with more examples.
“All right,” Cleese erupts in exasperation.
“But apart from the sanitation, the medicine, education, wine, public order, irrigation, roads, the fresh-water system, and public health, what have the Romans ever done for us?”
The scene brilliantly captures America’s cantankerous and contradictory zeitgeist.
On one hand, public trust in government is at an all-time low.
On the other hand, Americans are deeply frustrated with gaping holes in health care, education, equality of opportunity, infrastructure, and environmental protection – goods and services traditionally provided by government.
A reflection of this contradictory mindset is a surge in private activity to address social problems. These include billion-dollar efforts by non-profits like the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation and Bloomberg Philanthropies to spur innovative solutions in education, public health, and poverty reduction.
It is also reflected in social-enterprise start-ups designed to achieve both social and financial returns, as well as in new impact-investing platforms aimed at the growing number of investors who are also seeking both types of returns.
All of this is good news.
The government’s capacity to invest is under severe pressure.
And, though many government programs deliver good value for money – Medicare is a good example – far too many do not.
Peter Schuck’s new book Why Government Fails So Often provides a thoughtful if pessimistic analysis.
Government agencies are always at risk of putting money into what Schuck calls “bad bets” and “bad apples.”
They are also inherently rigid, risk-averse, and reluctant to innovate, because they know that if they deviate from the letter of the law, or if an innovation goes awry, they will be chastised politically.
And costly, ineffective programs are notorious for surviving indefinitely because they develop powerful defenders.
But blanket distrust in government, framed by glaring examples of boondoggles and fueled by ideology, too often focuses on the wrong question: How big should government be?
The right question is how to develop innovative and efficient government programs to provide public goods and services that neither the marketplace nor the nonprofit sector can deliver on its own.
One approach is to put government in the role of venture capitalist.
Its task would be less to design and implement top-down solutions than to solicit, support, evaluate, and scale up innovative strategies by tapping into ideas developed by state and local governments, businesses, and non-profit institutions.
This can happen – indeed, in the US under President Barack Obama’s leadership it is already happening – in many different ways.
For example, the US Department of Education’s Race to the Top Fund, which offered $4 billion in grants to states that developed successful educational reforms, spurred innovations that hold promise for school systems across the country.
More broadly, prize competitions to reward targeted innovation and crowd-source new ideas offer a highly cost-effective opportunity for government to leverage its scarce resources for important public goals.
The federal government now operates Challenge.gov, an Internet platform to facilitate new competitions.
Some 50 public agencies have sponsored more than 260 challenges since 2011.
After the 2010 Deepwater Horizon oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico, the Obama administration teamed up with the X-Prize Foundation to offer a $1.4 million prize to the group that produced the most efficient oil-recovery solution.
The winning approach, from Elastec American Marine, was three times as efficient as the industry’s previous best rate.
The United States’ Affordable Care Act, which entered into force this year, contains further variants on the idea of government as a catalyst, including incentives to reward health-care systems that improve outcomes and reduce costs.
The incentives have spurred a number of state-level experiments in Medicaid (America’s health-insurance program for the poor) through waivers of the standard rules.
Likewise, the new federal Social Innovation Fund provides grants to social-sector intermediaries – foundations, non-profits, and social enterprises – that develop new programs to tackle problems like unequal educational opportunity.
These grants are awarded on a competitive basis, and funding is contingent on achieving measurable outcomes.
Some state and local governments are experimenting with new “pay-for-performance” contracts – sometimes called social impact bonds (SIBs) – to promote social innovation.
In a SIB, the government contracts with an outside provider to achieve a measurable social goal (like reducing recidivism among juvenile offenders), private impact investors finance the program’s upfront costs, and the government promises a return to them if the program’s targets are achieved.
Recently, the Obama administration proposed a $300 million fund to catalyze federal pay-for-performance contracts.
Several existing federal programs like the Community Reinvestment Act and the Small Business Investment Companies program are supporting the growth of impact investing funds.
According to a recent study, impact investing in the US would not exist without the support of and partnership with the federal government through grants, loans, and guarantees.
Metrics are an essential feature of pay-for-performance contracts, and must be an essential feature of all government programs.
This is mostly not the case today, but the situation is improving as the Obama administration links more of its spending to evidence of success, and as non-profit groups, like America Achieves, develop sophisticated new techniques to evaluate government programs.
With the government acting as a venture capitalist, the private sector can create effective new programs to address social problems.
But scaling up these programs will require government resources.
The Gates Foundation may devise breakthrough innovations for public schools; but, even with its billions of dollars, it lacks the resources to revitalize education at the national or even the state level.
As former New York City Mayor Michael Bloomberg recently observed, philanthropists should test innovative policy ideas and then rely on government money to implement them widely.
Only governments can provide public goods and address social challenges on a national scale.
But there are numerous ways in which governments can work with non-profits, investors, businesses, and citizens to find the best ways to achieve these goals – and thus restore public trust in government itself.
Paying for Productivity
BERKELEY – One of the United States’ defining – and disheartening – economic trends over the last 40 years has been real-wage stagnation for most workers.
According to a recent US Census report, the median full-time male worker earned $50,033 in 2013, barely distinguishable from the comparable (inflation-adjusted) figure of $49,678 in 1973.
Because most households earn the bulk of their income from their labor, the absence of real-wage growth is a major factor behind the stagnation of family incomes.
The average family income of the bottom 90% of households has been flat since about 1980.
Real family income for the median household in 2013 was 8% below its 2007 level and nearly 9% below its 1999 peak.
Stagnating middle-class wages and family incomes are a major factor behind the US economy’s slow recovery from the 2007-2009 recession, and pose a serious threat to long-term growth and competitiveness.
Household consumption accounts for more than two-thirds of aggregate demand, and consumption growth depends on income growth for the bottom 90%.
The heyday of US economic growth in the two decades after World War II was also a golden era for the middle class.
The long boom of the 1990s, when the US enjoyed sustained full employment, was one of few periods in the last 40 years when incomes climbed at every quintile of the income distribution.
Many influential economists are now worried that the US faces anemic growth and “secular stagnation,” owing to a persistent gap between aggregate demand and full employment.
Stagnant middle-class incomes imply weak aggregate demand, which in turn means slack labor markets and stagnant wages for most workers.
In the absence of aggressive monetary and fiscal policies to support aggregate demand at full-employment levels, the result is a vicious slow-growth cycle.
Two competitiveness gurus, Michael Porter and Jan Rivkin of Harvard Business School, recently warned that stagnant middle-class incomes undermine US companies in several ways.
“Businesses cannot thrive for long while their communities languish,” they cautioned.
Unless corporations step up to the plate, “American business will suffer from an inadequate workforce, a population of depleted consumers, and large blocs of anti-business voters.”
Porter and Rivkin are not calling on businesses simply to pay their workers more.
Instead, they are urging businesses to engage in a “strategic, collaborative” push to improve education and training to raise the skill levels of their workers.
That is a laudable goal.
But, as Porter and Rivkin find in their survey of business leaders, companies often discourage investment in skills by their reluctance to hire full-time workers.
Nearly half of the respondents indicated that, when possible, they prefer to invest in technology or outsource to third parties and hire part-time workers, none of whom receive much additional training or have a stake in their company’s long-term success.
There is also a disturbing implication in the Porter-Rivkin survey that workers themselves, along with America’s schools, are to blame for wage stagnation: If only workers were not so poor in math and science, so ill-equipped for the modern world, and so unproductive, they would earn higher incomes.
The reality is different.
US productivity has been growing at a respectable pace for two decades.
The problem is that productivity gains have not translated into commensurate wage increases for the typical worker or income growth for the typical family.
According to standard economic theory, real wages should track productivity.
As Lawrence Mishel of the Economic Policy Institute has documented, this was the case from 1948 until about 1973.
Since then, real wages for the typical worker have flat-lined, while productivity has continued to climb.
Mishel calculates that productivity increased 80.4% from 1948 to 2011, while median real wages rose only 39% – almost none of the wage growth occurred during the last four decades.
True, highly skilled workers, especially those with sought-after technology skills and postgraduate degrees, have fared much better.
But that prosperity has reached only a small elite.
From 1979 to 2012, the real median wage increased by only 5%.
But real wages climbed 154% for the top 1% of wage earners and 39% for the top 5%, while real wages stagnated for the bottom 20th percentile of workers and fell for the bottom tenth.
Indeed, inequality in labor compensation has been the largest driver of yawning income inequality, except at the very top of the income distribution, where capital income has been more important.
Meanwhile, corporate profits have soared.
The GDP share of after-tax corporate profits is at a&nbsp;record high, whereas labor compensation has plunged to its lowest share since 1950.
Strong productivity growth is an important policy goal.
But it is not enough to increase most workers’ wages or most families’ incomes.
Reconnecting productivity gains and wage gains requires both policy actions, such as an increase in the minimum wage with a link to productivity growth, and changes in corporate human-resources practices, such as broader reliance on profit-sharing programs.
Such programs have intuitive appeal.
Employees who have a direct stake in a company’s profitability are likely to be more motivated and engaged, and turnover is likely to be lower.
This intuition is confirmed by empirical research.
Some 20 years ago, Alan Blinder of Princeton University corralled a number of economists, including me, to examine existing studies on the link between profit-sharing and productivity.
The overwhelming majority of the studies found a strong positive effect.&nbsp;Shared Capitalism at Work,&nbsp;a recent book edited by Douglas Kruse, Richard Freeman, and Joseph Blasi, confirms this conclusion with more recent evidence.
Various forms of profit-sharing – including grants of options and restricted stock, annual profit-based bonuses, and employee stockownership plans – have been growing as a share of labor compensation since the 1960s.
But most workers are not covered by such plans, and the biggest beneficiaries have been CEOs and top managers, a significant fraction of whose pay is tied to productivity, as reflected in profits and stock performance.
Such incentive pay schemes have driven the outsize increases in compensation for the top 1% of the wage and salary distribution.
America’s long-run living standards and economic competitiveness depend not just on productivity growth, but also on how that growth is shared.
More equitable sharing of profits with America’s workers and their families would do much to address the worrisome stagnation of wages and middle-class incomes in recent decades.&nbsp;
Law and Order, Russian-Style
Around the world, people worry that political freedom is disappearing in Vladimir Putin's Russia.
Indeed, about the only people who are unconcerned about creeping authoritarianism in Russia are the Russians themselves.
Russians seem to care less about political freedom than they do about social welfare - pensions, domestic violence, children's rights, or police brutality.
In fact, most Russians are indifferent to the government's efforts to curtail press freedom and limit the right to protest.
Such apathy makes my task as Russia's ombudsman, an office charged by the State Duma (parliament) with protecting political rights in Russia, difficult, if not impossible.
The ombudsman acts as a bridge between the authorities and the people, seeking to resolve conflicts that arise between state bodies and citizens.
My office is open not only to Russian citizens, but to foreigners and stateless people who feel their political rights have been compromised.
The standards we apply are not only those contained in Russia's constitution, but also international legal principles and human rights norms, even if they sometimes contradict our constitution.
For example, as ombudsman, I was opposed to curtailing the right of Russians to jury trials.
Those who wanted to limit the use of juries supposedly feared a risk to state security in some instances.
My office worked closely with the state to assure that, in most cases, juries are used.
Similarly, my office defended the liberal weekly newspaper Novoe Vremya (New Times), which was being pressured by Moscow's city government on the pretext of a commercial dispute about a lease.
That fight is not over, but after my intervention, Moscow's authorities must take into account the public's negative attitude to their effort to quash this publication.
Of course, Russia provides far more headline-grabbling examples of political and human rights problems, such as the low-grade war in Chechnya or the Yukos affair.
My office pays maximum attention to Chechnya, although this is not easy to do from Moscow.
Indeed, I could spend all my time in Chechnya, but Russia has 89 regions with countless human rights issues to address.
This is why I suggested to Putin that Chechnya have its own regional rights ombudsman who would spend all his time there.
The new Chechen authorities seem to welcome this prospect.
As to the Yukos affair, my office cannot intervene in any legal process until it is completed.
Former Yukos CEO Mikhail Khodorkovsky's lawyers have sent a complaint to the European Court for Human Rights in Strasbourg.
If Khodorkovsky disagrees with the final decision of the Russian courts, he will undoubtedly appeal to that court. Only then will I be able to express an opinion.
Many observers nonetheless insist that those under criminal investigation should be released on bail instead of being kept in prison.
Others say that this is not an option in Khodorkovsky's case - being very rich, he could easily jump bail and flee abroad.
In fact, this is precisely what happened with other figures accused in the Yukos case.
All of these serious human rights questions expose the fact that Russia's legal institutions remains half-formed.
For example, the Duma has taken far too long to enact a law on lobbying, which in most developed democracies clearly defines what constitutes acceptable and unacceptable behavior.
Khodorkovsky might not be in as much trouble if such precise laws existed.
Unformed laws are directly related to unformed ideas.
Human rights in Russia are often violated simply because people are not aware that they have some particular right.
The most important strategic goal of my office is that people learn how to defend their rights better, and to make the authorities take the complaints of ordinary Russians into consideration.
Sadly, most bureaucrats still look upon human rights values with disdain.
But the real problem for my office is neither ignorance nor legal infirmity, it is that in an under-developed legal system such as Russia's, my authority is mostly personal, and requires help from the mass media.
Because concepts of human rights remain rudimentary, the best that can be hoped for is that awareness will slowly begin to take hold.
My tactical goal is thus to raise the public profile of the ombudsman's office, in order to win more respect and recognition by both citizens and the state.
This will be all but impossible without cooperation with non-governmental human rights organizations in Russia.
Indeed, I view one of my tasks as being to facilitate contacts between these groups and the authorities.
The government's response to these efforts will be an important indicator of whether and to what extent Putin's administration intends to include human and political rights within its so-called "dictatorship of law."
Happiness by Design
LONDON – Over the last few years, thinking on happiness has undergone a sea change.
Until recently, it seemed sensible to assume that our happiness was determined by factors such as luck, fate, or genes that are beyond our control.
It was easy to believe that, in the words of Samuel Beckett, the “tears of the world are a constant quantity.”
But new discoveries point to fresh ways of thinking about happiness, as something over which we do have control and that can be taught.
Happiness depends on many factors, from obvious things, like enjoying good health and close relationships, to others that might not seem immediately intuitive, like engaging in generous behavior.
Some of these can be learned or cultivated, and courses that teach positive mental habits – like appreciating things that matter or avoiding dwelling on setbacks – have demonstrated measurable improvements in wellbeing.
The Dalai Lama recently helped launch a series of such courses in London, developed by Action for Happiness, an organization that I helped found.
Whole societies can also try to improve their happiness.
British Prime Minister David Cameron introduced the measurement of happiness into national statistics, and more recently German Chancellor Angela Merkel launched a program to promote citizen’s wellbeing.
How countries are governed has a huge impact on happiness.
Success in maintaining peace, the rule of law, and a functioning democracy matter greatly.
There is very strong evidence that these tend to correlate with wellbeing, and probably cause it, and there are obvious reasons why this should be the case.
Being in a country at peace does not of itself make everyone happy; but it removes many obvious causes of unhappiness.
Individual policies can have a big impact, too.
There is strong evidence for encouraging greater attention to mental and physical health, and for placing a high priority on reducing unemployment.
But evidence in other areas remains patchy.
We simply don’t know how different policies on marriage will affect wellbeing, even though we know that marriage correlates with it.
Similarly, we don’t know whether more or less compulsory schooling, or which curriculum, has a positive or negative effect.
Overall, education has surprisingly little clear impact on happiness (perhaps because expectations often rise faster than the possibility of meeting them).
Nor is the science unambiguous about whether rights to parental leave and flexible time, later retirement ages, or laws promoting work sharing, have the effects one might expect.
The problem is partly a matter of insufficient evidence; but complex interactions sometimes make tracing causation difficult.
At first glance, one might think that lowering taxes would make people happier, because having more disposable income increases their wellbeing.
But other factors can also come into play, such as whether the tax cuts are perceived as fair and whether they are accompanied by unpopular spending cuts.
By contrast, at the level of individual programs, there is now a great deal of strong evidence.
There are now detailed manuals describing the effects of different kinds of exercise on both physical and psychological health.
For the elderly, remaining active is a clear source of happiness, whether that means exercising, volunteering, or engaging in paid employment.
(Indeed, a survey in Canada found that paid employment was the most satisfying activity for people over the age of 65.)
There is also mounting evidence that policy interventions in schools to promote resilience or empathy can have a positive impact on wellbeing.
And there are suggestive indications that urban planning can influence happiness, especially when it reduces the time spent commuting or alleviates worries about crime.
It is impossible, of course, to eliminate suffering.
It is part of the human condition.
But it is within the power of individuals and governments to make the world a happier place.
The tears of the world need not be a constant quantity.
Learning from America
As the United States prepares to celebrate the inauguration of its first African-American president, it showcases again one of the best aspects of its national identity.
Though it took more than 200 years to reach this point, foreign observers, especially in Europe, marvel at Barack Obama’s ascendancy.
They recognize from their own relative marginalization of people of color or of immigrants that no French, German, Italian, or British Obama is on the horizon, and they wonder: how does America do it?
America certainly has its flaws and its struggles over race and national identity, but it also has much to be proud of in terms of how it assimilates those with foreign or minority backgrounds.
Obama’s example – and that of his newly formed cabinet, which includes many accomplished leaders from ethnic or racial “out-groups” – holds useful lessons for other nations, particularly in Western Europe.
So what is it that America is doing right?
First, America’s national story is different in essence from those of Western European nations.
The French story is that of French-ness, the British story one of British-ness; by definition, newcomers are “less than” or “outside of” this narrative.
But the American national drama is the drama of immigration: everyone, except Native Americans, came from somewhere else.
All who are now part of the national elite have ancestors who came, often bedraggled and harassed, from somewhere else.
Indeed, in America the qualities that lead people to become immigrants – initiative, ambition, risk-taking – are lionized.
Immigrants are seen as arriving on a journey of continual reinvention, driven to exceed their opportunities in their countries of origin.
By contrast, immigrants in Western Europe were invited to fill low-status jobs, creating a built-in incentive for natives to see them and their children as a servant class, incapable of entering, let alone leading, the larger society.
Moreover, unlike America, Western Europe must live with the uneasy conscience stirred by immigrants whose very presence serves as a reminder of a history of colonialism.
In this sense, the relationship between native-born and new Americans starts out “cleaner.”
Second, Americans don’t demand that immigrants regard their cultural or ethnic background as being in contrast to or in opposition to their American-ness.
Everyone gets to be hyphenated.
By contrast, when identity is presented as being a stark choice, people often do not choose the identity of the host country that is being so inflexible.
As a result, Britain, France, and The Netherlands contain deeply entrenched subcultures of alienated, radicalized Muslim youth.
But, while they and other radical Muslims around the world may hate Americans, it is hard to imagine a more Americanized, suburbanized immigrant subculture than Muslim immigrants in the US.
Rather then listening to radical clerics, they are busy assimilating, sending their kids to law and medical school, barbequing on weekends, and going to (American) football games – all while still maintaining devout ties to their religion and community.
That has not changed since the 9/11 terrorist attacks, despite rising hostility toward US Muslims among native-born Americans, based the assumption that they could not assimilate (a charge often directed in the past at Jews in various countries).
More generally, Americans view immigrants as being welcome to combine their culture of origin with their new American-ness, while immigrants see no conflict between their ethnicity and religion and their embrace of America.
And, most significantly when it comes to assessing the ease of integration over time, they fully expect their kids to be completely, unhesitantly “American” – a promise that, by and large, is readily fulfilled.
How different it is in Western Europe.
Three generations after West Indians began immigrating en masse to the United Kingdom, Caribbean-descended Britons still doubt that their children or grandchildren will ever be seen as fully British.
Turkish Gastarbeiter are still, two generations later, not seen as fully German.
And the unrest of the children and grandchildren of Algerian, West African, and Moroccan immigrants in the French banlieues attest to France’s failure to assimilate its immigrant population, despite the Republic’s official egalitarian rhetoric.
Third, and perhaps most importantly, Americans separate Church and State.
As long as there is a Church of England, if you are Jewish or Muslim or Sikh, there is a subtle level at which you will simply not feel fully English.
But because the US Founders – many of them descended from people fleeing official religious persecution – guaranteed that there would never be a state-sanctioned religion, no religious group in America, no matter how small, is made to feel marginalized.
It is for this reason that Americans are not alarmed by visible symbols of different religions in public settings.
It is assumed that since religion is a private matter for everyone, personal religious symbols are just that – personal.
A Muslim girl who wears a headscarf in a public school is simply wearing a headscarf, not provocatively challenging a hegemonic social order.
Fourth, America is defined in terms of a set of values that everyone can share, not as a lineage, a specific history, and a geographical area.
Immigrant kids who go to US schools learn that America – ideally – is about freedom, aspiration, and tolerance.
The history that they learn about their new home illustrates how the US fulfills (or falls short of) those ideals, whereas an immigrant schoolchild in Europe learns less about ideals and more about a monarchical lineage, a set of historical events, and a roster of “great men.”
If Western Europe took a leaf from the US, it would be more peaceful within its own borders and better able to use the talents and leadership of its Turkish, Algerian, Caribbean, and other immigrants.
Only then would we see a British, French, Dutch, or German Obama.
Learning from Crises
PRINCETON – Crises, especially very severe ones, are often learning opportunities.
Unfortunately, so far the world seems to have learned very little from the recent financial crisis.
In fact, the situation today is just as dangerous as it was in 2007, with the United States now worried by its anemic economic recovery, Europe paralyzed by fears for the survival of its currency union, and emerging markets wrestling with asset-price bubbles.
Learning from crises is partly an exercise in analyzing what went wrong. But it is also about finding solutions.
Collectively, we have done well on the former, and very poorly on the latter.
Most explanations of the causes of the post-2007 financial crisis point to five sources of instability.
First, the crisis was precipitated by the peculiarities of the US real-estate market, by government incentives for increased homeownership, and in imprudent lending by financial institutions.
Second, perverse incentives led financial institutions to assume excessive risks.
Internally, bankers had enormous potential to benefit from risky moves, but were insulated from the costs of failure.
For individual institutions, this was not seen as a problem, because they were protected by the logic of being “too big to fail.”
When the crisis erupted – owing to a downturn in the US housing market that was clearly foreseeable but willfully unforeseen – the public sector had to absorb the contingent liabilities built up in the financial system.
Third, global imbalances led to cheap money.
Long-term current-account surpluses in some countries (China, other rapidly growing Asian economies, and Gulf oil producers) permitted the long-term financing of deficits in others (the United Kingdom, Australia, Spain, Ireland, and, above all, the US).
Fourth, central banks, especially in the US, mistakenly maintained loose monetary policy.
With dollar financing by the Federal Reserve available to large institutions, the Fed became the equivalent of a world central bank.
Finally, once the crisis erupted, the fiscal consequences of bailing out too-big-to-fail financial institutions contributed to rapid public-debt unsustainability, which threatens to boomerang on the banking sector.
None of these issues, with the possible exception of the first, has been resolved.
Of course, some discussion of financial-sector reform is taking place in a variety of forums, with a gradual consensus building around sliding or incremental capital-adequacy rules.
But many systemically important banks became bigger rather than smaller as a result of the crisis.
Moreover, while global imbalances were immediately reduced in the course of the initial crisis, with the US adjusting its deficit relatively rapidly, they are now re-emerging.
The world’s major industrial economies, meanwhile, are maintaining very low interest rates.
Before 2007, such a policy was seen as a mistake at worst; now it is interpreted as a malign strategy.
There is a widespread suspicion that the US is deliberately pursuing dollar depreciation (or “currency wars,” in the words of Brazil’s finance minister).
We do not know how to handle the fiscal issues posed by the financial crisis.
Doubts about the sustainability of government debt produce sudden surges in interest rates, as risk premia rise dramatically with perceptions of the likelihood of default.
Such surges are, by definition, abrupt – and thus highly disruptive.
For countries on the brink, a merciless logic follows.
Government debt service has in general become easier, owing to low interest rates.
But hints of new fiscal imprudence or of backsliding on long-term debt consolidation and reduction can drive up borrowing costs dramatically.
In these circumstances, the additional costs of debt service easily outweigh any gains that might come from some measure of fiscal relaxation.
As a result, fiscal uncertainty is affecting all major industrial countries, and producing political paralysis.
So, while we understand very well what may have produced the financial crisis, we find ourselves helpless to draw usable lessons from it.
In a longer historical perspective, this policy paralysis may not be surprising.
It took a good deal of time to learn what we all now take to be the lessons of the interwar Great Depression.
It was only 30 years later, in the 1960’s, that Keynesian fiscal policy was widely accepted.
It was also only in the 1960’s that Milton Friedman clearly formulated the Great Depression’s monetary lessons.
It was only in trade policy that the lesson was learned more quickly.
During the Great Depression, a spiral of protectionist trade quotas and tariff restrictions was used to combat monetary deflation, as popular demand for political action met legislative “log-rolling” by representatives of groups with very different – and often very locally oriented – policy priorities.
The political scientist E.E. Schattschneider’s analysis of the process was influential in transferring responsibility for trade measures from the US Congress to the President.
The modern equivalent of that learning about trade policy would be to think about mechanisms to ensure long-term improvement in fiscal policymaking.
In particular, it would be helpful to devise a way to identify potential risks to fiscal stability (such as those implied by an over-extended banking and financial system).
Moreover, there is a need to limit legislative pressure for additional spending on locally important projects that fuel overall fiscal dysfunction.
The constructive (and relatively quick) trade-policy response in the aftermath of the Great Depression did not pay off immediately.
But, in the long run, it produced a much better policymaking environment.
Now is the moment to launch an analogous effort to reform and rationalize the political process that produces fiscal policy.
Learning from Lebanon
NEW YORK – After watching the collapse of Lebanon’s government last week, it is hard not to think about efforts to build a stable Iraq.
The two countries have so much in common.
Both are volatile democracies where any political question can provoke not just intense debate, but also the threat of violence.
Both countries have relative freedom of speech, at least relative to their Arab neighbors, and a multitude of political parties that are always ready to use it.
Each faces a greater risk of manipulation by outsiders than other countries in the region.
Iraq and Lebanon are also the Arab world’s most ethnically and religiously diverse countries.
Though Lebanon has not conducted a reliable census in decades, its population is thought to be about 30% Sunni Muslim, 30% Shia Muslim, and 30% Christian, with Druze and others accounting for the rest.
In Iraq, about 60% are Shia, 20% are Sunni Arabs, and 20% are Kurds, who are mostly Sunni.
In both countries, representatives of each of these groups demand substantial political influence.
But, as Lebanon turns to Saudi and Syrian mediators to help rebuild a governing coalition, Iraq moves forward with a tenuous unity government of its own.
At times like these, the two countries’ similarities and differences can point Iraq’s leaders toward a stable democratic future.
Despite this week’s turmoil in Beirut, Lebanon has an advantage that Iraqis should emulate.
The personal freedoms that Lebanese citizens enjoy give their country a special resilience, and its cultural dynamism is the envy of young people throughout the Middle East.
Though some of Iraq’s conservative local clerics wield considerable influence, its current leaders will resist any drive to transform the country into a socially repressive and isolated state.
If Iraq is to keep the best of its next generation at home, cultural openness will be critically important.
Second, Lebanon’s leaders were reminded again this week that their country can be governed only with some degree of consensus among the major factions.
This principle is even more important in Iraq, where the Shia majority faces the constant temptation to punish Sunnis for years of repression under Saddam Hussein.
In Lebanon, sectarian power-sharing is enshrined in the constitution.
The president must always be a Maronite Christian, the prime minister a Sunni, and the speaker of parliament a Shia.
This system, which codifies Lebanon’s factionalism, remains a subject of much controversy, but, by ensuring that no group can govern at the expense of others, it also reinforces baseline stability in a country built atop powerful religious and ethnic fault lines.
Without opposition support, Lebanon’s government can do little more than manage the most basic day-to-day state functions, but the country is unlikely to relapse into civil war.
In Iraq, sectarian power-sharing will remain less formal, and compromise won’t come easily to many of the country’s elected leaders.
Each major faction is represented in government.
Jalal Talabani, a Kurd, retains control of Iraq’s largely ceremonial presidency.
Osama Nujaifi, a Sunni, has been elected speaker of Iraq’s parliament.
But Shia leaders will lose their constituents’ support if they formally surrender any of the powers denied them for decades under Saddam.
Government stability will remain a delicate balancing act.
Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki will have to manage relations with firebrand Shia cleric Moqtada al-Sadr and his followers, who can provoke unrest in southern Iraq if they feel under-served.
In addition, the Kurds will expect to retain a veto over any proposal that might compromise Kurdish autonomy in the northern provinces.
Then there are the Sunni Arabs.
Support for Maliki’s government from Iraqiya, the multi-sectarian political coalition supported by most Sunnis, will remain in question.
Iraqiya won the largest share of seats in the March 2010 parliamentary elections, yet its leader, former Prime Minister Ayad Allawi, will not return to his old job.
Instead, he will lead the National Council for Strategic Policy, an institution charged with overseeing domestic security, but whose authority remains unclear.
Nor is it clear whether Maliki will finally end the de-Baathification process – another major source of tension.
Many Shia insist that the last vestiges of Saddam’s elite must be purged, but many Sunnis argue that the process is intended to bar them from good jobs and political influence.
If Sunnis come to believe that Shia and Kurds intend to treat them as second-class citizens, they will have no stake in the success of Maliki’s government and could again begin to pursue their political interests by other means, provoking another surge of sectarian violence.
Worse still, factional conflict would undermine further development of a post-Saddam Iraqi identity.
Otherwise, the country’s various interest groups could, like Lebanon’s feuding factions, turn to outsiders to negotiate solutions to their problems.
There are good reasons for Iraq to avoid Lebanon’s example in this respect.
Even in the best of times, Lebanon muddles through with a politically dysfunctional government and an army that operates in the shadow of a large Shia-dominated militant organization.
With the exception of Iran, none of Iraq’s neighbors wants to see that model in Iraq.
Lebanon’s democracy often looks a lot like a train wreck, and the country has stumbled into armed conflict many times in recent years.
But if Iraq’s leaders can create enough near-term stability to combine Lebanon’s openness and entrepreneurial energy with the revenue that comes from development of the country’s vast oil reserves – an advantage that Lebanon’s leaders can only envy – Iraq might one day offer citizens of neighboring states something they don’t have: a hopeful model for the future.
Learning from Mexico
On July 2, Mexico held a presidential election that triggered what has become a bitter political firefight.
After conservative candidate Felipe Calderon was declared the winner by less than 1% of the vote, his populist rival, Andres Manuel Lopez Obrador, quickly claimed fraud.
For the past two months, thousands of Lopez Obrador’s most fervent supporters have transformed the Zocalo, Mexico City’s central square, into a virtual sea of tents – the center of gravity of opposition to the official result.
On September 1, dozens of opposition lawmakers created a primetime spectacle inside Mexico’s parliament by occupying the speaker’s podium, thereby denying outgoing President Vicente Fox the chance to deliver his final state of the nation address in person.
Four days later, Mexico highest electoral court ruled that Fox had improperly interfered in the election but unanimously reaffirmed Calderon’s victory.
Lopez Obrador has vowed to obstruct Calderon’s presidency from the moment he takes office on December 1.
You learn a lot about a country’s underlying stability by how it responds to a crisis.
Similar electoral conflicts unfolded in the United States in 2000 and in Ukraine in 2004.
In the wake of fiercely contested presidential elections, large numbers of voters in each country questioned the legitimacy of the outcome.
The nation’s highest courts were compelled to rule on demands for a ballot recount.
But US political and economic stability was never in doubt in 2000, because public confidence in the country’s governing institutions allowed them to resolve the conflict peacefully.
These institutions proved far more powerful than the political personalities involved.
In Ukraine, on the other hand, public outrage, buttressed by international pressure, brought the government to a halt.
In a second vote, the election’s loser was crowned the winner.
But the initial euphoria that accompanied the so-called “Orange Revolution” quickly faded, and Ukraine is still dealing with the political and economic fallout.
What, then, should we make of Mexico and its disputed election?
Here, too, a large segment of the electorate told pollsters that they doubted the legitimacy of the official result.
The judiciary rejected calls for a full recount, though they did examine roughly 9% of the ballots before ruling that the review indicated no challenge to the election’s outcome.
Like Ukraine’s Viktor Yushchenko, who lost the initial vote in Ukraine, Lopez Obrador demanded that the result be overturned.
Unlike Yushchenko, he was denied.
But the good news for Mexicans is that their country’s political institutions have proven far more stable than did Ukraine’s.
Despite Lopez Obrador’s best efforts to create chaos in the streets with public demonstrations involving hundreds of thousands of protesters, domestic and international confidence remains strong.
The peso has barely budged since the election—a clear indication that investors have not lost faith in the country.
Their resilience is important, because market fears of instability often become a self-fulfilling prophecy.
The point is not that public confidence (or lack thereof) in an election outcome doesn’t matter.
It does.
But the broader picture – whether, as in Mexico, a country is able to continue to go about its business as its political institutions sort out the mess – matters far more.
Unlike in Ukraine, investors have shrugged off the noisy demonstrations in Mexico City’s streets and remained focused on interest rates and fluctuations in the global economy.
This suggests that governing principles and sturdy political institutions, not powerful individuals, have become the bedrock of Mexican governance.
Indeed, while Lopez Obrador continues to denounce the outcome and has threatened to make Mexico ungovernable, Mexico’s growing middle class has taken the political conflict in stride.
Many who supported Lopez Obrador’s candidacy do not support the post-election protests in his name.
A recent poll in the newspaper Reforma found that Calderon would now defeat him by 19 percentage points.
Voters may prefer Lopez Obrador, but they value Mexico’s stability above all.
Moreover, during the political standoff, Calderon has worked behind the scenes to form an administration and to settle on a governing strategy.
Aware that he must establish a greater sense of political legitimacy, his cabinet is likely to include representatives of other political parties.
He will probably introduce measures to tackle poverty and create jobs.
Calderon’s task will not be easy.
Lopez Obrador and his supporters can be expected to work relentlessly to thwart his plans.
But they are unlikely to derail his government.
The underlying stability highlighted by Mexico’s post-election crisis is also evident elsewhere in Latin America.
Whatever the potential for a leftward shift this year in some Latin American countries, others, including Mexico, Chile, and Brazil, are clearly less vulnerable to the type of populist rule we’ve seen in Venezuela and Bolivia.
Elected leaders in these countries face institutional constraints – parliaments that check the powers of the executive and courts that check the powers of both – on their ability to shape policy.
To be sure, political and market volatility in a broad range of emerging-market economies will continue.
But some of them appear to have “graduated” toward a stability rooted in sustainable governance.
Beyond Latin America, several Eastern European countries offer ready examples.
In these states, regulatory and taxation issues now affect confidence more deeply and consistently than does political tension.
Many in the media may not comprehend that yet.
But markets do.
Though Mexico’s election saga may continue to make headlines, its true significance is that it reveals just how politically sturdy a place Mexico has become.
Learning from the Cold War
NEW YORK – Every war is fought three times.
First comes the political discussion over whether to start or enter it.
Then comes the question of how to fight it.
And, finally, there is consideration of what lessons should be learned from it.
The Cold War, the third major conflict of the twentieth century, is no exception to this rule.
All three phases can be identified, and all three triggered intense debate.
There were, for example, those who questioned whether the Cold War was in fact necessary and whether the Soviet Union and Communism constituted a threat.
Such “revisionists” were a distinct minority, which is a good thing, as there is no reason to believe that the Soviets and Communism were a benign force.
As a result, the Cold War, a four-decade-long global struggle, became a reality.
There was also an ongoing debate about how best to wage the Cold War throughout its history.
The two principal schools of thought were “roll back” and “containment.”  The former argued that nothing less than overthrowing communism – “regime-change” in today’s parlance – would do.
The latter approach held that efforts to roll back Communism in the short run were too risky, given the Soviet nuclear arsenal, and that the United States and the West should content themselves with limiting the spread of Soviet power and influence.
Containment prevailed, but this hardly settled the debate, as there were intense arguments both over where it should be applied (Vietnam, Central America, and the Middle East all come to mind) and how it should be carried out, i.e., the right mix of military force, covert action, diplomacy and arms control, and economic sanctions and assistance.
A second and very different school of thought emphasizes less what the West did and more what the Soviet Union was.
In this narrative, the Cold War was not so much won by the US and the West as lost by the Soviets, the inevitable result of Soviet economic weakness and political decay.
Yet another perspective stresses that Western willingness to engage the Soviet Union as much as confront it played a major role in how history turned out.
Détente helped to keep the competition from spilling over into conflict as it exposed the Communist world to Western ideas of freedom and capitalism along with their benefits.
The Soviet and other top-heavy regimes increasingly found themselves losing the battle of ideas and, as a result, the support of their own citizens.
All of these factors played a part.
Western willingness to deny the Soviets success was an essential component of strategy.
But this alone would not have been enough; indeed, the Cold War could well have turned hot if Western strategy had consisted only of military competition and confrontation.
It was important to moderate the competition in order to allow pressure for change to build up from within the Soviet bloc.
And it was important to expose the societies under Soviet control to their shortcomings and to the advantages of outside ideas.
All of the above has implications for today’s challenges.
To be sure, there is no global threat on the scale of the former Soviet Union, but there are dangerous challenges emanating from such countries as Iran and North Korea.
What is required is a policy on the part of the global community that mixes military strength with a willingness to negotiate and interact, a policy of collective strength and collective flexibility.
It is important here to keep in mind that containment, the dominant doctrine of the Cold War era, sought to push back against Soviet and Communist expansion – not just to limit the reach of Soviet power, but to frustrate it – in order to create a context in which the inherent flaws of communism and authoritarian rule would come to the fore.
Mikhail Gorbachev could only have done what he did amidst a crisis of confidence.
Today, the world needs to create similar crises of confidence in the minds of those ruling Iran and North Korea.
The goal should be to limit what they can accomplish in the short term; to get them to change their policies in the medium term; and to set in motion forces that will bring about new and fundamentally different governments and societies in the long term.
Such an approach served the world well during the Cold War; it could do the same now.
Learning Globalization From Football
Football is not only the world’s most popular sport, but also probably its most globalized profession.
It is inconceivable that Brazilian, Cameroonian, or Japanese doctors, computer scientists, blue-collar workers, or bank tellers could move from one country to another as easily as Brazilian, Cameroonian, or Japanese football players do.
Indeed, London’s Arsenal football club is composed entirely of foreigners, including a French coach.
Even the captain roles are no longer reserved for domestic players: Thierry Henry, a Frenchman, is Arsenal’s captain, Andriy Shevchenko, a Ukrainian, is often the captain of AC Milan, and Christiano Zanetti, an Argentine, is captain of Inter Milan.
Similarly, dozens of South Americans and Africans play in Russian, Turkish, Polish, and various Southeast European leagues.
Football thus provides a glimpse of how true globalization of labor would work.
In football, as in other occupations, restrictions on labor mobility came entirely from the demand side.
No limits were ever imposed on players’ movements, except by Communist countries.
But the demand side was heavily regulated, owing to a rule that clubs could field no more than two foreign players in any single game.
The Bosman ruling, named after a Belgian player who successfully challenged the rule’s application to players from other European Union countries, eroded the limit, which collapsed altogether under the onslaught of the richest European clubs’ demand for a free hand in hiring the best players, wherever they might be found.
So wherever globalization and full commercialization reign supreme, there is an unmistakable concentration of quality and success.
Consider the number of clubs that have qualified for the European Champions’ League top eight slots.
If we look at five-year periods between 1967 and 1986, the number of different teams that qualified for the quarterfinals varied between 28 and 30.
In the next two five-year periods, however, the number fell to 26, and in the most recent period (2000-2004), there were only 21.
The bottom line is simple: fewer and fewer clubs are making it into the European elite.
National leagues are similar.
Since the English Premier League was started in 1992, only one championship was not won by Manchester United, Arsenal, or Chelsea.
In Italy, all but two Serie A championships since 1991 have been won by either Juventus or AC Milan.
In Spain, all but three championships since 1985 have been won by either Real Madrid or Barcelona.
The reason for this concentration at the top is obvious: the richest clubs are now able to attract the best players in the world.
Yet this has arguably been accompanied by improved quality in the game itself, owing to what economists call “increasing returns to scale.”
When the best players play together, the quality of each, and of the team as a whole, increases exponentially.
When Ronaldinho and Messi, or Kaka and Shevchenko, play together, their combined “output” (number of goals) is greater than the sum of goals that each would score if he played in a different club with less talented co-players.
Free mobility of labor in other areas would probably produce the same effect.
If doctors, computer specialists, or engineers (let alone the proverbial Polish plumbers!) were allowed to move freely, the concentration of talent in the richest countries would most likely increase.
Inequality in the distribution of talent across countries would rise, even if total world output of goods and services, and their average quality, improved, as with football today.
Poorer or smaller countries can hardly dream of winning a European championship, as Steaua (Romania), Red Star (Serbia), or Nottingham Forest (now languishing in the English third division) once did.
Remarkably, they are not trounced by the traditional powerhouses.
On the contrary, the elite eight teams of the last four World Cups have included two “newcomers ” that had never been quarterfinalists, such as Turkey and South Korea in 2002.
There are again two reasons for this.
First, free movement has meant that good players from small leagues improve much more than they would had they stayed home.
A good Danish or Bulgarian player improves much faster if he joins Manchester United or Barcelona.
Second, that improvement in quality was “captured” by national teams thanks to FIFA’s rule requiring players to play only for their national team.
Eto’o can play for any Spanish, Italian, or English club, but in the national competitions, he can play only for Cameroon.
In other words, FIFA has introduced an institutional rule that allows small countries (in the football sense) to capture some of the benefits of today’s higher-quality game, thereby partly reversing the “leg drain.”
The same rule could be applied to other activities.
Free movement of skilled labor could be accompanied by binding international requirements that migrants from poor countries spend, say, one year in five working in their countries of origin.
They would bring home skills, technology, and connections that are as valuable as the skills that Eto’o, Essien, or Messi bring back to Cameroon, Ghana, or Argentina.
Job placement would remain a problem, but the principle is sound: the world should learn from its most popular sport.
Self-Measurement and Self-Manipulation
HONG KONG – Recently I met with two nice slim men who have just launched a weight-loss app that provides daily menus and recipes, and offers some substitutions in case the user does not like a particular food.
The two are programmers who have little understanding of their target market and have not read much of the relevant literature.
I must confess that I was appalled at their ignorance of nutrition, psychology, game dynamics, and even women’s magazines.
Yes, they mean well, and they feel their users’ pain. “We get letters...” one said.
“One lady wrote that she follows the menus properly, but then she wakes up at midnight and goes to the refrigerator....I don’t know what to tell her!”
Well, for starters, he could suggest that she keep sweets out of the house to avoid temptation, or that she put aside part of one of each day’s meals for a midnight snack.
The idea is not to get overly scientific or precise, but to help people change their habits.
I think about this challenge a lot these days, because my new startup, called HICCup (Health Initiative Coordinating Council), aims (in part) to help people do just that on a massive scale, though initially concentrated in just a few communities.
The point is not to turn everyone into an obsessive calorie-, weight-, or step-counter, but to get people to be better self-manipulators.
The way to do that is to replace temptations with safe choices.
Give people rules of thumb, not product manuals.
Suggest new habits to replace old ones.
Let people see how they are being manipulated already by advertising, product formulations, and the media to buy more, consume more, and want more.
In the field of diet and nutrition, there is a fundamental debate between calorie counters and proponents of specific diets, whether low-fat, low-carbohydrate, or buy-my-line-of-expensive-formulated-products.
The issue is less whether any such diet works in general (though some of them are actually unhealthy) than whether more than a few individuals can follow such a regimen over the long term.
Calories do count; the physics of energy works even in the human body.
But the kind of food you eat and when you eat it does influence how hungry you feel (and thus your self-control), and whether you use up the calories you eat or turn them into fat even as you still feel hungry.
(Sugar is the main culprit, as Robert Lustig, the author of Fat Chance, has argued.)
So our approach at HICCup will be to help people figure out for themselves what works.
Maybe it is using smaller dinner plates; or keeping temptation out of the house, store, or workplace; or following the increasingly modish (but actually ancient) creed of eating breakfast like a king, lunch like a prince, and dinner like a pauper.
Then there is the simple tactic of restricting your options in advance, when you have the strength.
Avoid shopping for food when you are hungry.
Tell the waiter in advance that you do not want dessert.
Or read Predictably Irrational, by Dan Ariely, and apply it to your own health and behavior.
As Ariely points out, general advice is generally useless.
Individuals need their own tricks, and each person knows best what will work for them – if they think about it.
For example, I face my own dilemmas, and I do my own experiments.
I have a seemingly dangerous condition called Barrett’s esophagus – mysterious “lesions” around the entrance to my stomach that were discovered by chance (during medical exams for my cosmonaut training).
Not much is known about it, but it is probably not a good idea to swim – as I do every morning – with coffee in my stomach.
Yet my swimming time is definitely better after having coffee.
So I take my chances on mornings when I am really tired; otherwise, I do not.
For many people, the next big development will be non-invasive blood analysis, so that everyone, not just super-motivated diabetics, can test their own blood and understand their own metabolic chemistry.
Just what does a doughnut do to your blood sugar?
If Lustig is right and eating sugar just makes you hungry, you can see the mechanics for yourself.
I do not expect everyone to carry a blood-sugar monitor; freedom from such devices is surely what diabetics crave as much as sugar.
But if HICCup can set loose a bunch of schoolchildren to study sugar metabolism for themselves, they are likely to spread the message far and wide in their own communities, to friends and family alike.
Likewise, people could start experimenting with sleep.
There are lots of little quizzes you can take to compare your performance after different amounts of sleep.
I have found it much easier to leave parties early since I started doing this.
How much drunken conversation will compensate for a drop in IQ (even if only temporary) the next day?
All these little tricks are just that: tricks.
But, because they are tricks that you play on yourself, they can make you feel in control rather than manipulated.
I do not know the right approach for each person; the point is to liberate people to find their own path, not to chain them to some new “healthy” protocol that may or may not suit them.
The way to do that is with more information – not from books or learned articles, but through awareness of habits that can lead to finding one’s own answers to eternal questions about freedom and self-control.
Learning to Lead
CAMBRIDGE – Public-opinion polls show that citizens in many democracies are unhappy with their leaders. This is particularly true in Great Britain, where a number of members of Parliament have used their housing allowances to enhance their income, sometimes legally and sometimes not.