But Latin America is deeply troubled; it needs decisive, bold leadership at home and imaginative, unwavering support abroad.
Bush or Kerry - both can deliver the foreign support. It is in America's interest that they do.
Time for China to Float
China is being pressured to halt its interventions to prop up the US dollar in world currency markets, with opponents emphasizing how much harm the policy is causing to other countries.
But China’s authorities might respond more favorably to an argument that points out how China’s own economic health might benefit from abandoning the current exchange-rate policy, which pegs the yuan to the dollar.
Such an argument is not difficult to make.
China is currently pursuing a contradictory set of policies that paradoxically undermines its own economy while propping up America’s by accommodating pump-priming by the Federal Reserve.
China and Hong Kong are the largest net purchasers of US Treasury securities.
Otherwise, Treasury bond yields would be far higher, thwarting monetary expansion by the Fed.
Back in China, the dollar peg has led to large and growing foreign-exchange reserves, which are fueling domestic inflationary pressures and causing public-sector debt to balloon.
This is because official capital controls oblige exporters to deposit hard currencies with the People’s Bank of China in exchange for freshly printed yuan (usually as bank deposits) or government debt.
Both arrangements will eventually become untenable, because they will generate either an intolerable rate of inflation or an unsustainable burden of public-sector debt.
These are high prices for China to pay to maintain its current policies, including the pegged exchange rate.
There is a great deal of volatility in foreign-exchange markets across the globe, mainly owing to the weakening of the dollar.
As such, China and other countries are holding a depreciating asset that should be managed to serve domestic interests rather than those of the US.
Chinese policymakers should bear in mind that the value of the yuan is only one among many factors that affects the competitiveness of China’s economy.
After all, a currency can appreciate while an economy is sluggish, or depreciate despite robust growth.
As it is, the valuation of a country’s currency is not so much determined by the performance of its economy as by the forces of supply and demand on foreign-exchange markets.
For a given supply of money, an increase in the production of goods will increase the value of a currency, because each unit will buy more goods.
Likewise, increasing the supply of money relative to a fixed amount of output will lead to a decline in the purchasing power of money, as each currency unit buys fewer goods.
So it is nonsense to declare that China’s currency is currently undervalued.
We can only know that once all economic players have the opportunity to decide freely on where they wish to place their financial assets.
Given the high rate of growth in China’s money supply, there could be considerable pressures for the yuan to actually depreciate, because a rate of monetary growth that exceeds the growth rate of economic activity tends to cause a currency’s exchange rate to fall.
If exchange rates were fixed but capital could move freely, capital flight from the country would generate pressures to end loose monetary policies.
The debate over how to value the yuan is at the heart of the two-year struggle by the country’s policymakers to slow down China’s overheating economy.
One response was the decision by the People’s Bank of China to increase the one-year interest rate from 5.31% to 5.58%– its first rate hike in over nine years – in an effort to curb fixed-investment growth, staunch increasing prices, and offset a worrying decline in savings.
But such an insignificant rate hike will do little to relieve long-term pressures, because investors will expect more rate hikes and move money into China, increasing upward pressure on the yuan’s exchange rate.
Indeed, the logic is self-fulfilling: as more foreign currency flows into the market, the economy will continue to overheat, necessitating further interest rate hikes.
Meanwhile, the dollar’s falling value reflects the fact that the Fed is pumping more money into the system than are most of its trading partners.
So, the dollar will continue to weaken until the rate of increase in new money into the US economy no longer exceeds that of domestic economic growth and corresponds to the pace of monetary expansion followed by central banks in the rest of the world.
China’s effort to hold down the value of the yuan vis-à-vis the dollar is thus a costly and pointless policy.
By delaying a decision to float the yuan, the authorities are merely contributing to greater instability in the Chinese economy.
Time for Debt Reduction in Greece
WASHINGTON, DC – Once again, Greece is at an inflection point.
With its cash balances severely stressed, it seems unlikely to be able to pay the cascading debt payments that are falling due over the next few months.
So yet another round of contentious and protracted discussions with its creditors is underway – one that may well produce yet another short-term solution.
Yet kicking the can down the road is hardly the negotiators’ only option.
Indeed, it is the wrong approach.
When facing severe payment problems, a country has five basic maneuvers at its disposal.
It can, first, draw down the monetary reserves and wealth it has built up during better times and, second, borrow externally to meet payments falling due in the short term.
Third, it can simultaneously or subsequently implement domestic austerity measures (such as higher taxes or spending cuts) that free up resources to make debt payments.
Fourth, a cash-strapped country can also implement strategies to spur economic growth, thereby generating incremental income that can then be used for part of the payments.
And, if none of this works, it can pursue a fifth option: allow market forces to implement the bulk of the adjustment, whether through very large movements in prices (including the exchange rate) or by forcing a default.
Most economists agree on the ideal mix and sequencing of such maneuvers.
A so-called “beautiful de-leveraging” entails a combination of internal reforms, financing, and judicious use of the market pricing mechanism.
But what looks good in theory has proved difficult to implement in practice.
For one thing, politicians are more likely to continue increasing their countries’ reliance on financing, thereby heightening the risk of disorderly market adjustments, than they are to implement difficult structural reforms and fiscal adjustments.
For this reason, many countries have endured painful disruptions that have aggravated possibly avoidable falls in output, caused unemployment to surge, and, in the worst cases, eroded potential growth.
In any case, if a country is already too deeply indebted, it may find that no amount of realistic adjustment and financing is enough – the curse of what economists call the “debt overhang.”
Under these circumstances, reliance on austerity to free up internal resources to service the debt chokes off economic growth.
And pro-growth supply-side reforms cannot yield results fast enough to offset this impact.
External creditors, for their part, balk at the prospect of providing the financing the country needs to get back on track, with those that provided financing earlier often unwilling to accept losses.
This leaves only one real option: a disorderly market adjustment.
Because such an adjustment is not much more appealing for creditors than it is for debtors, both parties engage in time-consuming rounds of “extend and pretend” negotiations, in the hope that some magical solution will emerge.
Of course it doesn’t.
On the contrary, during the time they waste, the debt grows heavier, not only weakening the debtor’s short-term prospects, but also discouraging inflows of new capital and investments that are critical to future growth.
That, in a nutshell, is the story of Greece.
By avoiding decisive action to address the debt overhang, the country and its creditors have contributed to a situation that is disappointing for everyone.
Greece’s European partners have nothing substantive to show for the billions of euros they have lent the country.
The International Monetary Fund and the European Central Bank, which have gone along with the extend-and-pretend approach, have placed their credibility at risk.
But the biggest losers have been Greek citizens, who suffered through one of history’s most severe austerity programs but still cannot see light at the end of the tunnel.
Indeed, Greece’s debt-to-GDP ratio today is considerably higher than it was when its austerity efforts began.
And youth and long-term unemployment have remained at extremely high levels for an alarmingly long time.
Greece’s dismal growth performance over the last eight years contrasts sharply with the performance of the other eurozone members that faced crippling payment pressures.
Not having fallen as hard as Greece, Ireland and Portugal have bounced back to positive growth.
Even Cyprus has performed better, avoiding economic collapse and recapturing growth in the last two years, whereas Greece relapsed into recession.
The Greek economy’s performance also looks weak relative to that of Iceland, a country that, lacking the external support that Greece received, endured a vicious market adjustment.
While it faced a broadly similar economic contraction for a couple of years, growth has recovered robustly, and now far outpaces that of Greece.
As Greece and its creditors (now mainly sovereign lenders and multilateral institutions) deliberate about how to address the country’s looming cash crunch, they should recognize these differences and learn from the mistakes of their past approach.
The longer they deny reality, the greater the damage will be – and the more it will cost to repair it.
Kicking the can down the road is politically easier than reaching comprehensive and lasting solutions.
But it seldom works.
Greece can overcome its economic troubles only if it modifies its approach.
Specifically, Greece and its creditors must agree to a credible debt-reduction program that would support the domestic reforms needed to re-invigorate Greece’s growth engines and place its internal obligations in line with its capabilities.
Such an approach, which is already favored by the IMF, would boost Greece’s future growth prospects considerably.
If clear economic logic somehow does not provide sufficient motivation for Greece’s European partners to support debt reduction, surely Greece’s frontline role in Europe’s historic refugee crisis does.
After eight long years, it is time to give Greece the help it needs, in the form of a proper growth-oriented round of debt reduction.
It’s Time to Ban the Bomb
STOCKHOLM – The nuclear agreement between Iran, the five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council plus Germany, and the EU, comes at a historically propitious moment.
Seventy years ago next month, the nuclear bombs dropped on Hiroshima and Nagasaki opened the darkest chapter in the long history of humanity’s wartime horrors.
Fire, bullets, and bayonets were now joined by nuclear radiation – a silent, invisible killer like gas and biological agents.
After World War I, the international community adopted the so-called Gas Protocol, to prohibit the use of chemical and bacteriological weapons.
Likewise, the demand to ban any use of nuclear weapons has been strong and persistent since the end of World War II.
But the states possessing nuclear weapons have always opposed such a ban, arguing that it would not be credible.
Instead, they have recommended a step-by-step approach, eventually leading to a ban on the possession and production of nuclear weapons.
After all, the same approach brought about today’s strict limits on biological and chemical weapons.
Yet 70 years after Hiroshima and Nagasaki, the gradualist approach has clearly failed.
During the Cold War, the total number of nuclear weapons worldwide climbed to more than 50,000.
Many, including hydrogen bombs, had explosive yields that were orders of magnitude higher than the bombs dropped on Japan.
Some measures were agreed to reduce the nuclear danger: bilateral arms-control agreements between the United States and the Soviet Union, restrictions on the testing of new weapons, and – above all – the Non-Proliferation Treaty.
The aim of the NPT, signed in 1968, is the universal elimination of nuclear weapons: non-nuclear-weapon states commit not to acquire them, and the five states that officially possess them (the US, the United Kingdom, France, China, and Russia) commit to disarmament negotiations.
But the overall threat has never diminished much.
To be sure, the first part of the NPT has had some success: Since the treaty entered into force, only four states – India, Israel, North Korea, and Pakistan – have developed nuclear weapons.
South Africa eliminated its nuclear weapons and became a party to the NPT, while Ukraine, Belarus, and Kazakhstan transferred their nuclear arsenals to Russia.
Two states – Iraq and Libya – were stopped from developing nuclear weapons, and now Iran, a party to the treaty, has committed to abide by important restrictions on its nuclear program.
And yet the commitment of the five nuclear-weapon states to disarm has had very limited results.
Nuclear stockpiles were reduced – mainly for economic reasons – following the Cold War, to less than 20,000 nuclear weapons worldwide (still enough to destroy humanity several times over).
And the 2010 New START agreement brought welcome upper limits to the number of nuclear weapons deployed by the US and Russia.
But no serious disarmament negotiations have been pursued since.
Moreover, it was once hoped that NATO’s small number of non-strategic nuclear weapons sited in Europe could be withdrawn to the US, as they were widely considered militarily useless.
Doing so, it was suggested, could lead Russia to remove its own tactical nuclear weapons.
Neither action has been taken.
Likewise, the hope that the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT), adopted in 1996, would become binding has not been realized.
A moratorium on such tests exists, and an impressive monitoring machinery has been created, able to register not only weapons tests, but also earthquakes and tsunamis.
Yet, because eight countries, including the US and China, have failed to ratify it, the CTBT occupies a legal netherworld: it may be said to be in operation, but not in force.
Rather than nuclear disarmament, the world is witnessing an upgrading – and, in some cases, expansion – of nuclear arsenals.
There is little hope of any change for the better unless the Security Council’s permanent members conclude that their own security requires resuming détente among themselves and launching serious disarmament negotiations, as promised.
They have shown their willingness to act to restrain other states from acquiring weapons of mass destruction; now it is time for them to restrain themselves.
Of course, just as some states refuse to join the conventions that ban cluster bombs and landmines, the nuclear-weapon states will not join a convention banning their arsenals.
Yet the existence of such a treaty could serve as a constant reminder of what is expected of them.
For that reason alone, it should become an international priority.
During the Cold War, many people feared that mankind might commit suicide abruptly, by waging a nuclear war.
Today, more people may worry that humanity will suffer a more prolonged death through global warming.
But the nuclear peril is still there, and groups like Global Zero deserve our support in their efforts to raise public awareness.
It has been said that Hiroshima and Nagasaki created a taboo against any further use of nuclear weapons.
Let us hope so, but let us also demand that the taboo be made legally binding.
Time to Bring Mahatma Gandhi Back
NEW YORK – The Congress Party’s unexpected landslide in India’s general election was greeted with euphoria.
Many believe that Congress – with its commitment to secular values, economic growth, and helping the poor – now has a mandate to transform India into a great power.
Business and financial interests, in particular, are delighted with the outcome, crowing about the bonanza about to be unleashed as Congress liberalizes India’s economy further.
The Americans are happy that India’s pesky left, reduced to a paltry 24 seats, has been all but eliminated from national government.
India’s Communists had tried to topple the Congress-led government last year in an attempt to scuttle the nuclear deal brokered by the United States, and had vowed to upend it.
As for the threat from the right, anyone hoping for peace in the region and reduced tensions within India between religious communities is relieved by the defeat of the Hindu nationalist Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP).
The BJP’s strategy of painting the Congress as soft on terror and demonizing Muslims as an existential threat to India badly misfired.
Unfortunately, however, the economic trajectory that Congress is plotting, though it may well boost growth in the short term, is ultimately on a collision course with both equity and sustainability.
Despite rhetoric about “inclusive growth,” India’s wealth gap has widened during the years of exceptionally rapid economic expansion.
The majority of the world’s malnourished children live in India.
While private wealth management is a growth industry among India’s 200,000 or so nouveaux riches , 800 million Indians live on less than $2 per day.
India’s water supply is stretched to the limit, even as global warming is fast melting the Himalayan glaciers on which millions depend for water.
Moreover, climate change threatens to reduce agricultural output by up to 40% by 2080, when India will have another 450 million people.
At that point, the consultancy McKinsey &amp; Company projects India’s middle-class consumer market will have hit 600 million people, twice the size of the current US population.
That’s exciting news to retailers looking for new markets.
But what about India’s other billion people?
And where will the resources come from to manufacture all the stuff these new consumers will buy?
The die was cast for India’s development path on July 22, 1947, when India’s Constituent Assembly resolved to replace Mahatma Gandhi’s spinning wheel, or charka , with the emperor Ashoka’s wheel of dharma on the Indian national flag. The move symbolically rejected what the incoming government abandoned upon assuming office: Gandhi’s vision of an equitable and sustainable agrarian society based on self-sufficient, pared-down consumption.
For Gandhi, the spinning wheel symbolized the need to assume personal responsibility for consumption as a first step toward achieving justice and freedom for all.
But Jawaharlal Nehru, India’s first prime minister, believed in industrialization and urbanization, famously calling the new mega-dam projects his government underwrote the “temples of modern India.”
In his famous speech on India’s “tryst with destiny,” Nehru promised Indians that his government would seek to “bring freedom and opportunity to the common man, to the peasants and workers of India; to fight and end poverty and ignorance and disease;… to ensure justice and fullness of life to every man and woman.”
For 63 years, the vast majority of India’s people have waited for this promise to be fulfilled.
As Congress retakes power, it is Rahul Gandhi, the 39-year-old great-grandson of the man who made that promise, who is the heir-apparent to current Prime Minister Manmohan Singh.
Observers expect the young Gandhi to become prime minister within two years.
The essential challenge before him and his country is not transitioning from a more to a less state-directed economic system, as many of those cheering Congress’s electoral victory believe. While bureaucratic excess, entrenched corruption, and other inefficiencies beg remedy, the real challenge before India is its allegiance to a twentieth-century vision of modernity.
Former Finance Minister Palaniappan Chidambaram has said that his dream is to see 85% of Indians living in cities and only 15%, as opposed to the current 60%, engaged in agriculture, because to be an agrarian society in the modern era is to be poor and powerless.
To be “developed” means to be industrialized and urbanized.
But, for better or worse, we are no longer in the modern era.
The post-modern realities of our grave present make a mockery of modernity.
When asked what he thought about Western civilization, Gandhi famously replied, “It would be a good idea.”
He also said that “Earth provides enough to satisfy every man’s need, but not every man’s greed.”
For Gandhi, greed led to violence, violence to militarism, militarism to war, and war to annihilation.
His philosophy of non-violence was aimed at the most basic form of human aggression: the appetite for more than one’s share.
India’s essential challenge is to take up Gandhi’s mantle and boldly imagine a future that is different from the West’s present.
Of course, no one is under the illusion that India or any other country will abandon its cities for a life as simple as the one Gandhi strove to live; but that doesn’t mean that India can’t look to Gandhi’s core values for inspiration.
Rahul Gandhi bears the name, if not the lineage, of the Mahatma (to whom he is not related).
If India is lucky, when he assumes leadership of the Congress Party he will let himself be as inspired by Mahatma Gandhi’s vision for India as by that of his great-grandfather.
After all, it was out of their complicated marriage of ideas that independent India was born. Nehru’s vision has had a good run; now it is time to bring back Gandhi’s.
Starving the Squid
BERKELEY – Is America’s financial sector slowly draining the lifeblood from its real economy?
The journalist Matt Taibbi’s memorable description in 2009 of Goldman Sachs – “a great vampire squid wrapped around the face of humanity, relentlessly jamming its blood funnel into anything that smells like money” – still resonates, and for good reason.
Bruce Bartlett, a senior official in the Reagan and George H. W. Bush administrations, recently pointed to research showing the sharp rise in the financialization of the US economy.
He then cited empirical work suggesting that financial deepening is useful only in the early stages of economic development, evidence of a negative correlation between financial deepening and real investment, and the withering conclusion of Adair Turner, Britain’s former top financial regulator: “There is no clear evidence that the growth in the scale and complexity of the financial system in the rich developed world over the last 20 to 30 years has driven increased growth or stability.”
Four years ago, during the 2008-9 crisis, I was largely ambivalent about financialization.
It seemed to me that, yes, our modern sophisticated financial systems had created enormous macroeconomic risks.
But it also seemed to me that a world short of risk-bearing capacity needed virtually anything that induced people to commit their money to long-term risky investments.
In other words, such a world needed either the reality or the illusion that finance could, as John Maynard Keynes put it, “defeat the dark forces of time and ignorance which envelop our future.”
Most reforms that would guard against macroeconomic risk would also limit the ability of finance to persuade people to commit to long-term risky investments, and hence further lower the supply of finance willing to assume such undertakings.
But events and economic research since the crisis have demonstrated three things.
First, modern finance is simply too politically powerful for legislatures or regulators to restrain its ability to create systemic macroeconomic risk.
At the same time, it has not preserved its ability to entice customers with promises of safe, sophisticated money management.
Second, the correlations between economic growth and financial deepening on which I relied do indeed vanish when countries’ financial systems move beyond banks, electronic funds transfer, and bond markets to more sophisticated instruments.
Finally, the social returns from investment in finance as the industry of the future have largely disappeared over the past generation.
A back-of-the-envelope calculation of mine in 2007 suggested that the world paid financial institutions roughly $800 billion every year for mergers and acquisitions that yielded about $170 billion of real economic value.
That rather poor cost-benefit ratio does not appear to be improving.
Back in 2011, I should have read Keynes’s General Theory a little further, to where he suggests that “when the capital development of a country becomes a by-product of the activities of a casino, the job is likely to be ill-done.”
At that point, it is time either for creative thinking about how funding can be channeled to the real economy in a way that bypasses modern finance, with its large negative alpha, or to risk being sucked dry.
Time to Get Back to Business on Doha
The suspension of the Doha Round of World Trade Organization (WTO) talks since July is deeply disappointing.
While the rhetoric of commitment to the round remains, in practice there has been a surrender to defensive lobbies clinging to the status quo.
But the status quo is unacceptable.
In agriculture, it protects the world’s rich farmers by stifling opportunity for the poor, at a cost of some $280 billion a year to taxpayers and consumers.
In manufacturing, it deters poor countries from moving up the value chain as tariffs on their exports increase with the degree of processing.
Barriers among developing countries are also especially high, impeding rapid growth in trade between them.
In services, trade barriers stand in the way of improved quality and efficiency, slowing the growth of a sector that could make a huge contribution to competitiveness and employment.
Delaying the conclusion of the Doha Round negotiations carries costs and risks for the entire world economy, rich and poor countries alike.
First, the delay implies a lost opportunity to raise global growth.
With risks to the current global expansion increasing, this is the wrong time to let an obvious and sustained source of growth slip away.
This is especially crucial for poor countries, where slower global growth means continuing hardship.
Second, the perception of weakness and division in the WTO will make it far harder to resist protectionist pressures worldwide, especially if the global economy slows.
We must not forget that the multilateral trading system – along with the Bretton Woods institutions – was originally created to avoid a repeat of the protectionism and competitive devaluations of the 1930’s that plunged the world into depression.
Third, trade reforms can help smooth international macroeconomic fluctuations and contribute to an orderly resolution of global imbalances.
A successful Doha Round would thus complement the international collaborative efforts underway, with IMF involvement, to tackle external imbalances among the major economies.
Finally, blockage of the multilateral process will trigger an even more pronounced shift toward bilateral or regional free trade agreements (FTA’s).
FTA’s cannot substitute for multilateral liberalization.
If properly designed, they can benefit their members, especially if combined with reduced trade barriers for all trading partners.
If designed badly, the cost of such agreements – in terms of trade diversion, confusion, and demands on limited administrative capacity – often exceeds the benefits.
More broadly, the growth of FTA’s undermines the central principle of the multilateral trading system: trade opportunities should be offered to all countries equally.
The multilateral trading system has faced challenges before, including during the Uruguay Round in the early 1990’s, and has emerged with renewed vigor.
We believe that it is still possible for the international community to get a good deal done.
But a sense of urgency is needed.
What, concretely, should be done in order to restart the negotiations?
Key countries must find the political will to confront defensive interests and negotiate with flexibility to reach a market-opening deal.
The initiative will have to come from the top if the case is to be made within each country for more open markets, and for help to be made available to those facing adjustment.
All countries will have to give; no country can be expected to carry the burden alone.
Pro-trade forces can speak up in the political process.
For example, it is untenable in rich countries that farm interests accounting for less than 4% of employment are effectively able to block a deal to open new markets for services and manufactures, which account for more than 90% of employment.
In developing countries, pro-trade voices could help turn the debate toward the opportunities of global integration rather than emphasizing exceptions.
The bottom line is that trade reforms benefit the country making them.
The Doha Round is an opportunity for countries to benefit from others’ reforms as well as their own.
Meanwhile, there should be no backsliding on the progress already made, such as the offer to eliminate agricultural export subsidies by 2013 and to provide duty-free/quota-free access for almost all exports from least developed countries.
We encourage donors to follow through on their commitments to increase effective aid for trade – assistance to help developing countries take full advantage of trade opportunities as a lever for growth.
For our part, both the World Bank and the IMF are stepping up financial, technical, and analytical trade-related assistance.
Much has already been achieved in the negotiations, and an agreement of significant value is within reach.
While the path back to the negotiating table is not an easy one, the obstacles are not insurmountable.
All countries, but especially the major players, have a responsibility to honor their commitment to the Doha Round.
For the sake of their citizens, the global trading system, and the world’s poor, it is time to get back to business.
Time to Nationalize Insolvent Banks
NEW YORK – A year ago, I predicted that the losses of US financial institutions would reach at least $1 trillion and possibly go as high as $2 trillion.
At that time, the consensus among economists and policymakers was that these estimates were exaggerated, because it was believed that sub-prime mortgage losses totaled only about $200 billion.
As I pointed out, with the United States and global economy sliding into a severe recession, bank losses would extend well beyond sub-prime mortgages to include sub-prime, near-prime, and prime mortgages; commercial real estate; credit cards, auto loans, and student loans; industrial and commercial loans; corporate bonds; sovereign bonds and state and local government bonds; and losses on all of the assets that securitized such loans.
Indeed, since then, the write-downs by US banks have already passed the $1 trillion mark (my floor estimate of losses), and institutions such as the IMF and Goldman Sachs now predict losses of more than $2 trillion.
But if you think that the $2 trillion figure is already huge, the latest estimates by my research consultancy RGE Monitor suggest that total losses on loans made by US financial firms and the fall in the market value of the assets they hold (things like mortgage-backed securities) will peak at about $3.6 trillion.
US banks and broker dealers are exposed to about half of this figure, or $1.8 trillion; the rest is borne by other financial institutions in the US and abroad.
The capital backing the banks’ assets was only $1.4 trillion last fall, leaving the US banking system some $400 billion in the hole, or close to zero even after the government and private-sector recapitalization of such banks.
Another $1.5 trillion is needed to bring banks’ capital back to pre-crisis level, which is needed to resolve the credit crunch and restore lending to the private sector.
So, the US banking system is effectively insolvent in the aggregate; most of the British banking system looks insolvent, too, as do many continental European banks.
There are four basic approaches to cleaning up a banking system that is facing a systemic crisis: recapitalization of the banks, together with a purchase of their toxic assets by a government “bad bank”; recapitalization, together with government guarantees – after a first loss by the banks – of the toxic assets; private purchase of toxic assets with a government guarantee (the current US government plan); and outright nationalization (or call it  “government receivership” if you don’t like the dirty N-word) of insolvent banks and their resale to the private sector after being cleaned.
Of the four options, the first three have serious flaws.
In the “bad bank” model, the government may overpay for the bad assets, whose true value is uncertain.
Even in the guarantee model there can be such implicit government over-payment (or an over-guarantee that is not properly priced by the fees that the government receives).
In the “bad bank” model, the government has the additional problem of managing all the bad assets that it purchased – a task for which it lacks expertise.
And the very cumbersome US Treasury proposal – which combines removing toxic assets from banks’ balance sheets while providing government guarantees – was so non-transparent and complicated that the markets dove as soon as it was announced.
Thus, paradoxically nationalization may be a more market-friendly solution: it wipes out common and preferred shareholders of clearly insolvent institutions, and possibly unsecured creditors if the insolvency is too large, while providing a fair upside to the tax-payer.
It can also resolve the problem of managing banks’ bad assets by reselling most of assets and deposits – with a government guarantee – to new private shareholders after a clean-up of the bad assets (as in the resolution of the Indy Mac bank failure).
Nationalization also resolves the too-big-too-fail problem of banks that are systemically important, and that thus need to be rescued by the government at a high cost to taxpayers.
Indeed, the problem has now grown larger, because the current approach has led weak banks to take over even weaker banks.
Merging zombie banks is like drunks trying to help each other stand up.
JPMorgan’s takeover of Bear Stearns and WaMu; Bank of America’s takeover of Countrywide and Merrill Lynch; and Wells Fargo’s takeover of Wachovia underscore the problem.
With nationalization, the government can break up these financial monstrosities and sell them to private investors as smaller good banks.
Whereas Sweden adopted this approach successfully during its banking crisis in the early 1990’s, the current US and British approach may end up producing Japanese-style zombie banks – never properly restructured and perpetuating a credit freeze.
Japan suffered a decade-long near-depression because of its failure to clean up the banks.
The US, the United Kingdom, and other economies risk a similar outcome – multi-year recession and price deflation – if they fail to act appropriately.
Time to Talk with Iran
BERLIN – The recent comprehensive assessment by America’s spy agencies about Iran’s nuclear program and ambitions – the so-called “National Intelligence Estimate” – has opened the door to fresh strategic discussions among the five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council and Germany.
Such a strategic reconsideration is probably most necessary for those in the Bush administration (and a few elsewhere), who until recently have been prophets of imminent danger.
For Europeans, the NIE has not removed, but rather confirmed, the concerns that in 2003 prompted the EU-3 (Britain, France, and Germany) – namely, that Iran’s nuclear program could eventually give it a military nuclear capability, and that even before that point, it might trigger regional nuclear proliferation.
The NIE also confirmed two assumptions that have since guided European diplomatic approach: Iran reacts to external incentives and disincentives, and taking legitimate Iranian interests into consideration is the best way to influence Iran’s leaders.
Most Europeans who have been dealing with the issue also assume that Iran is aiming at capacities that would eventually make available all options, including quick development of a nuclear weapon, rather than actually acquiring, let alone testing, a weapon and thereby violating the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty.
So concern about Iran’s nuclear program is still justified.
The robust diplomatic approach that is needed to confront the problem must include three components.
First, it should be based on a broad international consensus.
Second, it should clearly communicate that the issue is proliferation, not the nature of the Iranian regime.
Third, any further sanctions should be accompanied by an earnest offer of dialogue and engagement.
By contrast, some American policymakers continue to believe that Iran would abandon its enrichment program if only the European Union imposed unilateral sanctions.
But a clear-headed analysis of Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad’s behavior indicates that EU sanctions would lead to more trade diversion, with China, Russia, Turkey, or Dubai benefiting from reduced levels of European exports to Iran.
Of course, some imports would become more expensive for Iran, but the economic effect of such sanctions would remain limited.
Politically, Ahmadinejad certainly would not miss the chance to exploit unilateral measures for propaganda purposes – claiming that Iran has a conflict not with the international community, but with imperialist states intent on depriving his country of technological progress.
For these reasons, Europeans favor a new Security Council resolution, even if its measures are weaker than what the United States or the EU could impose unilaterally.
Such a resolution would send an effective signal to the Iranian public and political elite that Iran is in conflict with the entire international community.
Iranians do not like to be isolated; even the clerical elite has a strong interest in exchanges with the rest of the world, and they like to send their children to Western schools.
Making it obvious that it is Ahmadinejad’s policies that are isolating Iran would strengthen the still-fragile anti-Ahmadinejad alliance of pragmatic conservatives and reformers, which has lately become more vocal.
This is important to bear in mind, as a parliamentary (majlis) election is scheduled for March 2008.
The election will not be entirely free, but the government will be unable to manipulate them entirely.
The majlis plays a role in the political process, to the point of being able to induce or hinder policy changes: witness the way a conservative majlis blocked reformist President Mohammad Khatami in the last years of his term.
Europeans should now be confident enough to call for a common policy with the US that focuses on domestic developments in Iran.
Such a policy can include additional Security Council sanctions, but it must also carry an offer of dialogue that pragmatic forces in Iran would not refuse.
Both the EU and the US should be prepared to enter into direct, comprehensive, and unconditional negotiations with Iran.
Where security guarantees are concerned, America is Iran’s actual foe and potential partner.
So far, the two governments have communicated either through the EU or on strictly limited issues through their ambassadors in Baghdad.
The US has so far insisted that it will agree to a comprehensive dialogue only if Iran first suspends its enrichment activities.
But this should be the result of, not a precondition for, negotiations.
Whatever the US and Europe decide to do about Iran will affect that country’s internal political dynamics.
There are no easy mechanics at work here.
The best method of strengthening Ahmadinejad, however, appears to be to threaten the country and the regime as a whole.
An honest offer of engagement would allow Ahmadinejad’s pragmatic opponents to show that it is Iran’s president and his controversial policies, not the West, that are at fault.
Putting Democracy Above the Bottom Line
BOSTON – This month, we will have a chance to chart a course toward a stronger, safer global society, where power belongs to the many, not to the few, and where those who have run roughshod over our environment, human rights, and public health will be held accountable.
I am not talking about the United States’ presidential election.
To be sure, the US election will be immensely consequential; but endless punditry and horserace politics have obscured two groundbreaking events that begin on November 7: meetings of the parties to the World Health Organization Framework Convention on Tobacco Control (FCTC) and the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC).
Superficially, international law lacks the drama of a presidential race, and can undoubtedly seem stuffy at best, and irrelevant at worst.
But if one digs a little deeper, one finds an almost Shakespearean struggle between democracy and unbridled greed.
At each conference this month, the international community will make decisions that will affect the outcome of this struggle, and which could begin to solve some of today’s most vexing global issues.
Both the FCTC and the UNFCCC allow for governments to rein in global corporations’ unchecked power, which is a root cause of many other problems, from economic inequality to social injustice and broken democratic systems.
Global corporations are enormous, and their influence affects almost every aspect of our lives.
To understand the reach of their power, one must look no further than the billions of dollars they spend on elections; their lobbying to gut worker and environmental protections in trade agreements such as the Trans-Pacific Partnership and the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership; and fossil-fuel corporations’ relentless drive to derail climate-change policy.
Global corporations have disproportionate power because they can operate across national borders, which means that no single local or national government can effectively regulate them.
The crucial function of international frameworks such as the FCTC and UNFCCC is to provide concrete tools for governments to set national policies on issues ranging from public health to climate change and global inequality.
For example, Colombia was a stronghold for the tobacco corporation Philip Morris International two decades ago, and comprehensive tobacco-control legislation in that country was long unthinkable.
But in 2009 – just six years after the World Health Organization adopted the FCTC and 15 months after Colombia ratified it – the Colombian government enacted one of the strongest tobacco-control laws in the world.
Likewise, governments worldwide are adopting measures that are proven to reduce smoking rates and save lives, including graphic health warnings, marketing restrictions, and laws requiring tobacco products to be sold in unbranded packaging.
But the FCTC’s work is not done, and governments are now pushing for legal liability to be a part of national-level corporate-accountability frameworks.
If they are successful in negotiations at the FCTC conference this month, governments will have the tools they need to make Big Tobacco pay for the damage it has done.
Such an outcome would mean that governments could recoup hundreds of billions of dollars in tobacco-related health-care costs and force the release of internal industry documents.
The FCTC is effective because it includes a hard-won provision that explicitly prohibits corporations from influencing policymaking.
At the UNFCCC conference next week, some governments will hold up the FCTC as a strong precedent to argue that the fossil-fuel industry must be excluded from ongoing climate negotiations, owing to its conflicts of interest with sound climate policy.
Industries responsible for climate change must not be entrusted to solve it.
Only by removing them from the equation can we implement truly groundbreaking measures – such as renewable-energy systems owned and operated by communities – that put people and our planet’s survival above the industry’s bottom line.
For as long as we’ve had public regulatory institutions, corporate interests have sought to co-opt them.
Big Tobacco, Big Oil, Big Food, and Big Pharma have tried to bully, buy, and bribe their way into our public international spaces, all with the same goal in mind: to fend off regulation that would disrupt business as usual.
Costs to human life or the planet rarely enter into their calculus.
Democracy advocates in civil society and government have managed to push back against global corporations, but much of their progress hangs in the balance this month.
Will attendees at the FCTC and UNFCCC conferences defend democratic principles, or will they defer to big business?
The United Kingdom’s “Brexit” referendum notwithstanding, there is no denying that we live in a truly global world.
When the causes of our biggest problems are global, our solutions must be as well, which requires that we first address the fundamental issue of corporate interference.
The possibilities of what can be achieved by bringing international law to bear are too promising to ignore.
Tobin Trouble
CAMBRIDGE – European leaders are seriously considering a Tobin tax, which would put a small levy on financial transactions, thereby dampening trading.
But will the tax do as much as its proponents hope?
The popularity of the tax (named for the late Nobel laureate economist James Tobin, for whom its aim was to reduce exchange-rate volatility in currency markets) reflects widespread animus directed at the financial sector, but it far exceeds any real benefits that the tax would deliver.
Nonetheless, elected officials find a Tobin tax highly appealing, because it could blunt criticism and divert attention from fundamental, but politically paralyzing, problems surrounding economic policy, particularly budgets, debt, and slow growth.
A Tobin tax does have benefits, even if it cannot address enough of the problems that afflict financial markets today.
A tax on stock transactions encourages longer-term holdings.
It taxes liquidity, which many believe is overly abundant.
It encourages fundamental analysis of a company’s operations, and some advocates hope that a Tobin tax would push firms themselves to focus even more on long-term value.
Moreover, a Tobin tax moves financial traders – talented people with strong work habits – into other activities, which (policymakers hope) will benefit the economy more.
And, if financial innovations like derivatives and short-term repurchase agreements have made markets more volatile and fragile, a Tobin tax could help to stabilize and strengthen them.
While these are worthy goals, there are good reasons to believe that the tax would not achieve most of them.
Long-term stockholders alone do not encourage a firm’s managers to manage for the long term.
In fact, to the extent that dampened trading diminishes market feedback to firms and their directors, it could make managers complacent.
Traders might stop trading, but shareholders still might not conduct more fundamental, long-term analysis: the rise of index funds, which hold a broadly-diversified swath of the entire stock market, reflects this trend toward stockholder passivity.
Lowering volatility and sopping up excess liquidity can be beneficial, but there are risks here as well: regulators can easily overshoot the mark, leaving financial markets with weakened capacity for price discovery and too little liquidity.
That leaves the hope that a Tobin tax would induce high-IQ financial traders to do something else, with higher net benefits to society.
If trading today is not helping to move capital to its highest and best use, reallocating inefficiently employed financial talent could yield big benefits.
But is too much trading really a critical economic problem?
Consider the following.
The financial crisis erupted in 2008 when mortgage-backed securities were revalued at much less than what they had been thought to be worth.
The problem was not that these securities were ferociously traded (most were not, and thus were not the kind of security that a Tobin tax would hit hard), but rather that everyone in financial markets revalued them at the same time.
That left the financial institutions that held mortgage-backed securities in much weaker condition, and several failed.
At the time of the crisis itself, however, the main problem was not too much trading, but too little, as liquidity dried up for many financial transactions.
Still, in one area, a Tobin tax could provide an unmitigated benefit.
Many of the largest, most precarious financial institutions now finance themselves via repo: they buy a long-term security (often government debt) and sell it, promising to buy it back the next day for a slightly higher price.
Dampening the repo market could be economically useful, because this funding has proven to be unstable: Bear Stearns and Lehman Brothers used repo heavily in ways that made them unable to withstand investment reversals elsewhere in their business.
The same was true of MF Holdings last fall.
Stronger, longer-term financing might have allowed these firms to survive.
If a Tobin tax induced financial institutions to finance themselves with more longer-term debt and less overnight repo, it could play a significant stabilizing role.
While it is well known that a Tobin tax would have little effect on markets unless all major financial centers adopted it, what is true of markets is not necessarily true of financial institutions.
If, say, French President Sarkozy wanted to stop too-big-to-fail French financial institutions from transacting in ways that weaken them, a Tobin tax on their transactions, wherever in the world they occurred, could work; the tax would affect the institutions, even if it could not shape world-wide markets.
To be sure, markets might move those transactions from France and from French financial institutions, and, if the regulators erred – because the business was profitable and not destabilizing – French institutions would lose out.
But, if the regulators were right, the French institutions would be more stable.
If the Tobin tax aims to strengthen institutions (instead of altering markets), it could bite hard, even without the buy-in of every major country.
Overall, there is not much to be said against the tax (other than what is said against all taxes), and something to be said for it.
But it does not help to solve major financial problems, and those that it does address (short-term, overnight financing) could be dealt with more directly, with a more focused tax, better rules governing those transactions, and improved prudential regulation.
As of now, Europe’s Tobin tax proposals are not well targeted.
Sound transactions would be taxed along with destabilizing, overnight financing of fragile financial institutions.
A Tobin tax does, however, allow elected politicians to look like they are doing something useful – which they are, but without addressing more serious economic problems.
South Africa’s Winnable AIDS Battle
ERFURT – In the battle against HIV/AIDS, South Africa was for many years the perfect example of what not to do.
Until recently, the government’s response to the epidemic, which threatened the country’s very lifeblood, was lackluster and foolish.
But rising pressure over the past two decades – from civil-society groups, the media, and more enlightened politicians – is finally showing results.
A disease that has inflicted profound social and economic pain, and dramatically reduced life expectancy, appears to be in retreat.
But a new UN report suggests that South Africa’s battle against the virus is far from over.
The country has the world’s most severe HIV problem, with some 5.6 million citizens – more than 10% of the population – currently living with the virus.
Every year, around 300,000 new infections, and 270,000 AIDS-related deaths, are recorded.
HIV/AIDS patients are also prone to other infections: an estimated 70% of South Africans with AIDS also contract tuberculosis, while half of those carrying the HIV virus are expected to do so during their lifetime.
Worse, a third of pregnant women – a highly AIDS-prone demographic – have been diagnosed with the virus, which can be passed on to their babies during childbirth.
The ferociousness of the disease, and the speed at which it spread, took many South Africans by surprise.
As in developed countries, HIV infections initially were concentrated among hemophiliacs, sexually active gay men, and intravenous drug users.
But, during the 1990’s, and for reasons that are still not fully understood, the virus exploded into the general population.
The number of infected South Africans (equivalent to the population of Denmark) outstrips that of neighboring Mozambique, Lesotho, Botswana, Namibia, Swaziland, and Zimbabwe combined.
Yet, incredibly, the rapid spread of HIV and the rising toll of AIDS-related deaths failed to galvanize the country’s post-apartheid leaders, especially former President Thabo Mbeki, into meaningful action.
For years, the top ranks of the governing Africa National Congress seemed to be in denial over the pervasiveness of HIV/AIDS and how best to combat it.
Civil-society organizations were not so complacent, using the courts, the media, and civil disobedience to lobby for change.
Although contradictory views about how to treat HIV persisted, at least antiretroviral therapy has been available in some public facilities over the past decade.
But a more coherent and consistent approach evolved following the appointment of Aaron Motsoaledi as Minister of Health in 2009.
The South African National Department of Health and private health-care providers now report that conditions are no longer so desperate.
Three approaches have helped to contain the spread: the provision of antiretroviral therapy by the government and donor agencies; better treatment of tuberculosis patients, who tend to contract HIV/AIDS as well; and a greatly expanded program to prevent mother-to-child transmission.
These remedies have reduced the rate of new infections (though the total number of people living with HIV, especially aged 15-49, continues to rise).
With almost two million patients now on antiretroviral treatment, annual AIDS-related deaths have fallen by around 100,000 since 2005.
Contagion among newborn babies, once running at around 70,000 per year, have been cut by some 63%, and the lives of millions of HIV/AIDS sufferers have been prolonged.
Another important factor has been better integration of treatment plans.
The government has aligned its early antiretroviral treatment programs for existing sufferers, initiated in 2008, with early monitoring programs for pregnant women.
New, more effective treatment to prevent tuberculosis, especially the multidrug-resistant strains, has also helped.
More can and must be done.
Newborn infections, for example, could be further reduced by encouraging more pregnant mothers to visit health clinics for early monitoring and for checkups after delivery.
But progress to date should be acknowledged, if not celebrated.
The recent successes demonstrate that with political will and sufficient resources, even the greatest of scourges can be beaten – a lesson not only for South Africa but also for countries elsewhere in Africa and the developing world.
Tocqueville’s Lessons in Democracy
It seems appropriate that, due to the Iraq war, the world has been debating the nature of democracy 200 years after Alexis de Tocqueville’s birth.
Tocqueville is justly famous for rejecting reactionary nostalgia and regarding democracy’s triumph as our destiny, while warning against the dangers that democracy holds for liberty.
Should we still share his worries?
Tocqueville viewed democracy not only as a political regime, but, above all, as an intellectual regime that shapes a society’s customs in general, thereby giving it a sociological and psychological dimension.
Democratic regimes, Tocqueville argued, determine our thoughts, desires, and passions.
Just as there was Renaissance man and, in the twentieth century, homo sovieticus, “democratic man” is a form of human being.
For Tocqueville, democracy’s systemic effects could lead citizens to deprive themselves of reasoned thought.
They could only pretend to judge events and values on their own; in reality, they would merely copy the rough and simplified opinions of the masses.
Indeed, what Tocqueville called the hold of “social power” on opinion is probably strongest in democratic regimes – a view that foretells the growth of modern-day demagogy and media manipulation.
Tocqueville believed that there are no effective long-term constraints on this tendency.
Neither local democracy nor small societies, neither governmental checks and balances nor civil rights, can prevent the decline of critical thought that democracy seems to cause.
Schools have the power to be little more than enclaves from the corrosive strength of social influences on how the mind works.
Similarly, while Tocqueville thought that pursuing virtue as the ancients did, or having a religious faith, could sometimes elevate the soul, both conflict with the democratic ideal if they become officially prescribed in public life.
In this sense, Tocqueville’s intellectual heirs include the neo-Marxist theorists of the Frankfurt School, as well as Hannah Arendt, all of whom feared above all the disintegration of reason in modern societies.
Indeed, the French philosopher Marcel Gauchet entitled a recent book Democracy Against Itself.
The democratic way of life, these writers argue, tends to destroy original thought and to suppress “high” culture, yielding a mediocrity that leaves citizens vulnerable to democracy’s enemies.
But, while history is replete with murderous regimes applauded by cowed and deceived masses, the greater risk for democratic nations is that their citizens withdraw into apathy and short-term thinking for immediate gratification.
The past – despite rituals that seek to commemorate historic moments – is obliterated by an addiction to the now and the new.
Even the supposedly well-educated ruling class is subject to this bewitchment.
The essential problem of the democratic mind is its lack of historical consciousness.
Do the defects of democracy really mean, as Tocqueville claimed, that resigned pessimism is the only – realistic but unsustainable – path open to us?
I don’t think so.
There are means to fight against what might be called today’s growing “democratic stupidity.”
The first defense is to push for an educational system that really forms critical minds, namely through the (nowadays) largely neglected subjects of literature, history, and philosophy.
If the informed and critical citizenry that democracy requires is to be formed, our schools must stop pandering to the latest popular fads and begin to sharpen the analytical capacities of students.
The biggest impediment to such an education are the mass media, with its tendency to cultivate superficiality and amusement.
Many people nowadays spend more of their lives watching television than they do in classrooms.
The passivity that mass media encourages is the polar opposite of the active engagement that democratic citizens need.
But it is hard to imagine that the mass media (other than quality newspapers) would, of their own volition, become instruments of an education that enhances citizens’ critical capacities.
This concern about mass media is no mere elitist scorn for popular culture.
The question is not one of popularity alone – after all, Mozart was popular in his day, and Shakespeare’s plays attracted the poor as well as the rich – but of mass culture’s refusal to challenge and provoke.
The result of the failure is a generalized indifference and passivity in audiences.
Indeed, for a long time a globalized media culture, one unable to inspire the capacity for critical thought or create elevated feelings, has been on the rise.
It is a culture that, through its carelessness, threatens democratic freedom because it fails to create any sense of obligation – to society, to history, to community.
Is it too late to do anything about a culture that so deadens the spirit?
Tocqueville despised the elites of his time for their complacency in the face of the deracinating force of mass democracy.
Will the myopia of our leaders also serve as an agent of his disquieting prophecy?
To Cure the Economy
NEW YORK – As the economic slump that began in 2007 persists, the question on everyone’s minds is obvious: Why?
Unless we have a better understanding of the causes of the crisis, we can’t implement an effective recovery strategy.
And, so far, we have neither.
We were told that this was a financial crisis, so governments on both sides of the Atlantic focused on the banks.
Stimulus programs were sold as being a temporary palliative, needed to bridge the gap until the financial sector recovered and private lending resumed.
But, while bank profitability and bonuses have returned, lending has not recovered, despite record-low long- and short-term interest rates.
The banks claim that lending remains constrained by a shortage of creditworthy borrowers, owing to the sick economy.
And key data indicate that they are at least partly right.
After all, large enterprises are sitting on a few trillion dollars in cash, so money is not what is holding them back from investing and hiring.
Some, perhaps many, small businesses are, however, in a very different position; strapped for funds, they can’t grow, and many are being forced to contract.
Still, overall, business investment – excluding construction – has returned to 10% of GDP (from 10.6% before the crisis).
With so much excess capacity in real estate, confidence will not recover to its pre-crisis level anytime soon, regardless of what is done to the banking sector.
The financial sector’s inexcusable recklessness, given free rein by mindless deregulation, was the obvious precipitating factor of the crisis.
The legacy of excess real-estate capacity and over-leveraged households makes recovery all the more difficult.
But the economy was very sick before the crisis; the housing bubble merely papered over its weaknesses.
Without bubble-supported consumption, there would have been a massive shortfall in aggregate demand.
Instead, the personal saving rate plunged to 1%, and the bottom 80% of Americans were spending, every year, roughly 110% of their income.
Even if the financial sector were fully repaired, and even if these profligate Americans hadn’t learned a lesson about the importance of saving, their consumption would be limited to 100% of their income.
So anyone who talks about the consumer “coming back” – even after deleveraging – is living in a fantasy world.
Fixing the financial sector was necessary for economic recovery, but far from sufficient.
To understand what needs to be done, we have to understand the economy’s problems before the crisis hit.
First, America and the world were victims of their own success.
Rapid productivity increases in manufacturing had outpaced growth in demand, which meant that manufacturing employment decreased.
Labor had to shift to services.
The problem is analogous to that which arose at the beginning of the twentieth century, when rapid productivity growth in agriculture forced labor to move from rural areas to urban manufacturing centers.
With a decline in farm income in excess of 50% from 1929 to 1932, one might have anticipated massive migration.
But workers were “trapped” in the rural sector: they didn’t have the resources to move, and their declining incomes so weakened aggregate demand that urban/manufacturing unemployment soared.
For America and Europe, the need for labor to move out of manufacturing is compounded by shifting comparative advantage: not only is the total number of manufacturing jobs limited globally, but a smaller share of those jobs will be local.
Globalization has been one, but only one, of the factors contributing to the second key problem – growing inequality.
Shifting income from those who would spend it to those who won’t lowers aggregate demand.
By the same token, soaring energy prices shifted purchasing power from the United States and Europe to oil exporters, who, recognizing the volatility of energy prices, rightly saved much of this income.
The final problem contributing to weakness in global aggregate demand was emerging markets’ massive buildup of foreign-exchange reserves – partly motivated by the mismanagement of the 1997-98 East Asia crisis by the International Monetary Fund and the US Treasury.
Countries recognized that without reserves, they risked losing their economic sovereignty.
Many said, “Never again.”
But, while the buildup of reserves – currently around $7.6 trillion in emerging and developing economies – protected them, money going into reserves was money not spent.
Where are we today in addressing these underlying problems?
To take the last one first, those countries that built up large reserves were able to weather the economic crisis better, so the incentive to accumulate reserves is even stronger.
Similarly, while bankers have regained their bonuses, workers are seeing their wages eroded and their hours diminished, further widening the income gap.
Moreover, the US has not shaken off its dependence on oil.
With oil prices back above $100 a barrel this summer – and still high – money is once again being transferred to the oil-exporting countries.
And the structural transformation of the advanced economies, implied by the need to move labor out of traditional manufacturing branches, is occurring very slowly.
Government plays a central role in financing the services that people want, like education and health care.
And government-financed education and training, in particular, will be critical in restoring competitiveness in Europe and the US.
But both have chosen fiscal austerity, all but ensuring that their economies’ transitions will be slow.
The prescription for what ails the global economy follows directly from the diagnosis: strong government expenditures, aimed at facilitating restructuring, promoting energy conservation, and reducing inequality, and a reform of the global financial system that creates an alternative to the buildup of reserves.
Eventually, the world’s leaders – and the voters who elect them – will come to recognize this.
As growth prospects continue to weaken, they will have no choice.
But how much pain will we have to bear in the meantime?
Today’s Counter-Enlightenment
Not long ago, one might have concluded that, at least in Europe, there were no taboos left.
A process that had begun with the Enlightenment had now reached the point at which “anything goes.”
Particularly in the arts, there were no apparent limits to showing what even a generation ago would have been regarded as highly offensive.
Two generations ago, most countries had censors who not only tried to prevent younger people from seeing certain films but who actually banned books.
Since the 1960’s, such proscriptions have weakened until, in the end, explicit sexuality, violence, blasphemy – while upsetting to some people – were tolerated as a part of the enlightened world.
Or were they?
Are there really no limits?
Outside Europe, the “anything goes” attitude was never fully accepted.
And there were limits in Europe, too.
The historian David Irving is still in detention in Austria for the crime of Holocaust denial.
This is, to be sure, a special case.
The denial of a well-documented truth may lead to new crimes.
But is the answer to the old question, “What is truth?” always so clear?
What exactly are we doing if we insist on Turkey’s acknowledgement that the Armenian genocide did take place as a condition of its membership in the European Union?
Are we so sure of Darwin’s theories of evolution that we should ban alternative notions of genesis from schools?
Those concerned with freedom of speech have always wondered about its limits.
One such limit is the incitement to violence.
The man who gets up in a crowded theater and shouts, “Fire!” when there is none is guilty of what happens in the resulting stampede.
But what if there actually is a fire?
This is the context in which we may see the invasion of Islamic taboos into the enlightened, mostly non-Islamic world.
From the fatwa on Salman Rushdie for The Satanic Verses to the killing of a nun in Somalia in response to Pope Benedict’s Regensburg lecture and the Berlin Opera’s cancellation of a performance of Mozart’s Idomeneo , with its severed heads of religious founders, including Muhammad, we have seen violence and intimidation used to defend a particular religion’s taboos.
There are questions here that are not easily answered by civilized defenders of the Enlightenment.
Toleration and respect for people who have their own beliefs are right and perhaps necessary to preserve an enlightened world.
But there is the other side to consider.
Violent responses to unwelcome views are never justified and cannot be accepted.
Those who argue that suicide bombers express understandable grudges have themselves sold out their freedom.
Self-censorship is worse than censorship itself, because it sacrifices freedom voluntarily.
This means that we have to defend Salman Rushdie and the Danish cartoonists and the friends of Idomeneo , whether we like them or not.
If anyone does not like them, there are all the instruments of public debate and of critical discourse that an enlightened community has at its disposal.
It is also true that we do not have to buy any particular book or listen to an opera.
What a poor world it would be if anything that might offend any group could no longer be said!
A multicultural society that accepts every taboo of its diverse groups would have little to talk about.
The kind of reaction we have seen recently to expressions of views that are offensive to some does not bode well for the future of liberty.
It is as if a new wave of counter-enlightenment is sweeping the world, with the most restrictive views dominating the scene.
Against such reactions, enlightened views must be reasserted strongly.
Defending the right of all people to say things even if one detests their views is one of the first principles of liberty.
Thus, Idomeneo must be performed, and Salman Rushdie must be published.
Whether an editor publishes cartoons offensive to believers in Muhammad (or Christ, for that matter) is a matter of judgment, almost of taste.