Those prospects will diminish further if the annexationist Jewish Home, with whose domestic platform (a liberal economy, a better deal for the middle classes, and military service for the Orthodox) Lapid fully concurs, joins a Likud-Yesh Atid government.
Moreover, Lapid himself is far from being an especially forthcoming peacemaker.
Yes, he believes that Israel should end its policy of confrontation with the international community, and he truly wants a two-state solution.
But he remains in a fantasy world in which peace with the Palestinians can be achieved for less than what previous left-wing governments offered.
To make his point, Lapid even launched his electoral campaign in Ariel, an Israeli city built in the heartland of the Palestinian West bank.
Sadly, the so-called peace camp, now in opposition, is in complete disarray.
Faithless and wavering, it has been defeated by the unswerving conviction of the right.
Its demise reflects the destructive power of the narrative about the peace process that the right succeeded in persuading many Israelis to accept.
The right’s narrative is simple.
The Oslo Accords ushered in an era of bus explosions in Israel’s main cities.
The Second Intifada, with its waves of suicide terrorist attacks that slaughtered hundreds of innocent civilians, followed the Israeli concessions offered at the 2000 Camp David Summit.
And the withdrawal from Gaza ushered in a Hamas government that has overseen routine missile attacks on Israel.
Little wonder that, once most Israelis accepted this narrative, the “peace process” became a repulsive, discredited expression, and its advocates on the left came to be perceived at best as innocents detached from the real world.
Indeed, instead of facing the region’s changing realities with a new approach to peace in Palestine and beyond – endorsing the Arab peace initiative, for example – the Israeli left and center retreated either to worn-out slogans or to the safety of domestic agendas.
These parties made no effort to reach out to the new regimes and the rising new generations in the public squares of the Arab world.
The bottom line, however, is that even the domestic issues that loomed so large in the election can never be addressed effectively without regard for the colossal sums that Netanyahu and his allies have been pouring into the occupation system in Palestinian lands.
Nor should Israelis ignore what former Prime Minister Ehud Olmert described as “megalomaniacal preparations” for an attack on Iran “that would never happen.”
Israelis now seem to believe that their politicians can choose which problems should be solved and which should be ignored.
As a result, they are bound to be disappointed.
Israeli leaders have never had that choice.
The Israel Lobby’s Gay-Rights Hypocrisy
LONDON – One of the few liberal victories in a conservative age in the United States has been the formal acceptance of homosexuality.
Same-sex marriage is now recognized by the federal government and is legal in 35 out of 50 states.
The US is not alone.
Nineteen other countries (or regions of countries) – mostly in Europe and North and South America – now allow gay couples to marry legally.
South Africa is the only African country where same-sex marriage is permitted, and it is not legal anywhere in Asia or the Middle East, where to be openly gay can still be extremely dangerous.
Last year, Uganda enacted a law – attributed partly to the influence of well-funded evangelical missionaries from the US – mandating a life sentence for people caught in homosexual acts.
In Iran, sodomy can lead to a death sentence, as is true in Saudi Arabia, Hamas-controlled Gaza, and, of course, under the lash of militant groups like the Islamic State.
So there is nothing untrue about the headline of a paid advertisement that ran in the New York Times on December 23.
Placed beneath a picture of a vulnerable-looking young American male, it read: “Hamas, ISIS and Iran kill gays like me.”
And the last line of the advertisement is at least fairly true: “In Israel, I am free.”
That he is – but not to get married, owing to the opposition of Israel’s powerful Orthodox community.
There is something not quite right about this ad.
It was paid for by the Orthodox Rabbi Shmuel “Shmuley” Boteach, a popular media performer also known as “America’s Rabbi,” who presides over an advocacy group called This World, which promotes Israel and “Jewish values.”
Another major figure in the group is Sheldon Adelson, a Las Vegas casino magnate who donates millions of dollars to Republican politicians who most actively support Israel.
Favored speakers at This World galas include the right-wing Republican former governor of Texas, Rick Perry, who once compared homosexuality to alcoholism.
Neither traditional “Jewish values,” nor Perry, are naturally friendly to gays.
Homosexuality is considered an abomination in Jewish law, and Texas tried to ban gay marriage.
Still, gay people are not executed in Israel or Texas, and it is good to be reminded of such horrors where they exist.
You are letting them murder us, literally.”
First of all, not all people who criticize, say, Israel’s treatment of Palestinians are indifferent to violence against gays or anyone else.
Moreover, the two problems are hardly related.
The Israeli government is not driving Arabs off their land on the West Bank to protect gay people in Palestine, let alone in Iran.
And no one is criticizing Israel for its treatment of gays.
By stressing real human-rights abuses in Iran and Arab countries, this lobby group for Israel is suggesting that criticism (“scapegoating”) of Israel is not only wrong but immoral: “Your misguided actions ensure that LGBT people in the Middle East continue to live in hiding under constant threat of death.”
If the lobbyists had simply wished to point out that Western critics often consider Israel more harshly than its Middle Eastern enemies, they would be right.
But their ad wrongly implies that those double standards lead to the oppression of Arab and Iranian gays.
Calling on people to pay more attention to such oppression is no reason to pay less attention to problems in Israel/Palestine.
Abuses in one place, no matter how grotesque, should not be used to stifle criticism in another.
The ad shows the extent to which the language of human rights has become politicized.
As was true of religious zealotry in the past, the ideology of human rights is being invoked to defend or obscure the oppression of others.
Right-wing populist parties in Europe regularly whip up popular sentiment against Muslim minorities by condemning their treatment of women.
There is no doubt that many Muslim men treat women in ways that most modern people in the West would no longer condone.
(The same is true of men in ultra-Orthodox Jewish communities.)
But this is no reason to exclude them as fellow citizens.
More serious in terms of its consequences is the way in which human rights have been used to promote wars.
The idea, now accepted by the United Nations, of “humanitarian intervention” to save people from extreme human-rights abuses, sounds moral and high-minded.
And there may indeed be cases where armed intervention is the only way to stop mass murder.
But most “humanitarian” wars make things worse for the people they are supposed to be saving.
They tear societies apart, destroy the livelihoods of millions, and cause even greater conflicts, as we have seen in Iraq.
This is why, until recently, wars could be justified only if they were fought in self-defense, or in defense of allied nations.
The temptation to embark on wars that cause more harm than good is not the only danger of using the language of human rights to justify military intervention in political conflicts (which usually involve many other interests that have nothing to do with human rights).
Those who invoke human rights to promote wars or, as with This World, to make political propaganda, degrade the very ideals for which they claim to be fighting.
The New Middle East’s New Problems
BERLIN – When hostilities flared in Gaza last month, it seemed like the same old story was repeating itself.
The world again witnessed a bloody and senseless surge of violence between Israel and Hamas, in which the main victims were innocent civilians maimed and killed on both sides.
This time, however, things were not what they seemed, because the Middle East has undergone a significant change in the past two years.
The political epicenter of this troubled region has shifted from the conflict between Israel and the Palestinians toward the Persian Gulf and the struggle for regional mastery between Iran on one side and Saudi Arabia, Turkey, and now Egypt on the other.
In the emerging struggle between the region’s Shia and Sunni powers, the old Middle East conflict has become a sideshow.
Today, the key confrontation in this power struggle is Syria’s civil war, where all of the region’s major players are represented either directly or indirectly, because that is where the battle for regional hegemony will largely be decided.
This much is clear: Syrian President Bashar al-Assad and his Alawite/Shia power base will not be able to maintain control against the Sunni majority in the country and the region as a whole.
The only question is when the regime will fall.
When it does, it will be a major defeat for Iran, not only entailing the loss of its main Arab ally, but also jeopardizing the position of its client, Hezbollah, in Lebanon.
At the same time, a variant of the Muslim Brotherhood will come to power in Syria, as has been or will be the case almost everywhere in the Middle East as a result of the “Arab Awakening.”
From Israel’s viewpoint, the rise to power of Sunni political Islam throughout the region over the past two years will lead to an ambivalent outcome.
While the weakening and rollback of Iran serves Israeli strategic interests, Israel will have to reckon with Sunni Islamist power everywhere in its vicinity, leading directly to a strengthening of Hamas.
The rise of the Muslim Brotherhood and its offshoots has come at the expense of secular Arab nationalism and the military dictatorships that supported it.
Thus, the Brothers’ rise has de facto also decided the internal Palestinian power struggle.
With the recent war in Gaza, the Palestinian national movement will align itself, under Hamas’s leadership, with this regional development.
Palestinian Authority President Mahmoud Abbas and his Fatah party will be unable to offer much opposition – all the more so in view of Hamas’s break with Iran (despite ongoing arms deliveries) a year ago.
This development most likely means the end of prospects for a two-state solution, because neither Israel nor Hamas and the Muslim Brotherhood has any interest in it.
Hamas and the Brothers reject territorial compromise, because, for them, a Palestinian state means a Palestine that incorporates all of Israel.
This is by no means a tactical position or an expression of political naiveté.
On the contrary, the territorial question has morphed into a religious one, and has thus fundamentally redefined the conflict.
Hamas is playing a long game.
As long as it lacks the strength to achieve its more ambitious objectives, its intransigence in no way precludes negotiations with Israel or even peace treaties, as long as such agreements advance its long-term goals.
But such agreements will produce only truces of shorter or longer duration, not a comprehensive settlement that ends the conflict.
The recent success of Abbas in the United Nations General Assembly – securing observer-state status for Palestine – will not alter the basic aspects of this trend.
Palestine’s promotion is an alarming diplomatic defeat for Israel and a demonstration of its growing international isolation, but it does not imply a return to a two-state solution.
Paradoxically, the position of Hamas fits the political right in Israel, because it, too, puts little stock in a two-state solution.
And neither the Israeli left (of which little remains) nor Fatah is strong enough to maintain the two-state option.
For Israel, a future as a bi-national state entails a high long-term risk, unless the option of a West Bank-Jordan confederation, lost in the 1980’s, is rediscovered.
This is again a possibility.
Indeed, after the Assad regime falls, Jordan could prove to be the next crisis hotspot, which might revive the debate over Jordan as the “real” Palestinian state.
Israel’s settlement policy in the West Bank would then have a different foundation and take on new political significance.
While I do not believe that a West Bank-Jordan confederation could ever be a viable option, it might be the last nail in the coffin of a two-state solution.
Along with Syria, two issues will determine this new Middle East’s future: Egypt’s path under the Muslim Brotherhood, and the outcome of confrontation with Iran over its nuclear program and regional role.
The Egyptian question is already high on the agenda; indeed, it spilled into the streets after President Mohamed Morsi’s non-violent coup attempt.
Morsi’s timing was remarkable: the day after winning international acclaim for his successful efforts to broker a truce in Gaza, he staged a frontal assault on Egypt’s nascent democracy.
The question now is whether the Brothers will prevail, both in the streets and by means of Egypt’s new constitution (which they largely wrote).
If they do, will the West withdraw its support for Egyptian democracy in the name of “stability”?
It would be a bad mistake.
The question of what to do about Iran’s nuclear program will also return with a vengeance in January, after US President Barack Obama’s second inauguration and Israel’s general election, and will demand an answer within a few months.
The new Middle East bodes poorly for the coming year.
But one thing has not changed: it is still the Middle East, where it is nearly impossible to know what might be waiting around the corner.
The Fall of Netanyahu?
JERUSALEM – The dissolution of Israel’s parliament, the Knesset, just a day after Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu sacked two senior cabinet ministers, marks a surprising turnabout.
Indeed, when Israelis vote again in March, more than two years ahead of schedule, Netanyahu could be voted out of office, with important implications not only for Israel, but also for the wider Middle East.
Until last summer, Netanyahu appeared politically unassailable.
His coalition government, despite some internal bickering, was expected to serve out its term.
Not even 10% of Israelis would have preferred the opposition leader, the Labor Party’s Yitzhak Herzog, as Prime Minister.
Things began to unravel when two cabinet ministers abruptly resigned, citing family commitments or policy disagreements.
Then came the inconclusive war in Gaza, which, given Netanyahu’s unfulfilled pledge to “crush Hamas,” undermined his credibility, especially when ministers like Naftali Bennett, the leader of the nationalist-religious Jewish Home party, openly challenged his policies.
When some European parliaments voted in 2014 to recognize Palestine as an independent state, many Israelis, who had long blamed the Palestinians for the continued failure of peace talks, began to worry.
More significant, Netanyahu’s public clashes with US President Barack Obama fueled concerns among Israelis – including supporters of Netanyahu’s Likud party – that their government’s policies were deepening Israel’s isolation and thus undermining its security.
The domestic situation is not much better.
Netanyahu has failed to fulfill his promises since the massive demonstrations of 2011 to address prohibitively high living costs, especially for young couples.
On the contrary, housing prices have continued to rise.
When Yair Lapid – the ambitious but inept finance minister, who leads the centrist Yesh Atid party – proposed waiving the value-added tax on first apartment purchases by young couples, Netanyahu failed to respond decisively, giving the impression that he lacked control over his own cabinet.
But it was Netanyahu’s support for draft legislation seeking to constitutionalize Israel’s identity as the Jewish people’s nation-state – to the detriment of Israel’s Muslim, Christian, and Druze citizens – that brought the situation to a head.
The bill, which emphasizes Israel’s Jewish identity above its democratic principles, has caused deep divisions not only among the electorate, but also within the government coalition.
Netanyahu, with his weak and vacillating leadership exposed, sacked his opponents, Lapid and Justice Minister Tzipi Livni (who also denounced Netanyahu’s settlement-construction plans), and called for new elections.
But the real game changer was the declaration by Herzog and Livni, who leads the small centrist Hatnuah party, that their parties would run jointly in the elections.
If they win, they will rotate in the prime minister’s post.
This changed Israeli political discourse almost overnight.
Far from invincible, Netanyahu is now viewed as a failed prime minister, confronted by a center-left bloc that may well become the most powerful voice in the Knesset.
Yesh Atid voters, who have been disappointed by Lapid’s failure to deliver the “new politics” of efficiency and transparency that he promised, may supply the Herzog-Livni alliance with the necessary votes.
Some of the moderate orthodox parties, which have been undergoing their own internal splits, have also signaled their willingness to work with a center-left bloc that might enable Israel to make real progress.
Even Minister of Foreign Affairs Avigdor Lieberman, head of the right-wing Yisrael Beiteinu party, is now criticizing Netanyahu for alienating the US and has suggested that he would not rule out joining a centrist government.
All of this bodes well for the Herzog-Livni alliance.
But three months is a long time in politics.
Netanyahu may be a dismal prime minister; but he is also a formidable campaigner.
And if the centrist alliance finishes first in the election, it will still need coalition partners to form a majority in the Knesset.
Gaining fewer than 30 of its 120 seats might drive it to seek potential partners among the orthodox – an approach that could alienate moderate secular voters.
Moreover, once in power, the Herzog-Livni alliance would be met with serious challenges – beginning with reaching an agreement with the Palestinians.
Given that the Palestinians’ political leadership is divided between the Fatah-led Palestinian Authority, which controls the West Bank, and Hamas, which has established an Islamic fundamentalist regime in Gaza, a deal between Israel and Palestinian Authority President Mahmoud Abbas would mean little.
Nonetheless, a Herzog-Livni government would bring significant change, particularly in terms of relations with Europe and the US.
Netanyahu’s provocative policies and statements, which have undermined support for Israel among even its closest allies, would be supplanted by a willingness to negotiate in earnest and make genuine concessions.
Such a shift would reinvigorate hope among Israelis – and not a moment too soon.
There is a growing realization in Israel that it is time to chart a new path.
Netanyahu, always eager to impress upon the Israeli public the impossibility of making peace with the Palestinians, failed to address the question of what kind of country Israel will become if it continues to rule millions of people against their will.
This is what has turned so many people in the West against Israel, leading some to question its very legitimacy.
If Zionism means eternal dominion over the Palestinians, is it really worthy of support?
The Herzog-Livni alliance has tentatively named itself the “Zionist Camp.”
It may not be catchy (and it is likely to be changed), but it expresses an essential truth: Zionism is about the right of the Jewish people to self-determination, not about the permanent domination of another people.
One hopes that Israeli voters recognize this in March.
The Return of the Jordanian Option
TEL AVIV – France’s initiative to hold an international conference to re-launch direct talks between Israelis and Palestinians, aimed at the ever elusive “two-state solution,” is the child of a resilient fantasy.
But after decades of failed negotiations, it’s time to start thinking like adults.
Neither Israeli nor Palestinian society is primed for compromise.
On the contrary, in Israel, surging nationalism has become a major obstacle to any negotiation.
With Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu catering to ultra-nationalist elements, there is no possibility that he will produce the kinds of peace proposals pursued by his predecessors, Ehud Barak and Ehud Olmert.
As for Palestine, its fragmented polity undermines any possibility of effective negotiation.
But even beyond the current circumstances, there are more fundamental reasons why the Israel-Palestine peace process has never worked.
The role of history and religion in the conflict, together with the small size of territory over which the parties are fighting, leaves too little room for accommodation.
There is another vital reason: The Palestinian interlocutor is not a state, but an unpredictable movement.
It is a movement that is institutionally invertebrate and split between Islamists, who dream of a borderless Arab nation, and ineffective secular nationalists who four times (1937, 1947, 2000, and 2008) rejected offers for the creation of a Palestinian state.
When negotiating with Arab states, Israel was far more forthcoming than it ever was in the case of the Palestinian national movement.
In the early 1990s, Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin promised Syria’s then-president, Hafez al-Assad, a return to the 1967 borders without so much as a meeting.
In 1979, Egypt got back 100% of the land that Israel captured from it in the 1967 Six Day War.
Of course, Israel also began as a movement.
But almost from its inception, the Zionist project was driven by a unifying sense of purpose in building an independent nation-state.
At every crossroads throughout the years leading to Israel’s creation, the movement’s leaders made the pragmatic, rather than the fanciful, choice.
Palestinian nationalism, by contrast, was never focused on state-building.
Fueled by the tragedy of expulsion and disinheritance, it focused on the dream of restitution.
The failure and eventual sacking in 2013 of Palestinian Prime Minister Salam Fayyad – whose professed intention was to emulate Zionism through a laborious policy of state-building – is revealing.
But there is an alternative to the two-state solution that accounts for these factors: The West Bank could revert to Jordan, which would then become a kind of Jordanian-Palestinian confederation.
In essence, this option represents a return to the parameters of the 1991 Madrid Peace Conference, at which a Jordanian-Palestinian delegation represented the Palestinian cause.
Israel, in this scenario, would benefit from gaining an interlocutor that is an orderly state with a tradition of – and interest in – negotiation and compliance with agreements.
This should be enough to impel Israeli leaders at least to consider the option, and behave less deceitfully than they have in direct negotiations with the Palestinians.
With Israel no longer able to use Palestinian institutional weakness as a justification for its continued occupation of the West Bank, Palestine would stand to benefit.
Moreover, Israel could not, as it attempted to do in the past, annex strategic areas of the West Bank and return the rest to Jordan; instead, it would have to withdraw to the 1967 borders, with agreed modifications and land swaps.
Palestinians seem to recognize these benefits.
In 2013, according to polls conducted by the Palestinian Center for Policy and Survey Research, 55% of Palestinians supported the Jordanian option – a 10% increase from five years earlier.
Perhaps the biggest obstacle is Jordan, which currently is not interested in getting involved.
That will change only if it faces a threat to its own security, stemming, say, from the spillover of Palestinian instability from the West Bank.
Paradoxically, one potential trigger of such a security risk could be apparent progress toward a two-state solution.
The late King Hussein feared that an independent Palestinian state could become a radical irredentist entity, and his own 1988 decision to waive Jordan’s claim on the West Bank, taken under pressure from the Arab League, was never ratified in parliament, and is still regarded by many as unconstitutional.
Fear of Palestinian instability also drove two former Jordanian prime ministers, Abdel Salam Majali and Taher al-Masri, to advocate a Jordanian-Palestinian confederation.
Majali remains a staunch champion of the idea, as he made clear in a recent meeting in Amman with Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas.
His elaborate 2007 plan, undoubtedly shared with King Abdullah’s consent, was spurred by the prospect of chaos should an Israeli government decide to secure Israel’s survival as a Jewish state through unilateral withdrawal from much of the West Bank.
That chaos, Jordan’s government feared, could spread to the East Bank, potentially dealing a fatal blow to the Kingdom.
The international community is about to embark, yet again, on a peace process aimed at creating an orderly and viable independent Palestinian state in the West Bank.
That would be the most just outcome.
Unfortunately, it is highly unlikely, leaving a Jordanian-Palestinian confederation as the last remaining hope for Palestinian statehood.
Israel’s Centrist Victory
JERUSALEM – Israel’s election is a victory for centrism and national consensus.
Indeed, that is the key to understanding not only the vote count, but also Israeli public opinion, the next government, and its policies.
From experience, most Israelis have developed a worldview that combines traditional left-wing and right-wing thinking.
On one hand, they want to achieve a comprehensive political solution with the Palestinians based on creating a Palestinian state, in exchange for real, lasting peace.
On the other hand, they understand that there is no Palestinian leadership strong or moderate enough to bring it about.
Both the left and the right have been proven wrong.
The left offered big concessions and was ready to take high risks for the sake of peace.
Yet there is no credible way to achieve an agreement with such radical forces as Iran, Syria, Hamas, and Hezbollah, all of whom seek Israel’s destruction.
The Palestinian Authority (PA) is less extreme, but its leadership is weak, doesn’t control Gaza, and is still full of hard-line elements.
This approach also lost credibility as a result of the rise of Hamas and its determination to wage permanent war on Israel; Iran’s expanding influence and nuclear weapons’ program; and the high – even rising – levels of hatred against Israel among Arabs and Muslims.
In addition, the world didn’t reward Israel for making concessions and taking risks.
Indeed, the more Israel gave, the more slander and hostility it faced in many sectors.
At the same time, the right-wing mantra – victory – failed to offer a credible way to replace the Iranian and Syrian governments, or to destroy Hamas and Hezbollah.
There is neither the illusion nor the desire to hold onto captured territories permanently, or to build Jewish settlements, and Israel has virtually no international support for any of these goals.
With alternatives to the status quo constrained, it has become clear that Israel is in a long transitional period in which old ideas don’t work and a new approach is needed.
Foreign Minister Tzipi Livni’s Kadima party, opposition leader Binyamin Netanyahu’s Likud party, and Defense Minister Ehud Barak’s Labor party all fall – with only secondary variations – within a centrist consensus, which also reflects a popular national consensus. 
Thus, regardless of who becomes prime minister, the next government will not commit to real concessions to the Palestinians in exchange for a two-state solution unless the result will be an end to the conflict and a long, stable peace.
Few believe that the PA and Hamas’s main rival, Fatah, will be willing or able to make such an agreement for decades.
The same applies to Syria.
As a result, any real changes affecting the status of Jerusalem, the Golan Heights or West Bank settlements are a long way off.
Moreover, no deal can be made with Hamas.
But, since Hamas will not simply disappear – nor will Hezbollah – so the key point is to defend Israel and its citizens as they pursue their normal lives.
This also means that at some point a big decision may have to be made on attacking Iran’s nuclear facilities.
As a result of this national consensus – accepted by Labor, Likud, and Kadima, along with many others – the next government will most likely be a national unity government consisting of this trio. Its policy guidelines are already clear:
·        To stress Israel’s willingness to make peace, its readiness to agree to the creation of a Palestinian state, and its refusal to bear responsibility for the continuing conflict and violence;
·        To maintain deterrence and defend Israel and its citizens from cross-border attacks;
·        To preserve the best possible relations with the United States, Europe, and other countries, as long as this does not involve risks to Israel’s national interests or its citizens;
·        Security cooperation with the PA to prevent terrorist attacks on Israel, in exchange for economic aid and assistance to prevent a Hamas takeover;  
·        To strike back at Hamas – and potentially Hezbollah – based on any attacks against Israel, with the precise response to depend on timing, opportunity, and these groups’ behavior;
·        To work for the international isolation of Iran, Hezbollah, and Hamas;
·        To negotiate with Syria for peace, though without illusions as to the probability of success.
The main differences between the leading Israeli parties are more atmospheric than real, mainly concerning how much to concede and how much to demand.
Even so, Netanyahu will not embark on a settlement-building campaign, and Livni is not about to give away east Jerusalem.
The most important decision that Israel’s new government is likely to face, when the time comes, is whether the country’s well being and even survival requires acting decisively against Iran’s nuclear facilities.
Which path will be chosen is not clear, but it is far better that a broad coalition be responsible for making such a vital, even existential decision.
Israel’s Dangerous Political System
PARIS – What is wrong with Israel?
In the last few years, the Jewish state seems to have done more than all of its combined enemies to delegitimize itself in the eyes of the world.
Its leaders’ apparent inability to think in strategic terms, and their indifference to the tribunal of global public opinion, is resulting in growing frustration among its citizens and, what may be more dangerous, deepening international isolation.
Where should one look for an explanation for this tragic evolution?
Was it simply inevitable for a people who, deprived of a state for more than 2,000 years, may have lost the ability to act collectively in a “raison d’état” manner?
Or perhaps the weight of Holocaust remembrance has blinded Israel’s leaders and distorted their thinking – in ways that, at the time the State of Israel was created, the Holocaust itself almost miraculously did not.
Certainly, the failure of the peace process in the 1990’s, followed by the coming of the second Intifada, appears to have encouraged the radicalization of Israel’s extremes while discouraging moderates.
And the revival of religious parties – in a country created by avowed secularists – opened the way for a more politically powerful but also more nationalistic and intolerant setting.
One could also ask whether the arrival of one million “Russians,” regardless of their actual ties to Judaism, had a negative effect on Israeli society, by encouraging ideological rigidity and a disdain for democracy that did not prevail before.
Or is the explanation for Israel’s current predicament to be found on the more prosaic terrain of the country’s dysfunctional democracy?
In reality, all these explanations are largely complementary; none is in contradiction with the others. But the most important cause, the one that should be addressed before all others because it is eroding Israel’s very viability, is the near paralysis of the political system.
Italy can survive being badly governed and with a high level of corruption because it is surrounded by the peaceful environment of the European Union.
This is not true of Israel. Protected by a “security wall” on one side and the sea on the other, Israeli citizens may enjoy the feeling of living on an artificial island from which they can connect directly to the areas of modernity and prosperity in Asia and the West.
Yet they are surrounded by a sea of angry and frustrated people, and cannot escape the logic of the region they inhabit.
Israel’s political system, through its complex mechanisms of rigged party selection and absolute proportionality, condemns the country to weak coalition governments and escalating corruption. It must be reformed urgently.
Government leaders in Israel cannot afford to spend 90% of their time thinking about how to survive politically at a time when the state’s right to exist is being challenged.
To make of their country a pariah is a political, strategic, and moral failure for the leaders of Israel.
Those leaders’ strategic decisions over the last few years, if not longer, have been rather consistently poor, or at least imprudent.
This systematic miscalculation can be explained as follows.
From the 2006 war in Lebanon to the recent deadly raid on a Gaza-bound flotilla, Israeli leaders have badly appreciated the ratio between military gains and political risks, and the necessary proportionality between the two.
This is all the more dangerous for Israel in view of the apparent decline in its operational military capabilities.
Even the operation in Gaza in 2008-2009, despite its apparent military success, was highly damaging for Israel in political terms.
As Israel’s political center of gravity has shifted to the right, if not the extreme right, one consequence whose long-term effects are not sufficiently appreciated is the growing alienation of Arab citizens, who represent 20% of the population.
Yesterday, they felt discriminated against.
Today, they feel “occupied” by a nation of which they can never be a part, and by a state that they perceive as “democratic” for its Jewish citizens only and “Jewish” for its Arab citizens.
The process of isolation of Israel starts in the heads of its citizens, and is becoming a self-fulfilling prophecy.
History has taught the Jewish people that they can count only on themselves for protection and survival.
Yesterday, intelligence without power led to immense suffering.
But today, power without intelligence creates immense dangers not only for the Israel, but for the Jewish people at large.
Israel is too small to act foolishly.
It desperately needs allies whose populations accept what it is and respect what it does. There will come a moment when Israel’s actions will incite people – not only the most fanatical of the country’s foes, but also the most generously inclined of its supporters – to question Israel’s essence.
Whether or not this moment has already come, Israel cannot continue to be misgoverned in the way that it is.
Reform of the country’s political system has simply become a matter of life and death.
Israel’s Lonely Prosperity
PARIS – It is difficult not to be struck by the contrast between the “Asian”-like energy of Israel’s economy and civil society and the purely defensive nature of its approach to political change, both within and outside the country.
A recent law bars Israeli citizens from supporting Western boycotts aimed at reversing the country’s settlement policies and at backing an independent Palestinian state.
While Israel has never been so affluent, dynamic, and confident, it also has never been so isolated internationally.
Israel could have embraced the Arab Spring as an opportunity, rather than as a profound risk.
If Arab citizens could transform their culture of humiliation into a culture of hope, perhaps they would be able to reconcile themselves with Israel’s existence.
But Israeli leaders reacted purely negatively to the Arab upheavals.
In their estimation, a complex regional environment has now become even more dangerous, making prudence even more urgent.
For Israel, yesterday’s despots, like Egypt’s former president, Hosni Mubarak, were much more predictable than the “Arab masses.”
While some of the demonstrators might be inspired by democratic ideals, let’s have no illusions, the Israelis seem to be saying: Islamist forces will emerge as the only winners, and they are much more hostile to Israel and the West than their predecessors were.
Of course, with the Syrian regime’s massacres of its own citizens, some in Israel say that the suffering of Gaza’s inhabitants pales in comparison, and thus fails to attract the same sympathy as it did last year.
But this should not obscure the overall diplomatic picture for Israel, which remains essentially negative.
One of the more ironic results of the region’s changing political configuration is that Israel now perceives a strategic convergence with Saudi Arabia.
Despite their political systems’ deep differences, they both favor the regional status quo, and they share an obsessive suspicion of Iran.
But why not dream of a new strategic triangle comprising Israel, Saudi Arabia, and Turkey, just as Israelis once dreamed of a non-Arab triangle between Israel, Turkey, and the Shah’s Iran?
The Turks’ appalled reaction to the Syrian regime’s brutal behavior creates an opportunity that Israel should use to try to restore the privileged relationship with Recep Tayyip Erdoğan’s government that existed before the Gaza blockade.
But that would presuppose a small gesture towards the Palestinians, whom Israelis regard as being so deeply divided among themselves that no progress toward a peace settlement seems possible.
Israel’s leaders seem intent on gaining time both tactically, by resisting the soft pressure of US President Barack Obama’s administration, and strategically, by preparing the country for a new world in which emerging powers such as China play an increasingly important role.
That world, however, will be one in which Israel can no longer count on feelings of Holocaust guilt to influence major powers.
It is a world in which monotheistic rivalries will be diluted in an ocean of polytheist faiths, and in which Israel will be able to depend only on its comparative merits in the eyes of cynical, realistic actors who will judge it solely on the basis of their own national interests.
Israel may be “of Europe,” and its main ally may well remain the United States for many years to come, but Israeli leaders must start thinking of how their country can thrive in a post-Western world.
The most recent “President’s Conference,” held in June in Jerusalem under the patronage of Israeli President Shimon Peres, was highly symbolic of this evolution.
In the opening session, Obama’s special envoy, Denis Ross, was greeted with resounding silence when he conveyed to the participants his boss’s warm wishes.
By contrast, China’s culture minister was welcomed very warmly when he spoke, in typical fashion, of the growing need for global “harmony.”
In the minds of a few Israeli strategic thinkers, Israel must resist firmly for two or three more generations in order to become an irreversible reality in the region and a legitimate “accomplished fact” of the international system.
At that point, who would want to boycott a country whose technological prowess is needed all over the world?
In this context, the idea of a peace settlement with the Palestinians seems more abstract than ever.
Indeed, it makes the current status quo seem comfortable.
The gap between Israel’s rich and poor nowadays may recall Brazil, but who remembers the original Zionists’ social-democratic ideals?
The country’s prosperity is simply overwhelming. From Tel Aviv to Jerusalem, luxurious penthouses are multiplying.
Are we in Singapore, Hong Kong, or São Paulo? Why challenge the certainties of the present with the uncertainties of the future?
Moreover, Israel has not only become much more prosperous; it has also moved decisively to the right.
The second Intifada may very well have proven fatal to the Israeli left.
Triumphant capitalism, idolatry of the land, and the comforts of the status quo produce a heady cocktail.
But, high on the benefits of globalization, and waiting with a mixture of excitement and apprehension for the coming of a new post-Western world order, Israelis are dancing on the rim of a volcano.
Israel’s Mission
JERUSALEM – Israel is one of the biggest success stories of modern times.
A nation was reborn out of Holocaust survivors and uprooted Jewish communities who, mostly through the quality of their human capital, built a booming economy, created one of the world’s most innovative agricultures, and revived a dead language.
They also sustained, against all odds, a democracy that, however imperfect and dysfunctional, is nonetheless amazingly vibrant.
And yet, at its 60th anniversary, Israel stands at a crossroads.
Indeed, Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Olmert has warned of “the end of the Jewish state” if the country remains bogged down in the occupied territories and a Palestinian state is not established.
Israel’s internal challenges are no less demanding.
The relatively homogeneous society envisaged by its founders has fragmented into a tense multi-ethnic tapestry comprising secular Jews, an alienated Arab minority, a prolific ultra-orthodox community living on state allowances, religious nationalists bent on a Messianic brand of Zionism, immigrants from the former Soviet Union, marginalized Ethiopians, and Oriental Jews still struggling to join the middle class.
Moreover, Israel has failed to redress a dangerous imbalance: however creative its economy may be, the burden of military expenditure is undermining its investment in education and scientific research.
Metaphorically, Israel’s national psyche oscillates between “Tel Aviv” and “Jerusalem.”
“Tel Aviv” embraces secularism, hedonism, and economic growth, and views the State of Israel as a legal entity, in contrast to the dangerous, faith-driven “Jerusalemite” concept of “Eretz Israel.”
It has replaced Israel’s early pioneering ethos with the temptations of modernity, liberalism, and “normalcy.”
It aspires to be part of the “global village,” not an isolated, parochial Jewish outpost.
By contrast, “Jerusalem” regards “Tel Aviv’s” drive for “normalcy” as a shallow affair, one that is almost criminally indifferent to Jewish memory and the lessons of Jewish history.
The Israel of “Jerusalem” is one of yearning for Jewish roots, a deep-seated fear of “the Arabs,” and an unyielding distrust of “Gentiles” and their “international community.”
Israel was born in war and has lived by the sword ever since.
Rarely in history has a national movement marched to its Promised Land with such a brilliant display of diplomatic savoir-faire and military skill as the Zionists did on their way to statehood.
But Israel’s breathtaking victory against three Arab armies in 1967 brought it not only grandeur, but also moral and political decay.
Forty-one years later, Israel is still incapable of extricating itself from the corrupting occupation of Palestinian lands, and from the folly of settlements.
This is the paradox of Israel’s existence: a sense of power combined with an ever-present apocalyptic fear of annihilation, reflected in its hostile reaction to any initiative that touches its physical security.
Of course, Jews’ historical experience is not conducive to easy conciliation.
The crisis of the Jewish conscience in the traumatic transition from Holocaust to statehood has not yet been fully overcome.
Israel always, it seems, opts for a fatalistic interpretation of regional challenges, and its agonizing task today is to adopt a radical change of strategy by overcoming its leaders’ traditional tendency to make decisions only on the basis of worst-case scenarios.
It has been a sadly recurrent condition of the Arab-Israeli conflict that no war lost by a humiliated Arab side has ever ushered in a peace settlement, just as no war overwhelmingly won by Israel has ever led its leaders to be magnanimous in victory.
Peace efforts began almost invariably thanks to Arab, not Israeli, moves.
Such was the case of the 1973 war, which was started by President Anwar Sadat with the aim of forcing the United States to broker an Egyptian-Israeli peace.
Likewise, the Palestinian Intifada of 1987 forced Israel to abandon the politics of inertia and engage in a process that culminated in the Oslo accords.
Zionism’s unique combination of democracy and utopianism enabled the Jews to recover their birthright and gave them a key to the future.
The same tools must be used to end the conflict with the Arab world, in particular with the Palestinians.
The Jews did not survive extermination only to entrench themselves behind walls of their own making. They survived in order to resolve what for too long has looked like an insoluble conundrum: legitimizing Jewish statehood in the eyes of those who consider themselves its victims.
Obama in Israel’s New World
PARIS – Now that Binyamin Netanyahu has formed a new Israeli government out of a dizzying kaleidoscope of possible post-election permutations, has the country’s politics moved to the center?
US President Barack Obama would be wrong to think so as he prepares for his first official visit.
The unexpected second-place finish of Yair Lapid’s new Yesh Atid (“There is a Future”) party in the recent election has certainly changed the complexion of the government: the two leading Orthodox parties, Shas and United Torah Judaism, are out, while two smaller centrist parties, Kadima and Hatnua, are in.
But those who breathed a sigh of relief at the weakening of Netanyahu’s Likud and the country’s extreme right-wing parties should be as anxious as ever.
The political horse-trading is over for the time being, and the outcome seems assured.
Netanyahu will return as Prime Minister, and every party – in power or not – is ready to block, dilute, or paper over whatever policies the new government manages to adopt.
In Israel, the question nowadays is not whether the center will hold, but whether it matters.
In both domestic and in international terms, Israel has not so much moved to the center as it has embraced a new type of national consensus that began to emerge in 2011.
In May-June of that year, while the international community was still mooting potential land swaps for an increasingly distant peace settlement with the Palestinians, Israelis were focusing on a domestic battle over the regulation of cottage cheese.
The new consensus was best symbolized by the massive popular protests that erupted two months later, bringing together young, economically frustrated, mainly middle-class Israelis who might once have been politically divided by their allegiance to either the center-left Labor party or Netanyahu’s Likud.
No mention was made, then or now, of the need for peace initiatives; of the state of mind of the now-invisible (to Israeli eyes) Palestinians, now relegated to their side of the security wall; or of the growing inequalities that separate Israel’s Arab citizens from their Jewish counterparts.
By representing the aspirations of middle class Israelis seeking a better economic deal, Yair Lapid and Naftali Bennett of the nationalist Jewish Home party became the two sides of a newly minted political coin, one backed by an inward-looking ethnic and national identity in a country that sees itself as alone in the world.
This identity may be secular or religious; it may seek middle-class normality or proclaim an Israeli version of manifest destiny –&#160;the two are not incompatible.
Either way, the country no longer resonates with the expectations, hopes, and fears of a world still focused (ever more dimly) on resolving the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
Nor does Israel listen to the anguish of its own Ciceronian Zionists, perhaps best represented by the novelist Amos Oz.
Israel has simply stopped seeking to reconcile its Jewish identity with its commitment to democracy, for it has stopped addressing the contradiction that the Israeli-Palestinian question represents.
Simply put, that contradiction is no longer relevant to the new Israel.
Despite the deep economic frustrations of many of its middle-class citizens (the truly indigent did not protest), Israel has become a global economic and military powerhouse.
The country increasingly lives in its own virtual reality, simultaneously proximate to and far removed from the revolutionary pre-modernity of most of its neighbors.
Indeed, Israel is now on an equal footing with all of the rising new powers of an increasingly globalized world.
Few of them are democracies, and not one of them holds Israel to task for its settlement policies in the West Bank or cares, like the United States, about Middle East peace.
Why should Israel continue to focus on a weakened West that is constantly reprimanding it when the rest of the world beckons?
Nor does the old secular/religious divide have much salience anymore.
Israel has become post-modern, producing new – and sometimes startling – synergies among its avant-garde high-tech sensibility, its secular and ever more orthodox religious identities, and its overall ethno-nationalist outlook.
Its ancient biblical past can now coexist seamlessly with its ultra-modern present.
Israel’s new millionaires can easily live in far-flung settlements in “Judea and Samaria” and commute daily to their coastal startups.
And the army has already become the purview of nationalistic and religious cadres, even without conscription of the ultra-orthodox – one of the centrist camp’s demands in pressing for fairer national burden-sharing.
As a result, the Israeli state seems to be moving closer to its Asian counterparts, with their emphasis on economic innovation and their indifference to universal values or, for that matter, peace.
Israel is now proud to be in a world of its own, in which it feels free to act unilaterally and scoff at toothless criticism from Europe (and now partly from the US).
There is no reason to believe that Netanyahu’s new government will seek to revive the increasingly feeble and moribund peace process, beyond offering verbal promises and inconsequential half-measures.
Nor should anyone expect a moratorium on settlement expansion.
On the contrary, the settlements offer cheaper housing than is available in Israel, and thus resolve one of the main economic problems of the country’s middle class.
“Red lines” in Israel have a way of mutating into lines drawn in the sand, which are then rendered invisible at the slightest wind.
The new government’s fragile equilibrium only reinforces this sober interpretation.
In Israel, Obama will encounter a country that has indeed moved, but not toward a missing center. It has moved into its own orbit.
Israel’s New Realism
Kadima’s victory in Israel’s elections is the country’s most important political turning point in 30 years, if not longer.
The new party—barely six months old—has realigned Israeli politics by transforming the entire framework of ideological assumptions underpinning the country’s security strategy.
Everyone knew that Kadima would win and form a coalition with the moderate left Labor party, which managed a respectable second-place finish.
As a result, some Kadima voters stayed home, while other potential supporters voted for Labor to strengthen its hand in pushing social and economic issues in Kadima-led coalition.
On the right, the Likud party, which Sharon abandoned to establish Kadima, did very poorly, partly because many conservative voters also deserted it for religious, immigrant, and other parties.
In fact, a wide variety of small political groups, including three Jewish religious parties, Arab parties, and a pensioners’ party won seats.
Since Kadima and Labor will not have a majority even as coalition partners, they will have to bring in some of these groups.
But the importance of the distribution of seats pales in comparison to that of the longer-term changes in Israeli politics implied by Kadima’s victory.
Indeed, having attracted leading figures from both Labor and Likud, Kadima is now established as the most successful centrist party in Israel’s history.
With few political stars left in either Labour or Likud, Kadima may become the country’s dominant party for many years to come.
Ehud Olmert, the party’s leader and now elected prime minister, has been a maverick of the center since his student days – a fitting symbol for the rapprochement of left and right.
But the rapprochement itself is, of course, mainly the work of Ariel Sharon, whose influence is by no means diminished because he is in a coma.
Kadima is built on Sharon’s charisma and program, which reversed the most basic Israeli strategic thinking of the last half-century.
For 30 years after the 1967 war, Israelis agreed on the need to keep control of the West Bank and Gaza Strip unless or until there was a comprehensive peace agreement with the Palestinians and the Arab states.
From a security standpoint, the occupied territories constituted critical terrain for defending Israel against an attack on its borders by Arab states’ armies.
Moreover, from a diplomatic standpoint, the territories were regarded as bargaining chips (“land for peace”) to be used in achieving a negotiated solution.
The Oslo agreement in 1993 and the ensuing peace process embodied that expectation.
The strategy ran aground in 2000, when Prime Minister Ehud Barak offered to give up almost all the occupied territories and accept a Palestinian state in exchange for real peace.
The Palestinian leader Yasir Arafat turned him down flat and instead returned to a massive campaign of terrorism against Israel.
The entire Israeli political spectrum was thrown into confusion.
The left had maintained that Arafat would make a deal and honor it; the right claimed that Arafat would make a deal and violate it.
Everyone was wrong: there would be no deal to honor or violate.
With the collapse of the strategy’s most basic premises, what should Israel do?
Sharon formulated the answer in 2004, concluding that Israel did not need the territories.
They were no good as bargaining chips, because there was no one with whom to bargain.
Nor could they be annexed to Israel, owing to the demographic problem implied by continued control over so many Palestinians.
Finally, with the USSR gone and the United States the world’s sole superpower, the geostrategic situation had changed entirely.
Arab states, preoccupied with other issues in the post-Cold War era, were less interested in the conflict, while the security situation in the territories themselves had become a problem.
Sharon’s solution was unilateral withdrawal and the idea that Israel would decide on its own interim boundaries with a view to what it would claim if there was ever a negotiated agreement.
Moreover, Sharon now agreed that a security fence, which historically was favored by the Israeli left, would enhance Israel’s defenses.
The country would then focus on domestic issues such as economic development, improving its public institutions, and raising living standards.
This approach appealed to the vast majority of Israelis, regardless of their political loyalties, and the victory in January’s Palestinian election by Hamas, which extols terrorism and demands Israel’s extinction, only reinforced the new strategic consensus.
In fact, the new consensus is shared by most of Labour and the main opposition within Likud.
The dream of peace, the nationalist fervor, and the purported religious redemption that animated Israel’s political combatants for a half-century are gone, replaced by a resigned pragmatism.
That may inspire little enthusiasm, but the Israel that Olmert has now won a firm mandate to lead is by no means demoralized.
On the contrary, public opinion polls show that citizens remain highly patriotic and optimistic about their personal lives.
They have merely concluded that politics will not bring miracles, and that the most they can expect is to keep external threats to a minimum.
That is Sharon’s legacy. And, in Israel, fulfilling it will be no small achievement.
Israel’s Nuclear Option in Iran
LOS ANGELES – Revelations in former President George W. Bush’s recently published memoirs show that he declined an Israeli request to destroy Syria’s secret nuclear reactor in the spring of 2007.
While the revelation may appear merely to be a historical footnote, more profoundly it raises new uncertainty about whether Israel now thinks that it can rely on the United States to apply military force to stop Iran’s nuclear program should diplomacy fail.
The Syrian episode suggests that it cannot, which means that Israel may decide to go it alone once again, this time to eliminate Iran’s nuclear facilities.
If Israel did so, however, it would confront a conundrum.
Unlike the attack on Syria’s nuclear plant, Israel’s conventional forces do not have the capacity to destroy Iran’s suspect installations.
Portions of Iran’s nuclear program may be too heavily bunkered, dispersed, or concealed.
This raises the question of whether Israel’s repeated refrain that “all options are on the table” implies that even a nuclear strike is possible.
Israel’s nuclear history provides no clear answer, but the future may force the issue.
Israel has never acknowledged having nuclear weapons, let alone the size and scope of its arsenal.
Israeli policymakers refuse to talk about the subject.
Israel’s parliament, the Knesset, never discusses the program or appropriates money for it.
Military censors quash public discourse about it.
Yet American and other intelligence services and strategic-research institutes around the world all agree that Israel possesses nuclear weapons.
They disagree about how many, with estimates ranging broadly, from 40 to more than 400 warheads.
Israel’s reluctance to rattle its nuclear saber, even in dire circumstances, adds to the mystery.
In the Yom Kippur War, as Syrian forces threatened to break the country’s defensive lines, Israeli decision-makers recoiled even from threatening to use nuclear weapons.
While Israel keeps its bomb in the basement, it has a long history of stopping its adversaries.
As Iraq moved to complete the Osirak reactor by the early 1980’s, Israel applied diplomatic pressure and actions against foreign nuclear vendors, sabotaged atomic exports, and assassinated Iraqi scientists, before finally settling on the June 1981 air strike on the plant.
In the Syrian case, with one caveat, Israel decided to dispense with the preliminaries and simply destroy the reactor.
The caveat consists in a plea that Israel made to the US.
According to Bush’s memoir, in the spring of 2007, Prime Minister Ehud Olmert made a blunt request of the US president regarding Syria’s reactor: “George, I am asking you to bomb the facility.”
After consultation with his staff, Bush responded that, absent a plutonium extraction facility, US intelligence could not confirm that the plant comprised a nuclear weapons program.
“I told him [Olmert] I had decided on a diplomatic option backed by force” to stop Syria, Bush writes.
An apprehensive Olmert responded, “I must be honest with you.
Your strategy was very disturbing to me.”
Within months, Israel struck.
One year later, it followed up by assassinating Mohammed Suleiman, the Syrian general in charge of resurrecting the nuclear enterprise.
Given its efforts to fend off an attack, Iran represents a far more difficult target for Israel than Iraq and Syria did.
As a result, Israel ceded to the US and others responsibility to move the Iranian regime from its current path.
Since 2002, the US has applied a multi-pronged approach.
It pressed the International Atomic Energy Agency for greater scrutiny.
It got the United Nations Security Council to agree to impose increasingly onerous economic sanctions – and roped allies into even stronger sanctions.
It adulterated nuclear-related exports from European vendors to perform poorly during operation.
It may have inserted computer worms into Iran’s atomic infrastructure.
The result of all these efforts has been to slow, but not halt, Iran’s nuclear progress.
And, even as the US and its allies attempt to restrain Iran, its regime continues to goad Israel, calling for its extinction and exporting military wares to its Lebanese and Gazan adversaries.
In May 2010, Israel responded with a new wrinkle.
It leaked to the London Sunday Times that it had placed nuclear-armed submarines off Iran’s coast.
In the months before and after, it continued to hold war games and practice air strikes on Iran.
And it repeatedly uttered threats that “all” options are on the table.
Iran remains unmoved.
Concerned that President Barack Obama will be less likely than Bush to use force to stop Iran, Israel must now contemplate its next steps should diplomacy continue to stall.
One option would be to pursue a policy of “opacity plus”: a further lifting of the veil over its nuclear arsenal in order to caution Iran’s rulers about the potential consequences of their actions.
Another option would be to bring the country’s nuclear arsenal out of the basement altogether.
Israel could then mimic other nuclear-armed states by flexing its capacity through announcement and transparent nuclear deployment on land and sea, thereby promoting deterrence.
But, for a country that has had little faith in deterrence when it comes to existential nuclear threats, relying on it now would mark a new, uncomfortable bet.
That leaves nuclear use as the final option.
But nuclear attack carries its own heavy burden.
Given Iran’s placement of strategic sites in or near population centers, the deaths of many thousands of people would forever tar Israel.
The only worse stain on Israel would be if survivors of an Iranian nuclear strike were to lament that, had their country acted proactively, “the third destruction of the Temple” – the end of the Jewish state – could have been avoided.
These sobering prospects should prompt all involved to seek a peaceful resolution.
Time is growing short.
Israel’s Political Earthquake
Israeli politics is undergoing its most dramatic changes in 30 years.
The realignment of parties and leaders is all the more remarkable because the latest developments – Ariel Sharon’s decision to leave the ruling Likud party, the defeat of Shimon Peres as the Labor party’s chairman, and Labor’s withdrawal from Sharon’s grand coalition government – were utterly unexpected.
So it is all the more important to comprehend the significance of these changes for the future of Israel, the region, and the Arab-Israeli conflict.
Israel’s political system is, to put it simply, coming to the end of its second era.
From independence in 1948 until 1977, the Labor party was dominant, before giving way to an opposition coalition of conservative, nationalist, and centrist parties allied in the Likud bloc.
Since then, the two parties have taken turns in power, sometimes in grand coalitions and often in partnership with smaller parties.
On the surface, party competition has been between “left” and “right,” or “hawks” and “doves.”
The truth, of course, is more complex.
Social class and economic issues, overshadowed by the persistence of more existential concerns – physical security and the continued existence of the state – have played a much less important role in Israel than in other societies.
Here, the political divide could be defined as “optimists” versus “pessimists.”
The former, as in Labor, believed that some day a force would emerge among Arabs and Palestinians ready to make peace on a reasonable basis; the latter, as in Likud, were more doubtful.
For years, the argument remained an abstraction, a debate over what might happen in the future, until the Oslo agreement with the PLO in 1993 put the competing perspectives to the test.
Since 2000, when PLO leader Yasir Arafat rejected a political settlement and instead launched a five-year war of terrorism, there have been few optimists left.
The subsequent intellectual realignment in Israel has given rise to a new national consensus.
It is now generally accepted that, as the left has always insisted, Israel should be ready to withdraw from the West Bank and Gaza Strip and accept a Palestinian state in exchange for real peace.
But it is also accepted that, as the right has always maintained, there is no partner ready to make real peace.
In this context, Sharon gained two landslide election victories as a hardliner, but implemented a moderate policy, including a full withdrawal from the Gaza Strip.
This is where Israel stands today, facing a political upheaval fueled by two developments.
First, Sharon moved the Likud to the center, making it the hegemonic party, while destroying every stereotype about his personality, methods, and worldview.
For the same reason, though, many within Likud view Sharon – who helped found the party – as a traitor.
Sharon now needs to institutionalize his reforms, even if he now needs to establish another party to do so.
Second, the Labor party has proven politically bankrupt, with its only conceivable leader being the 82-year-old Shimon Peres and its anachronistic dovish optimism the source of much ridicule.
As a result – and helped by low voter turnout – the party’s leadership primary was won by Amir Peretz, an outsider and populist who wants to revitalize Labor by putting social and economic issues at the forefront, which means withdrawing from the national unity coalition with Likud.
Despite having to form a new party, Sharon will probably win the next election, which he has called for February.
Peretz’s strategy may draw voters from other parties on the left, but Labor will most likely lose centrist voters (and those for whom national security is paramount) to Sharon.
Paradoxically, all of this will mean both a great deal in principle and perhaps little in practice.
With Sharon enjoying a strong public mandate for a moderate policy, Israel will be more ready than ever to make a deal with the Palestinians, Syria, and the Arab world in general for a comprehensive diplomatic solution to the conflict.
Yet, given the chaos and paralysis that increasingly characterize Palestinian politics, that opportunity will go untaken.
The rising power of Hamas, which openly proclaims its strategy of increasing terrorism and its goal of destroying Israel, reinforces that trend.
The same can be said of Syria, whose hardline government is turning toward a dangerously adventurous militancy.
Sharon might decide on partial withdrawals and dismantling of settlements on the West Bank.
But it is now widely recognized that such changes are a response to dim prospects of real progress toward peace.
Holding onto territory as a bargaining chip makes less sense if there is no one with whom to bargain.
Instead, Israel will continue to prioritize its own security, strengthening its defenses against terrorism and consolidating control over the relatively small portions of the West Bank that it intends to claim as part of an eventual diplomatic settlement.
A byproduct of this strategy, combined with ongoing Palestinian attacks, has been growing international sympathy with Israel.
That, too, could continue if the current political realignment proves permanent, enabling Sharon to win over the center and even moderate left for his program.
Nothing is assured, of course.
The still popular Benjamin Netanyahu could emerge as a powerful rival on his right, and Peretz might yet shape Labor into a serious contender on his left.
Nevertheless, the national consensus has shifted, shaking all assumptions about Israeli politics.
The February elections will put those assumptions to their severest test in decades.
The Observer State of Palestine
NEW YORK – Palestine is no longer an “entity,” but a state – or, to be precise, a non-member observer state of the United Nations, just like the Holy See.
The Palestinian bid received the support of 138 member countries (Germany, Britain, and 39 other countries abstained), while only seven, including the Marshall Islands, Palau, and Panama, joined the US and Israel in opposing it, leaving both more isolated than ever.
Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu was furious; he called Palestinian Authority (PA) President Mahmoud Abbas a liar, and gave permission for 3,000 new Jewish homes to be constructed on occupied Palestinian territory.
His foreign minister, Avigdor Lieberman, had already threatened to crush the PA government on the West Bank if the UN vote went ahead.
But Israel has only itself to blame for what happened.
Abbas and his prime minister, Salam Fayyad, have been more moderate, and more open to serious negotiations with Israel, than any Palestinian leaders before.
The Palestinian police have cooperated with the Israelis to contain violence on the West Bank.
Improving the economy, rather than violent confrontation, has been the PA’s main concern.
But, by continuing to build settlements on Palestinian land, the Israeli government has undermined the authority of Abbas and his Fatah government almost to the point of impotence.
More and more Palestinians, fed up with the futility of what is still called the “peace process,” believe that Fatah’s fierce rival, Hamas, the Islamist movement that rules Gaza, has more effective ways to break the current impasse.