All of us must hope that the first Internet-generation American President can lead his own country and the rest of humanity into a safer and more sustainably prosperous future.
The New Bogeymen of Financial Capitalism
The sub-prime crisis has diverted attention from rising fears about Sovereign Wealth Funds (SWF’s) as the new bogeyman of global finance.
But the minute the sub-prime crisis subsides, anxieties about SWF’s will return.
For the emergence of this vast and growing pool of state-controlled funds may have implications more far-reaching, and certainly more politically sensitive, than the hopefully temporary distress caused by the subprime crisis.
Indeed, if SWF’s continue to grow their investments are bound to permanently alter the relative weight of state and privately controlled assets in advanced economies.
According to Morgan Stanley, SWF’s are expected to manage $12 trillion by 2015, up from about $2.5 trillion today.
Both sums dwarf the sums controlled by hedge funds and private equity groups.
Thus some of the biggest investors – both passive and strategic – in financial markets in the coming years will be government institutions.
That the biggest of these institutions are in China, Vladimir Putin’s Russia and some unstable petro-states adds another worry to the mix.
The growth of SWF’s is a direct consequence of the accumulation of more than $5 trillion in foreign reserves by emerging-market economies in Asia and among oil and commodity exporting countries.
These economies’ current-account surpluses, together with massive inflows of capital, have led their monetary authorities to try to prevent their national currencies from appreciating in order to maintain the competitiveness of their industries.
Initially, these countries invested their foreign reserves in liquid assets – short-term United States Treasury bills and government securities issued by other reserve currency countries.
Then they realized that their holdings in liquid and low-return assets far exceed what is needed to avoid the type of speculative runs that East Asia experienced in 1997, and Russia in 1998.
After all, why hold US T-bills with a meager 5% return, German Bunds with a 4% return, or Japanese government bonds with a 0.5% return when you can acquire foreign firms, invest in real assets, stock markets, or higher-yielding corporate bonds?
The answer seemed a no-brainer.
So central banks are transferring their excess reserves to existing or newly created SWF’s, which in turn invest in high-return equities.
But the emergence of SWF’s is creating a political backlash in the form of “financial protectionism.”
Examples include the China National Overseas Oil Company’s failed effort to buy the US energy firm UNOCAL, and Dubai Ports’ failed bid to buy a firm managing major US ports.
There is now legislation pending in the US Congress aimed at tightening the approval process for foreign acquisition of US firms, and a similar reaction is occurring in Asia and Europe.
Of course, not all SWF’s favor strategic investments, i.e. taking controlling stakes in the acquired firms.
Some, like Singapore’s Government Investment Corporation, prefer passive and diversified investments with no controlling stake in companies.
And China, when it took a 10% stake in the US private equity group Blackstone, eschewed any voting rights in the company’s management, perhaps as a way of keeping US financial regulators happy.
A third type of SWF takes the form of oil investment funds among oil/energy exporting countries, which are saving their windfalls into foreign assets.
Norway, indeed, has been doing this – very quietly – for many years
Views about how to respond to the SWF’s vary.
The United Kingdom has adopted a laissez faire approach, while political concerns dominate in the US, France and Germany.
Some worry about reciprocity: if Chinese firms are allowed to invest in US and EU firms, shouldn’t US and EU firms be allowed to invest freely in any Chinese firm?
Others worry about national security: what would happen if “our” ports and security industries or other “strategic” firms were taken over by China, Russia, or Saudi Arabia?
Still others worry about the fact that SWF’s are state-owned: what would happen to corporate governance when investors may have objectives other than maximizing risk-adjusted returns?
Similarly, there are concerns about transparency: many SWF’s do not reveal their investment strategies and how they operate.
What would happen if a small group of huge state-owned SWF’s made very large investments in a variety of assets?
How might equity prices or bond yields be distorted by $200 billion gorillas that need to invest $4 billion per week?
Dire predictions that the rise of the SWF’s means that the global financial system is becoming a form of state capitalism may be exaggerated.
But a small group of government players managing a vast amount of foreign assets does create complications.
Of course, so long as the US runs annual current-account deficits of almost a trillion dollars, it will need to borrow from strategic rivals such as China, Russia, and unstable Middle East petro-states, which increasingly will lend in the form of high-yield equity investments rather than low-yield T-bills.
So unless the US starts to save more, it will find it hard to complain about the form – equity rather than debt – that the financing of its external deficit takes.
It is also true that the massive accumulation of foreign reserves that is now feeding the SWFs’ growth is excessive and driven by misguided exchange-rate policies, with vastly undervalued currencies resulting in current-account surpluses.
These countries need to allow greater exchange-rate flexibility and currency appreciation to reduce their external surpluses – and thus the need to accumulate huge foreign reserves in the first place.
Indeed, emerging-market economies should reduce their accumulation of foreign assets rather than hope to weather the political backlash against SWF’s in the US and EU.
SWF’s are, it seems, here to stay and grow, and they do offer significant benefits.
But if they grow too large while their activities remain opaque, widespread “financial protectionism” will become all but inevitable.
The New Bush Doctrine
President George W. Bush’s second inaugural address set forth an ambitious vision of the role of the United States in advancing the cause of freedom worldwide, fueling worldwide speculation over the course of American foreign policy during the next four years.
The ideas expressed in Bush’s speech thus deserve serious consideration.
“It is the policy of the United States to seek and support the growth of democratic movements and institutions in every nation and culture,” Bush declared, “with the ultimate goal of ending tyranny in our world.”
There is a bow to diplomacy in the assurance that fulfilling this mission “is not primarily the task of arms, though we will defend our friends and ourselves by force of arms when necessary.”
Similarly, Bush recognizes that outsiders cannot force liberty on people.
Instead, “Freedom by its nature must be chosen and defended by citizens and sustained by the rule of law and the protection of minorities.”
Finally, there is acceptance of diversity, for “when the soul of a nation finally speaks, the institutions that arise may reflect customs and traditions very different from our own.
America will not impose our own style of government on the unwilling.
Our goal instead is to help others find their own voice, attain their own freedom and make their own way.”
I agree with this goal, and have devoted the last fifteen years of my life and several billion dollars of my fortune to attaining it.
Yet I find myself in sharp disagreement with the Bush administration. It is not only that there is a large gap between official words and deeds; I find that the words sometimes directly contradict the deeds in a kind of Orwellian doublespeak.
When Bush declared war on terror, he used that war to invade Iraq.
When no connection with Al Qaeda could be established and no weapons of mass destruction could be found, he declared that we invaded Iraq to introduce democracy.
Now the elections in Iraq are about to be converted into a civil war between a Shi’a-Kurd dominated government and a Sunni insurrection.
In Iraq and beyond, when Bush says that “freedom will prevail,” many interpret him to mean that America will prevail.
This impugned America’s motives and deprived the US of whatever moral authority the country once had to intervene in other countries’ domestic affairs.
If, for example, America offers support to Iranian students who are genuinely striving for greater freedom, they are now more likely to be endangered by US support, as the regime’s hardliners are strengthened.
To explain what is wrong with the new Bush doctrine, I have to invoke the concept of open society. That is the concept that guides me in my efforts to foster freedom around the world.
The work has been carried out through foundations operating on the ground and led by citizens who understand the limits of the possible in their countries.
Occasionally, when a repressive regime expels our foundation – as happened in Belarus and Uzbekistan – we operate from the outside.
Paradoxically, the most successful open society in the world, the US, does not properly understand the first principles of an open society; indeed, its current leadership actively disavows them.
The concept of open society is based on the recognition that nobody possesses the ultimate truth.
To claim otherwise leads to repression.
In short, we may be wrong.
That is precisely the possibility that Bush refuses to acknowledge, and his denial appeals to a significant segment of the American public. An equally significant segment is appalled.
This has left the US not only deeply divided, but also at loggerheads with much of the rest of the world, which considers our policies high-handed and arbitrary.
President Bush regards his reelection as an endorsement of his policies, and feels reinforced in his distorted view of the world.
The “accountability moment” has passed, he claims, and he is ready to confront tyranny throughout the world according to his own lights.
But the critical process that is at the core of an open society – which the US abandoned for eighteen months after September 11, 2001 – cannot be forsaken.
That absence of self-criticism is what led America into the Iraq quagmire.
A better understanding of the concept of open society requires that promoting freedom and democracy and promoting American values and interests be distinguished.
If it is freedom and democracy that are wanted, they can be fostered only by strengthening international law and international institutions.
Bush is right to assert that repressive regimes can no longer hide behind a cloak of sovereignty: what goes on inside tyrannies and failed states is of vital interest to the rest of the world.
But intervention in other states’ internal affairs must be legitimate, which requires clearly established rules.
As the dominant power in the world, America has a unique responsibility to provide leadership in international cooperation.
America cannot do whatever it wants, as the Iraqi debacle has demonstrated; but, at the same time, nothing much can be achieved in the way of international cooperation without US leadership, or at least active participation.
Only by taking these lessons to heart can progress be made towards the lofty goals that Bush announced.
China’s New Path
CAMBRIDGE – The opaque nature of China’s government makes it difficult to see where Chinese economic policy is heading, and thus how the Chinese economy will develop in the years ahead.
But the scale of China’s economy and its role in global trade and financial markets compel us to try to understand the intentions of China’s new leadership.
A useful starting point is to examine the key appointments that have been made since President Xi Jinping assumed office.
One surprise was the decision to retain Zhou Xiaochuan as Governor of the People’s Bank of China (PBOC).
Zhou had come to the end of his term – and had reached an age at which officials are supposed to retire.
So the decision to keep him on for at least the next two years represents a significant endorsement by the new Chinese leadership.
Zhou is an intelligent and internationally respected expert on monetary policy and finance.
As the head of the PBOC, he has favored more market-based monetary policies and increased internationalization of China’s currency, the renminbi.
He has also worked successfully to contain inflationary pressures.
We can expect more of the same in the coming years.
The new finance minister, Lou Jiwei, comes to the ministry from the China Investment Corporation, China’s sovereign wealth fund, where he dealt with global capital markets on a daily basis.
Lou, a trained economist who previously served in the Ministry of Finance as a deputy minister, where he was a voice for pro-market reforms, indicated his current approach to tax and budget policy at a recent meeting in Beijing.
He rejected what he described as the European style of very large government and high tax rates and the American style of lower tax rates but large fiscal deficits, in favor of low budget deficits and a tax system that would promote “opportunities” for individuals and private enterprises.
Xi and Premier Li Keqiang obviously knew what they were getting when they appointed Lou.
And, despite his age, they promised that he would have a full five years as Finance Minister, which would push his tenure past the normal retirement age.
Liu He is perhaps the least visible of the key economic thinkers.
Liu played an important role in shaping the recently adopted 12th Five-Year Plan, with its emphasis on urbanization and service-sector development as a means to increase personal incomes and the share of consumer spending in GDP.
He has recently been promoted to the post of Deputy Director of the National Development and Reform Commission, the principal body that advises the State Council on economic-development strategy and macroeconomic policy.
Taken together, these appointments demonstrate the new Chinese leadership’s emphasis on pro-market reforms and a shift from heavy industry to greater reliance on consumption and services.
That shift is likely to mean a slower rate of GDP growth than the annual rate of nearly 10% that China achieved during the last three decades.
But a slowdown to 7% annual growth would still double China’s GDP over the next decade.
More consumption and less heavy industry will also reduce China’s demand for raw materials, dampening global commodity prices.
Even more significant, shifting income from state-owned enterprises to middle-class workers and increasing consumer spending will reduce China’s enormous saving rate.
Since a country’s current-account surplus is the difference between its national saving and its national investment, China’s current-account surplus is likely to continue to shrink in the coming years.
That is consistent with the Five-Year Plan’s goal of basing GDP growth more on domestic demand and less on exports.
Since China’s external surplus is already down to less than 2% of GDP, a decline in domestic saving could result in China beginning to run a current-account deficit.
In that case, China would no longer be a net buyer of foreign bonds and other assets.
If China wanted to continue to invest in foreign businesses and natural resources, it would have to become a net seller of bonds from its portfolio.
The new leadership will, of course, face serious obstacles as it tries to shift policy in these market-friendly directions.
China’s state-owned enterprises are powerful forces in the economy, with substantial political influence; they will resist the shift from heavy industry to services.
Likewise, the widespread and official recognition of corruption introduces a new source of uncertainty into national and local politics.
But China’s new leaders have signaled where they want the economy to go and have emphasized their determination to reduce corruption.
Most important, they have put talented people in charge of the process.
The rest of the world should hope that they succeed.
The New Cosmopolitans
As globalization proceeds, with the help of ever-faster communications, faster travel, and more powerful multinational corporations, a new, cosmopolitan social class seems to be emerging.
These citizens of the world are developing loyalties to each other that cross national boundaries.
I was at a dinner the other night with Yale World Fellows, a carefully selected group of professionals, representing every major country of the world, who spend a semester here.
It was an unusual experience, because I began to feel that none of these people were really foreign to me.
It seemed they were probably easier to talk to than the local Americans who were waiting on us as and serving food.
Of course, a cosmopolitan class is hardly new.
In fact, 50 years ago, in his classic book Social Theory and Social Structure, the late sociologist Robert K. Merton described the results of a case study of influential people in a typical American town, Rovere, New Jersey.
As a sociologist, he chose this tiny town to study how people relate to each other and influence each other, just as biologists study tiny worms with only a few hundred cells so that they can study how each cell relates to an organism as a whole.
Merton discovered a strong pattern.
Rovere’s influential people seemed to be sharply divided into “cosmopolitan influentials,” who habitually orient themselves with respect to the world at large, and “local influentials,” who orient themselves with respect to their own town.
As he and his assistants interviewed people, the division between the two groups became more intriguing, and significant, in his mind.
Merton did not say that the cosmopolitan influentials were influential outside Rovere – apparently none of them was.
What stood out instead was their habitual frame of reference, which was tied to their personal identities.
When Merton engaged people in conversation, any topic would remind the cosmopolitan influentials of the world at large, while local influentials were reminded of things in their own town.
Cosmopolitan influentials, Merton said, tended to hang their success on their general knowledge, whereas locals relied on their friendships and connections.
The cosmopolitan influentials were often uninterested in meeting new people in town; the locals wanted to know everyone.
The cosmopolitan influentials tended to take positions in local government that reflected their broad expertise: board of health, housing committee, or board of education.
The local influentials tend to be in positions that they got through their local popularity: street commissioner, mayor, or township board member.
The cosmopolitan influential in the town is like the medical specialist; the local influential is like the family doctor.
Merton concluded: “It appears that the cosmopolitan influential has a following because he knows , the local influential because he understands .”
The local influentials, Merton discovered, spoke affectionately of their town, as if it were a unique and special place, and often said they would never leave.
The cosmopolitans spoke as if they might leave any day.
What was true in Merton’s day is becoming even more starkly true in today’s globalized economy.
What I find particularly striking is the sense of loyalty developing among cosmopolitans.
After the World Fellows Dinner, the Fellow from Namibia was extolling to me, in impeccable and relaxed English, the beautiful vacation homes I might find (and even buy) there.
I felt as if I could perhaps fall into a relationship with him that might work against the interests of the locals in Namibia.
I could picture doing that, and he and I would be natural allies, if I let it happen.
I was left wondering why this is happening on such a scale now.
Obviously, improved communications technology plays a role.
But how much does that explain the impression that the division between cosmopolitans and locals is so much wider now?
One must realize that individuals choose whether to play the role of cosmopolitan or local, and how much to invest in that role.
People make a conscious choice to become either cosmopolitans or locals, depending on their own personal talents and the perceived returns from making the choice.
In the twenty-first century, the new information age creates opportunities not just to be cosmopolitan in spirit and orientation, but to forge strong connections with other cosmopolitans.
The cosmopolitans have shared experiences: they are directly communicating with each other across the globe.
Many cosmopolitans around the world now also share the English language, the new lingua franca.
The term “global village” was first popularized in the late 1960’s by Canadian communications maven Marshall McLuhan in response to the already powerful communications media of that day.
But McLuhan could not have anticipated the cosmopolitan class, because he could not have anticipated the immense development of direct interpersonal communications media that allow cosmopolitans around the world to form friendships.
The cosmopolitans tend to be increasingly wealthy, and their wealth helps mark them as cosmopolitan.
Thus, economic inequality is felt differently in today’s world.
Perhaps it is accepted resignedly, as the cosmopolitan class is too amorphous and ill-defined to be the target of any social movement.
There is no spokesperson for the cosmopolitan class, no organization that could be blamed for what is happening.
I fear for the future.
How will the cosmopolitan class behave as their role in the world economy continues to strengthen?
How unfeeling will they come to be about the people who share their neighborhoods?
Most importantly, if resentment by the locals emerges, what political consequences will result?
The New Face of the United Nations
On January 1, 2007, Ban Ki-Moon, South Korea’s former foreign minister, will become United Nations Secretary-General, following Kofi Annan’s ten-year tenure.
Annan inspired the world with his diplomacy and leadership on poverty reduction and human rights, but the war in Iraq divided the world and drew attention and financial resources away from crisis regions and critical long-term problems like climate change, disease control, sustainable energy, and access to water.
With the recent elections in the United States and the rise of Asia’s global influence, there is an opportunity to turn the world’s attention to the most critical challenges facing our planet.
In addition to the long-term challenges of poverty, the environment, nuclear proliferation, and UN reform, the new Secretary-General will inherit a long list of hotspots: Iraq, Iran, Afghanistan, Palestine, Lebanon, Somalia, Myanmar, Sudan, North Korea, and others.
Recent attempts to influence developments in these countries through threats and sanctions, and sometimes war, have failed. Most are less stable today than they were five years ago.
Clearly, a new approach is needed.
The leading Asian countries, including Ban’s South Korea, have long favored a balance of diplomatic approaches and economic incentives as the way to solve complex challenges.
Rather than relying on sanctions and threats of force, the idea is to underpin long-term prosperity in today’s unstable regions.
This balanced approach is important because most of the world’s hotspots are in trouble not only, or even mainly, because of politics, but because of the underlying challenges of hunger, disease, and environmental crisis.
Consider Darfur, a crisis that has been debated in the UN Security Council as a confrontation between the Sudanese Government and the people of Darfur.
But the deeper truth is that Darfur is unstable because it is home to an impoverished and fast-growing population without adequate supplies of water, food, health clinics, schools, and other basic services.
Rather than focusing on sanctions, the major powers would do much better to work with Sudan’s government to propose and help to finance long-term development strategies.
Defusing the crises in Darfur and elsewhere will be among the greatest challenges facing the new Secretary-General.
Yet it is vital that the UN not simply lurch from one hotspot to the next.
The UN also has the unique role and opportunity to offer leadership in building a global consensus around vital long-term environmental and economic challenges facing the planet.
Climate change, deforestation, growing populations, and other ecological strains will challenge the very survival of hundreds of millions of people around the world in the coming decades.
UN leadership will be instrumental to proposing and forging solutions to such daunting long-term global challenges.
In fact, from 1992 to 2002, the UN’s member governments signed a number of treaties and agreements that can and should provide the foundation for long-term global solutions.
Three treaties emerged in 1992 out of the so-called Rio Conference on the Environment – on climate change, biodiversity conservation, and desertification.
In 2000, the member governments agreed on the Millennium Development Goals.
And in 2002, they agreed on the Monterrey Consensus, pledging concrete efforts to triple aid flows to the poorest in order to reach the international goal for foreign assistance of 0.7% of rich-world GNP.
The key for today’s UN, therefore, is not to create more goals, but to implement those that have been set.
This, too, fits strongly with the spirit in which Ban has approached his new position.
He has made clear his intention that the UN should implement the commitments that the world community has made.
Without implementation, all of the treaties in the world would lead us nowhere.
During his mandate, the Secretary-General will face the pressing challenge of forging a global agreement on climate change for the years beyond 2012, when the Kyoto Protocol ends.
The Millennium Development Goals remain far off track in the poorest countries, with just nine years to go.
Despite a global pledge to reduce significantly the loss of biological diversity by 2010, huge areas of rainforest and oceans continue to be destroyed.
If the United States works more closely within the UN framework, it will find willing partners in the rising Asian powers, which are intent on using their influence and resources to solve today’s challenges.
After all, Asian countries are interested in global stability to underpin their own long-term development.
They are acutely aware of their increasing influence around the world, as investors, trading partners, and as contributors to and victims of environmental change.
Behind the scenes, the Asian powers can help to defuse the crises in Darfur, North Korea, Myanmar, and elsewhere. And they will be crucial to forging new cooperative approaches to climate change, water scarcity, and the like.
The new Secretary-General comes to office with the world yearning to solve festering problems.
Importantly, there is already broad agreement on a set of shared goals.
Those goals are achievable.
The challenge is implementation.
The New Global Economy’s (Relative) Winners
CAMBRIDGE – The world economy faces considerable uncertainty in the short term.
Will the eurozone manage to sort out its problems and avert a breakup?
Will the United States engineer a path to renewed growth?
Will China find a way to reverse its economic slowdown?
The answers to these questions will determine how the global economy evolves over the next few years.
But, regardless of how these immediate challenges are resolved, it is clear that the world economy is entering a difficult new longer-term phase as well – one that will be substantially less hospitable to economic growth than possibly any other period since the end of World War II.
Regardless of how they handle their current difficulties, Europe and America will emerge with high debt, low growth rates, and contentious domestic politics.
Even in the best-case scenario, in which the euro remains intact, Europe will be bogged down with the demanding task of rebuilding its frayed union.
And, in the US, ideological polarization between Democrats and Republicans will continue to paralyze economic policy.
Indeed, in virtually all advanced economies, high levels of inequality, strains on the middle class, and aging populations will fuel political strife in a context of unemployment and scarce fiscal resources.
As these old democracies increasingly turn inward, they will become less helpful partners internationally – less willing to sustain the multilateral trading system and more ready to respond unilaterally to economic policies elsewhere that they perceive as damaging to their interests.
Meanwhile, large emerging markets such as China, India, and Brazil are unlikely to fill the void, as they will remain keen to protect their national sovereignty and room to maneuver.
As a result, the possibilities for global cooperation on economic and other matters will recede further.
This is the kind of global environment that diminishes every country’s potential growth.
The safe bet is that we will not see a return to the kind of growth that the world – especially the developing world – experienced in the two decades before the financial crisis.
It is an environment that will produce deep disparities in economic performance around the world.
Some countries will be much more adversely affected than others.
Those that do relatively better will share three characteristics.
First, they will not be weighed down by high levels of public debt.
Second, they will not be overly reliant on the world economy, and their engine of economic growth will be internal rather than external.
Finally, they will be robust democracies.
Having low to moderate levels of public debt is important, because debt levels that reach 80-90% of GDP become a serious drag on economic growth.
They immobilize fiscal policy, lead to serious distortions in the financial system, trigger political fights over taxation, and incite costly distributional conflicts.
Governments preoccupied with reducing debt are unlikely to undertake the investments needed for long-term structural change.
With few exceptions (such as Australia and New Zealand), the vast majority of the world’s advanced economies are or will soon be in this category.
Many emerging-market economies, such as Brazil and Turkey, have managed to rein in the growth of public debt this time around.
But they have not prevented a borrowing binge in their private sectors.
Since private debts have a way of turning into public liabilities, a low government-debt burden might not, in fact, provide these countries with the cushion that they think they have.
Countries that rely excessively on world markets and global finance to fuel their economic growth will also be at a disadvantage.
A fragile world economy will not be hospitable to large net foreign borrowers (or large net foreign lenders).
Countries with large current-account deficits (such as Turkey) will remain hostage to skittish market sentiment.
Those with large surpluses (such as China) will be under increasing pressure – including the threat of retaliation – to rein in their “mercantilist” policies.
Domestic demand-led growth will be a more reliable strategy than export-led growth.
That means that countries with a large domestic market and a prosperous middle class will have an important advantage.
Finally, democracies will do better because they have the institutionalized mechanisms of conflict management that authoritarian regimes lack.
Democracies such as India may seem at times to move too slowly and be prone to paralysis.
But they provide the arenas of consultation, cooperation, and give-and-take among opposing social groups that are crucial in times of turbulence and shocks.
In the absence of such institutions, distributive conflict can easily spill over into protests, riots, and civil disorder.
This is where democratic India and South Africa have the upper hand over China or Russia.
Countries that have fallen into the grip of autocratic leaders – for example, Argentina and Turkey – are also increasingly at a disadvantage.
An important indicator of the magnitude of the new global economy’s challenges is that so few countries satisfy all three requirements.
Indeed, some of the most spectacular economic success stories of our time – China in particular – fail to meet more than one.
It will be a difficult time for all.
But some – think Brazil, India, and South Korea – will be in a better position than the rest.
The New Grammar of Power
MADRID – Humanity’s main concerns today are not so much concrete evils as indeterminate threats.
We are not worried by visible dangers, but by vague ones that could strike when least expected – and against which we are insufficiently protected.
There are, of course, specific, identifiable dangers, but what worries us most about terrorism, for example, is its unpredictable nature.
What is most disturbing about the economy these days is its volatility – in other words, the inability of our institutions to protect us from extreme financial uncertainty.
Generally, much of our uneasiness reflects our exposure to threats that we can only partly control.
Our ancestors lived in a more dangerous but less risky environment.
Think of climate change; the risks of nuclear energy and proliferation; terrorist threats (qualitatively different from the dangers of conventional war); the collateral effects of political instability; the economic repercussions of financial crises; epidemics (whose risks increase with greater mobility and free trade); and sudden, media-fueled panics, such as Europe’s recent cucumber crisis.
All of these phenomena form a part of the dark side of the globalized world: contamination, contagion, instability, interconnection, turbulence, shared fragility, universal effects, and overexposure.
In this respect, one might speak of the “epidemic character” of our contemporary world.
Interdependency is, in fact, mutual dependency – a shared exposure to hazards.
Nothing is completely isolated, and “foreign affairs” no longer exists: everything has become national, even personal.
Other people’s problems are now our problems, and we can no longer look on them with indifference, or hope to reap some personal gain from them.
This is the context of our current peculiar vulnerability.
What used to protect us (distance, government intervention, foresight, classic defense methods) has been weakened, and now offers little or no protection.
Maybe we haven’t taken into account all of the geopolitical consequences deriving from this new logic of mutual dependence.
In such a complex world, not even the strongest is sufficiently protected.
Indeed, the logic of hegemony clashes with the current phenomena of fragmentation and autonomization – think of Pakistan, for example, or Italy – which create imbalances and asymmetries that are not always favorable to the powerful.
The weak, when certain that they cannot win, can hurt the strongest – and even make them lose.
In contrast to the centuries-old Westphalian order of nation-states, in which each state’s specific weight was the determining factor, in a world of interdependency, the security, economic stability, health, and environment of the strongest is continually a hostage of the weakest.
All are exposed to the effects of disorder and turbulence on the periphery.
These conditions of overexposure are for the most part unprecedented, raising numerous questions for which we don’t yet have the right answers.
What kind of protection would be appropriate in such a world?
Not surprisingly, a contagious globalization that increases vulnerability inevitably triggers preventive and defensive strategies that are not always proportionate or reasonable.
The xenophobia and chauvinism that some of the defensive strategies can awaken may end up doing more harm than the threats from which they were intended to protect us.
So, in this era of global warming, smart bombs, cyber warfare, and worldwide epidemics, our societies must be protected with more complex and subtle strategies.
We cannot continue to pursue strategies that ignore our common exposure to global risks, and the resulting environment of mutual dependence.
We must learn a new grammar of power in a world that is made up more of the common good – or the common bad – than of self-interest or national interest.
These haven’t disappeared, of course, but they are proving to be indefensible outside of a framework capable of addressing common threats and opportunities.
While the old power game sought the protection of one’s own interests with no concern for those of others, overexposure forces reciprocity of risks, the development of cooperative methods, and the sharing of information and strategies.
Truly effective global governance is the strategic horizon that humanity must pursue today with all its energy.
It sounds hard, and so it will be.
But it has nothing to do with pessimism.
The challenge of governing global risks is nothing less than the challenge of preventing the “end of history” – not as the placid apotheosis of liberal democracy’s global victory, but as the worst collective failure we can imagine.
The New IMF
WASHINGTON, DC – When Ministers meet for the IMF’s Spring Meeting this month they will find an institution with regained self-confidence.
The London G20 summit gave a strengthened mandate to the IMF, while tripling its resources.
More concessional finance will be available for low-income countries, and international liquidity will be increased by a hand-out of $ 250 billion in special drawing rights (SDRs).
This is a boost for the IMF, and it gives hope to emerging and developing countries that have been severely hit by a crisis that originated elsewhere.
The IMF is well-positioned to help its members overcome the financing gaps resulting from the crisis.
In the run-up to the G20 summit access to the Fund’s credit facilities was increased and policy conditions were streamlined.
In a watershed with former practice, a new non-conditional credit line was introduced for well-performing countries.
Mexico and Poland will be its first users and more countries will line up.
These more flexible lending policies reflect a new image of the IMF.
The negative stigma attached to IMF financing is a thing of the past.
Its financing role in this crisis secured, the IMF now needs to strengthen its position as guardian of an open international financial system.
The IMF was created to prevent crises like the current one and in this it has failed.
Admittedly, there were warnings, but policy makers, particularly in advanced countries, did not follow suit.
The ‘new’ IMF should be an institution that communicates better with its members, balances the interests of its advanced, emerging and developing members in an evenhanded manner, and aligns its policies better to the needs of the moment.
Now that the IMF has been given a second lifetime, it needs to regain its central position in the international financial system.
For this, it needs to focus on three issues: improved surveillance of financial stability, strengthened international coordination, and an updated decision-making process.
The new IMF needs to become more vocal on global financial stability issues.
The IMF should see to it that there are no gaps in the surveillance of financial institutions.
It can help shape a more robust global supervisory system which needs to be built in order to preserve the benefits of global financial markets.
And it should help develop a vision on what the future financial landscape should look like.
To this end IMF surveillance should include regular updates on supervisory regimes in systemically important countries.
Early warnings, commissioned by the G20, should be specific and the IMF should monitor whether policymakers give follow-up to the Fund’s advice.
The new IMF needs to take a fresh look at international policy coordination.
The demand for a different monetary order, as advocated by China, sets the stage for a renewed effort to avoid the international imbalances which were at the root of this crisis.
First, the US saving deficit will need to be addressed in a sustainable manner.
Second, China will have to make its currency convertible.
Third, the position of the euro will strengthen over time as more countries will join the euro zone.
With more key currencies in place, the perspective of a truly multipolar currency system comes in sight, with an increased role for the SDR.
This will lessen the need felt by emerging economies for self-insurance against financial instability, by building up large reserves.
Finally, the new IMF needs governance structures that better reflect today’s new global realities.
The perception that advanced countries are running business in the Fund, but do not adhere to Fund advice, has undermined the IMF’s authority.
The G20 summit marked the return of the United States to multilateralism.
This acceptance of collective responsibility should come with abandoning US veto power in the IMF by lowering required voting majorities, as well as abandoning Europe’s prerogative of appointing the Managing Director.
One of the strengths of the IMF’s present governance structure, the constituency system, should be duplicated at the G20 as well, so as to ensure inclusiveness.
The rapid growth of China, India, and other emerging countries should come with increased influence, to be implemented through the planned quota increase in 2011.
Advanced countries, including European countries, will see a relative decrease in voting power.
An increased say for emerging economies will imply taking more international responsibility as well, also in financial terms.
Now European countries finance 42% of IMF lending and 62% of concessional World Bank lending.
This task will have to be shared by emerging countries with large reserves.
These reserves are put to better use by assisting the IMF in maintaining an open and stable financial system and prevent crises like these from recurring
The New International Economic Disorder
NEWPORT BEACH – A new economic order is taking shape before our eyes, and it is one that includes accelerated convergence between the old Western powers and the emerging world’s major new players.
But the forces driving this convergence have little to do with what generations of economists envisaged when they pointed out the inadequacy of the old order; and these forces’ implications may be equally unsettling.
For decades, many people lamented the extent to which the West dominated the global economic system.
From the governance of multilateral organizations to the design of financial services, the global infrastructure was seen as favoring Western interests.
While there was much talk of reform, Western countries repeatedly countered serious efforts that would result in meaningful erosion of their entitlements.
On the few occasions that such resistance was seemingly overcome, the outcome was gradual and timid change.
Consequently, many emerging-market economies lost confidence in the “pooled insurance” that the global system supposedly put at their disposal, especially at times of great need.
This change in sentiment was catalyzed by the financial crises in Asia, Eastern Europe, and Latin America in the late 1990’s and early 2000’s, and by what many in these regions regarded as the West’s inadequate and poorly designed responses.
With their trust in bilateral assistance and multilateral institutions such as the International Monetary Fund shaken, emerging-market economies – led by those in Asia – embarked on a sustained drive toward greater financial self-reliance.
Once they succeeded in overcoming a painful crisis-management phase, many of these countries accumulated previously unthinkable levels of international reserves as precautionary cushions.
They extinguished billions in external indebtedness by generating and sustaining large current-account surpluses.
And they increased the scale and scope of domestic financial intermediation in order to reduce their vulnerability to external storms.
These developments stood in stark contrast to what was happening in the West.
There, unprecedented leverage, massive debt creation, and a seemingly infinite sense of credit entitlement prevailed.
Financial excesses become the rule rather than the exception, facilitated by financial innovation and the erosion of lending standards and prudential regulation.
Suddenly, the world turned upside down: “rich” countries were running large deficits and, in some cases, tipping from net creditor status to net indebtedness, while “poor” countries were running surpluses and accumulating large stocks of external assets, including financial claims on Western economies.
Little did these countries know that their divergent paths would end up fueling large global imbalances, and eventually trigger a financial crisis that has shaken the prevailing international economic order to its foundations.
There is no restoring fully that order.
Rather than recovering strongly, sluggish Western growth is periodically flirting with recession at a time of high unemployment and multiplying debt concerns, particularly in Europe.
In an amazing turn of events, virtually every Western country must now worry about its credit ratings, while quite a few emerging economies continue to climb the ratings ladder.
We can now consider the image of Western delegations heading to emerging countries to plead, cap in hand, for financial support, both direct and through the IMF.
At first blush, this unusual convergence between Western and emerging countries seems to reflect what advocates of a new international economic order had in mind.
But appearances can be misleading, and, in this case, they are misleading in a significant way.
Advocates envisaged an orderly process in which economic convergence accompanied and facilitated global economic growth.
They foresaw a collaborative process guided by enlightened policymaking.
But what is occurring is far different and more unpredictable.
Rather than exhibiting enlightened leadership, Western policymakers have consistently lagged realities on the ground, with a bewildering mixture of denial, misdiagnosis, and bickering undermining their responses.
Rather than proceeding in an orderly manner, today's global changes are being driven by the disorderly forces of de-leveraging emanating from a Europe in deep financial crisis and an America seemingly unable to restore sustained high rates of GDP growth and job creation.
Multilateral institutions, particularly the IMF, have responded by pumping an unfathomable amount of financing into Europe.
But, instead of reversing the disorderly deleveraging and encouraging new private investments, this official financing has merely shifted liabilities from the private sector to the public sector.
Moreover, many emerging-market countries have noted that the policy conditionality attached to the tens of billions of dollars that have been shipped to Europe pales in comparison with what was imposed on them in the 1990’s and early 2000’s.
Fortunately, despite having lagged rather than led this process of consequential (and increasingly disorderly) global change, it is not too late for policymakers to catch up.
But doing so requires more than just better national policymaking in Europe and America; it is also time for urgent and deep reform of the multilateral system and its main institutions.
That process requires joint leadership by the emerging world as a true equal and partner of Western powers.
The “New” Iraq Insurgency
Sun Tzu, the great Chinese philosopher of war, once wrote, “If you know the enemy and know yourself, you need not fear the result of a hundred battles.”
The absence of such knowledge invites trouble, often disaster.
This certainly applies to the ongoing conflict in Iraq, where understanding the insurgents is both crucial and difficult.
To some degree, the Iraq insurgency reflects its historic predecessors.
The conflict is “armed theater,” in which the antagonists are simultaneously locked in struggle with each other and sending messages to wider audiences, particularly the Iraqi people.
Like all insurgencies, public support – or the lack of it – will determine the outcome.
Moreover, it is likely to be a protracted performance.
History suggests that once an insurgency reaches “critical mass,” it takes a decade or more to eradicate it.
And, like past insurgencies, the Iraq conflict is one in which the insurgents use horrific acts to intimidate the public, expose the shortcomings of the government, and goad the regime into overreactions that might turn the public against it.
But the Iraq insurgency deviates from its forebears in vital ways.
Its cultural context differs from twentieth-century insurgencies, particularly the use of a radical ideology derived from religion.
By contrast, twentieth-century insurgencies were usually secular, based on economic class, sectarian differences, or other deep political cleavages.
The intermingling of religious passion and political radicalism makes the Iraqi insurgency particularly dangerous and difficult to quell.
The strategic context of the Iraq insurgency is also new.
In the twentieth century, the superpowers supported insurgency and counterinsurgency as a type of proxy conflict.
The Iraq conflict, by contrast, is part of the world’s first global insurgency – the web of individual conflicts spawned by Islamist extremism, most of them related in some way to al Qaeda, and the global war on terrorism.
For the first time in history, terrorism gives insurgents the ability to strike directly at their enemies’ external allies.
Moreover, the organization and methods of the Iraq insurgency, while not unique, differ from those seen in the late twentieth century.
Multiple insurgencies co-exist in time and space, each with differing objectives and tactics.
One component is the jihadists, some of them foreign and some local, with direct ties to al Qaeda or, at least, sympathy with its worldview.
The jihadists appear to want a Taliban-style Iraq that could serve as a bastion for the wider global Islamist insurgency.
A second component consists of former Ba’athist officials seeking a return to power.
With access to extensive funds, this group appears to sub-contract many of its operations to organized crime or “casual” insurgents motivated more by pay than by ideology.
The third component is sometimes called “Sunni nationalist,” but that phrase is a misnomer, because this group’s members are less concerned with Iraq as a nation than with Sunni domination of post-Hussein Iraq and responding to what they see as personal injustices or abuses.
This group appears to rely heavily on tribal structures, kinship, and other local affiliations.
While successful twentieth-century insurgencies developed some degree of hierarchy and a political wing, the Iraq insurgency remains a loose, amorphous network.
The various components, and the subdivisions within them, do not appear to be centrally commanded.
Some may cooperate; others do not.
Finally, the insurgency as a whole remains nihilistic, focused on destroying the new Iraqi government and the emerging economic and political system rather than articulating a coherent alternative.
In many ways, the Iraq insurgency is analogous to urban street gangs: each component shares behavioral and organizational similarities but pursues its own aggrandizement and undertakes autonomous operations within its “turf” rather than pursuing a master plan or strategy.
The good news for those who desire stability and democracy in Iraq is that an amorphous, disorganized, and nihilistic insurgency cannot “win” in the traditional sense of replacing the government and forming a new regime.
The bad news is that an amorphous, disorganized, and nihilistic insurgency can eventually evolve into a coherent, efficient, and purposeful one.
This would obviously pose a much more serious threat, but even an amorphous, disorganized, and nihilistic insurgency can survive and block stability, democratization, and prosperity for many years.
To return to the analogy, urban street gangs cannot seize political power, but they can certainly keep their neighborhoods dangerous, backward, and grim.
There are, then, three paths for Iraq: evolution of a more serious insurgency, persistent violence at current levels, or resolution of the insurgency.
At least three factors will determine which path that injured nation takes.
One factor is the will of the new government.
Insurgent movements that succeed do so because the government’s will collapses.
It is not clear at this point how much determination Iraq’s emerging democratic leaders will have.
A second factor is restraint on the part of the Shi’ite community.
There are ominous indications that the relative forbearance of this group may end.
If that happens, the insurgency will be superseded by a much more dangerous sectarian civil war.
The third factor is the willingness of outside groups – both states and non-state groups – to prolong Iraq’s misery by supporting the insurgency, whether overtly or by inaction.
Until states such as Saudi Arabia, Syria, and others vigorously dry up the inflows of people and money that sustain the insurgency, Iraq will never become stable, democratic, and prosperous.
The New Middle East Order
Sometime this month, President George W. Bush will – reluctantly – announce a new policy for the United States in Iraq.
A new policy is needed not only in order to halt America’s drift into impotence as it tries to prevent Iraq from spiraling into full-scale civil war, but also because the map of power in the Middle East has changed dramatically.
That map has been in constant flux for the last 60 years, during which the main players – Egypt, Iraq, Saudi Arabia, Syria, Israel, and Iran – have formed and broken alliances.
Now, something like a dividing line is emerging, and if Bush finally begins to understand the region’s dynamics, he may be able to craft a policy with a chance of success.
This regional realignment is typified by the emergence of a de facto alliance that dare not speak its name.
Israel and Saudi Arabia, seemingly the most unlikely of allies, have come together to contain their common enemy: Iran, with its mushrooming influence in Iraq, Lebanon, and Palestine.
Iran not only threatens Israel (and the region) with its desire for a nuclear capability and its Shi’a proxy militants; it is also seeking to usurp the traditional role of moderate Sunni Arab regimes as the Palestinians’ defenders.
After decades of using concern for the Palestinian cause to shore up popular support for their own ineffective and undemocratic regimes, these moderate Arab leaders have now been put on the defensive by Iran’s quest for hegemony. If Iran succeeds in being seen as the genuine patron of Palestinian national aspirations, it will also succeed in legitimizing its claim for dominance in the Middle East.
Israel, a country in shock following its failure to destroy Hezbollah last summer, and humiliated by Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejhad’s vow to “wipe Israel off the map” – a threat backed up by Iran’s support of Hamas and Hezbollah – now talks about a “quartet of moderates” as the region’s only hope.
Indeed, Israel now sees its security as relying not so much on a US guarantee, but on Egypt, Jordan, Saudi Arabia, and Turkey (which is seeking regional influence in fear of rejection by the European Union) restraining Iran and its paid proxies.
According to Israeli Vice Premier Shimon Peres, Israel hopes to isolate and contain the Shi’a/Farsi spheres of power by forging open cooperation with the Sunni/Arab domain.
Saudi Arabia is just as eager to contain the Iranian threat and the growing “Shi’a crescent” that, with the empowerment of the Shi’a in Iraq, has moved westward to begin to include the Shi’a regions of the Kingdom.
So it should be no surprise that the Saudi regime was the first to condemn Shi’a Hezbollah at the start of the war with Israel, and that it announced in December that it would support Iraq’s Sunnis militarily should a precipitate US withdrawal incite a Sunni/Shi’a civil war there.
The Shi’a threat to the Saudi government is ideological.
Indeed, it goes to the heart of the Saudi state’s authority, owing to the Al Saud royal family’s reliance on Wahhabi Islam to legitimate its rule.
Since the Wahhabis consider the Shi’a apostates, the challenge from the Shi’a – both within and without Saudi Arabia – represents a mortal threat.
So Saudi Arabia is ready to cooperate with Israel not only against Iran, but also against other “radicals,” such as Hamas.
Remarkably, Palestine’s Hamas prime minister, Ismael Haniyeh, was not received in Saudi Arabia in December, when he was traveling through the region pleading for support for his beleaguered government.
Conservative Saudi Arabia prefers dealing with traditional and predictable leaders, such as Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas and Lebanon’s premier, Fouad Siniora, rather than firebrand populist leaders like Hezbollah’s Hassan Nasrallah, Hamas’ Khalid Meshal, and Iran’s Ahmadinejhad.
Last year, Saudi Arabia’s King Abdullah, worried by Shi’a expansionism, was persuaded by Prince Bandar bin Sultan, the head of his National Security Council, to coordinate policy with Israel to counter Iran’s growing influence.
Israel, after all, is a “reliable enemy” for Saudi Arabia, having destroyed Nasser’s Egyptian army in 1967 – a time when the Saudis were fighting Egypt by proxy in Yemen.
So Prince Turki al-Faysal, the long time head of Saudi intelligence, has met with Meir Dagan, the head of Israel’s Mossad, while Bandar met with Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Olmert in Jordan the same month.
Yet covert support from Israel, America, and the Saudis for Abbas and Siniora does little to help them in their domestic battles.
From Morocco, Algeria, Libya, and Sudan to Bahrain and Yemen – indeed, throughout the Muslim world from Jakarta to Nigeria – Islamic radicals have won the popularity sweepstakes.
A recent poll in Egypt ranked Nasrallah, Meshal, and Ahmadinejhad as the three most popular figures.
This leads to an unavoidable dilemma: Bush will have to choose between supporting democracy and backing those who want to fight Islamic radicalism.
Yet Israel, America, and the region’s moderates can benefit from the deepening schism in the Arab/Muslim world.
That schism is being consolidated by Saudi support of all the region’s Sunni Muslims.
It is this sense of “Sunni solidarity” that is becoming the decisive factor in the war for the soul of Islam, and in the struggle for mastery in the Middle East that is now underway.
The New Monetary Disorder
PRINCETON – Currency chaos is back, highlighting demands for a revised international monetary order.
The rapid decline of the dollar and the pound, but also of the renminbi – now more firmly tied to the dollar than ever – is fanning tensions.
Some of the ghosts of the 1930’s have returned, too – in particular, the fear of unfair trade advantages caused by competitive devaluation.
United States Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner has already accused China of currency manipulation.
There are two alternative and sharply contrasting approaches to getting currencies right.
One is to have an international conference at which experts can suggest models to calculate exchange rates and politicians can negotiate deals.
The only successful instance of such an arrangement is the Bretton Woods conference in 1944, but even then the exchange rates that were fixed there proved unrealistic, and a major wave of parity alterations was soon needed (as well as the maintenance of exchange controls).
Other currency-centered conferences were dismal failures.
President Richard Nixon hailed the 1971 Smithsonian agreement as “the most significant monetary agreement in the history of the world.”
But it was soon in tatters, and the world moved to generalized floating.
In 1987, at the Louvre conference, there was not even any agreement about what had been concluded.
Some participants thought they had agreed to a sort of semi-fixing of exchange rates in the form of target zones, but the powerful German Bundesbank never shared that interpretation.
History suggests that collective negotiation about currencies and a new approach to the issue of reserves are unlikely to succeed.
The second, and better, approach lies in agreements in each country about what the appropriate basis for monetary policy should be.
If those agreements have widespread acceptance and mutual consistency, the result will be a stable international monetary system.
There have been two models for such a consensus.
In the first, a century ago, confidence was underpinned by gold; in the more recent wave of globalization, it depended upon the power of the human intellect to solve policy problems.
The end of inflation and “the great moderation” of the past three decades were fundamental to the liberalization of large parts of the world and to increased confidence, trade, and prosperity.
The search for a monetary rule during the latter period had two phases: in the earliest attempt to construct a basis for stable monetary policy, the emphasis was on monetary targeting.
In the second, more successful, phase, an increasing number of countries adopted either explicit or implicit inflation targets.
But inflation targeting was never an obvious concept, and the financial crisis has discredited it.
In 2003, Ben Bernanke, then a Governor of the US Federal Reserve, stated in a speech that many Americans considered inflation targeting “foreign, impenetrable, and possibly slightly subversive.”
That feeling is stronger now.
There was always uncertainty over the extent to which central banks should attempt to correct or limit asset-price bubbles when there was no corresponding rise in the general level of inflation.
Rising asset prices lead to a general increase in purchasing power, because many asset holders are willing (and able) to borrow more.
Many Europeans tried to argue in recent years that monetary policy should also take asset-price developments into account, whereas American policymakers and academics largely resisted this approach.
The problem is that asset prices and consumer-price inflation may move in different directions, as they did in the 2000’s, and that weighing both factors would produce inconsistent policy recommendations.
As a result, central banks ran the risk of no longer appearing to follow a clearly formulated policy guideline.
The credibility associated with a simple rule disappeared.
After the financial crisis, we have become wiser.
Formulating monetary policy has become a more complex process, but also a more politicized process, which is why it is likely to become more chaotic, with sharp differences between national approaches.
The Fed and the Bank of England remain less likely to be concerned about the emergence of new kinds of asset bubbles in stock markets or commodities. But the European Central Bank (ECB) will be more worried.
As divergences become explicit, the demand for a wider political debate about monetary policy and for political involvement in its formulation will become more intense.
The Bank of England’s Monetary Policy Committee has often been presented as a pioneer in making monetary policy transparent.
But, from an early stage, the transparency that resulted from the early publication of who voted for and against rate increases led to a public identification of members of the Committee as hawks or doves.
If it is clear who will vote for which measure, there will be increased demand for a public debate about who should be chosen: why not elect the MPC, since it is effectively a monetary government?
In Europe, a similar debate about the political accountability of European central banks has been simmering since before the ECB was even established.
Tensions between advocates of different policy solutions will lead to a demand for a greater political say.
This exercise looks like a dramatic repeat of the interwar story, when it was impossible to obtain consensus about policy and about mutually consistent policy frameworks.
Then, too, central banks were blamed when their policy framework (at that time the gold standard) disintegrated.
Consequently, nationalization of the central bank became a major platform of the British or French left.
That, in turn, cleared the way for manipulation of currencies in the interests of exporters, businesses, and labor unions.
The result was international monetary chaos – precisely the path we are heading down now.
Is the US Losing Latin America?
MADRID – It is a mantra increasingly heard around the world: US power is in decline.
And nowhere does this seem truer than in Latin America.
No longer is the region regarded as America’s “backyard”; on the contrary, the continent has arguably never been so united and independent.
But this view fails to capture the true nature of US influence in Latin America – and elsewhere as well.
It is true that US attention to Latin America has waned in recent years.
President George W. Bush was more focused on his “global war on terror.”
His successor, Barack Obama, seemed to give the region little thought as well, at least in his first term.
Indeed, at the Summit of the Americas in Cartagena in April 2012, Latin American leaders felt sufficiently confident and united to challenge US priorities in the region.
They urged the US to lift its embargo on Cuba, claiming that it had damaged relations with the rest of the continent, and to do more to combat drug use on its own turf, through education and social work, rather than supplying arms to fight the drug lords in Latin America – a battle that all acknowledged has been an utter failure.
It is also true that Latin American countries have pursued a massive expansion of economic ties beyond America’s sway.
China is now Latin America’s second-largest trading partner and rapidly closing the gap with the US.
India is showing keen interest in the region’s energy industry, and has signed export agreements in the defense sector.
Iran has strengthened its economic and military ties, especially in Venezuela.
Similarly, in 2008, Russia’s then-President Dmitri Medvedev identified the US war on terror as an opportunity to create strategic partnerships with rising powers such as Brazil, and with the Bolivarian Alliance for the Americas (ALBA), a Venezuelan-inspired bloc opposed to US designs in the region.
The energy giant Gazprom and the country’s military industries have spearheaded the Kremlin’s effort to demonstrate Russia’s ability to influence America’s neighborhood – a direct response to perceived American meddling in Russia’s own “near abroad,” particularly Georgia and Ukraine.
Yet it would be a mistake to regard Latin America’s broadening international relations as marking the end of US preeminence.
Unlike in the bygone era of superpowers and captive nations, American influence can no longer be defined by the ability to install and depose leaders from the US embassy.
To believe otherwise is to ignore how international politics has changed over the last quarter-century.
A continent once afflicted by military takeovers has slowly but surely implanted stable democracies.
Responsible economic management, poverty-reduction programs, structural reforms, and greater openness to foreign investment have all helped to generate years of low-inflation growth.
As a result, the region was able to withstand the ravages of the global financial crisis.
The US not only encouraged these changes, but has benefited hugely from them.
More than 40% of US exports now go to Mexico and Central and South America, the US’s fastest-growing export destination.
Mexico is America’s second-largest foreign market (valued at $215 billion in 2012).
US exports to Central America have risen by 94% over the past six years; imports from the region have risen by 87%.
And the US continues to be the largest foreign investor on the continent.
American interests are evidently well served by having democratic, stable, and increasingly prosperous neighbors.