So they have an interest in negotiating a fair deal, and one that is
But, even if a company embraces this approach, problems abound.
How can it be implemented without looking like bribery (in case the company gives the funds directly to the government)?
And how can companies prevent some of the funds from being misused (say, if the government hires a third-rate team)?
Here is a proposal: an Investment Contract Aid Facility (ICAF) under the umbrella of a well-respected organization.
The ICAF would function like an escrow account into which the firm pays the funds required for the host country to hire a negotiating team.
The escrow account manager then invites the country to select a team, suggesting what skills are required and perhaps even providing a roster of experts.
The country would be free to choose its own team, but the escrow account manager, aided by an international advisory board of expert volunteers, would need to agree that it is, in fact, world-class.
One could even include a capacity-building element by adding to the team one or two local negotiators.
The result should be a contract that is as fair as possible under the given circumstances – and perceived as such.
It would be enough for a handful of CEOs and prime ministers to say that they are prepared to consider using such a Facility on a case-by case basis.
While this would not end the abrogation or renegotiation of contracts, it would eliminate one important reason them, benefiting countries and companies alike.
Busur Keadilan Iklim
ISLAMABAD – Sebuah ironi yang menyakitkan tentang perubahan iklim bahwa mereka yang paling sedikit kontribusinya terhadap masalah justru yang paling menderita kerusakan.
Jika ada negara yang berhak mengklaim dirinya sebagai korban ketidakadilan iklim, itu adalah Pakistan.
Ketika para pemimpin dunia mempersiapkan diri untuk menghadiri Konferensi PBB tentang Perubahan Iklim di Paris, Pakistan berusaha pulih dari akibat buruk bencana banjir yang merusak bangunan, menghancurkan tanaman, menyapu bersih jembatan, dan menewaskan 238 orang.
Tragedi yang berhubungan dengan cuaca seperti ini bukan hal baru bagi Pakistan; yang berbeda hanyalah frekuensi dan keganasannya.
Banjir yang mematikan telah menjadi kejadian tahunan; pada tahun 2010, hujan deras yang memecahkan rekor menewaskan hampir 2.000 orang dan membuat jutaan orang kehilangan tempat tinggal.
Bahkan ketika Pakistan berjuang dalam pertempuran sengit melawan terorisme, meningkatnya cuaca berbahaya memicu kenaikan harga pangan dan air bersih, mengancam pasokan energi, melemahkan perekonomian, dan mengakibatkan ancaman keamanan yang serius dan menelan biaya besar.
Kemungkinan besar penderitaan iklim di Pakistan disebabkan oleh emisi gas rumah kaca yang dihasilkan negara-negara maju sejak awal Revolusi Industri.
Bahkan saat ini, Pakistan menghasilkan kurang dari 1% total emisi global.
Meskipun demikian, Pakistan selalu menjadi salah satu negara yang paling rentan terkena dampak berbahaya dari perubahan iklim, karena kondisi demografi, geografi, dan iklim alamiah.
Sejak tahun 1994 hingga 2013, perubahan iklim menimbulkan kerugian bagi Pakistan rata-rata $4 miliar per tahunnya.
Sebagai perbandingan, pada tahun 2012, terorisme di Pakistan merugikan negara sekitar $1 miliar.
Jika tidak sedang mengalami bencana banjir, Pakistan menderita kekurangan air, sehingga menjadi salah satu negara di dunia yang mengalami krisis air (water stress) terburuk, menurut Asian Development Bank.
Perubahan iklim menggabungkan kedua masalah tersebut, membuat gletser dan salju yang berfungsi sebagai regulator alami aliran air menjadi terkikis dan mencair, bahkan ketika erosi yang memburuk akibat banjir yang berkontribusi terhadap pendangkalan waduk-waduk besar.
Sementara itu, kenaikan suhu meningkatkan kemungkinan terjadinya hama dan penyakit pada tumbuhan, membahayakan produktivitas pertanian dan menjadikan penduduk semakin sering menderita gelombang panas.
Kenaikan permukaan air laut menyebabkan tingginya salinitas di daerah pesisir pantai, kerusakan pada bakau, dan mengancam tempat pembiakan ikan.
Selain itu, suhu laut yang lebih tinggi berpotensi menyebabkan siklon yang lebih sering dan berbahaya, sehingga mengancam kawasan pantai Pakistan.
Prospek ke depannya pun tidak kalah mengkhawatirkan: krisis air dan banjir bandang yang memburuk serta persediaan air di waduk-waduk yang menyusut.
Pada tahun 2040, perkiraan menunjukkan bahwa rata-rata kenaikan suhu sebesar 0.5º Celsius dapat merusak 8-10% hasil panen di Pakistan.
Beban ini tidak bisa dibiarkan untuk dipikul sendiri oleh Pakistan.
Sejauh ini, kemajuan dalam beberapa perundingan internasional tentang perubahan iklim masih relatif kecil.
Kelompok pelobi bahan bakar fosil, pemerintah negara-negara industri yang enggan, dan disengaged electorates telah menunda dan menghambat penetapan perjanjian yang kuat untuk mengurangi emisi gas rumah kaca secara global.
Meskipun harapan atas munculnya terobosan dalam perjuangan melawan perubahan iklim di Paris nanti merupakan keinginan, dorongan  untuk pemerataan distribusi biaya pemanasan global harus dilakukan.
Meskipun terdapat penambahan dana untuk adaptasi dan mitigasi perubahan iklim di negara-negara berkembang, kontribusi Pakistan tetap rendah dibandingkan dengan sejumlah bencana yang dialami selama lima tahun terakhir.
Pada tahun 2050, rata-rata biaya tahunan adaptasi perubahan iklim akan mencapai $6-12 miliar, menurut Konvensi Kerangka Kerja PBB tentang Perubahan Iklim.
Mitigasi sendiri akan memerlukan tambahan biaya $17 miliar per tahunnya.
Ketika perubahan iklim terus memakan korban, Pakistan tidak boleh membiarkan kerusakan yang senilai dengan kerugian miliaran dolar yang diakibatkan negara-negara pencemar terbesar di dunia tidak dibayarkan ganti ruginya.
Apapun persetujuan akhir yang dicapai di Paris, para negosiator iklim harus memastikan total kerugian akibat emisi global akan ditanggung secara adil dan tidak menjadi bebab tunggal negara-negara yang menderita dampak terburuk.
Sebagai salah satu negara dengan tingkat pencemaran terendah, Pakistan berhak mencari sumber daya dan dana untuk mengatasi dampak permasalahan yang tidak disebabkan olehnya, sama hal dengan banyak negara lain.
Usulan kami yang menyerukan penetapan mekanisme internasional yang mengikat untuk membagi beban perubahan iklim – suatu mekanisme yang menjamin keadilan iklim – tidak boleh diabaikan di Paris nanti.
The Responsibility to Protect Migrants
CORK – Migrants face countless perils.
Vicious mafias smuggle them across borders with reckless disregard for their lives.
Rapacious recruiters fleece them of their earnings.
Abusive employers exploit their labor.
And, adding insult to injury, anti-immigrant sentiment erodes the political will to confront these challenges.
Yet, when it comes to protecting migrants’ well-being and rights, smart practices abound – and should be promoted more widely and implemented more frequently.
With the number of international migrants on track nearly to double in the coming decades, such practices must become reference points for action.
The plight of migrants is particularly tragic when its source is violent conflict, like in Syria and Libya, or natural or manmade disasters.
In crises like these, migrants’ lives and physical safety are jeopardized through no fault of their own.
Yet the world has no clear guidelines for how to protect them.
Libya’s civil war placed the vulnerability of migrants in stark relief, with hundreds of thousands caught in the crossfire.
And, while Libyans were badly affected by the war, foreign workers were even more vulnerable, as they were largely left out of schemes aimed at protecting civilians.
What stood out were the very different fates migrants faced.
Most were left to their own devices to escape the violence, and many died trying.
Some were killed after being falsely targeted as mercenaries (largely owing to the color of their skin).
Other groups, however, fared better.
High-skilled migrants employed by Western oil companies, for example, were airlifted to safety.
Nationals from countries with robust protection protocols, and sufficient financial resources, were efficiently evacuated (the Philippines was exemplary in this regard).
Libya was thus a vivid reminder of the serious gaps that exist in helping migrants in life-threatening situations.
Their vulnerability is heightened due to their legal status and other obstacles – restrictions on exercising their fundamental rights, language barriers, constraints on their movement, and limited social capital and networks.
The International Organization for Migration (IOM) and the UNHCR, the United Nations’ refugee agency, were heroic in going above and beyond their mandates to protect migrants at risk in Libya, as were many NGOs.
The World Bank also acted quickly to provide funds to evacuate Bangladeshi nationals.
But international organizations alone cannot solve the problem.
Before the next crisis erupts, we need to clarify the critical roles that all key actors – including countries of origin and destination, neighboring states, businesses, and civil society – should play.
Last year, I began urging states and others to define a framework for action on helping migrants caught in crisis situations.
It would include a set of principles, such as this fundamental one: During a crisis, emergency assistance should be afforded to citizens and migrants alike, without discrimination.
I am grateful to the United States and the Philippines – working closely with the IOM, the UNHCR, and civil-society groups – for offering to help lead an initiative to address the situation of migrants caught in acute crises.
Georgetown University and the MacArthur Foundation also are playing indispensable roles.
Already, some countries have identified measures that stakeholders can take before, during, and after crises in order to keep migrants out of harm’s way.
Countries that are especially experienced in protecting their workers abroad offer a blueprint for action.
An early warning system in the Philippines, for instance, mobilizes government agencies to react quickly to crises, while a special fund pays for emergency evacuations.
The government also provides compulsory pre-departure and post-arrival orientation, so that migrants know what to do in an emergency.
Registration systems, such as Mexico’s matricula consular, help to ensure that countries know the location of their migrants – including those who are undocumented – in a crisis.
Destination countries have equally profound responsibilities in crises.
Evacuation from danger zones and humanitarian aid should be provided regardless of legal status – as the United States did last year in the wake of Hurricane Sandy.
Likewise, after the earthquake and tsunami in 2011, Japanese authorities broadcast information in 17 languages, assuring migrants that they could seek emergency services.
Migrants also typically need emergency travel documents after a crisis, as well as legal assistance to help them recover lost assets.
Neighboring countries have a vital role to play, too – for example, by keeping borders open so that migrants do not become trapped, as Egypt and Tunisia so generously demonstrated during the Libya crisis.
Employers, meanwhile, are linchpins during a crisis.
They should be obliged to repatriate foreign workers, as required in the standard migrant employment contract used by the Philippines.
They also should have evacuation plans for employees at all levels, not just executives.
It should be self-evident that we need to help all migrants in distress – not only those affected by conflicts and disasters, but also those abandoned by smugglers, countless more left in limbo for years in transit countries, and the millions working in slave-like conditions.
The principles and plans that we put in place to protect migrants in life-threatening situations eventually could – and should – be expanded in order to protect a much broader array of vulnerable migrants.
We need not be overwhelmed by the dizzying array of problems plaguing migrants.
With small groups of states, experts, international organizations, and civil society working together to trail-blaze solutions that might become global practices (a model that could be applied to other international problems), we can address the challenges facing migrants one by one and with the necessary resolve.
Faith in a Globalized Age
LONDON – For years, it was assumed, certainly in the West, that, as society developed, religion would wither away. But it hasn’t, and, at the start of a new decade, it is time for policymakers to take religion seriously.
The number of people proclaiming their faith worldwide is growing.
This is clearly so in the Islamic world.
Whereas Europe’s birthrate is stagnant, the Arab population is set to double in the coming decades, and the population will rise in many Asian Muslim-majority countries.
Christianity is also growing – in odd ways and in surprising places.
Religion’s largest growth is in China.
Indeed, the religiosity of China is worth reflecting on.
There are more Muslims in China than in Europe, more practicing Protestants than in England, and more practicing Catholics than in Italy.
In addition, according to the latest surveys, around 100 million Chinese identify themselves as Buddhist.
And, of course, Confucianism – a philosophy rather than a religion – is deeply revered.
There is a huge Evangelical movement in Brazil and Mexico.
Faith remains for many in the United States a vital part of their lives.
Even in Europe, the numbers confessing to a belief in God remain high.
And, of course there are hundreds of millions of Hindus and still solid numbers of Sikhs and Jews.
Those of faith do great work because of it.
Around 40% of health care in Africa is delivered by faith-based organizations.
Muslim, Hindu, and Jewish relief groups are active the world over in combating poverty and disease.
In any developed nation, you will find selfless care being provided to the disabled, the dying, the destitute, and the disadvantaged, by people acting under the impulse of their faith.
Common to all great religions is love of neighbors and human equality before God.
Unfortunately, compassion is not the only context in which religion motivates people.
It can also promote extremism, even terrorism.
This is where faith becomes a badge of identity in opposition to those who do not share it, a kind of spiritual nationalism that regards those who do not agree – even those within a faith who live a different view of it – as unbelievers, infidels, and thus enemies.
To a degree, this has always been so.
What has changed is the pressure of globalization, which is pushing the world’s peoples ever closer together as technology advances and shrinks the world.
Growing up 50 years ago, children might rarely meet someone of a different cultural or faith background.
Today, when I stand in my ten-year-old son’s playground or look at his friends at his birthday party, I find myriad different languages, faiths, and colors.
And, for those for whom religion matters, globalization can sometimes be accompanied by an aggressive secularism or hedonism that makes many uneasy.
So we must make sense of how the world of faith interacts with the compulsive process of globalization.
Yet it is extraordinary how little political time or energy we devote to doing so.
Most of the conflicts in today’s world have a religious dimension.
Extremism based on a perversion of Islam shows no sign of abating; indeed, it will not abate until it is taken on religiously, as well as by security measures.
This extremism is, slowly but surely, producing its own reaction, as we see from Islamaphobic parties’ electoral gains in Europe, and statements by European leaders that multiculturalism has failed.
Of course, throughout time, religion has often been part of a political conflict.
But that doesn’t mean that religion should be discounted.
On the contrary, it requires a special focus.
I see this very plainly spending so much time in Jerusalem, where – East and West – there is an emphatic increase in religiosity.
I started my Faith Foundation precisely to create greater understanding between the faiths.
My reasoning is simple.
Those advocating extremism in the name of religion are active, well resourced, and – whatever the reactionary nature of their thinking – brilliant at using modern communication and technology.
We estimate that literally billions of dollars every year are devoted to promoting this view of religion.
So my Foundation has a university program – now underway in nine countries – that is designed to take religion out of the sole preserve of divinity schools and start analyzing its role in the world today.
We have another program – in 15 countries, with others set to join – that links high school students across the world through interactive technology to discuss their faith and what it means to them.
And we have an action program through which young people work with those of another faith to raise awareness of the Millennium Development Goals, the United Nations-led program to combat world poverty.
We are just one organization. There are others starting.
But governments should start to take this far more seriously.
The Alliance of Civilizations, begun by Spain and Turkey, is one example.
The King of Saudi Arabia has also shown great leadership in this sphere.
Yet this is not just about bringing high-level people together.
It has to be taken down into the grassroots of nations, especially into the media of their young people.
Finally, religious leaders must accept a new responsibility: to stand up firmly and resolutely for respecting those of faiths different from their own.
Aggressive secularists and extremists feed off each other.
Together, they do constitute a real challenge to people of faith.
We must demonstrate the loving nature of true faith; otherwise, religion will be defined by a battle in which extremists seize control of faith communities and secularists claim that such attitudes are intrinsic to religion.
This would be a tragedy.
For, above all, it is in this era of globalization that faith can represent reason and progress.
Religion isn’t dying; nor should it.
The world needs faith.
Сөз бостандығы және жалған ақпарат
ПРИНСТОН – Өткен қарашада АҚШ-тағы президент сайлауына бір аптадай қалғанда әлдекім «туиттерде» Хилари Клинтон педофилдер тобының мүшесі деген ақпарат жариялады.
Бұл өсек әлеуметтік желі арқылы тарады, ал оңшыл ток-шоу жүргізуші Алекс Джонс Клинтонның балаға әлімжеттік жасау ісімен байланысы бар дегенді бірнеше мәрте қайталады, сонымен бірге ол Клинтонның сайлау кампаниясының басшысы Джон Подеста шайтани рәсімдерге қатысты дегенді де айтты. YouTube-ке салынған видеосына (кейіннен алынып тасталған) Джонс «Хиллари Клинтонның жеке өзі өлтіріп, балталап, зорлаған балалар» деп сипаттама жазды.
Сайлауға төрт күн қалғанда салынған видео 400 мың мәрте қаралған.
WikiLeaks жариялаған электронды пошта мәліметтеріне қарасақ, Подеста анда-санда Вашингтондағы Comet Ping Pong деп аталатын пицца мейрамханасында ас ішіп тұрған.
Сол себептен де балаларды зорлаушылар тобына қатысы бар деп әлгі мейрамханаға жала жабылды, тіпті #pizzagate деген арнайы хэштег те шықты.
Бұл айыптауларды боттар, яғни, «белгілі бір типтегі хабарламаларды таратуға арналған бағдарламалар» тарата бастады, соның арқасында жұрттың көбі «Пиццагейтті» шынайы оқиға деп қабылдап жатқандай әсер қалдырды. Бір қызығы, сайланған президент Дональд Трамптың қауіпсіздік жөніндегі кеңесшісі болатын генерал Майкл Флинн де бұл жаңалықпен туиттерде бөлісті.
Тіпті Трамп сайланғаннан кейін де, New York Times және Washington Post басылымдары жоққа шығарғанына қарамастан, бұл ақпарат таратыла берді.
Comet Ping Pong мейрамханасына қайта-қайта қорқытып, қорлап, телефон шалатындар жиілеп кетті.
Менеджері Колумбия округінің полициясына шағымданғанда, ол «бұл өсектің өзі – конституциямен қорғалған сөз бостандығының белгісі» деп жауап берген.
Арқасына Библияның жолдарын татуировка етіп жазған христиан дінінің өкілі Эдгар Уэлч - Джонстың тыңдармандарының бірі.
Автомат, тапанша және пышақпен қаруланған ол 4 желтоқсанда Солтүстік Каролинадағы үйінен 350 миль жол жүріп, Comet Ping Pong мейрамханасына жетеді.
Қонақтар мен қызметкерлер шығып кеткен соң ол құбырға жасырылды-мыс деген балаларды іздейді.
Құлыптаулы есікті бір оқ атып бұзған Уэлч ешқандай баланы таппаған соң полицияға беріледі.
Байсалды ақпарат құралы таратқан сияқты әдемі әрленген «белсенді дезинформация» - жалған ақпарат демократиялық институттарға қатер төндіреді.
Мұндай мысалдар бұрын да болған. Мәселен, Израиль қорғаныс министрі жасады деген елдің ядролық қуаты туралы «баяндама» оның пәкістандық әріптесін шатастырып, ол «Пәкістан да ядролық держава екенін» Израильдің қаперіне салатын туит жариялаған.
АҚШ-тағы сайлаудан соң Германияда баспасөз өкілдерінің алдында сөз сөйлеген президент Барак Обама демократиялық бостандыққа қауіп бар екенін мойындады.
1919 жылы бұл бапқа түсініктеме берген Жоғарғы Сот «анық әрі шынайы қауіп» төндірсе не зиян тигізетін болса ғана сөз бостандығын шектеуге болады деген қағиданы енгізді.
Бәлкім Америка судьяларының ішінде сөз бостандығын ең күшті қорғаған Луис Брандейстің 1927 жылғы Уитни мен Калифорния арасындағы іс кезінде айтқан пікірі бұл ұстанымды одан әрі анықтай түсті.
Брандейс сөз және жиналу бостандығын «тиімді демократия үшін өте қажетті функциялар» деп бағалады.
Ол «халықтың басқаруы процесіне сүйеніп, еркін әрі батыл пікір білдіру мүмкіндігіне сенетін өжет әрі өзіне сенімді адамдарға» қайырыла сөйледі.
Осы негізге сүйенсек, сөйленетін сөзден анық әрі тікелей қауіп төнетіні сондай, айтылған сөзді талқылауға да мүмкіндік болмайтыны дәлелденгенде ғана оны айтуға тыйым салынады.
Брандейстің айтуынша, «егер талқылау арқылы өтірік пен жасандылықты әшкерелеуге, білім беру арқылы зұлымдықты жеңуге уақыт бар болса, онда одан күшпен үнін өшіру емес, көбірек сөз беру арқылы қорғануға болады».
Ал бүгінде, әсіресе «халықтың басқаруы процесіне» сүйеніп, сайлауға әсер ету үшін айтылатын «еркін әрі батыл пікірдің» күшіне сену қиын.
Демек, Брандейстің «өтірік пен жасандылықты әшкерелеу» үшін «күшпен үнін өшіру емес, көбірек сөз беру» әдісін қолдану қажет деген пікірі тым аңғал көрінеді, әсіресе сайлау науқаны кезінде.
Ал, сонда, бұған қандай балама бар?
Джонстың Клинтон туралы айтқаны – нағыз жала екені рас, ол Джонсты азаматтық сотқа тарта алады.
Бірақ бұл тым қымбат әрі көп уақыт алады, сотта нәтижеге жету үшін бірнеше жыл кетуі мүмкін.
Қалай болғанда да, жала туралы азаматтық сот процестері моральдық шығынды өтеуге мүмкіндігі бар адамдарға қарсы қозғалғанда ғана тиімді болады.
Ал қылмыстық жала ше?
Ұлыбританияда «беделін түсіретін жала» ғасырлар бойы қылмыс түріне жатқызылып келген, бірақ көптен қолданылмай, 2010 жылы жойылған.
Ал АҚШ-та жала федералдық деңгейде қылмыс болып саналмайды.
Кей штаттарда ол әлі де қылмыс қатарына жатады, бірақ мұндай істер өте сирек.
Джей Вагнер мен Энтони Фаргоның «Халықаралық баспасөз институтына» арнап жасаған 2015 жылғы есебінде мұндай істердің көбі «азаматтық жала заңына» жататын, көбіне жеке адамдар «кек алу мақсатында» бастайтын мардымсыз жайттар деген баға беріледі.
Есепте қылмыстық жала туралы бап «орынсыз әрі қажетсіз» деген тұжырым жасалады.
Соңғы кездері тараған жалған ақпараттар Вагнер мен Фаргоның асығыс қорытынды жасағанын аңғартады.
Сайлау науқаны кезінде АҚШ президенттігіне кандидатты «балаларды өлтірді» деп айыптауы мардымсыз жайт емес, әрі азаматтық құқықта бұдан қорғайтын әдіс жоқ.
Интернет дәуірінде құқықтық сағаттың тілін кері бұрып, жала жабуды қылмыс қатарына жатқызатын кез келген жоқ па?
Gelombang Pengungsi Minyak
NAIROBI – Anggapan bahwa kekayaan minyak bisa menjadi kutukan sudah dikenal sejak lama – dan tidak perlu penjelasan lagi.
Setiap beberapa dekade, harga energi melonjak, memicu perebutan sumber-sumber minyak baru.
Lalu pasokan akhirnya melebihi permintaan dan harga minyak merosot.
Semakin dalam dan cepat terjadinya penurunan ini, semakin besar dampak sosial dan geopolitik yang akan timbul.
Krisis minyak yang besar terakhir terjadi di tahun 1980an – dan itu mengubah dunia.
Sebagai pemuda yang bekerja di ladang minyak Texas pada musim semi di tahun 1980, saya menyaksikan acuan harga minyak mentah naik hingga $45 per barel – setara dengan $138 dengan nilai tukar dolar sekarang.
Pada tahun 1988, harga jual minyak bahkan lebih rendah dari $9 per barel, kehilangan setengah nilai pada tahun 1986 saja.
Pengendara mobil diuntungkan dengan anjloknya harga bensin.
Akan tetapi di tempat lain dampaknya sangat buruk – walaupun tidak seburuk Uni Soviet yang perekonomiannya sangat bergantung pada ekspor minyak bumi.
Tingkat pertumbuhan Soviet turun sepertiga dibandingkan tahun 1970an.
Ketika Uni Soviet melemah, bentrokan sosial terjadi dan konflik berpuncak pada tahun 1989 saat Tembok Berlin hancur dan komunisme runtuh di seluruh Eropa Tengah dan Timur.
Dua tahun kemudian, Uni Soviet pun bubar.
Sama halnya dengan rendahnya harga minyak sekarang juga menguntungkan beberapa pihak.
Pengguna kendaraan bermotor lagi-lagi akan berbahagia; namun rasa sakit akan diderita banyak orang.
Lupakan sejenak tentang gejolak yang tidak dihindarkan yang dialami pasar keuangan global atau runtuhnya produksi shale-oil di Amerika Serikat serta dampaknya bagi kemandirian energi.
Risiko sebenarnya diderita oleh negara-negara dengan ketergantungan besar pada minyak.
Layaknya Uni Soviet, potensi disintegrasi sosial sangat besar.
Kawasan Sub-Sahara Afrika tentu akan menjadi salah satu episentrum krisis minyak.
Nigeria, negara dengan perekonomian terbesar, bisa jadi terpaksa bertekuk lutut.
Produksi minyak sedang ditunda dan angka pengangguran diperkirakan akan meroket.
Para investor sudah memikirkan ulang investasi miliaran dolar dalam komitmen keuangan.
Presiden Muhammadu Buhari, yang terpilih bulan Maret 2015 lalu, berjanji akan memberantas korupsi, membatasi elit ekonomi, dan memperluas layanan publik bagi masyarakat miskin yang jumlahnya mendominasi populasi Nigeria.
Kini, perwujudan keinginan tersebut nampaknya mustahil.
Tahun lalu, Angola, negara produsen minyak kedua terbesar di Afrika, adalah anak kesayangan investor global.
Pekerja asing yang memenuhi gedung-gedung perkantorwan di kota Luanda dan berkediaman di komplek perumahan mewah mengeluh bahwa mereka tinggal di kota termahal di dunia.
Kini, perekonomian Angola tengah mandek.
Perusahaan-perusahaan konstruksi tidak mampu membayar pegawainya.
Pemerintah yang kekurangan uang mulai memotong subdisi yang menjadi tumpuan warga negaranya sehingga memicu kemarahan warga dan kesan bahwa petro-boom hanya memperkaya kelompok elit tertentu dan membuat yang lainnya sengsara.
Ketika kaum pemuda menuntut perubahan politik dari presiden yang telah berkuasa sejak tahun 1979, pemerintah lalu meluncurkan tindakan keras terhadap perlawanan ini.
Di bagian lain benua Afrika, Kenya dan Uganda melihat harapan mereka menjadi eksportir minyak lenyap.
Selama harga masih rendah, penemuan-penemuan baru harus berada di bawah tanah dan tidak digunakan.
Namun uang yang dipinjam untuk investasi infrastruktur tetap harus dibayarkan – meskipun pendapatan dari minyak yang disiapkan untuk tujuan tersebut tidak pernah diperoleh.
Pendanaan untuk program-program sosial di kedua negara telah dipotong.
Orang-orang biasa sudah murka melihat kleptocratic elite yang menyedot dana publik.
Lalu apa yang akan terjadi dalam beberapa tahun ketika sebagian besar anggaran nasional harus dialokasikan demi membayar utang luar negeri, bukan membiayai pendidikan atau pelayanan kesehatan?
Gambaran kondisi di Afrika Utara pun sama suramnya.
Dua tahun lalu, Mesir percaya bahwa penemuan sumber gas alam lepas pantai yang besar akan menjinakkan gerakan pemuda yang meledak-ledak, ibarat tong mesiu yang memicu Arab Spring pada tahun 2011.
Namun tidak lagi.
Bahkan lebih parahnya, Arab Saudi, yang selama bertahun-tahun mengalirkan dananya ke pemerintah Mesir, kini menghadapi kegelisahan ekonomi.
Kini Kerajaan Saudi tengah mempertimbangkan tindakan yang sebelumnya tidak pernah terlintas di pikirannya: mencabut bantuan dana ke Mesir. 
Sementara itu, negara tetangganya yaitu Libya di ambang ledakan.
Perang sipil yang berlangsung selama setengah dekade mengakibatkan penduduknya menjadi miskin dan berebut pendapatan negara dari minyak yang jumlahnya sudah menyusut.
Ketersediaan makanan dan obat-obatan juga terbatas seiring perjuangan pemimpin perang demi sisa-sisa kekayaan nasional Libya.
Negara-negara ini tidak hanya tergantung pada ekspor minyak; mereka juga sangat bergantung pada impor.
Ketika pendapatan berkurang dan nilai tukar terpuruk, biaya hidup akan meroket dan memperburuk ketegangan sosial dan politik.
Eropa sudah kesulitan menampung para pengungsi dari Timur Tengah dan Afghanistan.
Nigeria, Mesir, Angola, dan Kenya adalah beberapa negara di Afrika dengan populasi penduduk terbesar.
Bayangkan konsekuensi yang akan timbul jika ledakan terjadi dan warga negara yang kehilangan haknya, marah, dan miskin mulai bergerak ke utara.
Farewell to Development’s Old Divides
NEW YORK &#45;&#45; The notion of a divide between the rich north and the poor and developing south has long been a central concept among economists and policymakers.
From 1950 to 1980, the north accounted for almost 80% of global GDP but only 22% of its population, and the south accounted for the remainder of global population and 20% global income.
But the north-south divide is now obsolete.
The dynamic process of globalization has resulted in unprecedented levels of growth and interdependence.
However, while this has blurred the old division, new ones have emerged, splintering today’s world into four inter-connected tiers.
The first tier comprises the affluent countries, notably the United States, European nations, Australia, and Japan – with a combined population of around one billion and per capita incomes ranging from $79,000 (Luxembourg) to $16,000 (Republic of Korea).
For the past 50 years, these affluent countries have dominated the global economy, producing four-fifths of its economic output.
However, in recent years, a new set of economies has emerged that is contesting the affluent countries’ economic dominance.
These emerging economies – call them the Globalizers – constitute a second tier of about 30 poor and middle-income countries (including China and India), with per capita GDP growth rates of 3.5% or more, and a total population of 3.2 billion, or roughly 50% of the world’s population.
These countries have experienced unprecedented levels of sustained economic growth that may well enable them to replace the “Affluents” as engines of the world economy.
The Globalizers are a large and diverse group of countries – in size, geography, culture, and history – that have learned how to integrate optimally with, and leverage, the global economy to catalyze their development.
A third tier is made up of roughly 50 middle-income countries with a combined population of 1.1 billion.
They are also home to many of the world’s critical natural resources, possessing around 60% of proven oil reserves.
But these “Rentiers” have not been able to translate the rents of their natural resource wealth into sustained economic growth.
The fourth tier comprises countries that are lagging behind – the world’s poorest economies, with more than a billion people.
They continue to stagnate or decline economically.
Mostly located in sub-Saharan Africa, these “Laggards” are largely isolated from the global economy, and they face crucial development challenges.
This emerging four-tier world presents three key challenges.
First, we need to increase our efforts to ensure that the Laggards are no longer left behind.
This requires policy changes as well as more generous and more effective aid.
If one considers the issue of aid flows, one finds that though development aid rose in 2005 to $107 billion, most of the increase was geared towards “special circumstances,” such as debt forgiveness and for Iraq and Afghanistan.
The sad truth is that development aid to Africa has decreased from $49 per person in 1980 to $38 per person in 2005.
The true development needs of Laggard countries and other parts of the world are not being met, despite the rhetoric of scaling up aid.
Second, the old powers need to accommodate the rise of Globalizer economies – particularly China and India – by reforming our international order.
The Affluents will continue to be major global players, but as the Globalizers’ relative economic power rises, they will demand a greater role in international affairs.
Most Affluents seem unprepared for this change, but such demands will need to be accommodated.
Finally, while the Globalizers have lifted millions of people out of poverty and reduced global inequality, this has not resulted in a more equal world, because star economies like India and China are experiencing a rise in domestic inequity.
Whether it is coastal versus inland or rural versus urban, these countries must tackle the widening disparities, because high inequality may well threaten their very ability to continue growing as they have.
If we are to create a more equitable world, then traditional levers of development such as trade, investment, aid, and migration need to be scaled up comprehensively and coherently, and global institutions must be reformed.
This would improve our ability to address global challenges and better our prospects for building a more equitable world.
Otherwise, we might bid farewell to old development divides only to welcome new ones.
Farewell to the Euro?
MUNICH – “It’s not the euro that’s in danger, but the public finances of individual European countries.”
One hears this everywhere nowadays, but it’s not true.
The euro itself is at risk, because the countries in crisis have, in recent years, been running the eurozone’s monetary printing presses overtime.
Some 90% of the refinancing debt that the commercial banks of the GIPS countries (Greece, Ireland, Portugal, and Spain) hold with their respective national central banks served to purchase a net inflow of goods and assets from other eurozone countries.
Two-thirds of all refinancing loans within the eurozone were granted within the GIPS countries, despite the fact that these countries account for only 18% of eurozone GDP.
Indeed, 88% of these countries’ current-account deficits over the last three years were financed via the extension of credit within the Eurosystem.
By the end of 2010, ECB loans, which originated primarily from Germany’s Bundesbank, amounted to €340 billion.
This figure includes ECB credit that financed capital flight from Ireland totaling €130 billion over the past three years.
The ECB bailout program has enabled the people of the peripheral countries to continue to live beyond their means, and well-heeled asset holders to take their wealth elsewhere.
The capacity for continuing this policy will soon be depleted, as the central-bank money flowing from the GIPS countries to the core countries of the eurozone increasingly crowds out the money created through refinancing operations there.
If this continues for two more years as it has for the past three, the stock of refinancing loans in Germany will disappear altogether.
Indeed, Deutsche Bank has already stopped participating in refinancing operations.
If German banks drop out of the refinancing business, the European Central Bank will lose the direct control over the German economy that it used to have via its interest-rate policy.
The main refinancing rate would then only be the rate at which the peripheral EU countries draw ECB money for purchases in the center of Europe, which ultimately would be the source of all the money circulating in the euro area.
The GIPS’ enormous current-account deficits – and the massive exodus of capital from Ireland, in particular – would not have been possible without ECB financing.
Without the additional money that GIPS central banks created in excess of their countries’ requirements for internal circulation, trade deficits could not have been sustained, and the GIPS’ commercial banks would have been unable to prop up asset prices (which all too often were those of government bonds).
Last year, with the ECB running out of tools to keep Europe’s troubled banks from precipitating a financial crisis, follow-up financing was agreed upon, and from 2013 onwards the European Stability Mechanism (ESM) is meant to take on that responsibility.
This may relieve some pressure, but it only shifts the problem from the ECB bailout fund to the community of states.
The ESM is a sure way to bring Europe to its knees, because the longer bailout loans continue, the longer the GIPS’ current-account deficits will persist, and the more their external debts will grow.
Eventually, these debts will become unsustainable.
The sole exception is Ireland, which is suffering not from a lack of competitiveness, but from capital flight.
Ireland is the only country that has lowered its prices and wages, and its current-account deficit is about to swing into surplus.
By contrast, Spain’s external deficit is still above 4% of GDP, while Portugal and Greece recently recorded astronomical figures of around 10%.
What Europe is trying to do in Portugal and Greece is reminiscent of central banks’ futile efforts in past decades to keep exchange rates away from the market equilibrium price level.
Some central banks, such as the Bank of England in its unsuccessful fight against George Soros in 1992, got burned; when it became clear how much money was required to buck the market, the policy was abandoned.
Apart from China, central banks don’t intervene to protect their currencies anymore.
Europe, too, will get a bloody nose if it keeps trying to artificially prop up asset prices in the periphery.
The sums required for this could ultimately run into trillions, according to an estimate by Citibank.
This would shatter Europe.
Apart from financial restructuring, which is crucial, Greece and Portugal must become cheaper in order to regain their competitiveness.
Estimates for Greece assume that prices and wages need to come down by 20-30%.
Things won’t be much different in Portugal.
If these countries lack the political consensus they need to pull this off, they should in their own interest consider leaving the eurozone temporarily to depreciate their currencies.
The banking system would not survive this without help, so the EU’s bailout activities should be refocused accordingly.
But these countries’ real economies would benefit from a furlough from the eurozone.
Depreciation inside the eurozone in the form of deflation, on the other hand, would drive large parts of the real economy into excessive debt, because only the value of assets, not that of bank debts, would decline.
The transitional independent privatization agency proposed by Jean-Claude Juncker for paying the Greek debt is not a good idea.
First, it would at best aim to solve the debt problem; it would not increase competitiveness.
Second, Germany’s experience with this kind of agency shows that it is impossible to sell off large parts of an economy simultaneously.
Europe’s banks would make a killing without reducing Greek debt in any meaningful way.
It is time to face the fact that Europe’s peripheral countries have to shrink their nominal GDP to regain competitiveness.  The only question is whether they will take the euro down as well.
Farewell to the Neo-Classical Revolution
LONDON – The looming bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers, and the forced sale of Merrill Lynch, two of the greatest names in finance, mark the end of an era.
But what will come next?
Cycles of economic fashion are as old as business cycles, and are usually caused by deep business disturbances.
“Liberal” cycles are followed by “conservative” cycles, which give way to new “liberal” cycles, and so on.&#160;
Liberal cycles are characterized by government intervention and conservative cycles by government retreat.
A long liberal cycle stretched from the 1930’s to the 1970’s, followed by a conservative cycle of economic deregulation, which now seems to have run its course.
With the nationalization of America’s two giant mortgage banks, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, following the nationalization earlier this year of Britain’s Northern Rock, governments have started stepping in again to prevent market meltdowns.
The heady days of conservative economics are over – for now.
Each cycle of regulation and de-regulation is triggered by economic crisis.
The last liberal cycle, associated with President Franklin Roosevelt’s New Deal and the economist John Maynard Keynes, was triggered by the Great Depression, though it took World War II’s massive government spending to get it properly going.
During the three-decade-long Keynesian era, governments in the capitalist world managed and regulated their economies to maintain full employment and moderate business fluctuations.&#160;
The new conservative cycle was triggered by the inflation of the 1970’s, which seemed to be a product of Keynesian policies.
The economic guru of that era, Milton Friedman, claimed that the deliberate pursuit of full employment was bound to fuel inflation.
Governments should concentrate on keeping money “sound” and leave the economy to look after itself.
The “new classical economics,” as it became known, taught that, in the absence of egregious government interference, economies would gravitate naturally to full employment, greater innovation, and higher growth rates.
At issue here is the oldest unresolved dilemma in economics: are market economies “naturally” stable or do they need to be stabilized by policy?
Keynes emphasized the flimsiness of the expectations on which economic activity in decentralized markets is based.
The future is inherently uncertain, and therefore investor psychology is fickle.
“The practice of calmness, of immobility, of certainty and security, suddenly breaks down,” Keynes wrote. “New fears and hopes will, without warning, take charge of human conduct.”
This is a classic description of the “herd behavior” that George Soros has identified as financial markets’ dominant feature.
It is the government’s job to stabilize expectations.
The neo-classical revolution believed that markets were much more cyclically stable than Keynes believed, that the risks in all market transactions can be known in advance, and that prices will therefore always reflect objective probabilities.
Such market optimism led to de-regulation of financial markets in the 1980’s and 1990’s, and the subsequent explosion of financial innovation which made it “safe” to borrow larger and larger sums of money on the back of predictably rising assets.
The just-collapsed credit bubble, fueled by so-called special investment vehicles, derivatives, collateralized debt obligations, and phony triple-A ratings, was built on the illusions of mathematical modeling.
Liberal cycles, the historian Arthur Schlesinger thought, succumb to the corruption of power, conservative cycles to the corruption of money.
Both have their characteristic benefits and costs.
But if we look at the historical record, the liberal regime of the 1950’s and 1960’s was more successful than the conservative regime that followed.
Outside China and India, whose economic potential was unleashed by market economics, economic growth was faster and much more stable in the Keynesian golden age than in the age of Friedman; its fruits were more equitably distributed; social cohesion and moral habits better maintained.
These are serious benefits to weigh against some business sluggishness.
History, of course, never repeats itself exactly.
Circuit-breakers are in place nowadays to prevent a 1929-style slide into disaster.
But when the financial system, left to its own devices, seizes up, as it now has, we are clearly in for a new round of regulation.
Industry will be left free, but finance will be brought under control.
The cycles in economic fashion show how far economics is from being a science.
One cannot think of any natural science in which orthodoxy swings between two poles.
What gives economics the appearance of a science is that its propositions can be expressed mathematically by abstracting from many decisive characteristics of the real world.
The classical economics of the 1920’s abstracted from the problem of unemployment by assuming that it did not exist.
Keynesian economics, in turn, abstracted from the problem of official incompetence and corruption by assuming that governments were run by omniscient, benevolent experts.
Today’s “new classical economics” abstracted from the problem of uncertainty by assuming that it could be reduced to measurable (or hedgeable) risk.
A few geniuses aside, economists frame their assumptions to suit existing states of affairs, and then invest them with an aura of permanent truth.
They are intellectual butlers, serving the interests of those in power, not vigilant observers of shifting reality.
Their systems trap them in orthodoxy.
When events, for whatever reason, coincide with their theorems, the orthodoxy that they espouse enjoys its moment of glory.
When events shift, it becomes obsolete.
As Charles Morris wrote: “Intellectuals are reliable lagging indicators, near-infallible guides to what used to be true.”
Farewell to the Revolution?
“The FARC are finished, no matter how many men and weapons they may still have.”
Former Salvadoran guerrilla leader Joaquín Villalobos’ lapidary conclusion about the Colombian narco-guerrilla movement is worthy of consideration, given his unmatched insight into Latin America’s armed, revolutionary left.
So is the almost tearful acknowledgement by Venezuelan President Hugo Chávez’s ideological guru, Heinz Dieterich, that “Chávez’s speech on the FARC (calling on it to abandon armed struggle and free its hostages) is the equivalent of unconditional surrender to Washington’s hemispheric ambition.”
However hasty these judgments may end up being, it certainly seems that the region’s oldest and last political-military organization is, at long last, on the brink of defeat.
Colombian President Alvaro Uribe’s strategy of “democratic security” appears to have paid off, supported by the United States-financed Plan Colombia, as well as by much plain good luck, such as finding thousands of incriminating computer files three months ago in an attack on a FARC camp in Ecuador.
If events in the next few months confirm the FARC’s demise, Latin America would finally be rid of one of its main scourges over the past half-century.
At least since December 1956, when Fidel and Raúl Castro, together with a young Argentine doctor, later known as Che Guevara, sailed from Mexico’s port of Tuxpan to Cuba and into history, the region has seen innumerable attempts by small left-wing revolutionary groups to take power through armed uprisings.
They have all invoked heroic precedents from the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, as well as the impossibility of proceeding otherwise under brutal right-wing dictatorships, such as Batista’s in Cuba, Somoza’s in Nicaragua, and military-oligarchic complexes in Guatemala, El Salvador, Bolivia, Argentina, Peru, Uruguay, and elsewhere – including Colombia.
In many of these cases, they were right: without recourse to guns and bullets, nothing in their countries would ever have changed.
They achieved only three successes: Cuba, in 1959; Nicaragua, in 1979; and El Salvador, where, by 1992, they fought the US and the local army to a stalemate, bringing peace and growing prosperity to their country.
Everywhere else, for whatever reason – misguided strategies, tactical mistakes, erroneous theories, US intervention, etc. – they faced only defeat, repression, and futility.
By the early 1990’s, it became increasingly evident that the armed struggle for power in Latin American was winding down.
Only a few groups remained: the Shining Path in Peru, the Manuel Rodríguez Patriotic Front in Chile, for a brief time the Zapatistas in Chiapas, Mexico, and the FARC in Colombia.
Democratic transitions throughout the hemisphere had made guerrilla warfare unjustifiable: as Che foretold in his La Guerra de Guerrillas in 1962, wherever the trappings (or, one might add, the realities) of democratic rule prevailed, taking up arms was pointless.
In country after country, the guerrillas were defeated, pacified, brought into the democratic process, or rendered irrelevant.
By the end of the twentieth century, only the FARC endured, together with a smattering of splinter groups in Mexico.
So if Villalobos and Dieterich are right about the FARC’s imminent collapse, it would be a veritable milestone for the region, and a vindication of a strategy – Uribe’s – of which many of us were wary.
That strategy has rightly been criticized for human rights violations, but it seems to have proved successful.
This is no minor matter for the hemisphere, for Colombia, and for Uribe.
Nonetheless, three major problems remain. First, despite high desertion rates, the death of three of their seven leaders, and Chávez’s apparent decision to forsake them (at least for now), the FARC have proved remarkably resilient over the past 40 years.
Yes, they are divided, unpopular, and devoid of international representation, but the ups and downs of guerrilla warfare are well known; the only truly dead guerrilla fighter is one who is buried.
Second, it would seem highly risky to conclude that one speech by Chávez is tantamount to a fundamental affirmation of principle.
To be sure, Chávez is absolutely crucial to FARC’s survival, given its current, undoubtedly weakened condition.
But, having met Chávez personally a dozen times, it appears naïve, at least to me, to attribute great significance or conviction to anything he says – moderate, hard left, or in between.
He may well have opted for a minor tactical “correction,” only to wait to fight another day.
Finally, supposing Uribe is on the verge of victory, what should he do with it?
Many have advocated negotiating pacification with the late FARC leader Manuel Marulanda’s successors.
But, without any notion of power-sharing, this is easier said than done.
After all, the 1992 Chapultepec Peace Agreements, which ended the Salvadoran civil war, were signed more than two years after it became obvious that neither side could win.
And this occurred thanks to skillful United Nations involvement, led by Alvaro de Soto; the talent of sophisticated FMLN leaders like Villalobos and chief negotiator Salvador Samayoa; strong pressure from the US and its point-man, Bernard Aronson; and Salvadoran President Alfredo Christiani’s undeniable courage and vision.
Few of these ingredients exist in today’s Colombia.
So perhaps Villalobos should be a bit more cautious, and Dieterich a bit less forlorn.
Siapa yang paling dirugikan akibat Perubahan Iklim?
SEATTLE – Beberapa tahun yang lalu, saya dan Melinda mengunjungi sebuah kelompok petani padi di Bihar, India, salah satu daerah yang paling sering terkena banjir di negara tersebut.
Mereka sangat miskin dan bergantung pada padi yang mereka tumbuhkan untuk memberi makan dan menghidupi keluarga mereka.
Saat musim hujan terjadi setiap tahunnya, sungai akan meluap, mengancam ladang pertanian mereka dan merusak tanaman di lahan tersebut.
Namun, mereka tetap percaya dan rela bertaruh bahwa lahan mereka tidak akan terkena banjir.
Seringkali mereka kalah dalam “taruhan” ini.
Tanaman mereka rusak, mereka lalu akan pindah ke kota untuk mencari pekerjaan serabutan untuk memberi makan keluarga mereka.
Pada tahun mendatang, namun demikian, mereka akan kembali – seringkali lebih miskin daripada saat mereka pertama pergi ke kota – siap untuk menanam lagi.
Kunjungan kami merupakan pengingat yang berharga bahwa untuk para petani yang paling miskin di dunia, hidup adalah seperti berjalan di titian kabel yang tinggi – tanpa jaring pengaman.
Mereka tidak memiliki akses terhadap bibit, pupuk, sistem pengairan, dan teknologi berguna lainnya yang memiliki kualitas lebih baik seperti yang dipakai oleh para petani di negara kaya – dan tidak ada asuransi tanaman pertanian untuk melindungi mereka dari kerugian.
Satu kemalangan saja – kekeringan, banjir, atau jatuh sakit – cukup untuk menjerumuskan mereka lebih dalam ke lubang kemiskinan dan kelaparan.
Saat ini, perubahan iklim juga menambahkan resiko baru dalam kehidupan mereka.
Suhu yang meningkat di dalam satu dekade mendatang akan memberikan gangguan yang besar terhadap pertanian, khususnya di wilayah tropis.
Tanaman tidak akan tumbuh karena hujan yang terlalu sedikit atau terlalu banyak.
Hama berkembang biak dengan pesat di iklim yang lebih hangat dan menghancurkan tanaman.
Para petani di negara yang lebih kaya akan mengalami perubahan juga.
Tetapi mereka memiliki peralatan dan bantuan untuk menghadapi resiko-resiko ini.
Para petani termiskin di dunia sebagian besar pergi bekerja setiap hari dengan tangan kosong.
Maka dari itu, dari semua orang yang akan dirugikan akibat perubahan iklim, mereka adalah orang-orang yang akan paling menderita.
Para petani miskin akan merasakan akibat dari perubahan ini dan pada saat yang sama dunia membutuhkan bantuan mereka untuk memberi makan bagi populasi yang kian berkembang.
Pada tahun 2050, kebutuhan pangan global diharapkan meningkat sebesar 60%.
Penurunan jumlah panen akan menghambat sistem  pangan global, memperburuk kelaparan dan mengurangi kemajuan yang sudah dicapai dunia dalam mengentaskan kemiskinan selama setengah abad belakangan ini.
Saya optimis bahwa kita dapat menghindari dampak perubahan iklim dan memberi makan dunia – jika kita bertindak sekarang.
Ada kebutuhan mendesak bagi pemerintah untuk berinvestasi pada inovasi-inovasi energi bersih yang akan secara drastis mengurangi emisi gas rumah kaca dan menghambat kenaikan suhu.
Pada saat yang sama, kita perlu memperhatikan bahwa kini sudah terlambat untuk menghentikan semua dampak suhu yang lebih panas.
Bahkan jika dunia menemukan sumber energi yang murah dan bersih minggu depan, akan butuh waktu untuk menghilangkan kebiasaan menggunakan bahan bakar fosil dan berganti ke masa depan yang bebas karbon.
Maka dari itu, penting bagi dunia untuk berinvestasi pada upaya-upaya untuk membantu masyarakat yang paling miskin untuk beradaptasi.
Banyak dari peralatan yang mereka butuhkan adalah alat yang mendasar – benda-benda yang mereka butuhkan untuk menumbuhkan lebih banyak makanan dan mendapatkan penghasilan yang lebih besar: akses terhadap pembiayaan, bibit yang lebih baik, pupuk, pelatihan, dan pasar di mana mereka dapat menjual apa yang mereka hasilkan.
Peralatan lainnya adalah peralatan baru dan disesuaikan dengan permintaan berdasarkan perubahan iklim.
The Gates Foundation dan para mitra telah bekerja sama untuk membuat varietas bibit baru yang dapat tumbuh bahkan pada masa kering maupun banjir.
Para petani padi yang saya temui di Bihar, contohnya, sekarang menumbuhkan varietas baru padi tahan banjir – disebut padi “scuba” – yang dapat bertahan dua minggu di bawah air.
Mereka sudah mempersiapkan jika pergantian pola cuaca akan mendatangkan banjir yang lebih besar ke daerah itu.
Varietas padi lainnya yang tahan kekeringan, panas, dingin, dan permasalahan tanah seperti kontaminasi garam yang tinggi sedang dibuat.
Semua upaya ini memiliki  kekuatan untuk mengubah kehidupan.
Ini cukup biasa untuk melihat bahwa para petani mampu panen dua kali dan tiga kali lipat saat mereka punya akses terhadap peralatan-peralatan canggih yang dianggap sepele oleh para petani di negara yang kaya.
Perkembangan baru ini membuat mereka mampu meningkatkan pola makan mereka, berinvestasi di pertanian mereka, dan mengirimkan anak-anak mereka ke sekolah.
Ini juga menyelamatkan hidup mereka dari ujung tanduk, memberikan mereka pengaman meskipun mereka mengalami panen yang buruk.
Ada juga ancaman-ancaman perubahan iklim yang tidak dapat kita prediksi sebelumnya.
Untuk bersiap-siap, dunia perlu untuk mempercepat riset atas bibit dan dukungan-dukungan lain bagi para petani kecil.
Salah satu inovasi yang membantu para petani adalah teknologi satelit.
Di Afrika, para peneliti menggunakan gambar satelit untuk membuat peta tanah yang terperinci, yang dapat memberitahukan petani mengenai varietas yang dapat tumbuh subur di lahannya.
Tetap saja, bibit yang lebih baik atau teknologi baru tidak dapat mengubah hidup keluarga petani sampai teknologi ini dapat mereka miliki dan gunakan.
Beberapa organisasi, termasuk sebuah kelompok non-profit bernama One Acre Fund, mencari cara untuk memastikan para petani mendapatkan keuntungan dari solusi ini.
One Acre Fund bekerja dengan lebih dari 200,000 petani Afrika, menyediakan akses kepada pendanaan, peralatan, dan pelatihan.
Pada tahun 2020, mereka bertujuan untuk mencapai satu juta petani.
Pada Surat Tahunan tahun ini, saya dan Melinda bertaruh bahwa Afrika akan dapat memberi makan dirinya sendiri selama 15 tahun mendatang.
Bahkan dengan resiko perubahan iklim, menurut saya, saya akan memenangkan taruhan ini.
Ya, keadaannya sulit bagi para petani miskin.
Hidup mereka disulitkan dengan berbagai macam persoalan yang harus dibenarkan – dari menanam bibit yang tepat dan menggunakan pupuk yang benar sampai mendapatkan pelatihan dan memiliki tempat untuk menjual hasil panen mereka.
Jika satu hal saja bermasalah, makan hidup mereka akan terpuruk.
Saya tahu bahwa dunia ini sudah mengetahui apa yang harus dilakukan agar hal-hal ini berjalan dengan baik untuk menghadapi tantangan-tantangan yang mereka hadapi hari ini atau yang akan mereka hadapi di masa mendatang.
Lebih penting lagi, saya tahu bahwa para petani sudah menyadari hal ini juga. 
Fatah’s Status Quo Congress
HERZLIYA – The Sixth Fatah Congress, held recently in Bethlehem, was an important event for the future of the Arab-Israeli conflict and for the Palestinian movement.
But a careful look at the results of the Congress’s elections to Fatah’s Central Committee yields a picture that is quite different from what many will conclude about the meeting.
The Congress seemed to demonstrate three main points: Fatah has moved toward peace with Israel; it has adopted democratic procedures; and a new generation, or even a specific group called the Young Guard, has assumed leadership.
But this interpretation is in large part wrong.
In terms of its approach to peace, the new Central Committee is roughly the same as the old one.
Of the 18 elected members (Palestinian Authority leader Mahmoud Abbas will appoint four more later), no more than two (Nabil Shaath and Muhammad Shtayyeh) are really moderate.
At least four (Muhammad al-Ghuneim, Salim al-Zanoun, Abbas Zaki, and Nasser Kidra) are hardliners, and most of the rest follow pretty much the traditional Fatah line.
As for democracy, while the Congress was certainly a step forward from the past (when Fatah leader Yasir Arafat could handpick Fatah’s leadership), real limits remain.
Depending on one’s definition, Abbas chose between one-third and one-half of the delegates. The majority of the Central Committee, not surprisingly, are Abbas’s close associates and supporters.
The fact that only one out of 18 members will be from the Hamas-ruled Gaza Strip, which contains about half of all the Palestinians that Fatah governs, also skews the results.
But there is one aspect of this election so dangerous that it might outweigh everything else.
The candidate who came in first, with two-thirds of the vote, was Abd al-Mahir Ghuneim, who is increasingly being spoken of as Abbas’s successor.  Ghuneim is an unrepentant hardliner and an open opponent of the Oslo agreement, much less of a negotiated peace agreement with Israel.
If he becomes Fatah’s leader (and hence leader of the PA and the PLO as well), any compromise with Israel would become unimaginable.
What about the transfer of power to a new generation?
This is accurate in purely chronological terms – old leaders inevitably get older, after all. Yet, while almost all the old members of the committee were not reelected, at least 15 of the 22 members will be old-style leaders (presuming Abbas will appoint such people to the four seats that he controls).
Many of the newly elected members, moreover, are veteran Fatah bureaucrats.
The most interesting additions to the Central Committee are three younger men, though they have played leading roles in the organization for 20 years or more.
Marwan Barghouti, the leader of Fatah’s grassroots group on the West Bank, is now in an Israeli prison for organizing the bloody uprising that began in 2000, and for direct involvement in planning the killings of many Israeli civilians.
While some will point to Barghouti’s election as a victory for the younger generation, not one of his followers will join him.
The other two younger men, Muhammad Dahlan and Jibril Rajoub, built political bases of their own as commanders of security forces in the Gaza Strip and on the West Bank, respectively.
But Rajoub has many enemies, and Dahlan was responsible for Fatah���s humiliating defeat by Hamas in the fight that led to the expulsion of Fatah from Gaza.
In addition, all three of the younger men are rivals, not allies.
In other words, there is no unified Young Guard.
Indeed, far from being an electoral revolution, only two of those elected – Barghouti and Muhammad Shtayyeh, who has headed PECDAR, the Palestinian agency that promotes transparency and economic development – can be considered at all critical of the Fatah establishment.
But, while the election did not usher in a leadership eager for peace with Israel and a Palestinian state achieved by compromise, nor was it a prelude to a renewal of violence.
There are several individuals in the new leadership who have many Israeli contacts, and who can pick up a phone and call or be called by their Israeli counterparts.
It is also extremely important that most of Fatah’s new leaders have a strong distaste for Hamas, which makes rapprochement between the two groups unlikely.
Still, if Ghuneim takes over as the PA’s and Fatah’s leader, which could happen next year, a breakdown of negotiations with Israel and a new round of fighting would not be surprising.
The other interesting new face, though he has no chance of becoming a major leader, is Shtayyeh.
A successful businessman, he could become an ombudsman and whistle-blower, which would be a real innovation.
But, while it will be interesting to see whether he speaks out or is shut up, one shouldn’t read too much into his election: he finished last among those elected, beating by a single vote Tayib Abu Rahman, one of Arafat’s most trusted lieutenants and an old-school hardliner.
There is a wide range of views in the new Palestinian leadership.
This is neither a group that will make peace with Israel nor one that will ally itself with Hamas.
In other words, it is a group with which Israel can work on status quo issues, though not on a comprehensive agreement.
But if Muhammad al-Ghuneim does indeed become the new leader, the prospects for any peace at all look grim.
The $4.3 Billion Shrug
LONDON – In November, the United Kingdom’s Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) announced a settlement in which six banks would be fined a total of $4.3 billion for manipulating the foreign-exchange market.
And yet share prices barely reacted.
Why?
The nefarious practices and management failings uncovered during the yearlong investigation that led to the fines were shocking.
Semi-literate email and chat-room exchanges among venal traders revealed brazen conspiracies to rig the afternoon exchange-rate “fix” for profit and personal gain.
Senior managers were so disengaged that they allowed their employees to act like vulgar, overpaid children.
Using nicknames like “the three musketeers” and “the A-team,” they did whatever they liked, at an enormous cost to their institutions.
But, despite the huge FCA fine, no top executive was forced to fall on his or her sword, and investors did little more than shrug.
One reason, of course, is that the settlement was known to be coming; only the details of the offenses and the scale of the fines were news.
The more important reason, though, is that even $4.3 billion is small change when compared to the total fines and litigation costs incurred by the major banks over the last five years.
Morgan Stanley analysts estimate that the top 22 banks in the United States and Europe have been forced to pay $230 billion since 2009 – more than 50 times the cost of the FCA settlement.
This is over and above the heavy losses that banks incurred from bad lending and overambitious financial engineering.
American banks have incurred more than half of these massive penalties.
The European bill amounts to just over $100 billion – roughly half of which was paid by the top seven British banks.
But the numbers tell only part of the story.
In the US, the penalties have been dominated by fines for sales of misleadingly marketed mortgage-backed securities, often to the two government supported entities Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac.
The banks, it would be fair to say, do not wholly accept regulators’ arguments about that, but they have bitten their tongues and paid up.
(US regulators have also imposed high penalties on foreign banks for breaches of American sanctions policies in relation to Iran.)
In the UK, by contrast, the biggest penalties have come in the form of compensation payments made to individual mortgage borrowers who were sold Payment Protection Insurance.
The regulators maintain that much of this insurance was worthless to borrowers and was mis-sold.
The banks believe that some of the claimants whom they are being forced to pay are unworthy, but they have nonetheless coughed up the money.
That unhappy episode has cost British banks $37 billion so far, with more to come – most likely another $5 billion or so.
The Morgan Stanley analysis suggests that we can expect another $70 billion in fines and litigation costs over the next two years from already identified errors and omissions.
And new episodes could emerge; two years ago, no one anticipated the fallout from the manipulation of the foreign-exchange markets.
The irony here – not lost on the major banks’ finance directors – is that as fast as banks add capital from rights issues and retained earnings to meet the demands of prudential regulators, the funds are drained away by conduct regulators.