Couple these tax increases and spending cuts with the provisions of “Obamacare,” the US health-care reform championed by President Barack Obama, and, as of January 1, 2013, America’s &#160;long-run structural budget deficit disappears.
The restored tax rates will, for the foreseeable future, be sufficient to support the US defense establishment, the growing US social-insurance system, and a moderate – albeit inadequate and suboptimal – amount of other “discretionary” federal spending.
The US national debt/GDP ratio will be on track to fall from its current level of 75% to 50% by 2035.
Moreover, the US will begin running primary budget surpluses – the fiscal balance minus interest payments on existing debt – by 2015.
So why isn’t the prospect of going over the fiscal cliff greeted with enthusiasm?
Yes, there will be big spending cuts – which will hit defense contractors, doctors with Medicare patients, and all who benefit from or rely on government discretionary spending – and substantial tax increases.
But, to balance the budget in the long run, either taxes have to go up or spending has to go down relative to some baseline, or both.
There are two reasons why deficit hawks are not declaring victory.
First, many who call themselves deficit hawks are really spending hawks: they believe that US social insurance is too generous to the unemployed, the disabled, the elderly, and the sick, and that by far the best policy is to cut back on such programs rather than raise taxes to pay for them.
But, they fear that calling for spending cuts will be unpopular, unlike, they hope, demands to balance the budget.
For them, the problem with the fiscal cliff is that it does not cut spending enough and raises taxes too much.
Second, and more important for those who worry about the US economy’s health, the process is not well-described by the term “fiscal cliff.”
If no deal is reached by June 30, America’s likely 2013 real GDP growth rate will be -0.5%, with the likely unemployment rate returning to 8.9%.
Spending cuts and tax increases that in the long run restore fiscal sanity and balance are good.
Having them all hit a weak, still-depressed economy simultaneously is not good.
Thus, US officials face four tasks.
First, Republicans and Democrats must negotiate a bipartisan agreement to stretch out the spending cuts and tax increases that take effect on January 1, 2013.
That way, they will affect the economy gradually over five years, rather than all at once.
Second, the Federal Reserve should expand its quantitative easing and forward guidance programs.
Consumers will be spending less in 2013, owing to higher taxes, as will government, which means that someone has to be spending more.
Housing construction and exports are the obvious candidates, and both can be boosted somewhat by more aggressive balance-sheet operations by the Fed, together with promises of continued low nominal interest rates and higher inflation in the medium term.
Third, the large government-sponsored mortgage enterprises, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, should be used as macroeconomic-policy tools to restore housing construction to its long-term trend level.
This should have been done five years ago, but better late than never.
Finally, and also five years too late, the US Treasury secretary should announce that while the strong-dollar doctrine was appropriate (and in America’s interest) during the dot-com boom, the country needs a weak dollar in the aftermath of the austerity bomb’s detonation.
Reaching the wrong agreement to defuse the austerity bomb, or cushion the economy from its impact, would merely recreate America’s long-run structural budget deficit –&#160;a very bad outcome.
Failure to take all four steps outlined above all but guarantees renewed recession in America, even if a good agreement is reached on stretching out the tax hikes and spending cuts.
And if no agreement is reached on that, undertaking the last three steps would at least reduce somewhat the subsequent damage.
What Communism Still Teaches Us
PRAGUE - The fifteenth anniversary of the Velvet Revolution on November 17, 1989, which brought an end to 41 years of communist dictatorship in Czechoslovakia, is an opportunity to ponder the meaning of moral behavior and free action.
Today we live in a democratic society, but many people - not only in the Czech Republic - still believe that they are not true masters of their destiny.
They have lost faith that they can really influence political developments, much less influence the direction in which our civilization is evolving.
During the communist era, most people believed that individual efforts to effect change did not make sense.
Communist leaders insisted that the system was the result of history's objective laws, which could not be challenged, and those who refused this logic were punished - just in case.
Unfortunately, the way of thinking that supported Communist dictatorships has not disappeared entirely.
Some politicians and pundits maintain that Communism merely collapsed under its own weight - again, owing to "objective laws" of history.
Again, individual responsibility and individual actions are belittled.
Communism, we are told, was only one of the dead ends of Western rationalism; therefore, it was sufficient to wait passively for it to fail.
The very same people often believe in other manifestations of inevitability, such as various supposed laws of the market and other "invisible hands" that direct our lives.
As there is not much space in such thinking for individual moral action, social critics are often ridiculed as naive moralists or elitists.
Perhaps this is one of the reasons why 15 years after the fall of Communism, we again witness political apathy.
Democracy is increasingly seen as a mere ritual.
In general, Western societies, it seems, are experiencing a certain crisis of the democratic ethos and active citizenship.
It is possible that what we are witnessing is a mere change of paradigm, caused by new technologies, and we have nothing to worry about.
But perhaps the problem is deeper: global corporations, media cartels, and powerful bureaucracies are transforming political parties into organizations whose main task is no longer public service, but the protection of specific clienteles and interests.
Politics is becoming a battleground for lobbyists; media trivialize serious problems; democracy often looks like a virtual game for consumers, rather than a serious business for serious citizens.
When dreaming about a democratic future, we who were dissidents certainly had some utopian illusions, as we are well aware today.
However, we were not mistaken when we argued that Communism was not a mere dead end of Western rationalism.
Bureaucratization, anonymous manipulation, and emphasis on mass conformism were brought to "perfection" in the Communist system; however, some of the very same threats are with us today.
We were already certain then that if democracy is emptied of values and reduced to a competition of political parties that have "guaranteed" solutions to everything, it can be quite undemocratic.
This is why we put so much emphasis on the moral dimension of politics and a vibrant civil society as counterweights to political parties and state institutions.
We also dreamed about a more just international order.
The end of the bipolar world represented a great opportunity to make the international order more humane.
Instead, we witness a process of economic globalization that has escaped political control and, as such, is causing economic havoc as well as ecological devastation in many parts of the world.
The fall of Communism was an opportunity to create more effective global political institutions based on democratic principles - institutions that could stop what appears to be, in its current form, the self-destructive tendency of our industrial world.
If we do not want to be overrun by anonymous forces, the principles of freedom, equality and solidarity - the foundation of stability and prosperity in Western democracies - must start working globally.
But, above all, it is necessary - just as it was during the Communist era - that we not lose faith in the meaning of alternative centers of thought and civic action.
Let's not allow ourselves to be manipulated into believing that attempts to change the "established" order and "objective" laws do not make sense.
Let's try to build a global civil society, and let's insist that politics is not just a technology of power, but needs to have a moral dimension.
At the same time, politicians in democratic countries need to think seriously about reforms of international institutions, because we desperately need institutions capable of real global governance.
We could start, for example, with the United Nations, which, in its current form, is a relic of the situation shortly after the end of World War II. It does not reflect the influence of some new regional powers, while immorally equating countries whose representatives are democratically elected and those whose representatives speak only for themselves or their juntas, at best.
We, the Europeans, have one specific task.
Industrial civilization, which now spans the whole world, originated in Europe.
All of its miracles, as well as its terrifying contradictions, can be explained as consequences of an ethos that is initially European.
Therefore, unifying Europe should set an example for the rest of the world regarding how to face the various dangers and horrors that are engulfing us today.
Indeed, such a task - which is closely tied to the success of European integration - would be an authentic fulfillment of the European sense of global responsibility.
And it would be a much better strategy than cheaply blaming America for the contemporary world's various problems.
What Corporate Tax for Europe?
The European Commission is considering a common model of corporate taxation for the European Union that cannot possibly work.
Instead, it should consider a simpler, and more viable, alternative that already exists.
Corporate income in the EU is currently taxed under widely divergent national rules, based on separate accounting (SA) of income earned in each country.
Cross-border intra-company transactions are accounted for according to market prices for similar transactions – the so-called “arm’s-length principle” (ALP).
The system is complex, expensive to administer, and can result in double taxation because members usually do not allow full write-offs for losses and tax liabilities incurred abroad.
It is also prone to tax evasion, owing to different definitions of corporate income in the member states and the vast opportunities for cheating offered by ALP (since reference market prices often do not exist), not to mention profit-shifting to low-tax jurisdictions.
The Commission is now proposing that EU companies operating in more than one member state be taxed on a common definition of earned income – the Common Consolidated Base Taxation (CCBT).
Earned income would be calculated on a consolidated basis for the group and then “apportioned” among the member states according to a formula reflecting each business unit’s contribution to overall group income.
The formula could include such factors as sales, payroll, and tangible assets, as in Canada and the United States, or value-added, adjusted to exclude imports in order to measure the value-added “produced” in each country.
Each member state would remain free to decide the tax rate applicable to its portion of group income.
Under this approach, taxable income would be determined from the consolidated accounts based on international accounting standards (IAS), which since 2005 have become legally binding for EU-listed companies’ financial reports.
This offers full tax write-offs for losses within company groups, and transfer prices would no longer matter.
Even so, the Commission’s proposal has fatal shortcomings.
For one thing, the factors included in the apportionment formula would in practice be taxed at the national rates, creating fresh incentives for factor- and profit-shifting.
But it is two other obstacles that render CCBT hopeless.
First, the IAS responds to the information needs of financial investors, but it does not provide a reliable definition of income for tax purposes.
The accrual principle typical of financial accounting is incompatible with tax systems’ realization principle.
Moreover, the IAS leaves the allocation of profit and losses to different fiscal years largely undetermined, with each member state choosing different solutions.
Second, common legal rules on group consolidation do not exist; indeed, many EU countries’ commercial law contains no legal definition of a group.
The attribution of companies to a common group would need to be based on legal control, that is, ownership of some defined threshold of equity – 51% or higher.
But a much lower share of equity often is sufficient to secure de facto control, thus encouraging groups to adapt their capital structure – moving firms in and out of the group’s boundaries – to minimize tax liabilities.
Clearly, CCBT is a non-starter.
But this doesn’t mean that EU companies are condemned to live with 25 different national tax systems.
The idea of a common tax base must be preserved in order to simplify the system and narrow the scope for profit-shifting.
However, a radical change in approach is required: the notion of income as a basis for corporate taxation should be scrapped altogether.
Referring to corporate income made sense when company taxation was seen as a “back stop” within a system of progressive taxation of personal incomes.
But most countries have now adopted “dual” income taxation that treat the fruits of capital more leniently than other personal income.
More importantly, the notion of corporate income is inherently arbitrary, for it is based on correct measurement of capital consumption in each tax period, which has become less and less reliable owing to the increased importance of intangibles in the value of companies.
Moreover, any tax whose proceeds increase in line with company returns is bound to discourage investment.
This disincentive disappears if the corporate tax base is decoupled from current profits and linked to some broad measure of activity.
Indeed, this would create an incentive for each company to outperform the average, since above-average profits would go untaxed.
Another reason to scrap income and move to presumptive taxation of corporate activities stems from the EU’s decentralized nature.
While taxing the return on capital at the national level could discourage investment, taxing companies in exchange for location advantages might not.
Countries that offer world-class infrastructure, high-skill staff, and simple business rules may be well entitled to ask companies to pay a commensurate tax in return.
In sum, the EU “federal” corporate tax should be thought of as a benefit tax, based on a broad measure of activity, applied at a moderate rate, and unrelated to current returns; nor should it be deductible from other taxes.
Among the various options under consideration, the value-added tax base – perhaps averaged over a number of years – looks best, since the accounting and tax-assessment infrastructures already exist.
Of course, value-added includes profits, and to this extent the incentive for companies to manipulate transfer prices may reappear.
But the incentive would be much weakened, because gross returns typically represent a fairly small share of total value-added.
This model leaves the assessment and administration of corporate taxes entirely in the hands of member states, and would not require harmonization of legal and accounting rules.
It would be transparent, simple, and easy to administer.
The gigantic apparatus for managing transfer prices and tax credit claims with foreign tax authorities could be dismantled.
Indeed, the only losers would be Europe’s outsized army of tax lawyers and accountants.
What do Arabs Want?
CAIRO – The self-immolation a year ago of Tunisian street vendor Mohammed Bouazizi triggered a wave of popular protests that spread across the Arab world, forcing out dictators in Egypt, Libya, and Yemen.
Now, Syrian President Bashar al-Assad, too, seems near the end of his rule.
Together, these movements for change have come to be known as the Arab Spring.
But what values are driving these movements, and what kind of change do their adherents want?
A series of surveys in the Arab world last summer highlights some significant shifts in public opinion.
In surveys, 84% of Egyptians and 66% of Lebanese regarded democracy and economic prosperity as the Arab Spring’s goal.
In both countries, only about 9% believed that these movements aimed to establish an Islamic government.
For Egypt, Iraq, and Saudi Arabia, where trend data are available, the Arab Spring reflected a significant shift in people’s values concerning national identity.
In 2001, only 8% of Egyptians defined themselves as Egyptians above all, while 81% defined themselves as Muslims.
In 2007, the results were roughly the same.
In the wake of the Arab Spring, however, these numbers changed dramatically: those defining themselves as Egyptians rose to 50%, 2% more than those who defined themselves as Muslims.&#160; Among Iraqis, primary self-identification in national terms jumped from 23% of respondents in 2004 to 57% in 2011.
Among Saudis, the figure jumped from 17% in 2003 to 46% in 2011, while the share of those claiming a primary Muslim identity dropped from 75% to 44%.
There has also been a shift toward secular politics and weakening support for sharia (Islamic religious law).
Among Iraqis, the percentage of those who agreed that Iraq would be a better place if religion and politics were separated increased from 50% in 2004 to almost 70% in 2011.
Similar data are not available for Egypt and Saudi Arabia, but both countries show a decline in support for sharia.
In Egypt, those considering it “very important” for government to implement sharia declined from 48% in 2001 to 28% in 2011.
For Saudis, the figure fell from 69% in 2003 to 31% in 2011.
Finally, an analysis of a nationally representative sample of 3,500 Egyptian adults, who rated their participation in the anti-Mubarak movement, showed that participants were more likely to be younger single males with higher socioeconomic status, users of the Internet, newspaper readers, urban residents, and believers in modern values and free will.
They did not mind having Americans, British, or French as neighbors.
Religiosity did not predict participation, while religious intolerance reduced participation.
These figures seem at odds with the results of Egypt’s recent parliamentary election, in which the Muslim Brothers and the Salafi fundamentalists together gained about 65% of the popular vote.
It remains true that religion is an important factor for Egyptian voters, as 66% of those surveyed “strongly agree” or “agree” that it would be better if people with strong religious belief held public office; and 57% consider a government’s implementation of sharia “very important” or “important.”
Nonetheless, nationalism trumps religion.
Fully 78% agreed with the statement that it would be better if more people with a strong commitment to national interests rather than with strong religious views held public office.
How, then, to explain the inconsistency between the survey data and Egypt’s election results?
First, the fundamentalists benefited from years of political organizing and activism, and thus were better able to mobilize their supporters, whereas the liberals, who led the uprising against the former regime, lacked nationwide organization and had little time to translate their newly acquired political capital into votes.
Second, the liberals’ priorities were misplaced.
Instead of pushing their agenda forward among Egyptians, they focused on the wrong enemy, spending invaluable time organizing rallies against the army.
Finally, the election outcome is not as bad as it appears.
Liberalism has been under continuous attack for decades from religious extremists and religious institutions, and liberal organizations were stifled by oppressive rules.
If the Mubarak regime had fallen under the banner of political Islam, Muslim fundamentalists would have been in a much better position to advance more exclusivist claims over the revolution and the country.
But it was the liberals who delivered Egypt from authoritarianism.
This, in turn, brought legitimacy to liberalism and generated the powerful feeling of nationalist awareness among Egyptians.
As a result, support for sharia declined and national identity soared.
Insofar as political discourse is focused on national rebuilding and freedom, Islamic fundamentalists, in Egypt and elsewhere, will face an uphill battle.
What do Egypt’s Generals Want?
CAIRO – “Whatever the majority in the People’s Assembly, they are very welcome, because they won’t have the ability to impose anything that the people don’t want.”
Thus declared General Mukhtar al-Mulla, a member of Egypt’s ruling Supreme Council of the Armed Forces (SCAF).
Al-Mulla’s message was that the Islamists’ victory in Egypt’s recent election gives them neither executive power nor control of the framing of a new constitution.
But General Sami Anan, Chief of Staff and the SCAF’s deputy head, quickly countered that al-Mulla’s statement does not necessarily represent the official views of the Council.
So, one year after the revolution that overthrew Hosni Mubarak, who, exactly, will set Egypt’s political direction?
The electoral victory of the Muslim Brotherhood’s political wing and the Salafi parties, which together won more than 70% of the parliamentary seats, will give them strong influence over the transitional period and in drafting the constitution.
But they are not alone.
Aside from the Islamists, two other powerful actors will have their say: the “Tahrirists” and the generals.
Tahrir Square-based activism has not only brought about social and political change, but also has served as the ultimate tool of pro-democracy pressure on Egypt’s military rulers.
Indeed, while the army, the most powerful of the three actors, still officially controls the country, there is little confidence in the generals’ commitment to democracy.
“The SCAF are either anti-democratic….or some of their advisers told them that democracy is not in their best interest,” says Hazem Abd al-Azim, a nominee in the first post-Mubarak government.
If the generals do not want democracy, nor do they want direct military rule à la Augusto Pinochet.
So, what do they want?
Ideally, they would like to combine the Algerian army’s current power and the Turkish army’s legitimacy.
This implies a parliament with limited powers, a weak presidency subordinate to the army, and constitutional prerogatives that legitimate the army’s intervention in politics.
The minimum that they insist on is reflected in statements by Generals al-Mulla, Mamdouh Shahim, Ismail Etman, and others. That would mean a veto in high politics, independence for the army’s budget and vast economic empire, legal immunity from prosecution on charges stemming from corruption or repression, and constitutional prerogatives to guarantee these arrangements.
The new parliament and constitutional assembly will have to lead the negotiations with the SCAF.
But, given that any successful democratic transition must include meaningful civilian control over the armed forces and the security apparatus, the SCAF’s minimum demands could render the process meaningless.
The veto in high politics would include any issues that touch on national security or sensitive foreign policy, most importantly the relationship with Israel.
With an Islamist majority in the parliament promising to “revise” the peace agreement with Israel, tensions over foreign policy are likely to rise.
The independent military-commercial empire, which benefits from preferential customs and exchange rates, no taxation, land-confiscation rights, and an army of almost-free laborers (conscripted soldiers), is another thorny issue.
With the Egyptian economy suffering, elected politicians might seek to improve conditions by moving against the military’s civilian assets – namely, by revising the preferential rates and imposing a form of taxation.
Immunity from prosecution is no less salient.
“The Field-Marshal should be in jail now,” screamed the elected leftist MP, Abu Ezz al-Hariri, on the second day of the new parliamentary session.
When Mahmoud Ghozlan, the Muslim Brotherhood spokesperson, proposed immunity (known in Egypt as the “safe-exit” option), he faced a wave of harsh criticism.
Pressure from the United States has also influenced the SCAF’s decision-making.
“The military establishment receives $1.3 billion from the US….They are very sensitive to US requests,” according to Saad Eddin Ibrahim, who lobbied the Obama administration to support the revolution in January 2011.
But most of the SCAF’s pro-democracy decisions have come as a result of massive pressure from Tahrir Square.
This includes the removal of Mubarak, his trial (and that of other regime figures), and bringing forward the presidential election from 2013 to June 2012.
Two other factors are equally, if not more, influential: the status quo inherited from the Mubarak era and the army’s internal cohesion.
With few exceptions, the SCAF’s members benefited significantly from Mubarak’s regime.
They will attempt to preserve as much of it as possible.
“The sight of officers in uniform protesting in Tahrir Square and speaking on Al Jazeera really worries the Field Marshal,” a former officer told me.
And one way to maintain internal cohesion is to create “demons” – a lesson learned from the “dirty wars” in Algeria in the 1990’s and Argentina in the 1970’s and 1980’s.
In particular, Coptic protesters are an easy target against which to rally soldiers and officers.
Last October, amid an unnecessary escalation of sectarian violence, state-owned television featured a hospitalized Egyptian soldier screaming, “The Copts killed my colleague!”
The systematic demonization of the Tahririst groups, and the violent escalation that followed in November and December, served the same purpose.
Despite everything, democratic Egypt is not a romantic fantasy.
A year ago, Saad al-Ketatni, the Muslim Brotherhood leader, would never have dreamed of being Speaker of Parliament.
The same applies to the leftists and liberals who now hold around 20% of the parliament’s seats.
If 2011 witnessed the miracle of Mubarak’s removal, a brave parliament’s institutional assertiveness, coupled with non-institutional Tahririst pressure, could force the generals to accept a transfer of power to civilian rule (with some reserved domains for the army establishment) in 2012. What is certain is that this year will not witness a return to the conditions of 2010.
Egypt may become stuck in democratization’s slow lane, but there will be no U-turn.
The hundreds of thousands who marched to Tahrir Square on the revolution’s anniversary will guarantee that.
What Do Muslim Women Want?
NEW YORK – When caricature takes the place of dialogue, everyone suffers – especially when it comes to understanding issues affecting women, who struggle worldwide against being silenced.
Some right-wing American bloggers recently twisted an article that I wrote in a way that did just that.
I wrote that many women activists in Muslim countries tend to emphasize issues such as honor killings, legal inequality, and lack of access to education, and that they express frustration that the obsession among Westerners with Muslim women’s clothing can come at the expense of these concerns.
I also pointed out that many Muslim feminists defend their dress in terms of nationalism, anti-imperialism, or as a matter of faith.
This provoked a small firestorm of distortion in the West: “Wolf Wants to Institutionalize the Burka,” etc.
It was depressing to see a simple appeal for Westerners to listen to Muslim women deliberately distorted into a representation of all Muslim women as meek, will-less beings in need of rescue.
I was so sure that Muslim women should be allowed to speak for themselves because of the faces of Muslim feminism I encountered in recent travels – notably in Jordan, a country fascinatingly poised between tradition and innovation, developing under a forward-looking monarchy that is seeking to modernize and, to an extent, democratize.  For those Westerners who worry about Islamic fundamentalism in the Arab world, surely Jordan is a worthy model to understand, support, and engage.
The women leaders I met in Amman were not saying, “Please tell the West to save us.” They were too busy making egalitarian, modernist new worlds of their own, with an Arab, and often Islamic, imprimatur.
Princess Rym Ali, sister-in-law of Queen Rania – the Chanel-wearing media star who is rebranding a more contemporary Jordan – is one vivid example; Princess Rym is making immense progress in a more behind-the-scenes way.
She met me in a leafy Amman suburb, in the palace that she shares with Prince Ali and their small children.
A former CNN journalist, her quiet bearing and diplomatic manner belie her courage: she captured her husband’s heart as she was reporting from Baghdad on the eve of “shock and awe,” standing firm before the cameras even as the bombs were falling.
Princess Rym and Prince Ali have supported a new film institute, the Red Sea Institute of Cinematic Arts, a joint production with the University of Southern California that is bringing together bright young people from all over the Middle East to learn contemporary filmmaking, apprentice with international film productions, and get the region’s stories out.
Though she can no longer practice journalism directly, Princess Rym is also co-founding new Jordanian journalism school. Her aim is to replace journalists’ acceptance of the “party line” – even if the party is her own extended family – with a more critical perspective.
She directed my attention to Jordanian-made films about the subordination of women inside the home, and to Rana Husseini’s powerful book on honor killings, Murder in the Name of Honor .
But her implicit message was that these critical examinations of women’s inequality in the Arab world are most enlightening when they are created by women’s advocates from within that culture, rather than sensationalized or superficial versions of the problem created in the West.
Mary Nazzal, owner, with her family, of a chic and bustling boutique hotel, is another dynamo who looks as if she stepped out of a fashion shoot.
But it would be a mistake to underestimate her seriousness. I call her “Martha Stewart meets Che Guevara,” because, when not renovating the elegant public spaces of her hotel, she is suing Israeli generals for war crimes that she claims were committed against civilians in Gaza.
Nazzal was trained as a British barrister, and chairs the board of the Human Rights Legal Aid Fund.
Her organization is intent on using international law to hold accountable members of the Israeli military who put civilians in harm’s way during the invasion of Gaza – events that the recent Goldstone Report confirms.
She is passionate about the Palestinian cause, mixing her cutting-edge legal advocacy with a willingness to listen to decent people from all sides of the conflict, and a fierce attachment to peace in the region based on due process and justice.
Finally there is Rana Husseini herself – a role model for investigative reporters everywhere who began documenting and investigating honor killings in her newspaper, The Jordan Times .
Honor killings claim an estimated 5,000 women every year, and are increasingly common in immigrant communities abroad.
According to her account, a woman can be killed for “laughing at a joke in the street, wearing makeup or a short skirt…or being raped by a brother.”
After she began her series of reports, Husseini received death threats at her office almost daily – as well as hundreds of letters of support from readers.
As a result of her brave investigations, which included interviews in prisons, many Muslim countries are revising their criminal codes, and the issue has taken center stage internationally.
These women are exactly the kind of leaders that everyone should be cultivating and supporting, rather than overlooking because of a belief that they cannot exist in the Middle East.
We would do better to find out more about them than to waste our time on superficial debates about how they – and many others who are just as accomplished – should dress.
What Euro Crisis?
FRANKFURT – What constitutes a crisis?
Is it sustained economic decline, high and long-term unemployment, poverty, rampant inflation, a precipitous fall in the exchange rate, fiscal deficits, high borrowing costs, and political dysfunction?
Most would agree that a crisis exists if just some of these “misery indices” are present.
But, while Europe is widely perceived to be in the grip of crisis, only a handful of them are present, and in only a few eurozone countries.
So, why is there a eurozone crisis, and what defines it?
Time and again, it is argued that the single currency does not fit the different needs of its member countries, and that unsustainable economic divergence will ultimately require that the euro be abandoned.
The fatal divergences that are most frequently cited include differences in growth rates, job-creation, and unemployment rates, as well as dramatic disparities in current-account balances, all of which may be traceable to wide deviations in unit labor costs.
Perceptions of such divergences force considerable risk premiums on problem countries, inevitably resulting in accelerating capital flight to safe havens.
All of these developments are now visible in the eurozone, particularly in its peripheral countries.
Risk premiums started rising above benign levels in 2009, and then more strongly in 2011-2012, while capital flight became rampant in 2011.
But, if one considers what might underlie capital movements of this sort, suspicion must also fall on unsustainable policies that extend to countries well outside the eurozone.
In the wider European Union, countries like the United Kingdom or Hungary are as much afflicted by structural deficiencies as some peripheral eurozone countries are.
Exchange-rate flexibility has not helped them much, or at least they have chosen not to exploit it.
Moreover, there are countries with government-debt burdens that are as large, if not larger, than those on Europe’s periphery – the United States and Japan being prime examples.
Other countries, like Norway and Switzerland, are running current-account surpluses that exceed 10% of their GDP, but are resisting currency revaluation.
It is worth remembering that, for the decade until 2005, Germany was labeled the “sick man of Europe.”
Germany was uncompetitive when it entered the eurozone, owing to excessive wage and price increases following the country’s reunification – a problem that has since been overcome by structural reforms that the country undertook within the single currency.
The same is true for the most recent eurozone member, Estonia, whose rigorous wage restraint ensured competitiveness in the single market in a short period of time.
Why, then, is there such strong doubt that the euro can survive?
Some say that the current efforts to enforce sound policies in the peripheral countries are bound to fail, and that sacrificing democracy in these countries to keep the monetary union intact is too high a price to pay.
In fact, the efforts of governments and international institutions point the way toward more sustainable solutions.
Who would have believed at this time last year that the fiscal pact adopted in March would have been possible?
And, despite fluctuations, has there not been a considerable reduction in risk premiums for problem countries, without adding to the financing costs of donor countries?
Much remains unknown.
Are we seeing tentative signs of escape from the eurozone’s malaise?
Will debtor countries be able to stick to tough reform programs, or will their citizens reject austerity?
And will donor countries avoid the sort of populist backlash at home that might push them in a protectionist direction?
Intelligent cooperation that avoids moral hazard should be able to prevent panic, reduce risk premiums, and permit fuller use of resources.
For example, transnational migration flows should certainly be made easier and more attractive.
High levels of unemployment, particularly among young skilled workers, could be avoided if donor countries that need migrants to invigorate their own workforces were able to attract them.
More immigration would strengthen skills and raise income levels, while reducing distressed countries’ expenditure on unemployment benefits.
Greater labor mobility within the EU would also help to create a more open European mindset, and thus weaken old nationalist prejudices.
So, will Europe commit to moving toward political union, and thereby address what has remained missing, despite the single market, the euro, and the Schengen Agreement’s elimination of internal borders?
The model for a future United States of Europe is Switzerland, a country with four languages and ethnicities, fiscally strong sub-national units (cantons), a single first-rate currency, and a federal government and a parliament that exercises genuine, if limited, fiscal authority.
If the EU made the most of the competencies that it already has, and governed more effectively, the Union as a whole could achieve faster economic growth for at least the next decade, with a 2.5% annual rate not out of reach.
More generous support for countries in trouble is essential, because the euro must be preserved (albeit not necessarily on the base of a larger eurozone).
Financial markets would be more easily convinced if such support were complemented by the recipient countries’ acceptance of the fiscal pact, together with technical help to strengthen their governance.
In Greece, anti-corruption officers from the US, Italian tax-efficiency specialists, German privatization experts, and Spanish tourism professionals should be made available to accelerate the pace of modernization.
All of this amounts to a much-needed and often-advocated Marshall Plan for the periphery.
But it recognizes that what Europe’s troubled countries need most is not money, but the planning and administrative capacity to spend it effectively.
Over the last decade, Greece could absorb only a fifth of the EU modernization funds available to it.
It didn’t have to be that way then, and Europe cannot afford to let it remain that way now.
What The EU Must Do Now
WASHINGTON, DC – The United Kingdom’s Brexit vote is arguably the greatest disaster ever to hit the European Union.
Now, the EU must act fast – not least by ending the post-referendum market turmoil – if it is to survive.
British Prime Minister David Cameron, having lost the referendum, did the obvious thing by resigning.
But the other loser is the European Commission, whose president, Jean-Claude Juncker, did little to change the outcome of the Brexit vote.
Not since Jacques Delors was President of the Commission, from 1985 to 1995, has that position been filled by a leader with any vision or political clout.
Juncker, like Cameron, should accept responsibility and resign.
The EU needs a strong leader again.
There are many worthy candidates, but I recommend former Swedish Prime Minister Carl Bildt.
Before the post-referendum dust settles, the EU should set an ultimatum with clear and onerous principles for the UK’s exit – clarity to minimize the cost, and severity to deter populists in other member states from calling for exit referenda, too.
Sensibly, European Commission leaders have already moved in this direction by voiding concessions made by the EU to the UK back in February and declaring that there “will be no renegotiation.”
The European Council, for its part, has already called for an immediate summit.
Having failed for six years to resolve the Greek financial crisis, the EU finally appears to understand that its very survival depends on swift and decisive action.
But the EU must go further than just Brexit damage control.
For the last four decades, Europe’s fundamental problem has been complacency in the face of low economic growth caused by excessive taxation and regulation.
Current EU rules are clear on the responsibilities of EU institutions and national governments, respectively.
The problem is that most European governments (especially British Tory governments) tend to scapegoat the EU to mask their own political myopia.
Little wonder that the EU has grown so unpopular.
Given that it already receives the blame, the European Commission should now be granted the power to act politically.
The EU has a strong case to make for itself, but it needs good-faith leaders to deliver its message to the people.
European populists point to the mishandling of migration issues to justify their cause.
So, for starters, the EU should establish an orderly migration policy with quotas and criteria, as Australia and Canada have successfully done, and impose proper control over its external borders.
The EU border control agency, Frontex, needs a stronger mandate and more resources to fulfill this crucial role.
Going further, the EU should institute a joint foreign and defense policy to address the underlying causes of the migration crisis – namely, the conflicts in Libya and Syria.
For a quarter-century, Europe has benefited from the post-Cold War peace dividend and irresponsibly allowed member states’ average defense expenditure to slip to a paltry 1.4% of GDP.
This should be increased to at least the 2% of GDP each NATO member has promised.
Today, only five EU countries have defense expenditures at that level.
With good reason, US President Barack Obama has called Europeans “free riders.”
Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump, going much further, openly questions both NATO and US military expenditures abroad.
In the near future, Europe may no longer be able to rely on the US to defend it and should prepare for a scenario in which it is forced to fend for itself.
The principle of representative democracy is at the heart of European identity; ironically, only EU non-member Switzerland has a strong tradition of referenda.
One of the positive consequences of the squalid Brexit campaign is that it demonstrated that referenda and plebiscites are demagogic, not truly democratic.
EU members should recognize the risks of so-called direct democracy and tighten the criteria for the passage of referenda.
At a minimum, referenda should be required to achieve a supermajority with a high percentage of voter turnout.
The best one can say about Brexit is that it finally may have put an end to European complacency.
We will know for sure only if, and when, Europe chooses to save itself.
Whatever Happened to Wage Insurance?
A lot of public attention and worry nowadays surrounds the new risks that globalization and information technology create for our wages and livelihoods.
But there has been far less constructive discussion of new ideas about how to confront these risks.
In fact, we might be losing the momentum we had a few years ago to implement some of these ideas.
To be sure, we still sympathize with people who, upon reaching middle age or later, find themselves replaced by lower-paid workers in another part of the world, if not by a computer or a robot.
But are we really going to do anything about these risks?
One new idea that seemed hot a few years ago is “wage insurance.”
As then floated, the idea was simple: the government would protect people from the risk of losing their job and being unable to find a new one at the same wage.
A government insurance program would pay these people a fraction, say, half, the difference between their old pay and their pay in a new job for a specified period, such as two years.
The idea was first proposed by Robert Z. Lawrence and Robert Litan in their 1986 book, Saving Free Trade, andrevived in a 2001 article by Litan and Lori Kletzer.
The proposal generated interest.
A demonstration program was adopted in the United States in 2002.
In 2002, the Hartz Commission recommended a version of it in Germany.
Wage insurance programs have been actively talked about or actually implemented in some form in Britain, France, Switzerland, and Ireland.
Despite all the intellectual applause, however, wage insurance programs are still not a significant force in the world economy.
They should be. But they should also be supplemented by other devices.
One advantage of wage insurance is that it may be a more effective way to subsidize on-the-job training than traditional government-run vocational training programs.
Often, after completing a government-sponsored program, participants find it impossible to secure a job with the promised higher pay.
Far better, proponents of wage insurance argue, for the training to be carried out by an employer who wants a job done and knows what the employee needs to learn.
It seems plausible that two years is long enough for retraining, after which the employee might command a higher wage without a government subsidy.
But governments, fearing the expense of wage insurance if a lot of people exploit it, have not been willing to implement it on a large scale.
For example, the US wage insurance program is confined to manufacturing workers over age 50 who are in competitively vulnerable industries and are deemed by the Secretary of Labor to have nontransferable skills.
Moreover, the benefit is capped at $5,000 per year.
The program has practically been forgotten, and will expire next year unless it is renewed.
With government deficits the norm, that appears unlikely.
The way to regain lost momentum is to recognize that wage insurance is only one of several new ideas for insuring the emerging risks of this century.
The weakness of the current wage insurance proposal is that it pays benefits only for a limited period and relies for its long-term effect on the retraining incentives that it creates.
In reality, however, losing a high-paying job may be a lifetime event, and the supposed retraining that wage insurance would encourage for a laid-off 50-year-old worker often may be ineffective.
In my 2003 book, New Financial Order: Risk in the 21st Century, I proposed a different idea, which I called “livelihood insurance.”
As the name implies, livelihood insurance is designed to provide more than just a brief respite or a subsidy for retraining. It is aimed at dealing with long-term changes in the labor market, rather than assuring temporary wage levels.
It would also rely on the market rather than a government program.
With livelihood insurance, a private insurer would pay a stream of income to a policyholder if an index of average income in the insured person’s occupation and region declines substantially.
Moreover, this income stream would continue for as long as the index stays down, not just for a couple of years (or any other arbitrary period).
In other words, this insurance policy would protect against lifetime income risks.
One reason why government-run wage insurance programs must have limited duration is that they involve so-called “moral hazard”: the risk that people will get lazy or would take easier, lower-paying jobs and continue to collect insurance that pays them the wage of a more demanding occupation.
But this would not apply to livelihood insurance, because its benefits are tied to the rise and fall of income indices, which are beyond the control of individuals.
Livelihood insurance would also have another advantage.
Since the premium would be determined by the market, it would be higher in occupations that the market believes to be in danger from outsourcing or technical change.
This, in turn, would give workers a tangible warning and an incentive to anticipate job losses before they occur.
This is not to say that wage insurance is a bad idea, or that it should not be implemented on a wider scale.
Both wage and livelihood insurance appear to have important risk management functions.
Indeed, for the future, it is imperative to think about many new ways, involving both government and the market, to ensure that we manage better the greatest personal risks now faced by workers around the world.
France’s German Mirror
BERLIN – Berlin’s Tegel Airport, which still greets most of the passengers arriving in the capital of Europe’s leading economic power, is outdated and provincial.
The opening of Schönefeld Airport, transformed into an international hub, has been delayed for more than a year for technical reasons (a somewhat reassuring challenge to Germany’s reputation for efficiency).
Yet, despite the gray and chill of March in Central Europe, Berlin exudes confidence.
More than ever, the city is a work in progress – confused, not very beautiful, and overcharged with history.
Berlin is a construction site that has managed to transform its multiple pasts into positive energy.
“Diversity destroyed: Berlin 1933-1938” is the unifying theme of a series of exhibits marking the 80th anniversary of Hitler’s coming to power and the 75th of the Pogromnacht. &#160;At the Deutsches Historisches Museum on Unter den Linden, entire classes of young pupils and students flock to see the exhibit’s evocation of destruction by a criminal regime whose objects, from loudspeakers to uniforms and weapons, are displayed in an educational manner.
Young Berliners cannot ignore where they come from.
Yet, perhaps because the past still rings like a warning – and is still physically visible in the topography and architecture of the city today – Berlin is striking in its simplicity, its radiant modernity (symbolized by the glass dome of the Reichstag, a conception of the British architect Norman Foster), and, above all, its intensity.
That positive energy contrasts starkly with the decadent beauty of Paris, a city that is on a path of “museification.”
Of course, if you can afford to live there, Paris remains a great place to be.
But Berlin is a better place to work, even if what you do is very poorly paid.
The porter who brings my luggage to my hotel room is of Tunisian origin. He is a happy Berliner and a proud new German.
And, even on a low salary, he can live and raise his children in the city itself.
Thanks to its moderate housing costs, Berlin has not become, like Paris, a ghetto for the rich.
Unlike the French, who are handicapped by the high cost of housing, Germans’ purchasing power is more harmoniously distributed, creating more room for household consumption to contribute to economic growth.
Germany’s positive energy is, of course, the result of success translated into confidence, which Chancellor Angela Merkel incarnates with strength and simplicity.
Merkel has changed profoundly while in office.
Five years ago, she did not exude the natural authority that she now possesses.
Today, like Pope Francis, she is clearly at ease with herself.
Has there been a French president since François Mitterrand who was truly a match for a German chancellor?
If France has replaced Germany as “the sick man of Europe,” it is for political reasons, above all: vision, courage, and strength on the northern side of the Rhine, and vacillation, inertia, and weakness on the southern.
Of course, given its excessively low salaries and adverse demographic trends, Germany will continue to face difficulties.
But to emphasize only these problems, as some French do, is pure escapism.
German demography cannot be described as the solution to French youth unemployment, as though one could rest on a slogan such as: “They lack young people, our young people lack jobs – what a perfect match!”
This widespread sentiment irresponsibly assumes that time is working in favor of France, regardless of whether it implements structural reforms.
France’s current direction is a source of deep concern in Germany, whose evolution should be seen in France as a source of inspiration – an example to be emulated, even if the country must not fall into self-flagellation.
Yet today’s debate in France over the German model reminds one eerily of the discussions that followed France’s defeat in the Franco-Prussian War.
In June 1871, just after the war ended, the French statesman Léon Gambetta declaimed: “Our adversaries have won, because they rallied to their side foresight, discipline, and science.”
Germany, it seems, can still rally those eternal values.
The major difference now is that the European unification process rules out war – even economic war – between the two countries.
On the contrary, in the mirror of Germany, the French must ask themselves fundamental questions.
Have they made the right choices in terms of leaders and policies in recent decades?
The places of power in France do not encourage modesty.
In his latest book, Days of Power, the former agriculture minister, Bruno Le Maire, writes condescendingly of the building that houses his Danish counterpart in Copenhagen, which he compares to low-income housing.
With too much pomp, too many stumbling blocks, and a dearth of dynamism, France today can and should learn from Germany.
What Greece Needs to Prosper
NEW YORK – Some economists overlook the modern idea that a country’s prosperity depends on innovation and entrepreneurship.
They take the mechanistic view that prosperity is a matter of employment, and that employment is determined by “demand” – government spending, household consumption, and investment demand.
Looking at Greece, these economists argue that a shift in fiscal policy to “austerity” – a smaller public sector – has brought an acute deficiency of demand and thus a depression.
But this claim misreads history and exaggerates the power of government spending.
Much of the decline in employment in Greece occurred prior to the sharp cuts in spending between 2012 and 2014 – owing, no doubt, to sinking confidence in the government.
Greek government spending per quarter climbed to a plateau of around €13.5 billion ($14.8 billion) in 2009-2012, before falling to roughly €9.6 billion in 2014-2015.
Another finding casts doubt on whether austerity actually was imposed on Greece.
Government spending has certainly fallen – but only to where it used to be: €9.6 billion in the first quarter of this year is, in fact, higher than it was as recently as 2003.
So the premise of austerity appears to be wrong.
Greece has not departed from past fiscal norms; it has returned to them.
Rather than describing current government spending as “austere,” it would be more correct to view it as an end to years of fiscal profligacy, culminating in 2013, when the government’s budget deficit reached 12.3% of GDP and public debt climbed to 175% of GDP.
The “demand school” might respond that, regardless of whether there is fiscal austerity now, increased government spending (financed, of course, by debt) would impart a permanent boost to employment.
But Greece’s recent experience suggests otherwise.
The huge rise in government spending from 2006 to the 2009-2013 period did produce employment gains, but they were not sustained.
The real sticking point is that the government would have to issue bonds to finance its extra spending.
Assuming a limit to foreign investors’ willingness to buy these bonds, Greeks would have to buy them.
In an economy unequipped for growth, household wealth relative to wages would soar, and the labor supply would shrink, causing employment to contract.
So spending more is not the remedy for Greece’s plight, just as spending less was not the cause.
What is the remedy, then?
No amount of debt restructuring, even debt forgiveness, will suffice to achieve prosperity (in the form of low unemployment and high job satisfaction).
Such measures would only help Greece to revive government spending.
Then the economy’s stultifying corporatism – clientelism and cronyism in the public sector and vested interests and entrenched elites in the private sector – would gain a new lease on life.
The European left may advocate that, but it would hardly be in Europe’s interest.
The remedy must lie in adopting the right structural reforms.
Whether or not the reforms sought by the eurozone members raise the chances that their loans will be repaid, these creditors have a political and economic interest in the monetary union’s survival and development.
They should also be ready to help Greece with the costs of making the necessary changes.
But it is Greece itself that must take charge of its reforms.
And there are encouraging signs that Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras is willing to take up that cause.
But he will need a sense of the required reforms.
Greece must dismantle corporatist arrangements and practices that obstruct whatever innovation and entrepreneurship might emerge.
Nurturing an abundance of imaginative innovators and vibrant entrepreneurs requires embracing a vision of venturesome lives of creativity and discovery.
What Happened to India?
CHICAGO – Emerging markets around the world – Brazil, China, India, and Russia, to name the largest – are slowing.
One reason is that they continue to be dependent, directly or indirectly, on exports to advanced industrial countries.
Slow growth there, especially in Europe, is economically depressing.
But a second reason is that they each have important weaknesses, which they have not overcome in good times.
For China, it is excessive reliance on fixed-asset investment for growth.
In Brazil, low savings and various institutional impediments keep interest rates high and investment low, while the educational system does not serve significant parts of the population well.
And Russia, despite a very well educated population, continues to be reliant on commodity industries for economic growth.
Hardest to understand, though, is why India is underperforming so much relative to its potential.
Indeed, annual GDP growth has fallen by five percentage points since 2010.
For a country as poor as India, growth should be what Americans call a “no-brainer.”
It is largely a matter of providing public goods: basic infrastructure like roads, bridges, ports, and power, as well as access to education and basic health care.
And, unlike many equally poor countries, India already has a very strong entrepreneurial class, a reasonably large and well-educated middle class, and a number of world-class corporations that can be enlisted in the effort to provide these public goods.
Satisfying the demand for such goods is itself a source of growth.
But, also, a reliable road creates tremendous additional activity, as trade increases between connected areas, and myriad businesses, restaurants, and hotels spring up along the way.
As India did away with the stultifying License Raj in the 1990’s, successive governments understood the imperative of economic growth, so much so that the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) contested the 2004 election on a pro-development platform, encapsulated in the slogan, “India Shining.”
But the BJP-led coalition lost that election.
Whether the debacle reflected the BJP’s unfortunate choice of coalition partners or its emphasis on growth when too many Indians had not benefited from it, the lesson for politicians was that growth did not provide electoral rewards.
In any event, that election suggested a need to spread the benefits of growth to rural areas and the poor.
There are two ways of going about that.
The first, which is harder and takes time, is to increase income-generating capabilities in rural areas, and among the poor, by improving access to education, health care, finance, water, and power.
The second is to increase voters’ spending power through populist subsidies and transfers, which typically tend to be directed toward the politically influential rather than the truly needy.
In the years after the BJP’s loss, with a few notable exceptions, India’s political class decided that traditional populism was a surer route to re-election.
This perception also accorded well with the median (typically poor) voter’s low expectation of government in India – seeing it as a source of sporadic handouts rather than of reliable public services.
For a few years, the momentum created by previous reforms, together with strong global growth, carried India forward.
Politicians saw little need to vote for further reforms, especially those that would upset powerful vested interests.
The lurch toward populism was strengthened when the Congress-led United Progressive Alliance concluded that a rural employment-guarantee scheme and a populist farm-loan waiver aided its victory in the 2009 election.
But, while politicians spent the growth dividend on poorly targeted giveaways such as subsidized petrol and cooking gas, the need for further reform only increased.
For example, industrialization requires a transparent system for acquiring land from farmers and tribal people, which in turn presupposes much better land-ownership records than India has.
As demand for land and land prices increased, corruption became rampant, with some politicians, industrialists, and bureaucrats using the lack of transparency in land ownership and zoning to misappropriate assets.
India’s corrupt elites had moved from controlling licenses to cornering newly valuable resources like land.
The Resource Raj rose from the ashes of the License Raj.
India’s citizenry eventually reacted.
An eclectic mix of idealistic and opportunistic politicians and NGOs mobilized people against land acquisitions.
With investigative journalists getting into the act, land acquisition became a political land mine.
Moreover, key institutions, such as the Comptroller and Auditor General and the judiciary, staffed by an increasingly angry middle class, also launched investigations.
As evidence emerged of widespread corruption in contracts and resource allocation, ministers, bureaucrats, and high-level corporate officers were arrested, and some have spent long periods in jail.
The collateral effect, however, is that even honest officials are now too frightened to help corporations to navigate India’s maze of bureaucracy.
As a result, industrial, mining, and infrastructure projects have ground to a halt.
Populist government spending and the inability of the supply side of the economy to keep pace has, in turn, led to elevated inflation, while Indian households, worried that no asset looks safe, have taken to investing in gold.
Because India does not produce much gold itself, these purchases have contributed to an abnormally wide current-account deficit.
Not much more was required to dampen foreign investors’ enthusiasm for the India story, with the rupee falling significantly in recent weeks.
As with the other major emerging markets, India’s fate is in its own hands.
Hard times tend to concentrate minds.
If its politicians can take a few steps to show that they can overcome narrow partisan interests to establish the more transparent and efficient government that a middle-income country needs, they could quickly re-energize India’s enormous engines of potential growth.
Otherwise, India’s youth, their hopes and ambitions frustrated, could decide to take matters into their own hands.
What Happened to Mohamed al-Hanashi?
NEW YORK – Mohammed al-Hanashi was a 31-year-old Yemeni citizen who was held at Guantánamo Bay without charge for seven years.
On June 3, while I was visiting Guantánamo with other journalists, the press office there issued a terse announcement that al-Hanashi had had been found dead in his cell – an “apparent suicide.”
Because my commercial flight was canceled, I got a ride back to the United States on a military transport.
I happened to be seated next to a military physician who had been flown in to do the autopsy on al-Hanashi.
When would there be an investigation of the death, I asked him?
“That was the investigation,” he replied.
The military had investigated the military.
This “apparent suicide” seemed immediately suspicious to me.
I had just toured those cells: it is literally impossible to kill yourself in them.
Their interiors resemble the inside of a smooth plastic jar; there are no hard edges; hooks fold down; there is no bedding that one can use to strangle oneself.
Can you bang your head against the wall until you die, theoretically, I asked the doctor?
“They check on prisoners every three minutes,” he said.
You’d have to be fast.
The story smelled even worse after a bit of digging. Al-Hanashi, it turned out, had been elected by the detainees to serve as their representative.
(The Geneva Conventions call for this process but the US did not give it any formal recognition).
As their designated representative, al-Hanashi knew which prisoners had claimed to have been tortured or abused, and by whom.
On January 17, al-Hanashi, according to his fellow prisoner Binyam Mohamed (who has since been released), was summoned to a meeting with the Admiral of Guantánamo and the head of the Guard Force there.
He never returned to his cell.
He was taken to the psychiatric ward, where, according to another prisoner who had been there, he was kept until he died.
Can you kill yourself in the psych ward?
According to Cortney Busch of Reprieve, a British organization that represents Guantánamo detainees, there is video running on prisoners in the psychiatric ward at all times, and there is a guard posted there continually, too.
The day after al-Hanashi died, the nurse and psychologist had shown a group of journalists of which I was a part an oddly defensive display of how hunger-striking prisoners are bound in restraint chairs when being “enterally fed” (that is, force-fed).
Al Hanashi, the press office at Guantánamo noted, had formerly been a hunger striker.
It is worth considering how easy it would be to do away with a troublesome prisoner being force-fed by merely adjusting the calorie level.
If it is too low, the prisoner will starve, but too high a level can also kill, since deliberate liquid overfeeding by tube, to which Guantánamo prisoners have reported being subjected, causes vomiting, diarrhea, and deadly dehydration that can stop one’s heart.
I have been putting questions to Lt. Commander Brook DeWalt, the head spokesman for the Guantánamo press office, about how al-Hanashi died, for eight weeks now.
According to the Yemeni embassy in Washington, al-Hanashi’s body was repatriated in mid-August.
Al Jazeera has reported that the Yemeni government announced only what the US had – that al-Hanashi had died from “asphyxiation.”
When I noted to DeWalt that self-strangulation was impossible, he said he would get back to me when the inquiry – now including a Naval criminal investigation – was completed.
I have yet to receive an answer.
The Yemeni government, too, notes that they have yet to receive the coroner’s report from the US.
An investigation by the military of the death of its own prisoners violates the Geneva Conventions, which demand that illness, transfer, and death of prisoners be registered independently with a neutral authority (such as the ICRC), and that deaths be investigated independently.
If governments let no outside entity investigate the circumstances of such deaths, what will keep them from “disappearing” whomever they take into custody, for whatever reason?
I sent DeWalt a copy of the relevant section of the Geneva Conventions and asked how the US military’s handling of al-Hanashi’s death conforms to it.
Actually, I sent it twice. Again, no answer.
Was al-Hanashi suicidal?
Binyam Mohamed told the Associated Press that al-Hanashi was a positive person (and, one can assume, a natural leader) who would never consider suicide.
He had been in custody for seven years without a lawyer, and killed himself just two weeks after having finally been assigned one?
That lawyer, Elizabeth Gilson, probably knows al-Hanashi’s state of mind before he died, but the US government will not allow her to talk about it.
What happened to Mohamed al-Hanashi, and why?
The fact that no one can answer this question yet means that even in Barack Obama’s America, as in Stalin’s Russia or Ahmadinejad’s Iran, people can simply be disappeared without trial.
The world’s law-abiding governments and ordinary citizens should call and email DeWalt, the Pentagon, and the White House press office to demand answers.
A young man with a great deal of potentially compromising information died under suspicious circumstances in US custody.
Ireland and the Austerity Debate
DUBLIN – Both sides of the austerity debate that is now gripping economists and policymakers cite Ireland’s experience as evidence for their case.
And, however much they try to position the country as a poster-child, neither side is able to convince the other.
Yet this tug-of-war is important, because it illustrates the complex range of arguments that are in play.