Merkel insists that a political union should precede a full-fledged fiscal and banking union.
That is both unrealistic and unreasonable.
The three have to be developed together, step-by-step.
There can be no treaty or constitutional clause preventing the establishment of the EFA if the German electorate, as represented by the Bundestag, approves it; otherwise, the ESM could not have been created.
If the rest of Europe is united behind this proposal, and the Bundestag rejects it, Germany must take full responsibility for the financial and political consequences.
How France Will Reform
PARIS – The world is changing rapidly – and it will not wait for anyone.
The only way to thrive is to keep pace with this transformation.
That is why France is pursuing reforms.
Of course, reform means change.
But it does not mean giving in to external pressure, or giving up what makes France French.
Rather, it is the key to consolidating our history, our pride, our traditions, our way of life, and our values in a dynamic global environment, for the sake of today’s citizens and tomorrow’s.
It is the key to building a stronger, more prosperous France.
Clearly, much is at stake in the ongoing reform process.
The good news is that many factors work in France’s favor, including diverse geography, a vibrant science and technology sector, a rich culture, and vast human capital.
Indeed, these factors help to explain why France remains the world’s fifth-largest economy.
But, as globalization transforms the world economy, France must adapt in order to enable its businesses to compete abroad as well as at home.
A robust business sector is decisive in an open economy, as it shapes a country’s ability to preserve – and improve – its citizens’ living standards.
That is why everything possible must be done to enable France to create more and better wealth.
By helping French businesses recover lost margins, we can empower them to invest and create employment.
That is precisely what the “responsibility pact,” which came into force on January 1, and the tax credit for encouraging competitiveness and jobs aim to do.
As we help French businesses to expand abroad, we must also work to encourage inward foreign investment.
Both are key to a country’s commercial attractiveness – among the most important dimensions of global competition.
This stronger France will tackle whatever challenges the world throws at it head on.
At the same time, it will demonstrate its capacity to eliminate drags on creativity and wealth creation.
The “law on growth and activity” that will be voted on this year will unleash the business sector’s energy, including by stimulating competition.
Moreover, opening up regulated professions will help to reduce the inequalities with which the French public has become increasingly frustrated.
To create more wealth in an open economy is one of my government’s priorities.
But more wealth alone will not cure France’s ills.
The most successful countries are those where employers and employees feel bound to a common fate.
It is thus urgent to improve social dialogue and bolster trust in France.
This objective underlies our “simplification schemes” for negotiation and consultation in the business sector.
And it is helping to guide vocational education and training reform, which will benefit not only those who wish to enhance their skills at work, but also those whose lack of training is preventing them from finding employment.
These initiatives are just part of a broader shift.
Through a variety of mechanisms, we are working to make citizens’ lives easier, streamline business activities, and relieve the authorities of extraneous work that diverts attention from important strategic tasks.
French citizens will soon begin to feel the impact of these efforts in their daily lives.
Despite the tremendous potential of these initiatives, they will be for naught if they are not perceived as being fair.
France, after all, has long been defined by a strong egalitarian impulse.
Consider education.
In reworking our “priority education” program, we can adjust teaching methods to address school inequalities, while channeling additional resources to disadvantaged areas.
This includes ensuring that all schools have enough computers, so that all students can benefit from today’s technological breakthroughs, with no digital divide among students or regions.
The fact that the impact will not be felt for years should not be allowed to diminish its urgency.
Indeed, the entire process of building a strong and equitable economy should aim not just to improve citizens’ lives today; it must also prepare France for the future.
And, when it comes to boosting a country’s long-term prospects, the most successful initiatives often take time to produce visible results.
In a society that overvalues immediacy, it can be difficult to take a long-term view.
But my government will not be deterred from forward-thinking action that will ensure that tomorrow’s France is the France our citizens want and deserve.
It is up to the state to set an example for reform.
This is all the more true in France, where citizens place high expectations on the state – not to do everything, but certainly to draw strategic lines and enable local actors to succeed.
In short, the government must put its agenda-setting power at the service of the people.
When it comes to preparing for the future, one exceptionally large project lies ahead: the energy transition.
We all know that we are headed toward a new growth model – one that is more sober and sustainable, that depends less on fossil fuels and more on renewable energy sources.
This new approach to growth will entail new habits, new attitudes, and new modes of living.
With the energy transition law, my government aims to get ahead of this trend by creating the legislative framework for future “green” growth.
The goals of the French government’s reform agenda are clear: A stronger France, able to thrive in a rapidly changing global environment; a fairer France, without which no effort, whether individual or collective, could be considered a success; and a more steadfast France that can serve as a stable and prosperous home for our children.
In the interest of France and its people, we are committed to the reforms needed to realize this vision.
How India Survived the Financial Crisis
NEW DELHI – As the world economy begins to recover, Indians are looking back with particular satisfaction at how they coped with the recent crisis.
Despite an unprecedented global recession, India remained the second fastest growing economy in the world.
Whereas most countries suffered negative growth in at least one quarter over the last two years, India’s GDP grew by more than 6% throughout this period – and by 7.9% in the last quarter of 2009.
India’s achievement is all the more striking given that the Pakistani terrorist attacks on Mumbai – India’s financial nerve center and commercial capital – in late November 2008 came in the midst of the crisis.
The terrorists dented the worldwide image of India as an emerging economic giant, a success story of the era of globalization, and a magnet for investors and tourists.
Indeed, in late 2008, foreign investors did withdraw $12 billion from India’s stock markets. But India’s resilience in the face of adversity, and its mature restraint in the face of violent provocation, encouraged investors to return.
Foreign direct investment totaled $27.3 billion in 2008-2009, despite the global financial crisis, and reached $1 billion in just one week in May 2009.
India’s ability to stave off the economic gales was helped by the fact that it is much less dependent than most countries on global flows of trade and capital.
India relies on external trade for about 20% of its GDP (the figure for China is roughly double). The country’s large and robust internal market accounts for the rest.
Indians continued producing goods and services for other Indians, and that kept the economy humming.
Though India’s merchandise exports did register declines of about 30%, its exports of services continued to do well throughout the crisis.
Indians abroad stayed loyal to India: remittances from overseas Indians remained robust, reaching $46.4 billion in 2008-2009, the bulk of which came from the mainly blue-collar Indian expatriate community in the Gulf countries.
India’s generally conservative financial system played a vital role, too.
Its banks and financial institutions were not tempted to buy the mortgage-supported securities and credit-default swaps that ruined several Western financial institutions.
Among the drivers of growth, domestic capital formation retained much of its momentum from preceding years.
Moreover, India’s government adopted a pro-active fiscal policy, rolling out two rounds of stimulus packages.
The authorities pursued pro-growth policies, including lower interest rates, expanded credit, and a reduction in excise duties.
There are still challenges ahead.
Reform is pursued hesitantly by a coalition government constantly wary of voters’ reactions.
A decision to de-regulate petrol and diesel prices has sparked massive street protests and stoked fears of rampant inflation.
Privatization of India’s bloated public sector (from massive coal and steel enterprises to the loss-making national carrier Air India) has been slow to get off the ground.
And, of course, the persistent complaints of corruption and bureaucratic red tape have not faded with liberalization.
The country’s infrastructure remains woeful, as any visitor flying into an Indian airport notices. Power shortages are frequent.
Some 40% of the population still lives below a poverty line drawn just this side of the funeral pyre.
Yet all these problems are being dealt with by a confident Prime Minister Manmohan Singh, who has steered the ship of state through some particularly treacherous waters.
India is simultaneously tackling the “hardware” of development (ports, roads, airports) and its “software” (health care, education).
Success will not occur overnight, but progress has been impressive and is continuing.
In the last 15 years, India has pulled more people out of poverty than in the previous 45 – roughly 10 million people per year on average in the last decade.
The country has visibly prospered, and, despite population growth, per capita income has grown faster, and to a greater level, than ever before.
The current financial crisis, far from prompting India to retreat, is an opportunity to safeguard and build on those gains.
India can advance with the confidence that it can cope with the world from a very secure base.
As the 2010 monsoon nourishes India’s plains, that’s an encouraging place to be.
How Inequality Fueled the Crisis
CHICAGO – Before the recent financial crisis, politicians on both sides of the aisle in the United States egged on Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, the giant government-backed mortgage agencies, to support low-income lending in their constituencies.
There was a deeper concern behind this newly discovered passion for housing for the poor: growing income inequality.
Since the 1970’s, wages for workers at the 90th percentile of the wage distribution in the US –such as office managers – have grown much faster than wages for the median worker (at the 50th percentile), such as factory workers and office assistants.
A number of factors are responsible for the growth in the 90/50 differential.
Perhaps the most important is that technological progress in the US requires the labor force to have ever greater skills.
A high school diploma was sufficient for office workers 40 years ago, whereas an undergraduate degree is barely sufficient today.
But the education system has been unable to provide enough of the labor force with the necessary education.
The reasons range from indifferent nutrition, socialization, and early-childhood learning to dysfunctional primary and secondary schools that leave too many Americans unprepared for college.
The everyday consequence for the middle class is a stagnant paycheck and growing job insecurity.
Politicians feel their constituents’ pain, but it is hard to improve the quality of education, for improvement requires real and effective policy change in an area where too many vested interests favor the status quo.
Moreover, any change will require years to take effect, and therefore will not address the electorate’s current anxiety.
Thus, politicians have looked for other, quicker ways to mollify their constituents.
We have long understood that it is not income that matters, but consumption.
A smart or cynical politician would see that if somehow middle-class households’ consumption kept up, if they could afford a new car every few years and the occasional exotic holiday, perhaps they would pay less attention to their stagnant paychecks.
Therefore, the political response to rising inequality – whether carefully planned or the path of least resistance – was to expand lending to households, especially low-income households. The benefits – growing consumption and more jobs – were immediate, whereas paying the inevitable bill could be postponed into the future.
Cynical as it might seem, easy credit has been used throughout history as a palliative by governments that are unable to address the deeper anxieties of the middle class directly.
Politicians, however, prefer to couch the objective in more uplifting and persuasive terms than that of crassly increasing consumption.
In the US, the expansion of home ownership – a key element of the American dream – to low- and middle-income households was the defensible linchpin for the broader aims of expanding credit and consumption.
Why did the US not follow the more direct path of redistribution, of taxing or borrowing and spending on the anxious middle class?
Greece, for example, got into trouble doing precisely this, employing many thousands in the government and overpaying them, even while it ran up public debt to astronomical levels.
In the US, though, there have been strong political forces arrayed against direct redistribution in recent years.
Directed housing credit was a policy with broader support, because each side thought that it would benefit.
The left favored flows to their natural constituency, while the right welcomed new property owners who could, perhaps, be convinced to switch party allegiance.
More low-income housing credit has been one of the few issues on which President Bill Clinton’s administration, with its affordable-housing mandate, and that of President George W. Bush, with its push for an “ownership” society, agreed.
In the end, though, the misguided attempt to push home ownership through credit has left the US with houses that no one can afford and households drowning in debt.
Ironically, since 2004, the homeownership rate has been in decline.
The problem, as often is the case with government policies, was not intent.
It rarely is.
But when lots of easy money pushed by a deep-pocketed government comes into contact with the profit motive of a sophisticated, competitive, and amoral financial sector, matters get taken far beyond the government’s intent.
This is not, of course, the first time in history that credit expansion has been used to assuage the concerns of a group that is being left behind, nor will it be the last.
In fact, one does not even need to look outside the US for examples.
The deregulation and rapid expansion of banking in the US in the early years of the twentieth century was in many ways a response to the Populist movement, backed by small and medium-sized farmers who found themselves falling behind the growing numbers of industrial workers, and demanded easier credit.
Excessive rural credit was one of the important causes of bank failures during the Great Depression.
The broader implication is that we need to look beyond greedy bankers and spineless regulators (and there were plenty of both) for the root causes of this crisis.
And the problems are not solved with a financial regulatory bill entrusting more powers to those regulators.
America needs to tackle inequality at its root, by giving more Americans the ability to compete in the global marketplace. This is much harder than doling out credit, but more effective in the long run.
How Japan Fuels Global Financial Instability
Over the past several years, much attention has focused on the role of China’s trade surplus in creating today’s global financial imbalances.
But too little attention has been paid to the role of Japan’s policy of near-zero interest rates in contributing to these imbalances.
As global financial uncertainty rises, it is time for Japan to change course.
Japan’s ultra-low interest rate policy was initiated in the 1990’s to put a floor under the economy following the bursting of its asset price bubble.
However, over time these ultra-low interest rates have promoted a highly speculative financial “carry” trade: speculators borrow yen at low interest rates and then buy dollars and other currencies that are invested in higher-yield assets elsewhere.
There are two key features of this carry trade.
First, it contributes to yen depreciation and dollar appreciation as carry traders switch out of yen.
Second, it increases global asset demand, generating asset price inflation.
The yen’s depreciation versus the dollar has contributed to continuing large US trade deficits with Japan.
It has also pressured other East Asian countries to under-value their exchange rates in order to remain competitive with Japan.
Given China’s under-valued currency, East Asia’s two largest economies have thus anchored down exchange rates throughout the region, thereby increasing the region’s trade surplus at the expense of jobs and growth in the rest of the global economy.
Funds switched out of Japan have shifted to other financial markets, with the chase for yield driving up asset prices and lowering interest rates.
In the US, this has complicated the Federal Reserve’s task.
The Fed has been trying to slow demand growth and cool the housing price bubble to avoid inflation, but carry trade speculators have been easing credit.
Most importantly, the carry trade generates global financial fragility by creating fundamental – and dangerous –mismatches.
First, carry traders borrow in yen but invest in dollars and other currencies.
Second, carry traders borrow short-term money in Japan but may invest in longer-term assets outside Japan.
Unexpected yen appreciation could cause large carry trade exchange rate losses, as could unexpected closing of the interest rate gap with Japan.
Such losses, or just the thought of them, have the potential to trigger global contagion as carry traders close positions in US markets to repay loans in Japan.
In addition to the global dangers of the carry trade, the policy of ultra-low interest rates may also be bad for Japan.
This is because ultra-low interest rates may hurt Japan’s households and lower consumption, and this effect may be larger than the benefit that a weak yen confers on Japan’s exports.
Higher interest rates can spur consumption if their impact on income outweighs the increased incentive to save.
This may well be the case for Japan, which has a rapidly aging population.
Current ultra-low interest rates may be scaring people about the adequacy of future income.
Raising rates could alleviate those fears, increasing consumer confidence and spending.
Additionally, raising interest rates would be a form of expansionary fiscal policy.
This is because Japan has a large public debt, and increasing interest payments on that debt would put extra money in the hands of households.
The policy of ultra-low interest rates was justified in the aftermath of the bursting of Japan’s asset price bubble, but Japan stabilized its economy long ago.
At this stage, the policy has become a contributor to global financial fragility, and it may be retarding Japan’s own prosperity by contributing to consumer anxieties.
That means Japan should decisively abandon ultra-low interest rates, albeit gradually so as to allow an orderly unwinding of speculative positions.
How Long for Low Rates?
CAMBRIDGE – How long can today’s record-low, major-currency interest rates persist?
Ten-year interest rates in the United States, the United Kingdom, and Germany have all been hovering around the once unthinkable 1.5% mark.
In Japan, the ten-year rate has drifted to below 0.8%.
Global investors are apparently willing to accept these extraordinarily low rates, even though they do not appear to compensate for expected inflation.
Indeed, the rate on inflation-adjusted US Treasury bills (so-called “TIPS”) is now negative up to 15 years.
Is this extraordinary situation stable?
In the very near term, certainly; indeed, interest rates could still fall further.
Over the longer term, however, this situation is definitely not stable.
Three major factors underlie today’s low yields.
First and foremost, there is the “global savings glut,” an idea popularized by current Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke in a 2005 speech.
For various reasons, savers have become ascendant across many regions.
In Germany and Japan, aging populations need to save for retirement.
In China, the government holds safe bonds as a hedge against a future banking crisis and, of course, as a byproduct of efforts to stabilize the exchange rate.
Similar motives dictate reserve accumulation in other emerging markets.
Finally, oil exporters such as Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates seek to set aside wealth during the boom years.
Second, in their efforts to combat the financial crisis, the major central banks have all brought down very short-term policy interest rates to close to zero, with no clear exit in sight.
In normal times, any effort by a central bank to take short-term interest rates too low for too long will boomerang.
Short-term market interest rates will fall, but, as investors begin to recognize the ultimate inflationary consequences of very loose monetary policy, longer-term interest rates will rise.
This has not yet happened, as central banks have been careful to repeat their mantra of low long-term inflation.
That has been sufficient to convince markets that any stimulus will be withdrawn before significant inflationary forces gather.
But a third factor has become manifest recently.
Investors are increasingly wary of a global financial meltdown, most likely emanating from Europe, but with the US fiscal cliff, political instability in the Middle East, and a slowdown in China all coming into play.
Meltdown fears, even if remote, directly raise the premium that savers are willing to pay for bonds that they perceive as the most reliable, much as the premium for gold rises.
These same fears are also restraining business investment, which has remained muted, despite extremely low interest rates for many companies.
It is the combination of all three of these factors that has created a “perfect storm” for super low interest rates.
But how long can the storm last?
Although highly unpredictable, it is easy to imagine how the process could be reversed.
For starters, the same forces that led to an upward shift in the global savings curve will soon enough begin operating in the other direction.
Japan, for example, is starting to experience a huge retirement bulge, implying a sharp reduction in savings as the elderly start to draw down lifetime reserves.
Japan’s past predilection toward saving has long implied a large trade and current-account surplus, but now these surpluses are starting to swing the other way.
Germany will soon be in the same situation.
Meanwhile, new energy-extraction technologies, combined with a softer trajectory for global growth, are having a marked impact on commodity prices, cutting deeply into the surpluses of commodity exporters from Argentina to Saudi Arabia.
Second, many (if not necessarily all) central banks will eventually figure out how to generate higher inflation expectations.
They will be driven to tolerate higher inflation as a means of forcing investors into real assets, to accelerate deleveraging, and as a mechanism for facilitating downward adjustment in real wages and home prices.
It is nonsense to argue that central banks are impotent and completely unable to raise inflation expectations, no matter how hard they try.
In the extreme, governments can appoint central bank leaders who have a long-standing record of stating a tolerance for moderate inflation – an exact parallel to the idea of appointing “conservative” central bankers as a means of combating high inflation.
Third, eventually the clouds over Europe will be resolved, though I admit that this does not seem likely to happen anytime soon.
Indeed, things will likely get worse before they get better, and it is not at all difficult to imagine a profound restructuring of the eurozone.
Nevertheless, whichever direction the euro crisis takes, its ultimate resolution will end the extreme existential uncertainty that clouds the outlook today.
Ultra-low interest rates may persist for some time.
Certainly Japan’s rates have remained stable at an extraordinarily low level for a considerable period, at times falling further even as it seemed that they could only rise.
But today’s low interest-rate dynamic is not an entirely stable one.
It could unwind remarkably quickly.
How Military Should Japan Be?
Is it time for Japan to prime its weapons and sail out into the world in defense of peace?
The very idea still incites howls of protest in Asia - not least in Japan, where popular attachment to the country's postwar "peace" constitution remains powerful.
Yet Japan's modestly named Self-Defense Forces are involved in many regional hot spots (no combat duty, of course) and seek to play a more active part in UN peacekeeping.
If a shooting war ever breaks out in Asia, Japan is nowadays prepared to do a lot more than fill the petrol tanks.
It is past time for these modest changes, because the Asia/Pacific region's many fault lines affect the interests of the world's great and emerging powers in fundamental ways.
Northeast Asia contains the last remnants of the Cold War: the divided Korean Peninsula and hostile glares across the Taiwan Straits.
Southeast Asia forms its own unique geo-political environment, with a wide variety of ethnic groups, cultures, and religions in tension - as the current Islamic unrest in Thailand attests.
Beyond these conventional strategic concerns, the emergence of global terrorism and the Iraq War re-enforce Japan's sense that the strategic environment has changed profoundly.
The roles and obligations of the Self-Defense Forces must gradually shift and diversify, and their zone of action broadened.
Neat binary concepts like "peacetime" and "wartime" are no longer viable.
The world must get used to a twilight security environment of sudden and peripheral emergencies.
Japan's laws are primed for this change, because the obligations of the Self-Defense Forces are relatively clear in these circumstances.
The "Anti-Terrorism Special Measures Law" allows the Self-Defense Forces to participate in the fight against international terrorism, although the form of participation is limited to logistical support.
Nor are the Self-Defense Forces' operations and obligations any longer restricted to Japanese territory and the adjacent seas.
Ever since Japan dispatched minesweepers to the Persian Gulf after the Gulf War in 1991, the Self-Defense Forces have been expanding their activities beyond Japan and its immediate vicinity to include international peacekeeping missions, emergency relief operations, multilateral military exercises, and naval refueling support in the Indian Ocean.
Self-Defense Force units have been dispatched to southern Iraq to provide humanitarian aid and support reconstruction efforts.
Of course, the obligation of the Self-Defense Forces not to engage in offensive combat operations remains unchanged.
With its expanded roles, however, the Self-Defense Forces are well prepared to engage in other military operations, such as shadowing and chasing spy ships, anti-terror activities, and missions to prevent proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and ballistic missiles.
Japan's warships can help with sanctions monitoring and minesweeping.
Its ships and aircraft can rescue stranded nationals.
But these incremental changes in Japan's military capacity and policies, though necessary and effective, can be sustained only with a clear national consensus on the country's defense interests.
The international community's demand that Japan participate directly in resolving global tensions has helped, by changing the terms of domestic debate.
The old deadlock on security issues is relaxing, and the Japanese public, recognizing the changed international environment, mostly embraces the Self-Defense Forces' deployment in pursuit of international and regional responsibilities.
Every Japanese citizen may have his or her own opinion, but a clear majority appear to agree that Japan must become a prominent nation in promoting international and regional security, as well as economic growth.
To achieve these ends, Japan must be endowed with responsibilities equivalent to the country's national power, while securing the safety, comfort, and prosperity of Japan and preserving the people's identity as Japanese with pride and honor.
Achieving these goals requires fulfilling several conditions.
Japan's political leadership needs to be founded on a competitive but stable political structure.
Only a truly popular political mandate can assure that the Japanese people are fully aware of their international responsibilities as an influential nation in the international community.
Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi seems to grasp much of this, and so is undertaking discussions on security and defense that aim to help revise the "National Defense Program Outline."
Those with bitter memories of Japanese behavior half a century ago should be reassured; this debate is about how to defend peace, not about how to promote or wage war.
Many of Japan's neighbors were understandably reassured by the Cold War arrangement whereby America promised to defend Japan, relieving the country of the need for a powerful military.
The one-sided nature of this alliance rankled little when Japan was just one among many protected by America's global shield.
As Japan prospered under America's protection, it prided itself on being a "civilian" power, using its trade and aid, rather than tanks and guns, to encourage stability.
But America, in its global war on terror, has justifiably lost interest in bearing Asia's many military burdens alone.
Hence, Japan must be seen to be doing more to support its inseparable ally, as well as international peacekeeping efforts in general.
A rich and powerful Japan in a region as dangerous as East Asia cannot go on playing military bit parts forever.
The question is whether Japan's Self-Defense Forces work alongside America and the world in defense of world peace now, or eventually do so alone in defense of Japan.
How Musharraf Survives
The devastating Kashmir earthquake is once again testing the skills of one of the world’s great political survivors.
General Pervez Musharraf, president of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, has few friends and many enemies.
Pakistan’s major political parties oppose him.
For the religious right and the mullahs, he is an agent of America, the great Satan, and has thus betrayed the cause of Islam.
Somewhere out there, gunning for Musharraf, are Islamic militants furious at being dumped after they fought his covert wars in Afghanistan and Kashmir.
Many in Musharraf’s own army despise him for the same reason.
For Pakistan’s small and embattled liberal and left-wing forces, he is yet another military dictator who seized and holds power by force, undermining the development of democracy.
So how does Musharraf survive?
In large part, he can thank 9/11.
Faced by a United States bent upon bloody vengeance, Pakistan’s military establishment scurried to join the US-led coalition and take up arms against its own creation, the Taliban.
Only a few senior officers with an Islamic bent resisted this straightforward betrayal.
They were soon marginalized, drawing praise from Washington.
With US help, an economy that had nearly run aground was suddenly righted by a wave of international aid and loan write-offs.
Even more important was a decision, taken in the hope of choking off funds to extremist groups, to require all expatriate Pakistani earnings to be remitted through official banking channels.
In a curious way, nuclear weapons also are crucial to Musharraf’s survival, for they create conditions that distract Pakistan’s highly ideological army from its objective of war with India.
The dispute over Kashmir had occupied the minds of military planners throughout Pakistan’s history, and war had been the raison d’etre for maintaining the world’s eighth-largest standing army.
But nukes, a belief in deterrence, and the growing realization that Kashmir is a lost cause, have freed the army from the hard life of the trenches.
Ideology is increasingly irrelevant as the officer class scrambles to build vast personal fortunes.
A look at Pakistan’s economic landscape says it all.
The CEO’s of many, if not most corporations, public and private, are retired military officers – many fairly young.
The military owns airlines and freight companies, petrochemical factories, power generation plants, sugar mills, cement and fertilizer plants, construction firms, banks and insurance companies, advertising agencies, and more.
Vast tracts of prime real estate in cities, sold to officers for a pittance, have turned into mega housing developments.
Musharraf defends the military acquisitions, claiming that they are economically efficient, and angrily dismisses criticism as the ranting of unpatriotic Pakistani pseudo-intellectuals.
But they are “efficient” only in the sense that they dampen the threat to Musharraf posed by the military.
No so Pakistan’s Islamists, however, whom Musharraf infuriated yet again last month, when he ordered his foreign minister to initiate the first official contact with Israel.
But the Islamists’ call for nationwide protests flopped.
The military, after decades of rule, has dismantled all forms of political organization – parties, trade unions, and student associations – leaving a Pakistani society immobilized, apathetic, and incapable of articulating its preferences.
As Islamists’ anger at Musharraf’s betrayals increases, so does his global standing and image as a world statesman.
Scenes of wild-eyed mullahs demonstrating in the streets of Pakistani cities are a boon to his position.
Surely the Pakistani public needs to be tamed by a strongman.
No harm if it is an army general.
But the truth is more complex.
This process has deepened pro- and anti- US divisions within the army, both among commissioned and non-commissioned officers, but nothing in Pakistan today suggests that radical change is imminent.
To be sure, more incidents of global terrorism associated with Pakistan, such as July’s London bombings, will bring new pressures.
The US and Europe will make their usual demands to close down the country’s hate-spewing madrassas, and to reform a public-school system that, unhindered by the government, churns out young militants burning to kill and die for Islam.
For Musharraf, this means that continuing to hunt with the hounds and run with the hares might get harder.
But the current constellation of forces suggests that, barring unforeseen developments, his survival instincts will serve him well for years to come.
Egypt’s new leaders have inherited Mubarak’s dilemma – how to realize the country’s aspiration to lead the Arab world without angering its Saudi benefactors. For this reason, the Egyptian-Iranian rapprochement will yield more photo opportunities than tangible results. On opposite sides of religious and ethnic divides, a close bilateral relationship would seem unlikely under even the best circumstances. And, with Egypt in need of massive financial aid to offset the economic losses caused by its February revolution, its leaders can ill afford to alienate the Saudis, who view Iran, not Israel, as the gravest threat to regional stability.
Egypt is entering a new era. But the radical policy upheavals predicted by analysts will prove to be small tremors. Saudi interests will continue to weigh heavily on Egyptian foreign policy.
And that, above all, means preserving the status quo.
America’s Fiscal Cliff Dwellers
WASHINGTON, DC – In early 2012, Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke used the term “fiscal cliff” to grab the attention of lawmakers and the broader public.
Bernanke’s point was that Americans should worry about the combination of federal tax increases and spending cuts that are currently scheduled to begin at the end of this year.
But there is not really any kind of “cliff” in the sense that if you stepped over the edge, you would fall fast, land on something hard, and not get up for a long time.
In the modern US economy, the scheduled changes constitute more of a fiscal “slope” – meaning that the full effect of the tax increases would not be felt immediately (income withholding takes time to adjust), while the spending cuts would also be phased in (the government has some discretion regarding implementation).
This slope offers President Barack Obama a real opportunity to restore the federal government’s revenue base to what it was in the mid-1990’s.
The choice of words to describe America’s fiscal situation matters, given the hysteria that has been whipped up in recent months, primarily by people who want to make big cuts in the country’s two main entitlement programs, Social Security and Medicare.
Their logic is that if we are about to rush off a cliff, we need to take extreme measures.
And cutting pensions and health care for the elderly certainly qualifies as extreme – as well as completely inappropriate and unnecessary.
If, instead, the US faces a fiscal slope, then people who refuse to consider raising taxes – namely, Republicans in the US Congress’s House of Representatives – have a very weak hand indeed.
It has become clear that the House Republicans will steadfastly refuse to vote for any increases in tax rates during the current lame-duck congressional session.
House Speaker John Boehner, who offered relatively conciliatory remarks immediately after the election, now says that he would accept higher revenue with lower rates – precisely what the temporary tax cuts enacted by George W. Bush’s administration were supposed to deliver, but manifestly did not.
It is very unlikely that congressional Democrats and Republicans can reach an agreement on extending the Bush-era tax cuts for the middle class, while allowing them to expire for the rich.
They will spar with each other for another six weeks, then go to the brink of the purported “cliff” and see who blinks at the last moment.
The sensible course of action for Obama would be to step off the “cliff” by vetoing any extension of the Bush-era tax cuts, which would then expire at the end of 2012.
Once tax rates were restored to their previous levels, Obama could present his own tax-cut package to Congress – for example, with a proposal in early January that provided greater benefit to lower-income Americans, as he promised during his re-election campaign.
These tax cuts should also be linked to the state of the economy, so that they would wind down as employment recovers (for example, to its level in 2007, relative to total population).
If the economy looks weaker than anticipated in early 2013, the proposed tax cuts could be larger (as long as they were phased out during the economic recovery).
This approach would significantly transform America’s longer-run fiscal prospects.
Then, as America heads steadily down the fiscal slope in early 2013, the House Republicans would have a choice.
Do they vote, week after week, against tax cuts that would help 100 million Americans, while the economy deteriorates around them?
Or do they embrace a deal that cuts taxes and tax rates relative to where they would be otherwise?
In effect, the House Republicans can be forced to sign onto a deal that both supports the economy and restores revenue to the level that prevailed before the disastrous experiment of Bushonomics.
Obama has already put spending cuts on the table – probably to a greater extent than would please his electoral base (he does have a tendency to do this).
The big question is whether the US can strengthen revenue in an appropriate manner that is consistent with renewed economic growth.
America should aim to return to the tax rates of the mid-1990’s, when the economy was booming and the federal budget was in much better shape.
But it should do this fully only once the economy has completely recovered.
Ordinarily, partisan political gridlock in Washington would prevent any such sensible change.
Fortunately, the fiscal slope gives Obama the opportunity to bring it about – and even to write some history in the process.
That means vetoing any extension of the Bush-era tax cuts, and then working to enact the Obama tax cuts.
How Obama Leads
CAMBRIDGE – Two years ago, Barack Obama was a first-term senator from a mid-western state who had declared his interest in running for the presidency.
Many people were skeptical that an African-American with a strange name and little national experience could win.
But as his campaign unfolded, he demonstrated that he possessed the powers to lead – both soft and hard.
Soft power is the ability to attract others, and the three key soft-power skills are emotional intelligence, vision, and communications.
In addition, a successful leader needs the hard-power skills of organizational and Machiavellian political capacity.
Equally important is the contextual intelligence that allows a leader to vary the mix of these skills in different situations to produce the successful combinations that I call “smart power.”
During his campaign, Obama demonstrated these skills in his calm response to crises, his forward-looking vision, and his superb organizational ability.
In addition, his contextual intelligence about world politics has been shaped from the bottom up with experience in Indonesia and Kenya, and his understanding of American politics was shaped from the bottom up as a community organizer in Chicago.
Obama continued to demonstrate these leadership skills in his almost flawless transition.
By selecting his primary opponent, Hillary Clinton, as his Secretary of State, and reaching across party lines to retain Robert Gates as Secretary of Defense, he showed openness to strong subordinates.
In his inaugural address, he sounded the themes of smart power – a willingness “to extend an open hand to those who unclench their fists” – but also stressed themes of responsibility as Americans confront sobering economic problems.
Moreover, Obama has started his term in decisive fashion.
In his first weeks in office, he began to fulfill his campaign promises by outlining a massive economic stimulus plan, ordering the closure of the Guantánamo Bay prison, promoting new fuel-efficiency standards to save energy, giving an interview to Al Arabiya, and sending a top emissary to the Middle East.
George W. Bush once said that his role as leader was to be “the decider.”
But even if Bush had been better as a decider, people want something more in a leader.
We want someone who reinforces our identity and tells us who we are.
We judge leaders not only by the effectiveness of their actions, but also by the meanings that they create and teach. 
Most leaders feed upon the existing identity and solidarity of their groups.
But some leaders see moral obligations beyond their immediate group and educate their followers.
Nelson Mandela could easily have chosen to define his group as black South Africans and sought revenge for the injustices of Apartheid and his own imprisonment.
Instead, he worked tirelessly to expand the identity of his followers both by words and deeds.
When Obama was faced with a campaign crisis over incendiary racial remarks by his former pastor, he did not simply distance himself from the problem, but made use of the episode to deliver a speech that served to broaden the understanding and identities of both white and black Americans.
The crisis on September 11, 2001, produced an opportunity for Bush to express a bold new vision of foreign policy.
But he failed to produce a sustainable picture of America’s leadership role in the world.
A successful vision is one that combines inspiration with feasibility.
Bush failed to get that combination right. 
Obama will need to use both his emotional and contextual intelligence if he is to restore American leadership.
Contextual intelligence is the intuitive diagnostic skill that helps a leader align tactics with objectives to produce smart strategies in different situations.
A decade ago, the conventional wisdom was that the world was a uni-polar American hegemony.
Neo-conservative pundits drew the conclusion that the United States was so powerful that it could do whatever it wanted, and that others had no choice but to follow. 
This new unilateralism was based on a profound misunderstanding of the nature of power – that is, the ability to affect others to get the outcomes one wants – in world politics.
The US may be the only superpower, but preponderance is not empire.
America can influence but not control other parts of the world.
Whether certain resources will produce power depends upon the context.
To understand power and its contexts in the world today, I have sometimes suggested the metaphor of a three-dimensional chess game.
On the top board of military power among countries, the US is the only superpower.
On the middle board of economic relations among countries, the world is already multipolar.
America cannot get the outcomes it wants in trade, antitrust, or other areas without the cooperation of the European Union, China, Japan, and others.
On the bottom board of transnational relations outside the control of governments – pandemics, climate change, the drug trade, or transnational terrorism, for example – power is chaotically distributed.
Nobody is in control. 
This is the complex world in which Obama takes up the mantle of leadership.
He inherits a global economic crisis, two wars in which US and allied troops are deployed, crises in the Middle East and South Asia, and a struggle against terrorism.
He will have to deal with this legacy and chart a new course at the same time.
He will have to make difficult decisions while creating a larger sense of meaning in which America once again exports hope rather than fear.
That will be the test of his leadership.
Oily Dirt
EDMONTON – Calm discussion of the environment nowadays is about as plausible as reasoned dialogue on witchcraft in colonial Massachusetts.
Consider the hyperbolic debate over the Keystone XL pipeline, which would funnel oil from Canada’s Athabasca tar sands in northeastern Alberta to refineries on the Texas Gulf Coast.
The Alberta government – and the oil companies that influence it – would upgrade “tar sands” to “oil sands,” apparently thinking that a better name somehow silences environmental critics.
Environmentalists opposing the pipeline refer, with equal deftness, to “dirty oil.”
Bystanders understandably wonder which is worse – awkward rebranding or awkward puns.
Neither gaucherie is entirely deceptive.
The tar sands are hundreds of square kilometers of bitumen, a viscous and corrosive tarlike deposit.
Bitumen permeates the dirt at the surface or, where thin layers of compost and sediment intervene, somewhat below basement levels.
Grasping a handful of dirt from a riverbank does leave one’s hand more oily than tarred, and the greasy dirt is somewhat sandy.
This highlights the real deception by both sides.
Awkwardly for oil companies, bitumen is not ordinary oil.
Awkwardly for environmentalists, Nature put corrosive bitumen in the dirt.
Had BP spilled hundreds of billions of barrels of bitumen across hundreds of square kilometers, environmentalists would rightly demand that no expense be spared to rid the dirt of every trace of oil.
A double standard applies, because, whatever Nature does is, well, natural, and therefore good.
Environmentalists’ awkwardness is, or ought to be, disconcerting.
But oil companies’ awkwardness is more substantial. They remove bitumen from the dirt in two ways.
An older technology features vast strip mines, huge diggers, and trucks carting oily dirt to industrial-scale pressure cookers that drain off the bitumen.
A newer technology leaves the surface untouched by pumping steam into the subsoil.
This heats the bitumen, making it runny enough to be pumped out.
Both processes leave toxic residues and somewhat less oily dirt.
Environmentalists make several arguments for leaving the bitumen in the dirt.
They disparage hideous strip mines and toxic tailing ponds that even superstar marketers cannot “greenwash.” &#160;The scale is unusual, but open-pit mines and tailing ponds are normal mining operations everywhere.
Moreover, the newer bitumen technology does without strip mines.
Environmentalists correctly note that producing heat for either process uses more energy than does overcoming gravity to pump up ordinary oil.
Burning natural gas to heat oily dirt releases large amounts of carbon dioxide, exacerbating global warming.
Unfortunately, biodiesel from soy is little better on this count; and California heavy oil and farm ethanol are both far worse.
We are running a global experiment while living in a test tube.
Given this, the oil industry’s defense – “I’m no worse a scoundrel” – seems dishonorable.
US President Barack Obama has a limited opportunity to preserve the bitumen companies’ integrity.
They want to access the American market and use Gulf Coast ports to export more widely, but Keystone XL is not their only option.
If Obama blocks the pipeline, they will build others, and other export facilities – if not on Canada’s environmentally delicate Pacific coast, then at some already-industrialized Atlantic port.
These developments will come anyway, and, once they do, the United States will become a mere bystander.
By offering conditional approval of the Keystone XL, Obama could advance the pipeline’s very genuine diplomatic and economic benefits, while reducing its environmental costs.
The benefits are huge.
Flooding global markets with Canadian oil would constrain global oil prices. More important, it would advance the cause of peace.
Addiction to Middle East oil distorts foreign policies, causes wars, and ravages the environment.
Recall how Iraqi soldiers retreating from Kuwait in 1991 set hundreds of wellheads ablaze.
The infernos spewed CO2 into the air and flaming oil across delicate desert ecosystems for months.
War is not green.
America cannot realistically expect its allies – let alone countries like Iran and Venezuela, with which its relations are strained – to adopt principled foreign policies when Middle East Realpolitik distorts its own foreign policy.
In the short term, Canadian oil would liberate the US from this hypocrisy.
In the longer term, were shale gas and oil to satisfy US demand, Canadian oil could wean America’s allies from their Middle East oil addiction, giving them new foreign-policy options, too.
Obama’s approval should be conditional on Canada enforcing serious environmental safeguards.
Many bitumen companies claim that they already abide by such safeguards; but environmentalists’ skepticism is justified.
Competition presses each company to keep its costs down.
Only strong regulations, transparency, and severe penalties can create a level playing field.
One obvious condition is mandatory CO2 “sequestration” (removing CO2 from the air and storing it deep underground).
Mandatory sequestration could make net CO2 emissions from bitumen extraction no worse than those from conventional oil wells, and perhaps even better.
Another obvious condition is mandatory timetables for restoring strip mines and tailing ponds to their natural condition.
The companies want the bitumen that Nature put in the oily dirt.
Let them take it, but let’s also ensure they leave no worse a mess than Nature intended.
The Political Economy of 2013
NEWPORT BEACH – Watching America’s leaders scramble in the closing days of 2012 to avoid a “fiscal cliff” that would plunge the economy into recession was yet another illustration of an inconvenient truth: messy politics remains a major driver of economic developments.
In some cases during 2012, politics was a force for good: consider Prime Minister Mario Monti’s ability to pull Italy back from the brink of financial turmoil.
But, in other cases, like Greece, political dysfunction aggravated economic problems.
Close and defining linkages between politics and economics are likely to persist in 2013.
Having said this, we should also expect much greater segmentation in terms of impact – and that the consequences will affect both individual countries and the global system as a whole.
In some countries – for example, Italy, Japan, and the United States – politics will remain the primary driver of economic-policy approaches.
But elsewhere – China, Egypt, Germany, and Greece come to mind – the reverse will be true, with economics becoming a key determinant of political outcomes.
This duality in causation speaks to a world that will become more heterogeneous in 2013 – and in at least two ways: it will lack unifying political themes, and it will be subject to multi-speed growth and financial dynamics that imply a range of possible scenarios for multilateral policy interactions.
With an election looming in Italy, the country’s technocratic interim administration will return the reins of power to a democratically elected government.
The question, both for Italy and Europe as a whole, is whether the new government will maintain the current economic policy stance or shift to one that is less acceptable to the country’s external partners (particularly Germany and the European Central Bank).
Monti may or may not be involved in the new government.
The further removed from it he is, the greater the temptation will be to alter the policy approach in response to popular pressures.
This would involve less emphasis on fiscal and structural reforms, raising concerns in Berlin, Brussels, and Frankfurt.
Japan’s incoming government has already signaled an economic-policy pivot, relying on what it directly controls (fiscal policy), together with pressure on the Bank of Japan, to relax the monetary-policy stance, in an effort to generate faster growth and higher inflation.
In the process, officials are weakening the yen.
They will also try to lower Japan’s dependence on exports and rethink sending production facilities to lower-wage countries.
The economic impact of politics in the US, while important, will be less dynamic: absent a more cooperative Congress, politics will mute policy responses rather than fuel greater activism.
Continued congressional polarization would maintain policy uncertainty, confound debt and deficit negotiations, and impede economic growth.
From stymieing medium-term fiscal reforms to delaying needed overhauls of the labor and housing markets, congressional dysfunction would keep US economic performance below its capacity; over time, it would also eat away at potential output.
In other countries, the causal direction will run primarily from economics to politics.
In Egypt and Greece, for example, rising poverty, high unemployment, and financial turmoil could place governments under pressure.
Popular frustration may not wait for the ballot box.
Instead, hard times could fuel civil unrest, threatening their governments’ legitimacy, credibility, and effectiveness – and with no obvious alternatives that could ensure rapid economic recovery and rising living standards.
In China, the credibility of the incoming leadership will depend in large part on whether the economy can consolidate its soft landing.
Specifically, any prolonged period of sub-7% growth could encourage opposition and dissent – not only in the countryside, but also in urban centers.
Then there is Germany, which holds the key to the integrity and unity of the eurozone.
So far, Chancellor Angela Merkel has been largely successful in insulating the German economy from the turmoil elsewhere in Europe.
Unemployment has remained remarkably low and confidence relatively high.
And, while growth has moderated recently, Germany remains one of Europe’s best-performing economies – and not just its paymaster.
While some would have favored greater policy activism, Merkel’s Germany has provided a steady anchor for a eurozone struggling to end bouts of financial instability and put an end to questions about its survival as a well-functioning monetary union (one that aspires to becoming much more).
A change in German leadership would, therefore, raise questions about Europe’s policy underpinning.
How politics and economics interact nationally and globally is one of the important questions for 2013 and beyond.
There are three scenarios: good economics and effective politics provide the basis for a growing and more cooperative global economy; bad economics interact with dysfunctional politics to ruin the day; or the world muddles through, increasingly unstable, as a tug of war between economics and politics plays out, with no clear result or direction.
Part of the answer depends on what happens in three countries in particular – China, Germany, and the US.
Their economic and political stability is essential to the well-being of a world economy that has yet to recover fully from the 2008 global financial crisis.
Current indications, albeit incomplete, suggest that the three will continue to anchor the global economy in 2013.
That is the good news.
The bad news is that their anchor may remain both tentative and insufficient to restore the level of growth and financial stability to which billions of people aspire.
The Siren Song of “Strongmania”
CLAREMONT – Political strongmen are back in style.
Not long ago, Russian President Vladimir Putin was one of the only leaders worthy of the label.
Today, he has much more competition.
The trend can be seen in traditionally autocratic regimes.
Chinese President Xi Jinping is arguably the country’s most powerful leader since the death of Mao Zedong four decades ago.
But something similar can be seen in countries that had been touted as model young democracies.
In Turkey, President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, who had long been moving toward autocracy, has concentrated power further in the wake of last month’s failed military coup.
Hungarian Prime Minister Viktor Orbán has reversed a post-communist success story with a sharp turn toward illiberalism.
Even in the Philippines, where the People Power Revolution overthrew Ferdinand Marcos in 1986, voters have just elected as their president Rodrigo Duterte, an avowed populist strongman and trigger-happy warrior against drug lords.
Even the world’s most stable democracies have been infected by strongmania.
In Austria, Norbert Hofer, leader of the far-right Freedom Party, is likely to be elected to the presidency in October.
And in the United States, Donald Trump has capitalized on the frustration and prejudices of parts of the American electorate to gain a chance – fortunately, weakening by the day – of becoming the country’s next president.
This embrace of leaders who promise that they alone can fix society’s problems and restore some idealized past reflects widespread ignorance of the nature and consequences of populist rule.
In fact, history has not been kind to such rulers.
Like today’s leaders, they would often ride to power on a wave of public anger against the perceived failures of democracy – failures that they had no intention of fixing.
Instead, once in office, they would often pursue an entirely different agenda – one that usually made things much worse.
One need look no further than Venezuela, where today’s economic meltdown can be traced back to the disastrous rule of populist par excellence Hugo Chávez.
People loved Chávez’s social-welfare schemes, seemingly unconcerned that they were based on oil revenues and foreign debt.
As long as the benefits flowed, Chávez was free to expropriate industries and otherwise discourage private competition.
Unsurprisingly, economic diversification stalled, and when oil prices collapsed, so did the economy.
This highlights a key reason why strongmen nearly always lead their countries toward catastrophe.
After winning over voters with their apparent decisiveness and directness, such leaders capture enough authority to make quick decisions and demonstrate short-term results – thereby keeping voters on their side as they claim still greater authority.
But decisiveness carries a high cost.
With nobody checking their behavior, strongmen rarely account for long-term risks.
In the end, the prosperity they promised never arrives, at least not for long.
Instead, the economy usually ends up in ruins.
And that’s not the worst of it.
Voters surrender freedoms for that promised prosperity, as Russia under Putin illustrates.
Putin promised stability and order, and consolidated his power by taking down his political opponents, liberals and oligarchs alike.
Then he began methodically destroying Russia’s fragile democratic institutions, stifling the press, and curtailing civil liberties, including freedom of assembly.
Less than a decade later, he had erected a personal autocratic regime on the ruins of a flawed new democracy.
And, as in Venezuela, the absence of economic modernization and diversification tied the economy’s fate to the global oil market.
The ability to criticize the government freely is the core difference between democracy and dictatorship.
So how can anyone believe that a leader who curtails people’s right to speak out can save a flawed democracy?
In fact, the combination of freedom of expression and electoral competition is the key to improving democracies, because it enables systemic failures – not to mention leaders’ missteps – to be subjected to public scrutiny.
China’s autocratic government is famous for avoiding such scrutiny by suppressing freedom of information.
Its many elements of Internet censorship – from blocking politically sensitive Wikipedia articles to filtering certain key words out of online searches – come together to form the so-called Great Firewall of China.
That firewall, together with press censorship, enables China’s leaders to conceal their failures and highlight their achievements, however dubious.
Putin behaves similarly, using the press to emphasize, say, how Russia’s annexation of Crimea has reminded the country’s Western opponents of its “greatness.”
Orbán and Erdoğan seem to be operating from the same playbook.
Moreover, like China, Russia has embraced extravagant spectacles like the Olympic Games, in an effort to showcase the country’s magnificence and the beneficence of its leaders.
Coverage of such events fills the media space that should be used to discuss serious governance issues.
If that were not enough to convince voters of the dangers posed by populist autocrats, one might also consider the human toll of living under their rule.
Perhaps the dozens of journalists who have been arrested in Turkey since the coup attempt, or the families of Putin’s many opponents who have ended up dead, could provide some insight into the cost of living in constant fear of the government.
The growing popularity of strongmen in much of the world may or may not herald the dawn of a new autocratic age.
Strongmen tend to self-destruct, owing to colossal mistakes that doom their grandiose ambitions.
Unfortunately, they tend to leave a severely compromised democracy and a derelict economy in their wake.
Ultimately, the best defense against such outcomes is to prevent populist autocrats from getting elected in the first place.
Countries that have elected such leaders should stand as a warning to others tempted to go down a similar path.
The Competition Factor
BRUSSELS/MEXICO CITY – Since the global economic downturn began in 2008, debate has centered on the macroeconomic strategies and instruments used to address the crisis and foster recovery.
But correcting imbalances and addressing short-term slowdowns or recessions, while important, should not be allowed to overshadow the need to establish long-term conditions for solid and sustainable economic growth.
So far, macroeconomic policy has borne both the blame for economic malaise and the hope that it can be overcome.