Economic policymakers around the world are looking for ways to boost growth, with infrastructure investment topping most lists.
But, as Lagarde regularly&nbsp;reminds her audiences, another, often-overlooked remedy is to increase the economic participation and advancement of women.
Women account for half of the global labor supply and about 70% of the world’s consumption demand.
Yet there remains a long way to go in realizing their economic potential, as the World Economic Forum’s just-released&nbsp;Global Gender Gap Report 2014 confirms.
In many countries, both developed and developing, men and women are at or near parity when it comes to education and health, according to the report, which covers 142 countries and 94% of the world’s population.
But, as the attack on the heroic Pakistani schoolgirl and Nobel Peace Prize laureate Malala Yousafzai demonstrated, girls and women are still blocked from education in many places, sometimes through violence.
Moreover, in terms of economic participation and opportunity, women continue to lag behind men by a considerable 15-25% even in the most gender-equal societies.
Globally, only about half of working-age women are employed, and they earn three-quarters as much as men, even when they have the same level of education and are in the same occupation.
Meanwhile, women are over-represented in informal, temporary, and part-time jobs, most of which are low-productivity positions with low pay, no benefits, and limited opportunities for advancement.
Based on the rate of progress over the last nine years, it will take another 81 years to close the world’s economic gender gap and unlock the associated economic benefits.
By one estimate, women&nbsp;hold&nbsp;about 24% of top management positions globally, with comparable figures across regions and development levels.
A&nbsp;recent study by the Credit Suisse Research Institute (CSRI) of 3,000 companies in diverse sectors and countries, however, yields a more depressing conclusion: women occupy only about 13% of top management positions (CEOs and people who report directly to them), on average, with even the highest rate, in North America, amounting to only 15%.
Women’s participation, moreover, is skewed toward positions in less influential areas like shared services, in which opportunities for promotion to top positions are limited.
And, though female participation on company boards has increased in almost every country and sector over the last three years, with the largest gains occurring in countries that have introduced quotas, women hold only about 12.7% of board positions, on average.
The gender gap does not hurt only women; it hurts everyone.
Healthy, educated women are more likely to have healthier and more educated children, creating a virtuous circle of development.
WEF data suggest a strong correlation between a country’s progress in closing the gender gap – particularly in education and the labor force – and its economic competitiveness.
The business case for women in leadership is strong.
Companies with more women in top management and board positions better reflect the profiles of their customers and employees, benefit from more diverse views when solving problems, rank higher on indicators of organizational cooperation and health, and report higher profitability and returns on equity.
Furthermore, the CSRI study indicates higher returns on equity, higher valuations, and higher payout ratios, with no discernible differences in risk-taking.
Realizing the economic potential of women requires changes in policies, business practices, and attitudes.
Developed countries should invest in affordable child care, early childhood education, and parental leave; shift from family to individual taxes; and provide more generous tax credits, benefits, and protections for low-wage and part-time workers.
For example,&nbsp;research finds that women tend to be less confident and less likely to negotiate for pay raises and promotions than equally qualified men.
Companies can also use their influence with suppliers, distributors, and partners to support women-owned businesses and encourage gender-neutral advertising.
And companies&nbsp;can change how jobs are structured and remunerated to enhance flexibility, thereby helping both men and women balance work and family demands.
Gender gaps in economic participation and opportunity for women vary significantly across regions.
The WEF’s findings show that the Middle East and North Africa suffer from the widest gender gap, with women reaching only 40% of parity in the workplace, on average, compared with nearly 80% in North America.
Indeed, the overall gap has widened in Jordan and Tunisia.
Even so, there are positive trends.
Over the last nine years, Saudi Arabia has reduced its economic gender gap, relative to its starting point, more than any other country.
Lagarde challenges policymakers and business leaders alike to make changes that broaden economic participation and opportunity for women.
The economic gains from doing so are significant.
In the words of Klaus Schwab, the WEF’s founder, “Only those economies which have full access to all their talent will remain competitive and will prosper.
But, even more important, gender equality is a matter of justice.”
It would be difficult to identify more compelling reasons to accelerate progress toward gender parity.
The Immorality of Coal
SYDNEY – Momentum seems to be building for a global deal at the United Nations Climate Change Conference in Paris this December.
With this sense of optimism comes a keen awareness that the use of fossil fuels must be phased out globally as rapidly as possible.
Indeed, the idea that greenhouse-gas emissions should be reduced to zero by 2050 is gaining wider acceptance.
Early movers are already shaking things up.
Universities, pension funds, churches, banks, and even the heirs to the Rockefeller oil fortune are pulling their money out of fossil-fuel assets or are considering the possibility of divestment – an option made increasingly attractive by the swiftly falling cost of renewable energy.
In the face of this progress, though, one sector stands apart.
The coal industry seems determined to fight for profits at the expense of the global environment.
Perversely, it is furiously attempting to capture the moral high ground by claiming that coal is essential to ending energy poverty.
Coal companies and their allies argue that limiting coal production would keep the lights off in rural communities by preventing poor countries from building big, cheap power plants.
“Let's have no demonization of coal," as one ally, Australian Prime Minister Tony Abbott, put it. “Coal is good for humanity."
Speaking at an event hosted by the Global Warming Policy Foundation, a think tank that is skeptical of climate change, the United Kingdom's former environment secretary, Owen Paterson, accused climate-change activists of having “African blood" on their hands.
Setting aside the deeply offensive character of such efforts to silence its critics, the coal industry is posing a false choice: end the use of coal or end poverty.
But, though energy is indeed central to efforts to end poverty, one must be clear: at this point in history, coal is not good for anyone.
Consider this: for all of the attention the Ebola virus has received in recent months, coal is a far deadlier killer.
Toxic fly ash kills some 800,000 people per year and sickens millions more.
Beijing's ongoing battle with smog – a problem that has become known as the “airpocalypse" – provides a potent reminder of coal's impact on air quality.
But China's capital is hardly unique in that respect.
Many Indian cities have air pollution that is just as bad – and in some cases far worse.
Coal is also the single largest contributor to climate change, which threatens to put 400 million people in the poorest countries at risk of severe food and water shortages by 2050.
The coal industry is seeking to burden developing countries with the same unsustainable growth model that has brought the earth to the brink of climate disaster.
As the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change has repeatedly warned – and as the experience of countries like the Marshall Islands increasingly demonstrates – climate change is no longer a distant threat.
The terrible consequences of burning fossil fuels are already upon us, and those suffering the most are the world's poor.
Most people understand that coal is a dirty business, one that countries like Australia should abandon for their own economic wellbeing, as well as for the sake of the global climate.
That is why we are witnessing such resistance from the industry.
Coal's day is over, but it is trying desperately to hang on.
The world needs a rapid and fair transition away from dirty energy sources.
That means cleaning up developed economies and working to prevent the massive expansion of industries that damage our collective health and future.
It also means working with developing countries to help them develop modern, clean energy sources that provide cheap, locally produced power, and do not oblige them to buy fossil fuels.
Above all, it means that we must stop telling the poor in developing countries what they should do and start listening to what they want.
And what they want – unfortunately for the coal industry – is clean, affordable energy that powers their present, without costing them their future.
Coke Is It in Europe
European leaders need to get serious about Europe’s cocaine problem.
The “white lady” is seducing a steadily growing number of Europeans, and remaining in a state of denial will only worsen the consequences.
Cocaine used to be America’s problem, to the point that the United States started a major campaign against sellers and consumers of crack cocaine in the inner cities, drug traffickers, and suppliers in the Andes.
But now demand for cocaine in most of the world is stable or dropping.
Coca cultivation has been slashed by a quarter in the past five years, and seizures of cocaine have almost doubled.
An impressive 42% of all of the world’s cocaine was seized in 2005.
Only Europe is bucking the trend.
Cocaine use is on the rise, especially in Spain, Great Britain, and Italy.
There is plenty of anecdotal evidence indicating traces of cocaine found on bank notes and in water supplies.
Here are some harder facts.
For the first time, the level of cocaine use in Spain – 3% of the population aged 15 to 64 – now exceeds that in the US.
And the United Kingdom is not far behind.
In 2005, 2.4% of the UK population used cocaine at least once, up sharply from 0.6% a decade earlier.
Consider another telling indicator.
Ten years ago, 20% of all new clients entering treatment for drug abuse in the Netherlands were addicted to cocaine.
Now it is 40%.
In Spain, the proportion has soared to 42% in 2002, from just 7% in 1995 – and it has no doubt risen again since then.
Europe’s growing cocaine problem is due to several factors.
First, drug users in Europe are switching to cocaine from heroin.
Cocaine is fashionable because it is attractive: white, not dark; sniffed, not injected; consumed in a living room or a fashionable night-club, not in a dark alley.
It is seen as a drug for winners, not losers.
To many it is a symbol of success, until they end up in a hospital or treatment center.
Cocaine use by high-profile entertainers, executives, models, and socialites who flaunt their illicit drug habit certainly does not help.
Nor does uncritical reporting by the media.
It seems many Europeans need to be reminded that cocaine is highly addictive and harmful.
They are ill equipped to deal with the problem, so their societies have the drug problem they deserve.
This raises a basic credibility issue: how can Europe urge Colombia and Peru to reduce supply when its own drug habit is driving cultivation?
The solution is to attack the problem at its source by addressing both supply and demand.
Coca crops in Latin America need to be replaced with agricultural crops, and cocaine use in affluent Europe must be reduced.
Solving the cocaine problem is a shared responsibility.
On the supply side, there must be more support for poor farmers in drug-producing countries to give them viable alternatives to growing coca.
Most illicit coca growers are extremely poor.
Crop eradication will not work over the long term if there is no legal economy to replace drugs.
Drug control and development assistance must therefore go hand in hand.
Environmental protection is also at issue.
Coca farmers and producers slash and burn forests, polluting streams with toxic chemicals and damaging fragile ecosystems.
The Andean region has less than 1% of the world’s land area, but more than 15% of its plant life.
Vast areas of vegetation are being destroyed for lines of white powder.
At a time of growing concern about climate change, Europeans should be made aware of the long-term destruction done to a precious and fragile habitat for the sake of a short-term high.
But controlling supply is not enough.
If all of Colombia’s farmers stopped growing coca tomorrow, unrestrained demand by the world’s 13 million cocaine users would quickly generate as much cultivation somewhere else.
Clearly, the ultimate challenge is to prevent drug abuse and to treat and rehabilitate drug users successfully.
Sweden is a good example of how to do it right.
Drug use there is a third of the European average – the result of decades of consistent policies (irrespective of changes in government) that combine tough punishment of dealers and comprehensive treatment for users.
The more that can be done to prevent people from becoming cocaine addicts, the less damage these people will do to themselves and their families, the less money will get into the pockets of criminals, insurgents, and terrorists, and the less damage will be done to the environment.
But nothing will be done until Europe wakes up and faces its pandemic.
Cold War Lessons for George W. Bush
President Bush recently drew an analogy between the current struggle against violent jihadi terrorism and the Cold War.
He is right in one respect: waves of terrorism tend to be generational.
Unfortunately, like the Cold War, the current “war on terror” is likely to be a matter of decades, not years.
But Bush missed another lesson implicit in his analogy: the importance of using the soft power of culture.
The Cold War was won by a combination of military power, which deterred Soviet aggression, and the attractive power of Western culture and ideas.
When the Berlin Wall fell in 1989, hammers and bulldozers, not artillery, brought it down.
Unfortunately, Bush has not learned this lesson.
Academic and scientific exchanges during the Cold War played a significant role in enhancing American soft power.
While some American skeptics feared that Soviet scientists and KGB agents would steal American technology, they failed to notice that the visitors vacuumed up political ideas alongside scientific secrets.
Many of these scientists became leading proponents of human rights and liberalization inside the USSR.
Some 50,000 Soviets – writers, journalists, officials, musicians, dancers, athletes, and academics – visited the United States between 1958 and 1988.
Aleksandr Yakovlev was strongly influenced by his studies at Columbia University in 1958.
Yakovlev went on to become a Politburo member and key liberalizing influence on Mikhail Gorbachev.
Oleg Kalugin, who became a high KGB official, said in looking back from the vantage point of 1997, “Exchanges were a Trojan Horse for the Soviet Union.
They played a tremendous role in the erosion of the Soviet system….They kept infecting more and more people over the years.”
Yet today, the Bush administration oversees a cumbersome visa program that has cut the number of such exchanges, particularly with Muslim countries.
Popular culture was also important during the Cold War.
Many intellectuals disdain popular culture because of its crude commercialism.
But such scorn is misplaced, because popular entertainment often contains subtle images and messages about individualism, consumer choice, and other values that have important political effects.
American films, for example, include sex, violence, and materialism, but that is not the whole story.
They also portray American life as open, mobile, individualistic, anti-establishment, pluralist, populist, and free.
As the poet Carl Sandburg put it in 1961: “What, Hollywood’s more important than Harvard?
The answer is, not as clean as Harvard, but nevertheless, further reaching.”
The line between information and entertainment has never been as sharp as some intellectuals imagine, and it is becoming increasingly blurred.
Some popular music lyrics can have political effects.
Cultural messages can also be conveyed by the way that sports teams or stars conduct themselves, or in the multiple images purveyed by television or cinema.
Pictures often convey values more powerfully than words.
Even the consumption of fast food can make an implicit statement.
As one Indian family described their visit to McDonald’s, it was stepping out for “a slice of America.”
Even rock and roll played a part.
As one of Gorbachev’s aides later testified, “The Beatles were our quiet way of rejecting ‘the system’ while conforming to most of its demands.”
Czech Communist officials sentenced a group of young people to prison in the 1950’s for playing tapes of “decadent American music,” but their efforts turned out to be counter-productive.
In 1980, after John Lennon was murdered, a monument to him spontaneously appeared in Prague, and the anniversary of his death was marked by an annual procession for peace and democracy.
In 1988, the organizers founded a Lennon Peace Club that demanded the removal of Soviet troops.
Lennon trumped Lenin.
The Cold War was won by a mixture of hard and soft power.
Not all of the sources of soft power were American – witness the role of the BBC and the Beatles.
But it would be a mistake to ignore the role that popular culture played.
One has to be careful in drawing lessons for today.
Eastern European cultures were more similar to Western cultures than are Muslim cultures.
In some fundamentalist circles, and among the terrorists, Western culture evokes repulsion, not attraction.
But even in Iran, where the ruling mullahs describe America as “the great Satan,” the young want to watch American videos in the privacy of their homes.
Polls in the Muslim world show that American culture remains attractive to the moderate majority.
It is American policies that have led to America’s unpopularity.
For a start, Bush could learn to get out of the way and encourage more popular and grassroots contacts.
How to Beat Childhood Cancer
PHILADELPHIA – For a parent, there is perhaps no greater fear than the prospect of losing a child to illness or accident.
And it is childhood cancer that has the greatest potential to catapult a remote fear into an unimaginable reality.
As a pediatric oncologist, having cared for children with cancer and their families for more than 25 years, I know that only a parent who has confronted such a diagnosis truly understands the depth of this fear, as it touches the core of who we are as parents.
I also know that we are treating more children more effectively than ever before – and that we can do much better still.
For a child born in the 1960’s, the diagnosis of the most common form of childhood cancer, acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), meant almost certain death, with a survival rate of less than 10%.
A child with the same diagnosis today has a better than 80% chance of being cured.
Looking at the five-year survival rates for children with ALL from the 1970’s through the 1990’s, one sees an almost linear improvement in cure rates.
This makes the 1970s, 1980’s, and 1990’s look like an era of accelerating discovery and therapeutic development.
But virtually all of the drugs that we use today to cure children with cancer were discovered and approved in the 1950’s and 1960’s.
So, if new drugs did not fuel four decades of progress, what did?
A major driver was a remarkable, sustained scientific collaboration.
In the 1950’s, a group of clinical scientists recognized that, because childhood cancer was a rare disease, no single medical center could study enough patients to make the necessary advances across the spectrum of pediatric oncologic diseases.
The decision to conduct collaborative research across multiple institutions resulted in the development of cooperative group research.
In the fight against childhood cancer, this concept evolved into what is now the Children’s Oncology Group (COG), which unites more than 8,000 experts at more than 200 leading children’s hospitals, universities, and cancer centers across North America, Australia, New Zealand, and parts of Europe.
The COG conducts research across the spectrum of cancers that afflict children, and has approximately 100 clinical trials underway around the world.
With an emerging infrastructure in place for cooperative research, sustained improvement in outcomes partly reflected an ever-increasing understanding that childhood cancers are diverse.
Childhood ALL, for example, is not a single disease, but rather a spectrum of diseases.
Recognition of this diversity led to the study of different treatment regimens in different sub-populations of children with pathologically similar cancers.
Throughout this period, the ability to overcome the most common side effect of cancer drugs, myelosuppression (a decrease in blood counts), improved dramatically.
It began with the ability to transfuse not only red blood cells into anemic patients, but also platelets, reducing the threat of life-threatening bleeding that can accompany cancer therapy.
Equally important, the risks and types of life-threatening infections that come with myelosuppression were increasingly recognized, leading to the development and better use of more effective antibiotics.
Starting in the 1990’s, cytokines, drugs that stimulate bone marrow to produce infection-fighting white blood cells, began to be integrated into cancer treatments, further mitigating the risk of life-threatening infectious complications of care.
As a result of these advances in science and supportive care, the same chemotherapeutic drugs could be delivered much more intensively for children with select types and sub-types of cancer.
With selective intensification, cure rates began to increase steadily.
And yet, while this strategy has indeed resulted in better outcomes, the acute and long-term morbidity of therapy has been substantial.
Children with high-risk cancers who receive dose-intensive chemotherapy have a greater than 80% chance of experiencing at least one severe, life-threatening, or fatal drug-related toxic event over the course of their treatment.
The late effects of cancer treatment include permanent organ and tissue damage, hormonal and reproductive dysfunction, and second cancers.
More than 40% of the estimated 330,000 survivors of childhood cancer in the United States experience a significant health-related complication from childhood cancer and its treatment.
And, despite our advances, cancer in developed countries remains the leading cause of death from disease in children older than one year.
We are, however, entering an era of unprecedented discovery.
The powerful research tools that we now have to uncover the underlying basis of childhood cancers could fundamentally change how we treat children with these dreaded diseases.
For a limited number of childhood cancers, there are new drugs that can target the fundamental drivers of malignancy.
The most notable example is the impact of Gleevec (imatinib mesylate) on outcomes for children with an uncommon subtype of leukemia – Philadelphia chromosome-positive ALL.
The addition of this inhibitor to intensive chemotherapy has dramatically improved the outlook for these children, increasing the rate of three-year event-free survival from 35% to 80%.
The development of targeted new agents is likely to affect outcomes for other subtypes of childhood cancer, including anaplastic large-cell lymphoma and other types of leukemias.
Given that childhood cancers are all rare or ultra-rare diseases, the ability of the biopharmaceutical industry to invest resources into development of new treatments is limited at best.
Yet research is needed to identify potential targets for the entire spectrum of childhood cancers.
For some potential targets, public-private partnerships will be needed to develop new therapeutic approaches.
The past 40 years have demonstrated the remarkable return on investment to be gained in collaborative scientific research.
Now we must leverage current scientific opportunities and invest the resources needed to develop more effective, less toxic therapies, thereby improving outcomes for all children with cancer.
Colombia and the International Crisis
BOGOTA – Just five months ago, Colombia’s government was assuring its citizens that they were protected from the international crisis.
Now, analysts predict that the economy will barely grow 1% this year, and that is the best case scenario.
This bleak forecast marks the end of Colombia’s longest cycle of growth in three decades, leaving the country in the same fragile situation as that of many other developing economies.
Of course, a deteriorating economy is not exclusive to Colombia.
Since the middle of last year, the International Monetary Fund has been reducing its projections for growth across Latin America.
Last October, the Fund estimated that growth in the region would reach 3.2% this year; now, it says that growth will barely be positive.
And, most likely, the worst is yet to come: if the Obama administration does not succeed in stabilizing the United States economy in the coming weeks, Latin America will most likely face even steeper declines.
The good news for Colombia is that it is better off than many of its neighbors.
Although projecting concrete figures is a sterile exercise in these worrisome times, most analysts predict that Colombia’s economic performance this year will be inferior to Peru’s, but similar to Chile’s and Brazil’s and better than that of Argentina, Venezuela, and Mexico, a country expected to contract by more than 2%.
This comparatively benign situation reflects Colombia’s relatively favorable macroeconomic conditions.
Although the country was never as protected from the global downturn as its authorities claimed, the country benefits from some factors that do help ease the damage inflicted by the international crisis, especially with regard to the availability of foreign currency in these times of restrictions on external financing.
During the past few years, Colombia has become one of the three most attractive destinations for foreign investment in Latin America, allowing it to cover a significant part of its external financing needs this year.
Moreover, remittances by Colombians working abroad grew 8% in 2008, a surprising result when compared to countries such as Mexico and Ecuador, where remittances have fallen.
In addition, international financial markets perceive Colombia’s economy as being fundamentally sound.
The current risk premium for government borrowing in international markets is very similar to that paid by Peru and Brazil, and much less than that demanded of Argentina, Venezuela, and Ecuador.
But, while Colombia is not as bad off as some of its neighbors, the country will not be able to pull itself out of the crisis easily.
Unfortunately, the authorities do not have much margin for error in working to counteract the damage done by the international crisis.
The government did not set aside resources while things were going well, and now it does not have the fiscal space needed for an aggressive boost to public spending of the type that many other governments are attempting.
Although Colombia’s government announced a few weeks ago a strategy based on important infrastructure work, its impact will be limited: most of the investment was already in the budget last year, and the officials in charge of public works have consistently demonstrated inefficiency when executing large-scale projects.
Meanwhile, the country’s monetary authorities have much more leeway to boost the economy by lowering interest rates at a time when the threat of inflation is diminishing.
In fact, the Bank of the Republic has reduced its interest rates from 10% at the end of last year to 7% at its last meeting in March.
These policies should allow Colombia’s economy to grow – barely – this year, but only as long as the world economy begins to stabilize before the end of the first quarter.
If so, the outlook for Colombia is more favorable in 2010 and 2011, when growth should be close to 3%, thanks to inflows of foreign investment, improvements in security, and a better business environment.
But if the international crisis lasts longer than the first half of 2010, all bets are off, and Colombia will struggle to find its economic footing in a region devastated by generalized contraction.
Colombia at Peace?
BOGOTÁ – The Framework Agreement for the End of the Armed Conflict in Colombia that has just been announced by President Juan Manuel Santos is a historic landmark for his country and all of Latin America.
It is also a tribute to diplomatic resourcefulness and negotiating skill.
The agreement with the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia, better known as the FARC, came after long years of failed attempts by Colombian governments of all political shades to reach an accommodation with the last, and among the most odious, guerrilla movement to have operated in Latin America.
Never before has the FARC – a monumental apparatus of terror, mass murder, and drug trafficking – agreed to discuss disarmament, its fighters’ social and political reintegration, victims’ rights, an end to drug production, and participation in “truth and responsibility” commissions to examine the crimes committed during a half-century of conflict.
But now it has.
This momentous shift reflects the decimation of the FARC following long years of struggle, the resilience of Colombian society, and, perhaps most important, Santos’s brilliant regional policy.
By weakening the so-called Bolivarian Axis (Venezuela, Ecuador, and Bolivia), the FARC guerrillas were left without a supportive regional environment.
As with peace processes in the Middle East and Central America following the Cold War’s end, regional changes created the conditions for the start of the Colombian process.
But, in the Middle East and Central America, external actors – the United States and the Soviet Union – produced the change; in the case of the Colombian process, the change came from within.
Prior to engaging the FARC in secret talks in Cuba, Santos’s regional diplomacy shifted the region’s politics from saber rattling to the hard work of cooperation.
He turned Venezuela and Ecuador, which had long been safe havens for the FARC, into friendly neighbors willing to bring an end to the archaic tradition of revolutionary wars.
In fact, in what is perhaps the most remarkable diplomatic turnaround, Venezuelan President Hugo Chávez has become a key facilitator in the resolution of the Colombian conflict.
The talks with the FARC evolved as regional détente was followed by an ambitious initiative to address the root causes of the Colombian conflict.
Most notably, Santos signed the Victims and Land Restitution Law in June 2011, in the presence of United Nations Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon.
The law provides reparation for the victims of human-rights violations in the course of a 60-year conflict, as well as restitution of millions of hectares stolen from peasants.
The law thus puts Colombia on a path to peace by blunting the FARC’s appeal to land reform to justify its untold atrocities.
The law is undeniably complex, and by no means without shortcomings.
But, if implemented as planned, it could bring about a profound social revolution.
It also represents a novel approach to peace, given that such laws are normally introduced only after a conflict has ended.
In this case, returning land to dispossessed peasants and offering financial reparation to the victims and those who were displaced by the conflict became the way to peace.
Indeed, it was none other than Alfonso Cano, a former FARC leader, who called the law “essential to a future of reconciliation” and a “contribution to a real solution to the conflict.”
Skeptics and opponents of the negotiations do have a case, however.
The FARC’s record in previous peace talks reveals a penchant for manipulating negotiations to gain national and international legitimacy without actually being willing to strike a deal.
Santos could, therefore, have been tempted to choose the Sri Lanka way – a ruthless military onslaught to defeat the insurgents, at the price of major human-rights violations and the destruction of civilian communities.
Instead, Santos opted for the path of least expedience.
After all, war, in Colombia and elsewhere, frequently unites nations, while peace divides them.
The repercussions of a genuine end to the Colombian armed conflict would be felt far beyond the country’s borders.
If Chávez’s Venezuela has become a narco-state in which the regime’s acolytes are drug lords, this reflects their privileged relations with the FARC.
Repercussions would also be felt in Mexico, where drug cartels are tearing apart the country, and the US, the world’s largest source of demand.
West Africa, too, would be affected, having become in recent years the main transit point for South American drugs headed to Europe.
Formidable difficulties still lie ahead, and a final agreement is by no means certain.
But Santos nonetheless has a fair chance of burying, once and for all, the specious mystique of violent revolutionary change that has held back Latin America’s political and economic modernization for so long. &nbsp;
The Two Colombias
BOGOTÁ – In Medellín, Colombia’s second-largest city, you can listen to an impressive presentation by the mayor’s office about emerging industrial parks and new technology firms.
Then, a glance at your smartphone reveals that guerrillas have kidnapped an army general, and that negotiations to end a decades-long civil war with the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC), Latin America’s oldest guerrilla group, are at a standstill.
Colombia is the only country in Latin America where you can attend seminars at world-class universities, learn about mushrooming multinationals, and chat with supremely competent policymakers, all the while knowing that citizens are confronting one another with machetes and bazookas just a few dozen miles away.
In this sense, Colombia is two countries, which have been at war with each other for far too long.
On the one hand, there is the Colombia of rapid economic growth and booming foreign investment, of refurbished cities and innovative social policies.
On the other hand, there is the Colombia of Gabriel García Márquez’s fictional Colonel Aureliano Buendía, who started 17 civil wars – and lost all of them.
The bad news is that the struggle between the two Colombias has taken a tremendous human toll, with many citizens having suffered through poverty, warfare, and human-rights violations for most, if not all, of their lives.
The good news is that the modern Colombia, the country of peace and progress, is winning.
The fruits of that victory can be seen in places like Medellín, which, just 20 years ago, was synonymous with drug cartels and violence.
Today, mayors and city planners from all over the world, eager to learn about urban renewal, flock to Medellín, which boasts public libraries that take culture to hillside shanties and gleaming cable cars that haul residents to and from work every day.
It is difficult to think of a city that has undergone as dramatic a transformation as Medellín in recent years (though Dubai and Shanghai may be in the running).
The country as a whole has also experienced significant economic progress.
Since the 2008 financial crisis, Colombia, along with Peru, has been South America’s top economic performer.
And the government has indicated that, if the need arises, it is prepared to raise taxes to achieve its goal of gradually reducing public debt and improving public services.
The business community, despite some initial reluctance, seems willing to go along.
Colombia remains a highly unequal society, with the Gini coefficient, a common measure of inequality, hovering around 0.5 – in the same range as Brazil and Chile.
The problem has many causes, one of which is a poorly functioning labor market that forces many Colombians to accept informal work or no work at all.
But the government does not shy away from talk of redistribution.
Indeed, it has already initiated transfers (such as pension increases for poor retirees), and its policies have contributed to five consecutive years of declining unemployment.
As Finance Minister Mauricio Cárdenas observed in a spirited speech to a banking convention last week in Medellín, though President Juan Manuel Santos’ administration is historically rooted in Colombia’s center-right political forces, its fiscal prudence and activist social policy qualify it as an adherent of the social-democratic “third way.”
In the coming years, two factors could propel Colombia’s continued development.
One is the Pacific Alliance, which also includes Mexico, Peru, and Chile.
Firms learn to export new products by selling them in regional markets.
But, in South America, the rhetoric of trade integration has often been stifled by the harsh reality of protectionism.
Fortunately, with the consolidation of a free-trade bloc among the Pacific Rim countries – home to 215 million people and accounting for 37% of Latin America’s GDP – this is changing.
The second factor – which has yet to arrive – is peace, in the form of a definite cessation of hostilities with FARC. This is not the first time that talks have been suspended, and it might not be the last.
But never before have negotiations progressed so far, reaching substantial agreements in several areas.
Nothing is more important than building a Colombia where citizens no longer fear being caught in a hail of bullets or being dragged from their homes in the middle of the night.
At the same time, one should not underestimate the economic dividend of peace, which economists in Bogotá have estimated could boost GDP growth by as much as one percentage point annually for a decade or more.
A quarter-century ago, a safe and prosperous Colombia seemed impossible.
Yet it is now within reach.
At a time of intensifying political conflict and painfully few success stories, Colombians are giving the world reason for hope.
One Hundred Years of Tranquility?
SANTIAGO – Gabriel García Márquez’s great novel One Hundred Years of Solitude starts with a colonel who “started 32 civil wars and lost them all” facing the firing squad.
The site of the event is the fictional town of Macondo, but few readers are fooled: the novel is about García Márquez’s native Colombia.
Last week, Colombia’s civil war – the sole remaining armed conflict in Latin America – formally came to an end.
It lasted more than 50 years, cost a quarter-million lives, and displaced six million people.
It seems hard to believe, but peace is finally here.
Pessimists will point out that much remains to be worked out, fighters have yet to hand in their weapons, and the final peace agreement has not been signed.
Still, the handshake in Havana between President Juan Manuel Santos and guerrilla leader Rodrigo Londoño Echeverri (known by the nom de guerre Timochenko) marks the end of a tragic era and the beginning of a far more promising one.
Beginning in the 1960s, Latin America was infected by a bad case of what Lenin called “Left-Wing Communism: an Infantile Disorder.”
Donning fatigues and taking to the mountains was the cure for all social ills.
Guerrilla movements were born and grew, often only to split up and engender new ones.
In many places – especially Central America – violent insurgency became endemic.
Colombia’s bloodshed started even earlier, in the period simply known as “The Violence,” following the murder in 1948 of the liberal presidential candidate Jorge Eliécer Gaitán.
The fighting between liberals and conservatives came to an end with the advent of the bloody dictatorship of Gustavo Rojas Pinilla in 1953.
Democracy of sorts returned in 1958, but violence continued – until now.
Of course, the poster child for the period of revolutionary fervor in Latin America was the Cuban revolution of 1958.
Che Guevara’s intense gaze and red-starred beret, captured in Alberto Korda’s iconic photograph, mobilized a generation.
Nearly six decades later, the dream of the Cuban revolution lies in tatters.
Its once-proud leader, Fidel Castro, has become a pathetic figure, clad in garish tracksuits, appearing from time to time to utter increasingly incoherent pronouncements.
His brother and handpicked successor, Raúl, as grey and uninspiring as political leaders come, hosted this week’s peace ceremony in Havana.
In the 1970s and 1980s, the counterpart of childish revolution from the left was murderous repression from the right.
Dictatorships proliferated, from Brazil and Argentina to Uruguay and Chile, all the way to El Salvador, Guatemala, and Honduras in Central America.
They, too, made promises, theirs based on law and order and orthodox economic management.
Today in Latin America only a lunatic fringe believes such promises.
When the going gets tough, no one turns to the military barracks anymore.
As former Brazilian president Fernando Henrique Cardoso pointed out recently, in the midst of his country’s political crisis everyone now knows the names of prosecuting judges, but no one knows the names of leading generals.
That is progress, however hard earned.
Aside from Cuba, the saddest reminder of Latin America’s tragic mistakes of the past is Venezuela.
The country, ruled since 1999 by populist Hugo Chávez and his successor Nicolas Máduro, has gone from a political crisis to a full-fledged humanitarian disaster, with no food in stores or medicines in clinics.
The Financial Times reports that, according to the Venezuelan National Assembly, “17 years of chavismo have seen more than $425 billion of public money stolen or wasted.”
No one knows how, but with the Colombian tragedy over, the Venezuelan tragedy seems destined to end sooner rather than later.
Chavismo today inspires no one.
The copycat regimes it spawned around Latin America are gone or severely weakened.
Just as Europe, post-Brexit, seems to be moving toward nationalism and populism, Latin America is heading in the opposite direction.
With any luck, the era of the mountain guerrilla, the irate demagogue in green fatigues, or the frightful general in dark glasses is over in the Americas.
What comes next is the era of the prudent politician in a boring blue suit who acknowledges that hard problems have no easy solutions, and who spurns towering promises in favor of Churchillian sweat and toil.
We may finally be growing up politically.
Santos himself in Colombia, Mauricio Macri in Argentina, and Pedro Pablo Kuczynski in Peru are emblematic of this new period.
They are all capable managers and highly trained technocrats.
Steering the economy forward without populism – and the inflation and fiscal crisis that always go with it – is their principal challenge and possibly will be their most publicized achievement.
But they should not rely on technocratic prowess alone as the key to legitimacy and political success.
Today’s Latin Americans have grown disenchanted with vain revolutionary promises, but they also look at their liberal democratic institutions – and the people who lead them – with a skeptical eye.
This is understandable in a region where income inequality, unresponsive bureaucracy, and opaque businesses practices are still very much a feature of everyday life.
In Europe and Latin America, voters today need to feel that their leaders’ hearts are in the right place, and that they are acting on behalf of everyone, including the underprivileged, not merely serving a rich elite.
The ultimate goals of sound policy are ethical, and they ought to be described in those terms.
When a leader mismanages a middle-income economy so terribly that people go hungry –as Chávez and Maduro have done in Venezuela – that is an immoral act.
Hunger causes avoidable human suffering, a clear moral wrong.
Seeking consensus, avoiding demagoguery, pursuing incremental and, therefore, sustainable solutions – none of that sounds terribly epic, but it is profoundly moral.
If democratic leaders in Latin America can get that message across, then the era inaugurated by the Colombian peace agreement will be a long and happy one.
Colombia’s Gift to the World
MADRID – After four long years of talks in Havana, Cuba, Colombian President Juan Manuel Santos has negotiated an end to successive governments’ armed conflict with the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC), the most resilient insurgent group in Latin America.
Colombia’s civil war, which lasted for six decades, has killed an estimated 220,000 people and displaced another six million.
Ending it was a remarkable feat of diplomacy, and Santos deserves the world’s applause.
The law was a watershed, because it simultaneously pacified violent regions, delivered justice for millions of dispossessed peasants, radically improved standards of living, and blunted the appeal of a guerrilla group that used the banner of land reform to justify its untold atrocities.
It even drew praise from the Office of the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights in Colombia for its special provisions for women and children survivors of human rights abuses, and for those targeted for their perceived sexual orientation.
While not flawless, the Victims and Land Restitution Law clearly helped pave the way for peace and national reconciliation in Colombia.
Indeed, none other than the FARC’s former leader, Alfonso Cano (the nom de guerre of Guillermo Sáenz Vargas), acknowledged this in 2011.
Inevitably, the Colombian government’s transitional-justice regime to end the conflict and re-assimilate the FARC into the Colombian political process has some detractors, and has divided the Colombian electorate.
Former President Álvaro Uribe is now leading those who stridently oppose the peace deal on the grounds that it does not go far enough to punish FARC militants.
Nonetheless, the accord signed in Havana is historic and innovative, because it emphasizes truth-telling without eschewing justice altogether.
Its focus is not on vengeance and retribution, but on “restorative justice,” a principle Archbishop Desmond Tutu used to describe South Africa’s transition to majority rule after apartheid.
The Colombian model of transitional justice acknowledges that national reconciliation is achievable only if the communities broken by the long, savage war are repaired and revitalized.
In other words, Colombia’s approach to transitional justice puts the victims first – more so than any peace process seen in recent years.
Victims’ delegations even joined the Havana talks and met with the FARC leadership that was responsible for so many past atrocities.
The Colombian government’s pioneering approach seems to have benefited from a gender sub-commission that considered proposals from nongovernmental organizations representing women’s rights and the LGBT community.
The government was also wise to establish a special sub-commission to examine the history of the bloodshed, because disagreement about the past often constitutes an insurmountable obstacle to peace and reconciliation.
Colombian domestic politics should now move to the forefront of attention, because peace processes are vulnerable to public opinion.
While war often unites countries, peace tends to divide them, because it inevitably requires concessions and sacrifices.
Peace comes at a cost, and people often disagree about who should foot the bill.
For a democratic leader, negotiating peace is – perversely – riskier than waging war.
This is especially true for an asymmetric peace process between a democratically elected government and an unaccountable non-state actor, which doesn’t have to worry about upcoming elections, opposition political parties, the press, or a skeptical public.
Despite these enormous constraints, the Santos government never deviated from proper democratic procedures.
It considered proposals from popular assemblies around the country, and it maintained transparency throughout the process.
Santos has overcome formidable challenges, and the next one is a forthcoming plebiscite, where the Colombian people, one hopes, will recognize that their country has furnished a conflict-ridden world with a new model for peace.
The international community should take note of this and assist Colombia in the difficult transition ahead as it implements policies in accordance with the new agreement.
The post-conflict phase will be no less demanding than the peace process itself.
Colombia’s Eternal Agony
Colombia is in better shape today than it has been for years, thanks largely to President Alvaro Uribe’s leadership, but it remains a bizarre place, one facing strange and intractable challenges.
Colombia’s FARC guerrillas have held some of their kidnapping victims for many years.
Child soldiers still linger in paramilitary groups, and there are compromising video recordings of leading Colombian politicians and drug lords.
Perhaps weirdest of all, there are imprisoned guerrillas who refuse to be set free, and a government that insists on liberating them, even against their will.
Uribe was re-elected just over a year ago by a landslide, a tribute to the popularity and effectiveness of his “democratic security” policy of combating both the guerrillas and the country’s generalized violence.
Latin America’s oldest standing two-party system was decimated in that election, as the Polo Democrático presidential candidate won more votes than the Liberal Party’s contender, finally giving electoral expression to left-wing forces that had never been able to see more potential for change at the ballot box than by fighting in the mountains.
Negotiations on Colombia’s Free Trade Agreement (FTA) with the United States had been finalized.
Even the questionable deal Uribe cut with the right-wing paramilitary AUC groups, pardoning up to 30,000 of their members for often horrendous crimes in exchange for their disarmament, appeared successful.
With Uribe in charge, Colombia seemed to be on a roll.
But much of this success has since been squandered, with both Colombia and Uribe now in deep trouble.
The so-called parapolítica scandals have rocked Uribe’s government, forcing the resignation of some cabinet ministers, and embarrassing others, including the president himself.
Photographs, videos, and audio recordings of politicians and paramilitary thugs (including one who boasts of having personally killed more than 300 of his enemies) have discredited a political elite that, while never very popular, has now had some of the worst suspicions that many held about it graphically confirmed.
For years human rights activists and scholars suspected the obvious: the emergence of an enormous, vicious, well-armed, and well-trained parallel army to fight the guerillas was not some spontaneous act.
It was, many believed, a deliberate policy devised and carried out by the official military and the political elite to wage war “off the books.”
The parapolítica or paragate revelations seem to confirm another suspicion as well: the distinction between the paramilitaries and the drug cartels, like that between the guerrillas and the cartels, is a nuanced one.
Unfortunately, these revelations come at the worst possible moment.
Colombia’s FTA with the US was in danger the moment the US Republicans lost their majority in both houses of Congress last November.
Still, it seemed more likely to pass than the other two pending Latin American trade deals with Panama and Peru.
Now it appears that President George W. Bush’s closest ally in the hemisphere will not only have its FTA rejected, owing to human rights concerns in the US House and Senate. Moreover, it might also lose Plan Colombia, the huge – and hugely controversial – American aid program that has funneled tens of billions of dollars into Colombia since the late 1990’s, ostensibly to fight the drug cartels, but also, in fact, to wage counter-insurgency.
Uribe has spent weeks directly and personally lobbying key American legislators, and he is undoubtedly his own best advocate.
But, just as former US Vice-President Al Gore recently refused to share a dais with Uribe in Miami, many members of Congress refuse to approve a trade agreement or an aid package that may link them to a government tainted by egregious human rights abuses, complicity with drug lords, or both.
The US has never really wanted to include human rights issues in trade agreements; at best, and only when forced, US presidents have consented to incorporating labor and environmental chapters.
The European Union thinks differently; in its economic cooperation and free trade agreement with Mexico, for example, it insisted on – and achieved – the inclusion of a “democracy clause” that made its economic benefits conditional on ongoing respect for democratic rule and human rights.
Colombia’s blemished human rights record is affecting its government’s international standing and providing ammunition for those who wish to sabotage the FTA.
For example, protectionist Democrats in the US Congress have been able to insulate themselves from charges of opposing free trade if they scuttle Colombia’s FTA, because they will most likely ratify the deals for Panama and Peru.
Can Uribe survive his current travails?
The answer is almost certainly yes, unless the parapolítica mess reaches him directly, or the US explicitly rejects the FTA and postpones or attaches conditions to renewal of funding for Plan Colombia.
Uribe’s political demise would hurt everyone, but the rejection of the FTA on human rights grounds could set a healthy precedent.
In a region where threats to democracy and human rights are growing, linking trade and economic policy to these considerations is not a bad idea.
Uribe may not deserve such a fate, but history works in strange ways.
Comeback Cancers
LONDON, ONTARIO – Progress is being made against many types of cancer, with more patients surviving longer, thanks to research on two fronts: improved methods for earlier detection, and development of therapies that are more effective and less toxic.
Indeed, it is estimated that there are now more than 10 million cancer survivors in the United States alone, and this number has been steadily increasing.
Similar numbers, in proportion to population sizes, are found in other developed countries.
Cancers that are detected early – when they are small and less likely to have metastasized (spread away from the primary tumor) – are more likely to be treatable with local therapy, whereas successful treatment is ultimately unlikely once metastatic tumors develop.
And improved therapies mean that patients can be treated with drugs that work better (and that patients are more likely to receive the full dose needed).
But our dramatic progress in detecting and treating cancer has also led to growing awareness of the problem of tumor dormancy: a patient appears to be cured, only to have the same cancer return years or even decades later.
In breast cancer or melanoma, for example, recurrences 25 years after initial treatment have been reported.
With a growing number of cancer survivors, we need to understand better the twin processes of tumor dormancy and metastatic cancer recurrence.
While remarkable progress has been made in understanding the biology of cancer – leading in part to the development of new, less toxic drugs – our understanding of the biology of tumor metastasis, and especially the development of metastases after a long period of tumor dormancy, has lagged.
We do know that metastasis is a very inefficient process, with most cancer cells that escape into the blood stream failing to form metastatic tumors in distant organs.
Recent studies – from both the laboratory and the clinic – suggest that many cancer cells that leave the primary tumor may lodge themselves in new organs and go into a dormant state.
We also have evidence that says that these dormant cells may resist most current treatments.
This means that adjuvant cancer therapy, designed to kill presumed micrometastatic disease, may be missing an important fraction of disseminated cancer cells, some of which may eventually wake up.
Moreover, we are beginning to identify molecular mechanisms that regulate the entry of cancer cells into a dormant state, as well as their re-awakening at later times.
Our knowledge of the regulation of tumor dormancy is really in its infancy. But, given the growing numbers of cancer survivors, the need for this knowledge is becoming more pressing.
Indeed, there is evidence suggesting that tumor dormancy is a valid target for therapy.
For example, in some types of breast cancer, patients may be treated for more than a decade with anti-hormone therapies, and these long-term treatments are working – they are successful at preventing some of the cancer recurrences that occur with shorter treatment.
But, while these long-term therapies are relatively safe, they do have side-effects, and the number of cancer recurrences that they prevent is small.
The challenge today is thus to understand the processes of tumor dormancy and metastasis better, in order to determine more accurately which patients will benefit from long-term therapy.
We have much to learn, and at this stage don’t even know all of the questions to ask.
Would intermittent therapy be as useful as long-term treatment?
Are there features of the primary cancer, or of individual patients, that can help us predict who will develop late recurrences and metastatic disease?
What if late recurrences simply cannot be predicted at diagnosis?
Are there modifiable factors – for example, lifestyle, immune-system status, or environmental conditions – that influence whether or not patients develop late recurrences?
The answers to these questions will require research, and research into metastasis and tumor dormancy is difficult.
It requires patience, development of models, and willingness to undertake long-term studies.
We also need to understand better the prevalence of long-term dormant disease in patients.
How common is the phenomenon we are examining? It may be that many cancer patients harbor disseminated tumor cells, and not all of these cells are destined to re-awaken.
In some ways, the success of cancer research is fueling pressure to “cure” cancer quickly, steering clinical and laboratory researchers away from the tricky problems of metastasis and long-term tumor dormancy.
This focus ultimately may be shortsighted, as the increasing number of cancer survivors leads to an increase in late recurrences.
Metastases, not the primary tumor, are responsible for most cancer deaths.
If we are to continue to improve on cancer survival statistics, we need to learn how to prevent, delay, or thwart the processes that give rise to metastatic disease.
The Coming Anti-National Revolution
NEW HAVEN – For the past several centuries, the world has experienced a sequence of intellectual revolutions against oppression of one sort or another.
These revolutions operate in the minds of humans and are spread – eventually to most of the world – not by war (which tends to involve multiple causes), but by language and communications technology.
Ultimately, the ideas they advance – unlike the causes of war – become noncontroversial.
I think the next such revolution, likely sometime in the twenty-first century, will challenge the economic implications of the nation-state.
It will focus on the injustice that follows from the fact that, entirely by chance, some are born in poor countries and others in rich countries.
As more people work for multinational firms and meet and get to know more people from other countries, our sense of justice is being affected.
This is hardly unprecedented.
In his book 1688: The First Modern Revolution, the historian Steven Pincus argues convincingly that the so-called “Glorious Revolution” is best thought of not in terms of the overthrow of a Catholic king by parliamentarians in England, but as the beginning of a worldwide revolution in justice.
Don’t think battlefields.
Think, instead, of the coffeehouses with free, shared newspapers that became popular around then – places for complex communications.
Even as it happened, the Glorious Revolution clearly marked the beginning of a worldwide appreciation of the legitimacy of groups that do not share the “ideological unity” demanded by a strong king.
Thomas Paine’s pamphlet Common Sense, a huge bestseller in the Thirteen Colonies when it was published in January 1776, marked another such revolution, which was not identical with the Revolutionary War against Britain that began later that year (and had multiple causes).
The reach of Common Sense is immeasurable, because it wasn’t just sold but was also read aloud at churches and meetings.
The idea that hereditary monarchs were somehow spiritually superior to the rest of us was decisively rejected.
Most of the world today, including Britain, agrees.
The same could be said of the gradual abolition of slavery, which was mostly achieved not by war, but by an emerging popular recognition of its cruelty and injustice.
The 1848 uprisings around Europe were substantially a protest against voting laws that limited voting to only a minority of men: property holders or aristocrats.
Women’s suffrage followed soon after.
In the twentieth and twenty-first centuries, we have seen civil rights extended to racial and sexual minorities.
All of the past “justice revolutions” have stemmed from improved communications.
Oppression thrives on distance, on not actually meeting or seeing the oppressed.
The next revolution will not abolish the consequences of place of birth, but the privileges of nationhood will be tempered.
While the rise in anti-immigrant sentiment around the world today seems to point in the opposite direction, the sense of injustice will be amplified as communications continue to grow.
Ultimately, recognition of wrong will wreak big changes.
For now, this recognition still faces strong competition from patriotic impulses, rooted in a social contract among nationals who have paid taxes over the years or performed military service to build or defend what they saw as exclusively theirs.
Allowing unlimited immigration would seem to violate this contract.
But the most important steps to address birthplace injustice probably will not target immigration.
Instead, they will focus on fostering economic freedom.
In 1948, Paul A. Samuelson’s “factor-price equalization theorem” lucidly showed that under conditions of unlimited free trade without transportation costs (and with other idealized assumptions), market forces would equalize the prices of all factors of production, including the wage rate for any standardized kind of labor, around the world.
In a perfect world, people don’t have to move to another country to get a higher wage.
Ultimately, they need only be able to participate in producing output that is sold internationally.
As technology reduces the cost of transportation and communications to near the vanishing point, achieving this equalization is increasingly feasible.
But getting there requires removing old barriers and preventing the erection of new ones.
Recent free-trade agreements under discussion, the Trans-Pacific Partnership and the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership, have suffered setbacks as interest groups attempt to bend them to their own aims.
But, ultimately, we need – and probably will get – even better such agreements.
To achieve factor-price equalization, people need a stable base for a real lifetime career connected to a country in which they do not physically reside.
We also need to protect the losers to foreign trade in our existing nation-states.
Trade Adjustment Assistance (TAA) traces its roots in the United States back to 1974.
Canada experimented in 1995 with an Earnings Supplement Project.
The European Globalization Adjustment Fund, started in 2006, has a tiny annual budget of €150 million ($168.6 million).
US President Barack Obama has proposed to expand the TAA program.
But, so far, this has meant little more than experiments or proposals.
Ultimately, the next revolution will likely stem from daily interactions on computer monitors with foreigners whom we can see are intelligent, decent people – people who happen, through no choice of their own, to be living in poverty.
This should lead to better trade agreements, which presuppose the eventual development of orders of magnitude more social insurance to protect people within a country during the transition to a more just global economy.
Coming Soon: Capitalism 3.0
CAMBRIDGE ­– Capitalism is in the throes of its most severe crisis in many decades.
A combination of deep recession, global economic dislocations, and effective nationalization of large swathes of the financial sector in the world’s advanced economies has deeply unsettled the balance between markets and states.
Where the new balance will be struck is anybody’s guess.
Those who predict capitalism’s demise have to contend with one important historical fact: capitalism has an almost unlimited capacity to reinvent itself.
Indeed, its malleability is the reason it has overcome periodic crises over the centuries and outlived critics from Karl Marx on.
The real question is not whether capitalism can survive – it can – but whether world leaders will demonstrate the leadership needed to take it to its next phase as we emerge from our current predicament.&#160; &#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;
Capitalism has no equal when it comes to unleashing the collective economic energies of human societies.
That is why all prosperous societies are capitalistic in the broad sense of the term: they are organized around private property and allow markets to play a large role in allocating resources and determining economic rewards.
The catch is that neither property rights nor markets can function on their own.
They require other social institutions to support them.&#160;
So property rights rely on courts and legal enforcement, and markets depend on regulators to rein in abuse and fix market failures.
At the political level, capitalism requires compensation and transfer mechanisms to render its outcomes acceptable.
As the current crisis has demonstrated yet again, capitalism needs stabilizing arrangements such as a lender of last resort and counter-cyclical fiscal policy.
In other words, capitalism is not self-creating, self-sustaining, self-regulating, or self-stabilizing.&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160; &#160;
The history of capitalism has been a process of learning and re-learning these lessons.&#160; Adam Smith’s idealized market society required little more than a “night-watchman state.”
All that governments needed to do to ensure the division of labor was to enforce property rights, keep the peace, and collect a few taxes to pay for a limited range of public goods.
Through the early part of the twentieth century, capitalism was governed by a narrow vision of the public institutions needed to uphold it.
In practice, the state’s reach often went beyond this conception (as, say, in the case of Bismarck’s introduction of old-age pensions in Germany in 1889).
But governments continued to see their economic roles in restricted terms.
This began to change as societies became more democratic and labor unions and other groups mobilized against capitalism’s perceived abuses.
Anti-trust policies were spearheaded in the Unites States.
The usefulness of activist monetary and fiscal policies became widely accepted in the aftermath of the Great Depression.&#160;
The share of public spending in national income rose rapidly in today’s industrialized countries, from below 10% on average at the end of the nineteenth century to more than 20% just before World War II.