Estimates from Citigroup indicate that almost half of all jobs will be disrupted in the coming decades.
Jobs that require lower skills and less training are particularly vulnerable; but it is also clear that many other occupational categories – including administration, accounting, logistics, banking, and various service activities – are likely to be affected.
Companies will be able to reduce their headcount and production costs while improving customer service, which, like Uberization, will affect the wage-setting process.
Central bankers, I believe, are underestimating the impact of this structural shift.
In the more tech-oriented economies, like the US, the United Kingdom, and the Nordic countries, there is a risk that traditional macroeconomic models will overestimate the cost pressure from labor.
Another reason why the Fed should postpone a rate hike is that financial turmoil in emerging markets, particularly China, could have a substantial impact on the global economy, with some clear implications for the US economy.
In particular, lower energy and commodity prices are likely to dampen inflationary pressure.
When inflation is low for a long period, inflation expectations also tend to be low.
Add falling commodity and energy prices to the mix and there is a risk that inflation expectations will remain too low to sustain a balanced recovery.
The global implications of lower emerging-market currencies are also likely to be deflationary.
The direct impact is that a stronger dollar reduces the cost of imported goods.
The indirect effect, which might be substantial, is that cost-competitive light manufacturing in emerging markets increases.
That would reinforce the deflationary pressure from globalization for years to come.
There is also a risk of greater currency-market volatility if the Fed jumps the gun in raising rates.
The Fed’s unconventional monetary policies have been necessary for the US.
But, because they flooded global markets with liquidity, large portfolio flows have moved into emerging-market countries, whose currencies often are not as liquid as the dollar.
When investment moves back into dollars, the currency fluctuations in these less liquid markets can become excessive.
The Fed clearly has a responsibility to consider how its policy decisions affect the global financial system.
Excessive currency volatility is not in America’s interest, not least because large exchange-rate depreciations in emerging markets would amplify the effects of globalization on US jobs, wages, and inflation, particularly as weaker foreign currencies make outsourcing a more economically viable solution.
Another reason for the Fed to reconsider hiking rates is that the legitimacy of the Bretton Woods institutions depends on a well-functioning global financial system.
The global economy’s center of gravity is moving to Asia, Latin America, and Africa, but the IMF and the World Bank still seem to mirror the reality of the 1950s.
If the Fed is seen as unleashing a major crisis in emerging markets, this will almost certainly do long-term damage to the global financial system.
The Fed should regard lower commodity prices, reduced inflationary pressures, changes in the labor market, and further disruptive technological shifts as sufficiently convincing arguments to postpone a rate hike.
Including the risk of excessive volatility in the global financial system tips the balance even further.
There is plenty of time for the Fed to signal that its policy stance has shifted, and the conclave in Jackson Hole is an excellent opportunity to start that communication.
If the facts have changed, the policy implications must also change.
The greatest loss of credibility always comes when policymakers try to ignore changing realities.
Why the Greek Bailout Failed
CAMBRIDGE – As the Greek crisis evolves, it is important to understand that a successful structural-adjustment program requires strong country ownership.
Even if negotiators overcome the most recent sticking points, it will be difficult to trust in their implementation if the Greek people remain unconvinced.
That has certainly been the experience so far.
And without structural reform, there is little chance that the Greek economy will see sustained stability and growth – not least because official lenders are unwilling to continue extending an unreformed Greece significantly more money than it is asked to pay.
(This has been the case through most of the crisis, even if one would never know it from the world press coverage.)
Greece’s membership in the European Union gives its creditors significant leverage, but evidently not enough to change the fundamental calculus.
Greece remains very much a sovereign country, not a sub-sovereign state.
The “troika” of creditors – the International Monetary Fund, the European Central Bank, and the European Commission – simply do not enjoy the kind of leverage over Greece that, say, the Municipal Assistance Corporation wielded over New York City when it teetered on the edge of bankruptcy in the mid-1970s.
The best structural-adjustment programs are those in which the debtor country’s government proposes the policy changes, and the IMF helps design a bespoke program and provides the political cover for its implementation.
Imposing them from the outside is simply not an effective option.
So, for reforms to take hold, the Greek government and its electorate must believe in them.
That a country must take ownership of its reform program is not a new lesson.
The IMF’s rocky relationship with Ukraine began long before the latest round of negotiations.
Back in 2013, IMF staff wrote a sobering report on the organization’s experience in the country.
Their conclusion, in essence, was that the government’s failure to embrace the reform process fully all but guaranteed that its program would not work.
If a government is incapable of or uninterested in making the needed adjustments, the report argued, the best option is to drip money out as reforms are implemented, as is now being done in Greece.
Unfortunately, that approach has not proved adequate to overcome the challenges there.
Structural-reform conditions often tilt the balance between competing domestic factions, for better or for worse.
If there is no will inside the country to maintain the reforms, they will quickly be undermined.
Left-wing ideologues have long viewed structural-reform programs with deep suspicion, accusing international lenders like the IMF and the World Bank of being captured by neoliberal market fundamentalists.
This critique has some truth in it, but is overblown.
To be sure, structural reforms often favor policies like labor-market flexibility.
But one should not make the mistake of viewing these interventions in black-and-white terms.
Breaking down dual labor markets that are excluding young workers (as they do in much of southern Europe, including Italy and, to some extent, France) is very different from making it easier to fire all workers.
Making pension systems sustainable does not amount to making them stingier.
Making tax systems simpler and fairer is not the same as raising all taxes.
Recently, opponents of structural reform have put forward more exotic objections – most notably the problem caused by deflation when policy interest rates are at zero.
If structural reforms simply lower all wages and prices, it may indeed be difficult in the short-term to counter the drop in aggregate demand.
But a similar critique could be made of any other change in policy: if it is poorly designed, it will be counter-productive.
The truth is that the way forward in Europe requires achieving greater productivity.
The lessons from Greece and other unsuccessful bailout programs are sobering.
If a debt bailout program requires a wholesale change in a country’s economic, social, and political model, the best course of action might be to write off the private losses, rather than pour in public money to cover them.
In cases like Greece, the creditors’ passion for structural reforms might be better directed at home – particularly toward improving financial regulation.
The vast majority of Greeks want to stay in the EU.
In an ideal world, offering financial aid in exchange for reforms might help those in the country who want to shape it into a modern European state.
But given the difficulty Greece has had so far in making the necessary changes to reach that goal, it might be time to reconsider this approach to the crisis completely.
In place of a program providing the country with further loans, it might make more sense to provide outright humanitarian aid – regardless of whether Greece remains fully within the eurozone.
Why the Greek Deal Will Work
LONDON – Now that Greek banks have reopened and the government has made scheduled payments to the European Central Bank and the International Monetary Fund, does Greece’s near-death experience mark the end of the euro crisis?
The conventional answer is a clear no.
According to most economists and political commentators, the latest Greek bailout was little more than an analgesic.
It will dull the pain for a short period, but the euro’s deep-seated problems will metastasize, with a dismal prognosis for the single currency and perhaps even the European Union as a whole.
But the conventional wisdom is likely to be proved wrong.
The deal between Greece and the European authorities is actually a good one for both sides.
Rather than marking the beginning of a new phase of the euro crisis, the agreement may be remembered as the culmination of a long series of political compromises that, by correcting some of the euro’s worst design flaws, created the conditions for a European economic recovery.
To express guarded optimism about the Greek deal is not to condone the provocative arrogance of former Greek Finance Minister Yanis Varoufakis or the pointless vindictiveness of German Finance Minister Wolfgang Schäuble.
Neither is it to deny the economic criticism of the bailout provisions presented by progressives like Joseph Stiglitz and conservatives like Hans-Werner Sinn.
The arguments against creating a European single currency and then allowing Greece to cheat its way into membership were valid back in the 1990s – and, in theory, they still are.
But this does not mean that breaking up the euro would be desirable, or even tolerable.
Joining the euro was certainly ruinous for Greece, but there is always “a great deal of ruin in a nation,” as Adam Smith remarked 250 years ago, when losing the American colonies seemed to threaten Britain with financial devastation.
The great virtue of capitalism is that it adapts to ruinous conditions and even finds ways of turning them to advantage.
The United States in the mid-nineteenth century was badly suited for a single currency and a single economic structure, as evidenced by the Civil War, which was provoked as much by single-currency tensions as by moral abhorrence to slavery.
Italy would probably be better off today if Garibaldi had never launched unification.
But once unification has happened, the pain of dismantling the political and economic settlement usually overwhelms the apparent gains from a break-up.
This seems to be the case in Europe, as clear majorities of voters are saying in all eurozone countries, including Germany and Greece.
Thus, the question was never whether the single currency would break up, but what political reversals, economic sacrifices, and legal subterfuges would occur to hold it together.
The good news is that Europe now has some persuasive answers.
Indeed, Europe has overcome what could be described as the “original sin” of the single-currency project: the Maastricht Treaty’s prohibition of “monetary financing” of government deficits by the ECB and the related ban on mutual support by national governments of one another’s debt burdens.
In January, ECB President Mario Draghi effectively sidestepped both obstacles by launching a program of quantitative easing so enormous that it will finance the entire deficits of all eurozone governments (now including Greece) and mutualize a significant proportion of their outstanding bonds.
Moreover, European governments have belatedly understood the most basic principle of public finance.
Government debts never have to be repaid, provided they can be extended in a cooperative manner or bought up with newly created money, issued by a credible central bank.
But for this to be possible, interest payments must always be made on time, and the sanctity of debt contracts must always take precedence over electoral promises regarding pensions, wages, and public spending.
Now that Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras’s government has been forced to acknowledge the unqualified priority of debt servicing, and can now benefit from unlimited monetary support from the ECB, Greece should have little problem supporting its debt burden, which is no heavier than Japan’s or Italy’s.
Finally, Germany, Spain, Italy, and several northern European countries required, for domestic political reasons, a ritual humiliation of radical Greek politicians and voters who openly defied EU institutions and austerity demands.
Having achieved this, EU leaders have no further reason to impose austerity on Greece or strictly enforce the terms of the latest bailout.
Instead, they have every incentive to demonstrate the success of their “tough love” policies by easing austerity to accelerate economic growth, not only in Greece but throughout the eurozone.
This raises a key issue that the Tsipras government and many others misunderstood throughout the Greek crisis: the role of constructive hypocrisy in Europe’s political economy.
Gaps between public statements and private intentions open up in all political systems, but these become huge in a complex multinational structure like the EU.
On paper, the Greek bailout will impose a fiscal tightening, thereby aggravating the country’s economic slump.
In practice, however, the budget targets will surely be allowed to slip, provided the government carries out its promises on privatization, labor markets, and pension reform.
These structural reforms are much more important than fiscal targets, both in symbolic terms for the rest of Europe and for the Greek economy.
Moreover, the extension of ECB monetary support to Greece will transform financial conditions: interest rates will plummet, banks will recapitalize, and private credit will gradually become available for the first time since 2010.
If budget targets were strictly enforced by bailout monitors, which seems unlikely, this improvement in conditions for private borrowers could easily compensate for any modest tightening of fiscal policy.
In short, the main conditions now seem to be in place for a sustainable recovery in Greece.
Conventional wisdom among economists and investors has a long record of failing to spot major turning points; so the near-universal belief today that Greece faces permanent depression is no reason to despair.
Money-Market Resistance
CAMBRIDGE – The United States Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) recently rejected proposed rules aimed at making money-market funds safer in a financial crisis – a rejection that has caused consternation among observers and other regulators.
Given the risks that money market funds can pose to the global financial system, as shown by their destabilizing role in the 2008 financial crisis, it is not hard to see why they are worried.
Money-market funds take excess cash from investors and use it to purchase short-term IOUs from businesses, banks, and other financial institutions.
They mimic bank accounts by allowing investors to write checks and promise that their investment’s value will not fall.
In 2012, American “prime” money-market funds, which buy bank and corporate debt, were worth nearly $1.5 trillion.
The money flowing through these funds went to many of the world’s largest banks, including not just the obvious US suspects (JP Morgan Chase, Bank of America, and Citi), but also major European and Japanese banks such as Barclays, Deutsche Bank, Bank of Tokyo, Sumitomo, Credit Suisse, and ING.
These six international banks alone accounted for nearly 20% of the prime money-market funds’ value.
Many readers know how money-market funds work: An investor buys a $1.00 share from the XYZ fund, which keeps each share’s value at a constant $1.00, allowing the investor to believe that the money – invested in a pool of safe, secure, but not always government-guaranteed assets – is on deposit.
Even if the asset pool declines in value, the fund’s managers keep the value of each share at $1.00 by rounding upward the fund’s real value.
If the fund’s losses are big enough that rounding off still leaves it short of a stable $1.00 value, the fund “breaks the buck.”
That happened when Lehman Brothers failed in September 2008.
The Reserve Fund, a well-established money-market fund with too many unpaid IOUs from Lehman, could not keep its value steady. It broke the buck.
All money-market funds then became suspect, and many investors fled – withdrawing one-third of a trillion dollars in a single week.
Since much of the money-market funds’ assets are IOUs from the world’s biggest banks, the withdrawals weakened the already-shaky global banking system.
The Federal Reserve, seeking to stem the growing panic and stabilize the American and international banking system, promptly guaranteed the value of all money-market funds.
The proposals that the SEC rejected were aimed at making money-market funds more robust by requiring that each fund maintain capital reserves or let its value “float” – and not be rounded up – to reflect its true, underlying risk.
The proposal would also have required that money-market funds hold back a fraction of some redemptions, thereby making investors take some risk that funds might not have complete transactional liquidity if their investments weakened.
A majority of the commissioners turned down the proposals after substantial lobbying from the mutual-fund industry.
If money-market funds had to maintain capital reserves, industry representatives argued, yields to investors would decline and the industry’s profits would suffer.
And, if retail investors saw their money-market funds’ values declining from the amount that they had invested, and if they knew that they could not get all of their money back immediately, the funds would become less attractive.
Investors might choose other places for their excess cash, like banks.
Banks are obliged to hold reserves, maintain capital, and pay deposit insurance to ensure that they can honor their deposits.
The mutual-fund industry, one can assume, feared that the SEC’s rules would induce customers to redirect much of their cash directly into banks.
As a result of the SEC’s inaction, money-market funds will continue to operate outside the scope of bank-style rules on capital and reserves, even though investors treat them like bank accounts.
Unlike banks, though, they do not pay the government to insure their investors.
But the 2008 financial crisis showed that, when push comes to shove, the government will backstop money-market funds nonetheless.
The rejected proposals are thus good policy: money-market funds should be made safer – via capital requirements and liquidity restrictions – because they already receive a de facto government guarantee.
Their steady value makes them appear safer to investors than they are to the world’s financial system.
The SEC’s rejection of the proposed rules demonstrates the power of concerted lobbying – and that concentrated interests often trump diffuse benefits.
Typically, an interest group lobbies Congress, blandishing persuasive arguments, campaign contributions, and other support; often enough members – or enough key members – come to see the merit of the group’s point of view (or at least vote as if they do).
Meanwhile, ordinary citizens do not notice unless the issue receives significant media attention.
Often no one lobbies the other side of the issue.
One might think that banks would counter-balance the mutual-fund industry’s lobbying efforts, because the likely effect of forcing money-market funds to pay for more of their systemic costs would be to expand funds flowing directly to banks.
But inflows through money-market funds are not so bad for banks, which get the cash without having to set aside reserves or pay for deposit insurance.
With no one having a direct financial interest in the outcome pressing an alternative view, the SEC’s initial decision was as predictable as it was bad.
Transatlantic Free Trade?
MADRID – This month, the United States National Intelligence Council released a sobering report entitled Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds.
Most important, according to the authors, if current trends continue, Asia could soon surpass North America and Europe in global power.
It will have a higher GDP, larger population, higher military spending, and more technological investment.
In this geopolitical context, Europe and the US need each other more than ever, making greater transatlantic cooperation crucial.
This seems to be the approach that inspired outgoing US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton’s recent speech at the Brookings Institution on US-European relations.
Given the shift in global power and the prospect of US energy self-sufficiency as domestic hydrocarbon output booms, America is trying to adapt its foreign policy to the new multi-polar international order.
So now is the time for a bold initiative: the launch of a US-European Union free-trade agreement.
Clinton has already hinted at America’s readiness for this, mentioning the possibility of negotiating a complete agreement that would increase trade and stimulate growth on both sides of the Atlantic.
The journalist David Ignatius even dared to give it a name in a recent article in The Washington Post: TAFTA (Transatlantic Free-Trade Agreement).
Edward Luce, writing in the Financial Times, preferred “Transatlantic Partnership.”
The US and the EU (taken as a whole) are not only the world’s two largest economies and typically the largest commercial partners for other major economies; they also maintain the world’s largest bilateral trade relationship.
American investment in Europe is three times higher than it is in Asia.
European investment in the US is eight times larger than its investments in China and India combined.
So transatlantic trade is crucial for both economies, particularly for job creation.
Indeed, it is estimated that one-third of all bilateral US-EU trade consists of internal transfers by companies that operate in both markets.
Although US and EU tariffs on each other’s marketed manufactured goods are already low (below 3%, on average), a free-trade agreement would be enormously beneficial in promoting further investment, thereby boosting economic growth and creating more jobs.
Such an agreement could include trade in goods, services, financial instruments, and agriculture, and would necessitate greater compatibility of European and American regulations and legal norms, implying substantial savings.
Moreover, the effects of such an agreement would be felt far beyond the US and Europe.
For example, both have already signed free-trade treaties with various Latin American countries, implying the creation of a geographically enormous free-trade area, which should boost economic resilience in the face of global crisis.
Indeed, regional free-trade agreements are gaining momentum worldwide.
The Trans-Pacific Partnership, a free-trade agreement spearheaded by the US, is set to be a game-changer in the Asia-Pacific region, with decisive advances this year putting it on course to be concluded in 2015.
Potential signatories include the US, Australia, Malaysia, Vietnam, Singapore, New Zealand, Chile, Peru, Brunei, Canada, Mexico, and perhaps Japan and South Korea.
The result will be trade liberalization in an area that produces 40% of global GDP.
Isn’t it time to consider something similar for Europe and the US?
The EU, now confronting a wave of populism and Euro-skepticism, could revive its sense of purpose by committing itself to closer transatlantic cooperation and coordination on trade, to be carried out by the European Commission.
Such a project has worked before in bringing Europe together; it can do so again.
The most precious asset today is confidence, and the mere fact of launching negotiations would generate it in abundance.
Protectionism is no solution to the crisis, whereas a transatlantic free-trade agreement would favor multilateralism and openness.
In this sense, it is important to stress the work of the World Trade Organization, the best multilateral forum that the world has for resolving trade disputes.
Signing a transatlantic trade treaty would be irrefutable proof that the political case for open trade can be made – and won.
The only way to achieve this is through the clear commitment of political leaders on both sides of the Atlantic, together with private-sector involvement, which is fundamental to sustaining urgently needed economic growth.
But let’s not wait: faced with predictions of the West’s relative decline, the US and the EU must commit themselves to more union, more cooperation, and more prosperity.
Today, that means a transatlantic free-trade agreement.
Financial Reform’s Breakthrough Year
ZANZIBAR – Here’s an odd prediction for the coming year: 2013 will be a watershed for financial reform.
True, while the global financial crisis erupted more than four years ago, and the Dodd-Frank financial reforms were adopted in the United States back in 2010, not much has changed about how Wall Street operates – except that the large firms have become bigger and more powerful.
Yet there are reasons to expect real progress in the new year.
The US Federal Reserve is finally shifting its thinking.
In a series of major speeches this fall, Governor Dan Tarullo made the case that the problem of “too big to fail” financial institutions remains with us.
We need to take additional measures to reduce the level of systemic risk – including limiting the size of our largest banks.
News reports indicate that the Fed has already started saying no to some bank mergers.
At the same time, the US Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation has become a bastion of sensible thinking on financial-sector issues.
In part, this is because the FDIC is responsible for cleaning up the mess when financial-sector firms fail, so its senior officials have a strong incentive to protect its insurance fund by preventing risks from getting out of control.
The FDIC is showing intellectual leadership as well as organizational capabilities – Vice Chairman Tom Hoenig’s speeches are a must-read.
Wall Street is pushing back, of course.
But the rolling series of scandals surrounding global megabanks makes it difficult for anyone to keep a straight face when executives insist that our largest banks must maintain their current scale and scope.
Do we need HSBC to facilitate global money laundering?
Do we need Barclays and UBS to manipulate Libor (a key benchmark for interest rates around the world)?
Do we need still more losses at poorly run trading operations for JP Morgan Chase?
The pro-bank lobby groups are positioning themselves to argue that the new resolution powers under Dodd-Frank have ended the too-big-to-fail problem, and we can expect a public-relations drive in this direction early in the new year.
But the consensus view at the most recent meeting of the FDIC’s Systemic Resolution Advisory Committee (of which I am a member) was that this claim should not be taken seriously.
Under Dodd-Frank, it is arguably easier for the FDIC to handle the failure of a single large financial institution than it was in pre-Dodd-Frank days.
But what if two or three or seven firms are all in trouble at the same time?
The answer, as former Fed Chairman Paul Volcker implied at the meeting, is that we would be right back where we started – in the panic and frozen credit markets that followed the collapse of Lehman Brothers in September 2008.
Indeed, the idea that substantial shocks could soon hit the US financial system is not far-fetched.
The European debt crisis, for example, remains far from being resolved.
A significant sovereign-debt restructuring there would bring down European banks and potentially damage US banks – as well as financial institutions around the world.
Meanwhile, the continuing problems at European banks are a stark reminder that operating highly leveraged, thinly capitalized firms is incredibly risky.
And the regulatory failures in Europe – consider the German Landesbanks, for example – will become only more obvious in the coming months.
Creating a common supervisory authority will mean nothing unless it can clean up the mess created by the existing supervisors.
And that cleanup will expose more of the rot in banks’ current operations.
The need for banks to finance themselves with more equity and relatively less debt will be the focus of one of the main publishing events in economics in 2013.
Anat Admati and Martin Hellwig’s The Bankers’ New Clothes: What’s Wrong with Banking and What to Do About it? will appear officially in March, but advance copies are already being closely read in leading central banks.
Bankers everywhere will rush to read it before their regulators do.
The road to the ongoing financial and economic crisis was built on a foundation of intellectual capture: not only regulators, but academics, too, became captivated by modern finance and its methods.
Admati and Hellwig are at the vanguard of the counterrevolution, challenging the great myths of banking head-on.
Do we need financial institutions to be so highly leveraged (that is, carrying so much debt relative to equity)?
No, they argue.
If banks of all kinds were financed with more equity, they would have stronger buffers to absorb losses.
Both the equity and the debt issued by well-capitalized banks would be safer – and therefore cheaper.
Bankers want to be so highly leveraged for a simple reason: implicit government guarantees mean that they get the upside when things go well, while the downside is someone else’s problem.
Contrary to bankers’ claims, this is not a good arrangement for society.
Admati and Hellwig are confronting the bankers and their allies in no uncertain terms, grounding their argument in deep financial thinking, yet writing for a broad audience.
Whatever else happens in 2013, we can be sure that they will not win the Goldman Sachs Business Book of the Year award.
In Defense of Non-Visionaries
OXFORD – Many of the recent tributes for Margaret Thatcher following her death celebrated her as a “transformational” leader who brought about great changes.
There were frequent references to her equally transformational American counterpart, Ronald Reagan.
But a more interesting comparison is with her other presidential contemporary, George H. W. Bush.
Though often dismissed as a mere “transactional” manager, Bush had one of the best foreign-policy records of the past half-century.
His administration managed the end of the Cold War, the dismantlement of the Soviet Union, and the unification of Germany within NATO – all without violence.
At the same time, he led a broad United Nations-backed coalition that repelled Saddam Hussein’s aggression against Kuwait.
Had he dropped any of the balls he was juggling, today’s world would be much worse.
Although he presided over a major global transformation, Bush, by his own account, did not have transformational objectives.
On the unification of Germany, he resisted the advice of Thatcher and others, apparently out of a sense of fairness and responsiveness to his friend, German Chancellor Helmut Kohl.
In October 1989, Bush responded to a call from Kohl by publicly stating that he did not “share the concern that some European countries have about a reunified Germany.”
At the same time, he was careful to let Kohl and others take the lead.
When the Berlin Wall was opened a month later, partly owing to an East German mistake, Bush was criticized for his low-key response.
But Bush had made a deliberate choice not to humiliate the Soviets or gloat: “I won’t beat on my chest and dance on the wall,” was his response – a model of emotional intelligence in a leader.
Such self-restraint helped to set the stage for the successful Malta Summit with Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev a month later.
The Cold War ended quietly, and the dismantlement of the Soviet empire followed.
As Bush and his team responded to forces that were largely outside of his control, he set goals and objectives that balanced opportunities and constraints in a prudent manner.
Some critics have faulted him for not supporting the national aspirations of Soviet republics like Ukraine in 1991 (when he delivered his infamous “Chicken Kiev” speech warning against “suicidal nationalism”); for failing to go to Baghdad to unseat Saddam Hussein in the Gulf War; or for sending Brent Scowcroft to Beijing to maintain relations with China after the Tiananmen Square massacre of 1989.
But, in each instance, Bush was limiting his short-term gains in order to pursue long-term stability.
Other critics complained that Bush did not set more transformational objectives regarding Russian democracy, the Middle East, or nuclear non-proliferation at a time when world politics seemed fluid.
But, again, Bush remained more focused on maintaining global stability than on advancing new visions.
Bush was also respectful of institutions and norms at home and abroad, going to the US Congress for authorization of the Gulf War, and to the United Nations for a resolution under Chapter 7 of the UN Charter.
Although a realist in his thinking, he could be Wilsonian in his tactics.
Bush’s termination of the ground war in Iraq after only four days was motivated in part by humanitarian concerns about the slaughter of Iraqi troops, as well as by an interest in not leaving Iraq so weakened that it could not balance the power of neighboring Iran.
While Bush’s invasion of Panama to capture (and later put on trial) Manuel Noriega may have violated Panamanian sovereignty, it had a degree of de facto legitimacy, given Noriega’s notorious behavior.
And, when Bush organized his international coalition to prosecute the Gulf War, he included several Arab countries – not to ensure military success, but to boost the mission’s legitimacy.
When Bush and Thatcher met in Aspen, Colorado, in the summer of 1990, Thatcher allegedly warned him “not to go wobbly.”
But most historians agree there was no such danger.
With his careful combination of hard and soft power, Bush created a successful strategy – one that accomplished American goals in a manner that was not unduly insular and with minimal damage to the interests of foreigners.
He was careful not to humiliate Gorbachev, and to manage the transition to Boris Yeltsin’s presidency in a newly independent Russia.
Of course, not all foreigners were adequately protected.
For example, Bush assigned a low priority to Kurds and Shia in Iraq, to dissidents in China, and to Bosnians in the former Yugoslavia.
In that sense, Bush’s realism set limits to his cosmopolitanism.
Could Bush have done more had he been a transformational leader like Thatcher or Reagan?
Perhaps he might have done more in a second term.
And, with better communication skills, he might have been able to do more to educate the American public about the changing nature of the post-Cold War world.
But, given the profound uncertainty of a world in flux, as well as the dangers of miscalculation as the Soviet empire collapsed, prudent management trumped grand visions.
Bush famously said that he did not do “the vision thing.”
Nonetheless, few people at the end of 1989 believed that Germany could be reunited peacefully within the Western alliance.
Thatcher certainly did not.
The lesson is that in some circumstances, we should prefer leadership by good transactional managers like George H. W. Bush (or Dwight Eisenhower before him), rather than by more flashy and inspirational transformers.
Should Business Travel Be Obsolete?
COLOMBO – Think about it: You can call, email, and even watch your counterparty on FaceTime, Skype, or GoToMeeting.
So why do companies fork out more than $1.2 trillion a year – a full 1.5% of the world’s GDP – for international business travel?
The expense is not only huge; it is also growing – at 6.5% per year, almost twice the rate of global economic growth and almost as fast as information and telecommunication services.
Computing power has moved from our laptops and cellphones to the cloud, and we are all better off for it.
So why do we need to move brains instead of letting those brains stay put and just sending them bytes?
Why waste precious work time in the air, at security checks, and waiting for our luggage?
Before anyone starts slashing travel budgets, let’s try to understand why we need to move people rather than information.
Thanks to a research collaboration on inclusive growth with MasterCard and an anonymized donation of data to the Center for International Development at Harvard University, we are starting to shed some light on this mystery.
In ongoing work with Dany Bahar, Michele Coscia, and Frank Neffke, we have been able to establish some interesting stylized facts.
More populous countries have more business travel in both directions, but the volume is less than proportional to their population: a country with 100% more population than another has only about 70% more business travel.
This suggests that there are economies of scale in running businesses that favor large countries.
By contrast, a country with a per capita income that is 100% higher than another receives 130% more business travelers and sends 170% more people abroad.
This means that business travel tends to grow more than proportionally with the level of development.
While businesspeople travel in order to trade or invest, more than half of international business travel seems to be related to the management of foreign subsidiaries.
The global economy is increasingly characterized by global firms, which need to deploy their know-how to their different locations around the world.
The data show that there is almost twice the amount of travel from headquarters to subsidiaries as there is in the opposite direction.
Exporters also travel twice as much as importers.
But why do we need to move the brain, not just the bytes?
I can think of at least two reasons.
First, the brain has a capacity to absorb information, identify patterns, and solve problems without us being aware of how it does it.
That is why we can, for example, infer other people’s goals and intentions from facial expressions, body language, intonation, and other subtle indicators that we gather unconsciously.
When we attend a meeting in person, we can listen to the body language, not just the spoken word, and we can choose where to look, not just the particular angle that the video screen shows.
As a consequence, we are better able to evaluate, empathize, and bond in person than we can with today’s telecom technologies.
Second, the brain is designed to work in parallel with other brains.
Many problem-solving tasks require parallel computing with brains that possess different software and information but that can coordinate their thoughts.
That is why we have design teams, advisory boards, inter-agency taskforces, and other forms of group interaction.
Conference calls try to match this interaction, but it is hard to speak in turn or to see one another’s expressions when someone is talking.
Conference calls have trouble replicating the intricacy of human conscious and unconscious group interactions that are critical to solve problems and accomplish tasks.
The amount of travel should then be related to the amount of know-how that needs to be moved around.
Countries differ in the amount of know-how they possess, and industries differ in the amount of know-how they require.
Controlling for population and per capita income, travel is significantly more intense to and from countries and industries that possess or use more know-how.
The countries that account for the most travel abroad, controlling for population, are all in Western Europe: Germany, Denmark, Belgium, Norway, and the Netherlands.
Outside of Europe, the most travel-intensive countries are Canada, Israel, Singapore, and the United States, a reflection of the fact that they need to deploy many brains to make use of their diverse know-how.
Interestingly, countries in the developing world differ substantially in the amount of know-how they receive through business travel.
For example, countries such as South Africa, Bulgaria, Morocco, and Mauritius receive much more know-how than countries at similar levels of development such as Peru, Colombia, Chile, Indonesia, or Sri Lanka.
The fact that firms incur the cost of business travel suggests that, for some key tasks, it is easier to move brains than it is to move the relevant information to the brains.
Moreover, the fact that business travel is growing faster than the global economy suggests that output is becoming more intensive in know-how and that know-how is diffusing through brain mobility.
And, finally, the huge diversity of business travel intensity suggests that some countries are deploying or demanding much more know-how than others.
Rather than celebrate their thrift, countries that are out of the business travel loop should be worried.
They may be missing out on more than frequent flyer miles.
Why Turkey\u0027s Army Will Stay Home
Just when the smoke from Turkey’s domestic political conflicts of the past year had begun to clear, another deadly attack by Kurdish separatists on Turkish soldiers has the government threatening military attacks inside northern Iraq.
That prospect raises risks for Turkey, Iraq, and the United States.
But there are reasons to doubt that the situation is as dangerous as recent headlines suggest.
Turkey accuses Iraqi Kurds of harboring between 3,000 and 3,500 of Turkey’s most active Kurdish militants – the PKK separatist guerillas who are blamed for the deaths of 80 Turkish soldiers so far this year.
The trouble reached the boiling point on October 7, when Kurdish fighters killed 13 Turkish soldiers near Turkey’s border with Iraq.
The Turkish public has demanded action, and Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan’s government has responded.
On October 17, despite pleas for patience and restraint from Iraq and the US, Turkish lawmakers voted 507-19 to authorize Erdogan to order cross-border military strikes into Iraq at any time over the next year.
Erdogan has sent Iraqi Kurds a forceful message.
But, for several reasons, the Turkish military is likely to limit its operations to small-scale incursions and air strikes on specific targets rather than launch an all-out war.
First, the Turkish military has no interest in embracing the risks that come with involvement in Iraq’s sectarian strife.
A full-scale invasion might well provoke Iraq’s own Kurdish guerrillas into a prolonged and bloody battle with Turkish forces that can only undermine support for Erdogan’s government at home and abroad.
Second, Turkey’s government hopes to keep the country’s bid to join the European Union moving forward.
An invasion of Iraq would bring that process to a grinding halt.
EU Foreign Policy chief Javier Solana has made plain that Europe strongly opposes any large-scale Turkish military operation in Iraq.
Third, Turkey is well aware that an all-out attack inside Iraq is exactly what Turkey’s Kurdish separatists want.
What better way to damage Turkey than to pull its military into conflict with Iraq, the US, and the EU?
Erdogan has no intention of being drawn into that trap.
With all that in mind, this latest move by Turkey’s parliament should be seen more as an ultimatum to Iraq’s Kurdish Regional Government to expel the Turkish Kurds and an attempt to persuade the US to use its considerable influence there.
That’s hardball politics, not a declaration of war.
The parliamentary authorization itself is carefully worded to underline Turkey’s limited aims.
It stresses that Turkey’s military has no intention of occupying Iraqi territory or threatening Iraqi Kurds or their oil infrastructure.
An attack would certainly make Iraq’s Kurdish provinces less appealing for foreign investors.
But Turkey has no reason to attack the assets of foreign oil companies.
Iraq’s central government is aware of the risks, as well, and is likely to exercise maximum restraint.
A limited Turkish strike into northern Iraq would probably elicit little reaction beyond public condemnation and rhetorical assertions of Iraqi sovereignty.
Threats to Iraq’s oil infrastructure around the northern Iraqi city of Kirkuk and other territory under the Kurdish Regional Government’s control are minimal.
Turkey’s government knows that any move to shut down the 600-mile pipeline from Kirkuk to Turkey’s Mediterranean port at Ceyhan would have little near-term impact, since most of Iraq’s oil exports flow from the south, hundreds of miles from the country’s border with Turkey.
Furthermore, the Turkish military can increase the pressure on Iraqi Kurds with far less drastic measures.
It can close the two countries’ principal border crossing, an important route for food, fuel, and other goods headed for Iraqi Kurds.
It could also cut exports of electricity to northern Iraq.
Still, even small-scale military operations would generate risk.
If the PKK is able to launch a major attack on troops or civilians inside Turkey, the public outcry might leave Erdogan with little choice but to up the ante.
The issue is complicated further by Turkey’s refusal to negotiate directly with the Kurdish Regional Government in northern Iraq.
Such talks, Turkey fears, would offer tacit acknowledgement that Iraqi Kurds have won a degree of autonomy from Baghdad.
That’s a bridge too far for Turkey’s nationalists and its military.
There are risks for Iraqi Prime Minister Nouri al Maliki as well, because Turkish military strikes on Iraq’s northern provinces could undermine the Kurdish support on which his government increasingly depends.
Both Sunni Arabs and Kurds already resent al Maliki’s mild reaction to Iran’s recent shelling of Iraqi territory – an attempt to strike at Iranian Kurdish militants fleeing across its border with Iraq.
There are also risks for the US.
Most supplies headed for US troops in Iraq and Afghanistan move through the Incirlik airbase in Turkey.
With the threat that the US House of Representatives will approve a resolution that accuses Turks of genocide against ethic Armenians nine decades ago, this is a particularly inopportune moment for the two countries to be at odds over Iraq.
But, worst-case scenarios aside, a Turkish invasion of northern Iraq can only serve the interests of Turkey’s Kurdish separatists.
That’s why cooler heads are likely to prevail.
Limited cross-border operations are increasingly likely.
A war between Turkey and Iraqi Kurds is not.
Why Ukraine Deserves a Haircut
LONDON – In addition to its many other troubles, Ukraine now finds itself in a showdown with its creditors.
Investors holding high-yielding bonds – many of them bought at heavy discounts after Russia’s annexation of Crimea last year – are demanding to be paid in full.
Ukraine’s government, for its part, argues that the country’s financial difficulties – in particular the economic effects of the conflict and the plunge in the value of the hryvnia – have made its debt burden unsustainable.
The outcome of this standoff could determine Ukraine’s future, as much as the military confrontation with Russia.
Recent developments have put the country on a path that would have been unimaginable until very recently.
For the first time in Ukraine’s post-Soviet history, it has a government that is willing and able to carry out real reform.
Ukraine’s progress, however, could not be more fragile.
Without some form of debt relief, it could easily be lost.
A little over a year ago, Ukraine did not have an elected president or a representative and functioning parliament.
The political landscape was deeply fragmented.
Civil society had been energized by the Maidan revolution that ousted former President Viktor Yanukovych, but it was in turmoil.
Debate over the association agreement with the European Union, along with the Russian-backed rebellion in the east, had stoked tensions over distinctions that previously played little or no role in people’s lives.
But since parliamentary elections in October, Ukraine has begun to pull itself together.
Russia’s intervention has to some extent backfired, strengthening support for a European orientation.
Eastern Ukraine may have voted differently from the rest of the country, but the overwhelming majority of voters came out in favor of Europe.
The electorate also said no to the more virulent forms of nationalism, leaving the right-wing extremist parties marginalized.
The result of the elections was the formation of a five-party governing coalition.
Though seemingly fragile, it has held up remarkably well.
Some of its members have displayed worrying populist tendencies, but an analysis of parliamentary voting patterns indicates that so far the coalition has been able to find agreement, even on very difficult issues.
The government has, among other things, raised gas tariffs by 450% (from absurdly low levels).
Dissension has been relatively moderate.
As a result, Ukraine’s core institutions are undergoing fundamental change.
The central bank – once in the pocket of the country’s oligarchs, supplying inside information on exchange rates and liquidity in exchange for bribes – has been put under the command of a governor committed to reform, surrounded by an increasingly professional team.
The energy monopoly Naftogaz, previously a cesspool of illicit transactions, has in a year managed the seemingly impossible: making Ukraine virtually independent from direct gas delivery from Russia for at least a year.
Perhaps Ukraine’s single most important achievement is the establishment of the National Reform Council.
Originally set up to coordinate reforms across ministries and monitor their implementation, it has come to serve as an important tool to discuss and ensure coherence among the different branches of government.
This latter role is particularly important, given the constitutional ambiguity created by the reversion back to a parliamentary system and the uneasy co-habitation of President Petro Poroshenko and Prime Minister Arseniy Yatsenyuk in government.
Meetings are held every three weeks and are attended by the president, the prime minister, and his entire cabinet, providing a forum in which tensions can be discussed and eased.
In between meetings, the council’s special project-management office assists in the preparation and implementation of key reforms by ministries.
With support from the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the George Soros-funded International Renaissance Foundation, and bilateral assistance from, among others, the Swedish government, the office has been able to hire staff at market rates, raising the quality of the government administration.
Ukraine’s government has also benefited from the expertise of private-sector leaders.
Deputy Head of the Presidential Administration Dmytro Shymkiv, who drove the National Reform Council, was CEO of Microsoft Ukraine.
Finance Minister Natalie Jaresko and Economic Development and Trade Minister Aivaras Abromavicius were both investment bankers (neither was a Ukrainian citizen when they joined the government).
Infrastructure Minister Andriy Pivovarsky, also a former investment banker, was most recently CEO of Continium, one of the country’s largest holding companies.
Each has played a key role in pushing the reform agenda forward, working for salaries that are orders of magnitude smaller than what they earned before.
Some have even employed staff using their own money.
Meanwhile, the ambitious agendas of the government ministers and the presidential administration are closely monitored by an energized civil society.
As Soros has noted, Ukraine probably has the most active civil society in Europe.
One of the country’s most interesting new ventures is VoxUkraine, a blogging platform set up by two Ukrainian economics professors based in the United States, Yuriy Gorodnichenko and Timofiy Mylovanov.
They have championed modern evidence-based decision-making and constantly come up with new, constructive ways of challenging the government and its assumptions.
Despite all this progress, however, the odds remain stacked against the country.
The government is fighting at least two wars simultaneously – taking on a deeply entrenched oligarchy, while trying to fend off its hostile eastern neighbor.
Further trouble – in the form a steeply declining economy – is something it cannot afford.
The stakes could not be higher.
For the first time since the country gained its independence in 1992, Ukraine has a clear sense of direction and a government capable of supporting reform.
There are signs that the oligarchs’ grip is beginning to loosen, owing partly to internal conflicts among them.
The EU and the US are working to help resolve its conflict with Russia.
Ukraine’s private creditors must now do their part, recognize the country’s economic and political situation, and accept a haircut on their bonds.
Neither the Ukrainian economy – nor its political system – can afford that they do otherwise.
When Inflation Doves Cry
PITTSBURGH – The Wall Street Journal recently ran a front-page article reporting that the monetary-policy “doves,” who had forecast low inflation in the United States, have gotten the better of the “hawks,” who argued that the Fed’s monthly purchases of long-term securities, or so-called quantitative easing (QE), would unleash faster price growth.
The report was correct but misleading, for it failed to mention why there is so little inflation in the US today.
Were the doves right, or just lucky?
The US Federal Reserve Board has pumped out trillions of dollars of reserves, but never have so many reserves produced so little monetary growth.
Neither the hawks nor the doves (nor anyone else) expected that.
Monetarists insist that economies experience inflation when money-supply growth persistently exceeds output growth.
That has not happened yet, so inflation has been postponed.
Instead of rejecting monetary theory and history, the army of Wall Street soothsayers should look beyond the Fed’s press releases and ask themselves: Does it make sense to throw out centuries of experience?
Are we really so confident that the Fed has found a new way?
The Fed has printed new bank reserves with reckless abandon.
But almost all of the reserves sit idle on commercial banks’ balance sheets.
For the 12 months ending in July, the St. Louis Fed reports that bank reserves rose 31%.
During the same period, a commonly used measure of monetary growth, M2, increased by only 6.8%.
No sound monetarist thinks those numbers predict current inflation.
Indeed, almost all the reserves added in the second and third rounds of QE, more than 95%, are sitting in excess reserves, neither lent nor borrowed and never used to increase money in circulation.
The Fed pays the banks 0.25% to keep them idle.
With $2 trillion in excess reserves, and the prospect of as much as $85 billion added each month, banks receive $5 billion a year, and rising, without taking any risk.
For the bankers, that’s a bonanza, paid from monies that the Fed would normally pay to the US Treasury.
And, adding insult to injury, about half the payment goes to branches of foreign banks.
In normal times, there are valid reasons for paying interest on excess reserves.
Currently, however, it is downright counter-productive.
Bank loans have started to increase, but small borrowers, new borrowers, and start-up companies are regularly refused.
Current low interest rates do not cover the risk that banks would take.
To be sure, they could raise the rate for new and small borrowers; but, in the current political climate, they would stand accused of stifling economic recovery if they did.
The new Consumer Financial Protection Board is also a deterrent, as banks consider it safer to lend to the government, large corporations, and giant real-estate speculators.
The banks can report record profits without much risk, rebuild capital, and pay dividends and bonuses.
And the Fed can congratulate itself on the mostly unobserved way that the large banks have used taxpayers’ money.
Instead of continuing along this futile path, the Fed should end its open-ended QE3 now.
It should stop paying interest on excess reserves until the US economy returns to a more normal footing.
Most important, it should announce a strategy for eliminating the massive volume of such reserves.
I am puzzled, and frankly appalled, by the Fed’s failure to explain how it will restore its balance sheet to a non-inflationary level.
The announcements to date simply increase uncertainty without telling the public anything useful.
Selling $2 trillion of reserves will take years.
It must do more than repeat that the Fed can raise interest rates paid on reserves to encourage banks to hold them.
It will take a clearly stated, widely understood strategy – the kind that Paul Volcker introduced in 1979-1982 – to complete the job.
Should the end of QE come in September, December, or later?
Does it matter?
Historically, the Fed has typically been slow to respond to inflation.
Waiting until inflation is here, as some propose, is the usual way.
But that merely fuels inflation expectations and makes the task more painful.
And how high will the Fed push up interest rates?
Once rates get to 5% or 6%, assuming inflation remains dormant, the Fed can expect a backlash from Congress, the administration, unions, homebuilders, and others.
When contemplating the consequences of this, remember that 40% of US government debt comes due within two years.
Rolling it over at higher rates of 4% or 5% would add more than $100 billion to the budget deficit.
And that is just the first two years.
The budget cost increases every year, as more of the debt rolls over –&#160;and that does not include agency debt and the large increase in the current-account deficit to pay China, Japan, and other foreign holders of US debt.
Those who believe that inflation will remain low should look more thoroughly and think more clearly.
There are plenty of good textbooks that explain what too many policymakers and financial-market participants would rather forget.
Send in the Clowns
NEW YORK – When too many Italians voted late last month for either a louche and discredited business tycoon or a comedian, European stock markets plummeted.
With no public trust in the political class, Italy might become ungovernable.
But Italians are not alone.
Rage against the political establishment has become a global phenomenon.
Chinese bloggers, American Tea Party activists, British Europhobes, Egyptian Islamists, Dutch populists, Greek ultra-rightists, and Thai “red shirts” all have one thing in common: hatred of the status quo and contempt for their countries’ elites.
We are living in an age of populism.
The authority of conventional politicians and traditional media is slipping away fast.
Populism can be a necessary corrective when political parties grow sclerotic, mass media become too complacent (or too close to power), and bureaucracies are unresponsive to popular needs.
In a globalized world managed by bankers and technocrats, many people feel that they have no say in public affairs; they feel abandoned.
Our national politicians, increasingly powerless to cope with serious crises, are suspected, often with good reason, of simply looking after their own interests.
All we can do is vote the rascals out, sometimes by voting for candidates whom we would not take seriously in more normal times.
Italian elites are not the only ones in need of being shaken up.
But the problem with populism is that it is rarely benign. In the 1930’s, it resulted in violent movements led by dangerous men in uniform.
Today’s populists are different.
They do not, on the whole, advocate violence.
Some preach that Muslims are destroying Western civilization.
Others think that President Barack Obama is a kind of communist out to destroy America.
Two types of contemporary populist, however, stand out: the ultra-rich business tycoon and the clown.
In the Anglo-Saxon media world, Rupert Murdoch, owner of far too many newspapers, TV stations, and movie studios, is a typical populist tycoon.
But he never aspired to lead a country.
Former Italian Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi and former Thai Prime Minister Thaksin Shinawatra did – and still do.
Neither the clown nor the tycoon is well suited to being a democratic leader.
The question is which is worse.
Clowns have always played a role in politics.
Medieval court jesters were often the only ones who could speak truth to despotic kings.
Today, it is often comedians who claim to speak truth to power – and to the public.
In America, liberals turn for political commentary to television comedians like Jon Stewart and Stephen Colbert, who are now more trusted than traditional news broadcasters.
And clownish right-wing radio talk-show hosts now have more influence on many conservative American voters than the sober journalists of the mainstream media do.
A few years ago, a clown named Brozo, with a large red nose and a bright green wig, was Mexico’s most popular political commentator on television, actively courted by all candidates running for national office.
In 1980, the French clown Coluche actually dropped out of the presidential race when one newspaper put his popular support at 16%, causing him to fear that he might influence the result too much.
The prototype of modern European populism was the flamboyant Dutch political showman Pim Fortuyn, who was assassinated in 2002 by a fanatical vegan.
Fortuyn’s outrageousness was deliberately provocative and always entertaining.
His rants against the elites were often confused, but he was funny, which made the old elite politicians look like stuffy old bores – which many of them were.
And now Italy has Beppe Grillo, whose success in the country’s recent election makes him the first professional comedian to lead a major political party in Europe.
The thing about clowns, though, is that few have any aspirations to rule their countries.
Before his death, Fortuyn is said to have been terrified of the prospect of becoming Prime Minister.
And Grillo cannot even aspire to the job in Italy because of his criminal record.
Clowns mostly seek to provoke, and this can be healthy.
They are less likely than members of the professional political class to allow political calculations to influence their views.
And, sometimes, they actually say things that are uncomfortable but true, and that need to be said.
Political business tycoons, on the other hand, have different ambitions.
They attack the old elites not to shake things up, but to take their power.
Promising to spread the riches that they have made for themselves, they exploit the fantasies of those of us who have little and want more.
Berlusconi understood the dreams of many Italians very well.
His extravagance, clownishness, and even his girls were part of his popular appeal.
In Thailand, the self-made ethnic-Chinese media billionaire Thaksin Shinawatra was especially admired by the rural poor.
Like a beneficent king, he would give them money, and promised to challenge the old elites in Bangkok – the bankers, generals, judges, and even the courtiers surrounding the Thai king.
But tycoons are not natural democrats.
Their main interest is in their own business.
And they do not hesitate to undermine an independent press or judiciary when their business interests are threatened.
Even though his sister, Yingluck Shinawatra, is now in power, Thaksin is still trying to evade trial in Thai courts on a wide array of financial charges.
As it happens, Thaksin was overthrown in 2006 by a military coup that was largely backed by the Bangkok elites.
Berlusconi was replaced by a government run by elite technocrats, whose policies had to be approved by European bankers and European Union bureaucrats.
Neither of these responses to populism is likely to boost democracy.
On the contrary, they make things worse.
What is needed is mainstream politicians who understand and respond to what is fueling popular rage.
Paying attention to some of what the clowns are saying might be a good first step.
Why Don’t We Trust Our Leaders?
OXFORD – In developed democracies today, political leadership is increasingly up for grabs.