Reagan's defeat of the Air Traffic Controllers' strike in 1981 was a watershed event for the US labor movement - and for the stock market, which started its dramatic bull market in 1982.
The US government has been particularly aggressive in supporting the stock market since the peak of the equities price bubble in 2000, most notably cutting interest rates repeatedly.
Of course, this was publicly justified in terms of stimulating the economy, not supporting the stock market. But it is a telling sign of the US stock market's significance that one of the most important factors perceived to be weighing on the economy was declining equity prices.
Indeed, the authorities' response was not limited to monetary stimulus.
The US National Income and Product Accounts show that the effective rate of corporate profits tax (the percentage of profits actually paid to the government in taxes) crested at 33.7% in the first quarter of 2000 - the peak of the stock market and the economy in general - and fell to 20.2% in the fourth quarter of 2003, when the market was down.
Much of that decline reflects explicit tax relief measures voted by Congress, as well as the perception among corporations that in the current economic and political environment they can be more aggressive in tax avoidance.
Moreover, after the stock market crash, the maximum tax on dividends paid on stocks was slashed from 35% to 15%, giving a substantial new advantage to long-term investors and boosting the compounding effect of reinvesting after-tax dividends.
Again, this tax cut was justified in terms of stimulating the economy, which can, of course, be said of practically any measure aimed at supporting the stock market. But it is the balance of political forces that determines whether such a justification will be credible.
One might say that the same variables, including hostility to high taxes and a weak labor movement, have operated in the US for the past 200 years - and can thus be expected to continue operating in the future, producing high stock market returns and attracting huge inflows of foreign investment.
Those who believe that investments in the US stock market will maintain the same strong growth trend for decades may well be right.
But one should be clear about what one is forecasting.
Essentially, one is forecasting not just economics, but politics - and even the cultural values - that shape economic policies and performance.
The Human Thatcher
LONDON – It is difficult to separate some of my personal memories of Margaret Thatcher – mundane but revealing – from the sweeping judgments of history.
I had worked for her as the Conservative Party’s research director, and as a minister for about 15 years, before going to Hong Kong as Britain’s last Governor there.
Because she had negotiated Hong Kong’s handover to China, she was a frequent and welcome visitor during my tenure.&#160;
Thatcher was always hugely supportive of the preservation of Hong Kong’s rule of law, civil liberties, and democratic aspirations.
She sympathized with, and appeared to like, pro-democracy campaigners.
I also remember that, while our official residence was full of excellent, hardworking staff (to whom she was always kind and courteous), she was the only visitor – and there were many – who made her own bed!
The job was done with all the care and precision of a grand hotel: boxed corners and neatly turned-down cover.
Invariably, when she traveled on business to Beijing, she would insist on first shopping for a present for the former Chinese leader, Zhao Ziyang, with whom she had negotiated Hong Kong’s handover.
Since the Tiananmen killings, which he had tried to avert through compromise, he had been under house arrest.
By asking whichever senior officials she saw to pass on her gift and her best wishes to Zhao, the Chinese leadership would understand that the outside world was still thinking of him and wanted to ensure his survival.
It was typically practical and kind.
As a national leader, Thatcher’s principal achievements were to reverse Britain’s decline, which had gained momentum in the 1970’s, before her first term as Prime Minister in 1979.
Little of the extensive coverage of her death has focused on what Britain was like in those years.
The economy was on its knees, and the abuse of trade-union power had made Britain almost ungovernable.
Paradoxically, she made accountable and authoritative government possible again partly by curtailing the state’s role in the economy.
Her reforms laid the foundations for a period during which Britain’s per capita wealth grew faster than most of its competitors’.
Thatcher’s reforms reinvigorated the private sector, promoted home ownership, lowered taxes on enterprise, deregulated large parts of the economy, and reined in the unions’ power to use their industrial muscle.
She set about this reform program with determination, but – at least until her last years – with subtle pragmatism as well.
She moved step by step, invariably in the same direction.
No one in government would be in any doubt about what she wanted to do.
The reforms that she undertook struck a chord internationally.
Her period in office coincided with the crumbling of Soviet communism in Europe, which culminated with the fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989.
She had been an outspoken critic of Soviet communism, like her transatlantic friend and partner, Ronald Reagan.
Her espousal of free markets – indeed, her ringing declarations about the link between political and economic freedom – inspired the Soviet bloc’s peoples, who had suffered under the Soviet yoke for 40 years.
While her antipathy to German reunification was ill-judged, her doubts about the ability to reconcile greater political integration in the European Union with democratic accountability in its member states has gained many more sympathizers over the years – and not only in her own country.
She pushed for greater integration of the European single market, while questioning whether this really required ceding more political authority to the European Commission.
Many consider the Falklands War in 1982 as the apogee of her patriotism.
It was just as much a sign of her political bravado.&#160;
The recovery of this far-flung British dependency, whose citizens were resolutely committed to remaining British subjects after the Argentine invasion, was a daring military act.
It could have gone terribly wrong, bringing down her and her administration.
Even the Reagan administration came close to balking at supporting Britain’s military campaign.
But fortune favored the brave, and victory solidified her reputation for decisiveness and raw courage.
As Britain’s taxi drivers liked to say, she was the best man in the government.
Thatcher’s confidence in the strength of Britain’s relationship with the United States was underpinned by her friendship with Reagan.
They were very different characters who shared a similar philosophy, albeit expressed with more charm by a president who much admired her directness and her simple, even blunt assertions of the old verities.
“Isn’t she wonderful,” he is reported to have said to an aide, one hand over the telephone, as she scolded him from London for some US policy error.
It was a sentiment shared by many Americans who went to hear her lecture after her retirement.
I most admired Thatcher for her political style.
She never required a focus group to tell her what she believed or how to express it.
She regarded ideas as the very core of politics, and she battled for those that she held.
She did not “triangulate” in an effort to find the middle point between opposing views; she deplored the idea that the middle ground of politics, where most voters dwell, was pre-determined by a&#160;wishy-washy elite consensus.&#160; An effective leader, she believed, could shift this political terrain by convincing people of the truth and relevance of his or her position.
Thatcher was often more careful than her admirers have subsequently suggested in the way she set about doing this.
But, ultimately, her passion for the ideas to which she was devoted splashed bright colors across a political world usually painted in shades of grey.
Margaret Thatcher was not perfect.
Like everyone else, she made mistakes and got some things wrong.
But she was undoubtedly a giant of twentieth-century politics, a leader who changed her and our world – for the better.
The Asian Tigers of Nationalism
DENVER – Among the many arguments that former Serbian President Slobodan Milošević used to make to his interlocutors was that he never incited nationalism among his people.
Indeed, his public statements and speeches during those turbulent times were carefully calibrated to avoid any outright exhortation to nationalism.
But it was not so much the words that he used as it was the music.
With his crafty use of code words and body language to encourage a sense of victimhood among Serbs, Milošević was one of the most demagogic nationalists Europe had seen in generations.
Today, East Asia – especially China – is awash in a sea of nationalism.
The patterns of this age-old scourge are familiar, featuring national narratives based on a supposed record of victimization.
In China’s case, the narrative revolves around “the century of shame,” when China was too weak to defend itself against encroachments on its sovereignty, and the idea that it should never have to succumb again.
Among Japanese nationalist groups, the narrative is one of frustration with the wartime Allies’ version of history; almost 70 years – and billions of dollars in reparations and foreign assistance – later, Japan would like to move on.
“We are done apologizing,” Liberal Democratic Party leader Shinzo Abe has said.
Whether this outbreak of nationalism will end soon depends on the willingness of governments in the region – not just China’s – to take a stand and appeal to their publics to cease and desist.
These governments need to engage in a more honest dialogue with their citizens.
While historical frustration often shapes the narratives that fuel nationalism, there are clearly deeper and more powerful forces at work.
One of Japan’s persistent problems in recent years has been growing disenchantment with the political class and its inability to articulate a vision for the country’s future.
Many young Japanese are alienated from their country’s politics.
Although this is hardly an exclusively Japanese phenomenon, the narrowness of the political elite has made the problem more acute than elsewhere.
Japan is rapidly becoming one of the world’s oldest nations.
Having already passed its population peak, it will, in the continued absence of significant immigration, begin an increasingly rapid slide down the demographic curve, becoming a country that is much smaller than it is today.
And China has been a major source of angst for Japan, because, historically, there has seldom been a time when both countries could be strong.
Thus, in the hierarchical understanding of power that prevails in East Asia, if China is up, Japan surely must be down.
But Japan remains one of the world’s most culturally sophisticated societies.
And, just as the British made the transition from “Rule Britannia” to “Cool Britannia,” Japan, too, can engage in an internal process to define better its identity as a vibrant modern culture in the context of globalization.
Japanese culture has global reach, and much to be proud of, besides a desultory and unproductive debate about victimization and rock-strewn islands.
The problem in China is more serious.
China is moving toward another leadership transition, relatively calm by the standards of other powers, where elections sometimes take on the characteristics of political warfare.
China’s political rivalries do not play out in televised national debates; rather, they play out in the shadows, leaving the public to guess what the country’s leadership has in store.
As China’s economy slows, the public stirs, and its confidence in nonelected leaders wanes.
While some of the criticism calls for more openness and accountability in government, much of it is less inspiring to the rest of us.
The critics ask – often in pointed terms – what the government is doing to safeguard the country’s economic interests.
In democratic countries, such critics would group themselves into some kind of political movement, ultimately creating an opposition party that, through the dialectical process of democracy, would influence policymaking by the party in power.
China, however, lacks the institutional framework needed to channel this sentiment into the political process.
This does not mean that opposition disappears, much less moderates itself; rather, it simmers and incubates – and gathers strength.
Meanwhile, the Chinese Communist Party has no intention of ceding economic nationalism to an Internet-based proto-opposition.
After all, rapid economic growth lies at the heart of the CCP’s raison d’état, so it embraces economic nationalism, whether in disputes with Japan, the Southeast Asian countries, or the United States.
China needs to rein in these processes.
However it is done (which is for the Chinese to figure out), China has no choice but to embrace a world order based on stable relationships among countries – including its own neighbors.
Indeed, whether nationalists like it or not, this is the future that China has, in effect, already chosen.
China’s leaders need to stand up and articulate more clearly to the country’s restive public this vision of membership in an interdependent world.
Regardless of whether it charts a course toward a brighter or darker future, a country’s political leadership by definition plays the central role at the helm.
Leaders of both China and Japan need to accept their position in this process and, above all, not simply ride on the froth of current events.
The Politics of Anger
CAMBRIDGE – Perhaps the only surprising thing about the populist backlash that has overwhelmed the politics of many advanced democracies is that it has taken so long.
Even two decades ago, it was easy to predict that mainstream politicians’ unwillingness to offer remedies for the insecurities and inequalities of our hyper-globalized age would create political space for demagogues with easy solutions.
Back then, it was Ross Perot and Patrick Buchanan; today it is Donald Trump, Marine Le Pen, and sundry others.
History never quite repeats itself, but its lessons are important nonetheless.
We should recall that the first era of globalization, which reached its peak in the decades before World War I, eventually produced an even more severe political backlash.
The historical evidence has been well summarized by my Harvard colleague Jeffry Frieden.
In the heyday of the gold standard, Frieden argues, mainstream political actors had to downplay social reform and national identity because they gave priority to international economic ties.
The response took one of two fatal forms in the interwar period: Socialists and communists chose social reform, while fascists chose national assertion.
Both paths led away from globalization to economic closure (and far worse).
Today’s backlash most likely will not go quite so far.
As costly as they have been, the dislocations of the great recession and the euro crisis pale in significance compared to those of the Great Depression.
Advanced democracies have built – and retain (despite recent setbacks) – extensive social safety nets in the form of unemployment insurance, retirement pensions, and family benefits.
The world economy now has functional international institutions – such as the International Monetary Fund and the World Trade Organization (WTO) – that it lacked prior to the Second World War.
Last but not least, extremist political movements such as fascism and communism have been largely discredited.
Still, the conflicts between a hyper-globalized economy and social cohesion are real, and mainstream political elites ignore them at their peril.
As I argued in my 1997 book Has Globalization Gone Too Far?, the internationalization of markets for goods, services, and capital drives a wedge between the cosmopolitan, professional, skilled groups that are able to take advantage of it and the rest of society.
Two types of political cleavage are exacerbated in the process: an identity cleavage, revolving around nationhood, ethnicity, or religion, and an income cleavage, revolving around social class.
Populists derive their appeal from one or the other of these cleavages.
Right-wing populists such as Trump engage in identity politics.
Left-wing populists such as Bernie Sanders emphasize the gulf between the rich and the poor.
In both cases, there is a clear “other” toward which anger can be directed.
You can barely make ends meet?
It is the Chinese who have been stealing your jobs.
Upset by crime?
It is the Mexicans and other immigrants who bring their gang warfare into the country.
Terrorism?
Why, Muslims, of course.
Political corruption?
What do you expect when the big banks are bankrolling our political system?
Unlike mainstream political elites, populists can easily point to the culprits responsible for the masses’ ills.
Of course, establishment politicians are compromised because they have been at the helm all this time.
But they are also immobilized by their central narrative, which smacks of inaction and helplessness.
This narrative puts the blame for stagnant wages and rising inequality on technological forces beyond our control.
It treats globalization and the rules that sustain it as inexorable and inevitable.
The remedy it offers, investment in education and skills, promises few immediate rewards and would bear fruit years from now, at best.
In reality, today’s world economy is the product of explicit decisions that governments have made in the past.
It was a choice not to stop at the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) and to build the much more ambitious – and intrusive – WTO.
Similarly, it will be a choice whether to ratify future mega-trade deals such as the Trans-Pacific Partnership and the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership.
It was the choice of governments to loosen regulations on finance and aim for full cross-border capital mobility, just as it was a choice to maintain these policies largely intact, despite a massive global financial crisis.
And, as Anthony Atkinson reminds us in his masterful book on inequality, even technological change is not immune from government agency: There is much that policymakers can do to influence the direction of technological change and ensure that it leads to higher employment and greater equity.
The appeal of populists is that they give voice to the anger of the excluded.
They offer a grand narrative as well as concrete, if misleading and often dangerous, solutions.
Mainstream politicians will not regain lost ground until they, too, offer serious solutions that provide room for hope.
They should no longer hide behind technology or unstoppable globalization, and they must be willing to be bold and entertain large-scale reforms in the way the domestic and global economy are run.
If one lesson of history is the danger of globalization running amok, another is the malleability of capitalism.
It was the New Deal, the welfare state, and controlled globalization (under the Bretton Woods regime) that eventually gave market-oriented societies a new lease on life and produced the post-war boom.
It was not tinkering and minor modification of existing policies that produced these achievements, but radical institutional engineering.
Moderate politicians, take note.
The Politics of Anger Management
DENVER – Shortly after John Roberts, the conservative United States Supreme Court Chief Justice, sided with the Court’s four liberal justices to uphold President Barack Obama’s major health-care reform, he joked that he was leaving the country for the “impregnable island fortress” of Malta.
Roberts was referring not so much to the mainstream media’s speculation about the reasons for his surprise vote, but rather to the fury and thirst for retribution among conservative bloggers and pundits.
Indeed, “traitor” was one of their common epithets, as were “coward” and “sellout.”
Real-estate mogul Donald Trump, with his customary charm, thought it appropriate to refer to the brilliant and scholarly Roberts as a “dummy.”
The apoplectic rage that followed the Supreme Court’s decision on Obama’s health-care legislation is becoming routine in America’s public discourse, and it is a bipartisan malady.
Though it may have started on the left – in response to Richard Nixon, Ronald Reagan, and George W. Bush – it has become increasingly a right-wing phenomenon.
Radio personalities like Rush Limbaugh and Glenn Beck (who recently signed a $100 million deal to spew more hatred on the airwaves) dwarf liberal commentators in audience size.
The age of information and communications has given way to an age of anger.
Of course, this is not the first time that anger and fear have ruled US public discourse: Father Charles Coughlin’s toxic radio broadcasts in the 1930’s paved the way for today’s stars, who would feel similarly at home during the Red Scare of the 1920’s or the McCarthy era in the early 1950’s.
But this contemporary ugly mood, unlike those times, seems to be independent of the real threats that America faces in the world: a weak global economy, terrorism, failed states, and protracted wars, to name a few.
Americans have been angry for some time now, and their ire shows no sign of abating.
This sentiment is perhaps most obvious – and damaging – in foreign policy, where the choices facing officials are seldom obvious or risk-free.
For example, the bloody conflict in Syria is fraught with challenges and unforeseen consequences.
But such realities are lost on bloggers who blithely hold forth on what they claim are patently obvious solutions – and on the stupidity, cynicism, or insanity of leaders who fail to implement them.
Officials have an obligation to look beyond the current news cycle, and especially to understand that policy aimed at Syria, for example, engages policy toward Russia, Iraq, Lebanon, Egypt, and Israel.
As a result, it is profoundly difficult to develop policies that enjoy support at every excruciating phase of their implementation.
Wise policy is not always popular (a cliché that happens to be true).
Instant access to information does not mean instant access to knowledge, much less wisdom.
One aspect of knowledge, as we know from nineteenth-century philosophy (and who studies that anymore?), reflects the integration of information with experience.
Today, information is integrated with emotion – and with suspicion, sometimes bordering on paranoia, about the underlying motives of the leadership classes.
Compare this behavior to that of people who have truly suffered at the hands of political leaders – for example, South Africa’s Nelson Mandela, Burma’s Aung San Suu Kyi, or Poland’s Adam Michnik – and who managed to conduct respectful dialogue with their tormentors.
Their tolerance, one suspects, would not have been diminished had they had access to the Internet during their incarceration.
Nevertheless, technology does seem to be playing a central role in facilitating anger.
Establishing a blog, downloading photos, and creating catchy, sarcasm-drenched captions is not a particularly challenging activity.
(Fortunately, making a living from it is another matter!)
Mainstream media (whatever that expression means anymore) woo viewers by enabling them to “sound off” at the press of a button.
As anyone who has read a thoughtful article or news story can attest, bitter, vituperative responses usually follow.
Have these unhappy legions somehow always been there, waiting only for a button to push to register their views?
Clearly, there is something more going on than just an increase in clickable menu options.
One fundamental issue seems to be dwindling respect for established institutions, many of which are drowning in the noise of opinion.
The editorial of the local newspaper used to carry weight.
Now it is just another view among many (and, worse, it relies on a platform whose business model is in trouble).
Digital technology has played another important role in fostering this atmosphere of bad manners, vicious personal attacks, intolerance, disrespect, and general rudeness.
Sitting in one’s basement in pajamas, spewing out venom on a keyboard like a Batman movie villain who was poorly treated in a past life, one is at a safe distance from one’s target.
Bullying has gone virtual.
Indeed, perhaps the most damaging aspect of all of our wonderful technology is that it enables us to live blissfully apart from those with whom we disagree.
Our access to news can be tailored to our preconceived opinions.
Even where people live seems to be having an effect.
The proliferation of gated communities across America has increased the odds that people will live only with those who vote the same way.
The age of anger will end when Americans decide that they have had enough.
For starters, they could make a mid-summer resolution to buck the trend.
They might, for example, resist the Internet algorithm that suggests which book to buy or film to rent, based on what they read or watched previously.
And they might begin to re-learn the useful democratic art of respectful debate with those who happen to hold views different from their own.
The Politics of Cosmic Catastrophe
WASHINGTON, DC – One weighty decision that the world will need to make in 2010 is whether to support an idea raised by Anatoly Perminov, the head of the Russian space agency Roscosmos, to launch an unmanned mission to redirect a large asteroid that might collide with Earth after 2030.
At more than 360 meters in diameter, the asteroid, Apophis, is a dozen times larger than the Tunguska space object (presumably a meteorite or comet) that devastated a large part of eastern Siberia a century ago.
As far as can be determined, that object detonated on June 30, 1908, with the power of a nuclear weapon, felling 80 million trees over a 2,000-square-kilometer area. 
According to NASA, if Apophis hit the Earth, it could release more than 100,000 times the energy of the Tunguska event.
Thousands of square kilometers could vaporize in the blast, but the whole Earth would suffer from the loss of sunlight and other effects of the dust released into the atmosphere.
This danger explains why a Russian analyst has called Apophis a “space terrorist.”
Current projections are that Apophis, which was discovered in 2004, will orbit near the earth several times between 2029 and 2036.
In October 2009, near-Earth object (NEO) trackers Steve Chesley and Paul Chodas of NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, placed the odds of Apophis striking Earth in 2036 at about one in 233,000, lower than previous estimates.
But their forecast that it would come within 30,000 kilometers of our planet in 2029 (closer than some geostationary communications satellites, as well as the Moon) is more likely to please astronomers than international security experts.
Some unknown comet or other space object could fly near enough to the asteroid in the next few decades to change its predicted path, perhaps in a way that redirected it toward Earth.
According to Perminov, the proposals that Roscosmos is considering do not envision trying to destroy the asteroid, but rather to use the laws of physics to change its path.
He says that if Roscosmos’s management decided to act, it would work with experts from Europe, the United States, China, and other space powers to decide how best to proceed.
Scientists have proposed various ways to deflect an asteroid away from the Earth.
Some have suggested placing a large object nearby to change its trajectory through mutual gravitational attraction.
Another method is to use mirrors, light, or painted colors to change the way the asteroid absorbs heat, which could also shift its direction.
Attaching “solar sails” to the asteroid could cause the Sun’s particles to steer it along a different course.
Others have suggested ramming a spacecraft or other object into the asteroid to alter its momentum.
A few scientists, and many science-fiction writers, have also speculated about using nuclear weapons to destroy or damage an asteroid, comet, meteor, or alien spacecraft heading toward the earth.
The Outer Space Treaty bans placing nuclear weapons in orbit, on celestial bodies, or stationing “such weapons in outer space in any other manner,” but may be interpreted to permit their one-time use.
It also could be amended, or the states “attacking” the asteroid could withdraw from the agreement by giving one year’s notice.
The more practical problem is that even a nuclear explosion might not prove sufficiently powerful.
Even if the nuclear warhead broke the asteroid into many small pieces, they could have time to re-combine into another large object.
In addition, the space vehicle carrying the weapon might malfunction, and the nuclear warhead could land (and perhaps detonate) somewhere on Earth.
The safest approach might be to test several techniques on nearby asteroids before using them against Apophis when it approaches Earth.
Unfortunately, it is estimated that “attacking” an asteroid would cost billions of dollars, especially since multiple space launches would likely be needed to ensure that the required number of probes could complete the mission.
This raises the issue of who should pay for such a mission and, more fundamentally, who can authorize it.
These global governance questions also apply to other worldwide threats, such as climate change, that threaten humanity’s survival.
In 2008, a report by space experts called for the United Nations Security Council to make the final decision about how to counter potential threats from near-Earth objects.
The Security Council normally votes on issues that threaten international peace and security, but this method would allow only a small number of governments to decide Earth’s fate.
Perminov similarly seemed to suggest that only countries with large existing space programs could participate in the Apophis decision.
Since an asteroid collision could, like global climate change, affect all of humanity, should not everyone have some say in the decision?
Perhaps every country should vote in the UN General Assembly on how to proceed; the option receiving the most votes – with a possible mandatory minimum requirement, such as requiring an alternative to win a majority or some higher number of votes – would prevail.
Another option would be to allow every adult to vote directly in a global referendum for his or her preferred option.
An interesting issue would arise if some countries wanted to act, but others did not.
Would Russia or a coalition of willing countries have the right to attempt to alter Apophis’ orbit without the approval of other states?
What are the rights and duties of scientists and governments who consider the risks to be graver than their counterparts in other countries do?
Are they precluded from acting without unanimity?
Perminov’s proposal has raised important questions – both scientific and political.
Whatever the danger posed by Apophis, we would do well to begin addressing them.
The Politics of Frustration
Does extreme poverty breed violence and ultimately revolution?
Many people believe that it does, and seek to explain phenomena ranging from guerrilla insurgencies to Islamist terrorism accordingly.
But Karl Marx and Alexis de Tocqueville, the two great social analysts of the nineteenth century, knew better what makes people tick, and what makes societies change.
Extreme poverty breeds apathy, not rebellion.
The very poor can at most be used for occasional demonstrations of anger, but they are not the stuff from which either terrorists or revolutionaries are made.
A far more critical group in any society are those who have begun to move forward to new conditions, but then find their path blocked.
Their desires and ambitions are not unrealistic in the circumstances, but they are frustrated.
Things do not move as fast as they want them to, or not at all, owing to conditions that they do not control.
Opportunities exist, but they cannot be seized or realized.
This group, not the desperately poor and helpless, forms the great mobilizing force of violent protest, and ultimately of major change.
The politics of frustration has been particularly apparent in the postcommunist world during the last fifteen years.
The heavy hand of nomenklatura rule was gone, and the vision of a new life like that in the open societies of the West seemed real.
Yet, in fact, things initially got worse.
The route to prosperity and freedom was not straightforward.
On the contrary, it led through a valley of tears.
People reacted in a variety of ways.
Those who had the chance migrated, first to their homeland’s centers of economic progress, then abroad, to countries and places where the new world could be found immediately.
Those who stayed behind began to vote in strange ways – electing, for example, the successors of the old Communist parties that they had been glad to get rid of only a few years before.
The European Union, for all its weaknesses, has helped the postcommunist countries of Eastern and Southeastern Europe immensely.
It made the valley of tears bearable both by offering financial and other assistance and by holding out the promise of membership and economic prosperity in the near future.
Equally important, had the EU not supported the creation of an administrative and social infrastructure of liberty, there might well have been a more serious communist or even fascist backlash in Poland, Hungary, and elsewhere.
While the politics of frustration was thus controlled in the postcommunist world, it broke out with a vengeance in the Islamic world.
Here, too, the phenomenon was not new.
With the onset of modernization, millions of people were uprooted from their traditional communities and ways of life.
Young men, in particular, saw the prospect of a life more like that presented to them by Western television.
But they soon discovered that realizing this prospect would require a longer and more arduous journey than they had anticipated.
In fact, it would take at least a generation, during which much of the effort of modern life would have to be made, while the fruits of this effort would remain elusive.
Earlier generations may have borne the burden of working and waiting more readily, but nowadays people want results here and now.
If the benefits do not come quickly – and for most people they do not – they get restless.
The massive migration processes that have only just begun will be the major issue of the coming decades.
Particularly in Africa, migration will be almost the only quick route to modernization.
Those who do not manage to get to other countries, or who fail in the countries to which they have migrated, are in a quandary.
For them, the old world of traditional ties and customs is gone, but the new world of modernity remains out of reach.
They are lost in a limbo of uncertainty and disappointment.
It has been argued that this was one of the problems of “belated nations” like Germany a hundred years ago.
Seductive leaders (Hitler among them) exploited the resulting sense of frustration.
Whatever the value of such theories, it is evident that the frustration of young people’s ambitions in modernizing countries makes them the object of preachers of hate and tempts them to leave the course of plodding progress and turn to more dramatic action.
What we call “terrorism” has many causes, and one must beware of facile explanations.
However, the politics of frustration, of ambitions raised and then thwarted, is clearly one such cause.
It is thus also a challenge to those of us living in more fortunate circumstances.
If we do not wish to be submerged in violence and authoritarian responses to it, international institutions must do for the modernizing world what the EU has managed to do for the postcommunist countries.
For the world’s democracies, there is no greater or more important task.
Why Are the Wealthier Healthier?
DURHAM – In 1842, the English social reformer Edwin Chadwick documented a 30-year discrepancy between the life expectancy of men in the poorest social classes and that of the gentry.
Today, people in the most affluent areas of the United Kingdom, such as Kensington and Chelsea, can expect to live 14 years longer than those in the poorest cities, such as Glasgow.
Such inequalities exist, to varying degrees, in all developed countries.
Poorer groups fare particularly badly in the neo-liberal system of the United States; gaps in life expectancy in some US cities, such as New Orleans, are as large as 25 years.
Understanding and reducing these health inequalities remains a major public-policy challenge worldwide.
It is not only a moral issue; health inequalities carry significant economic costs.
But the causes of such inequalities are complex and contested, and the solutions are elusive.
The prevailing explanation for health inequalities is rooted in the social determinants of health – that is, the environments in which people work and live.
Affluent people have better access to health-promoting environments, such as well-maintained schools that offer a good education, high-quality housing, and stable jobs in secure, safe settings.
The poorer you are, the more exposed you are likely to be to health-damaging environments.
Various theories draw on this basic framework – and each competing explanation suggests different strategies for reducing health inequalities.
For example, the “cultural-behavioral” approach explains health inequalities in terms of differences in individual behaviors, asserting that poorer people have worse health outcomes, owing to a higher propensity to smoke, drink alcohol, and eat less healthy foods.
This view naturally underpins interventions like targeted smoking-cessation services or health-education initiatives.
The “materialist” approach takes a broader view, arguing that people with more money can essentially purchase better health through superior education, health care, and social services.
Accordingly, countries can reduce health inequalities by introducing higher minimum incomes for their poorest citizens and guaranteeing universal access to public services.
By contrast, “psychosocial” theories suggest that it is the psychological experience of inequality – the feelings of inferiority or superiority generated by social hierarchies – that matters.
This view implies that the poorest individuals and communities need to feel productive, valued, and empowered to take control of their own lives, rather than feel trapped in a subordinate position.
The “life course” approach combines multiple theories to contend that the unequal accumulation of social, psychological, and biological advantages or disadvantages over time, beginning in utero, produces health inequalities.
It demands early intervention to put children on a positive health path, together with an adequate social safety net throughout citizens’ lives.
The most encompassing view is that of the “political-economy” school, which argues that health inequalities are determined by capitalist economies’ hierarchical structure and the associated political choices about resource distribution.
This analysis calls for the most radical action: to develop an economic and social system in which resources, particularly wealth and power, are more evenly distributed.
Given that all of these theories can, to some extent, be supported by scientific evidence, politics can matter more than science in determining which strategies policymakers pursue to reduce health inequalities.
After all, some potential solutions are politically easier to implement within existing systems than others.
For example, interventions aimed at changing individual behavior are far less challenging to prevailing power structures than those that demand extensive social investment or revitalization of the entire system.
Thus, governments interested in closing the health gap – such as the British Labour government in 1997-2010 – usually end up pursuing such relatively painless “downstream” interventions.
But this approach has proved to be only partly successful in reducing health inequalities, leaving little doubt that more comprehensive measures are needed.
Indeed, most of the health gains over the nineteenth and twentieth centuries were brought about by far-reaching economic, political, and social reforms.
Ultimately, more equal societies have better health outcomes.
While even the most egalitarian developed countries have health inequalities, all of their citizens are better off and live longer.
The poorest and most vulnerable groups in social-democratic countries like Sweden and Norway are far healthier and live longer than their counterparts in neo-liberal countries such as the UK or the US.
These more egalitarian countries have also achieved comparatively stable, inclusive economic growth and a high standard of living.
So, if assessed from a neutral standpoint, social democracy is clearly the better choice for all.
The Politics of Revolutionary Surprise
DURHAM – In setting himself ablaze following a humiliating encounter with the police, the university-educated Tunisian vegetable seller Mohamed Bouazizi triggered a wave of protests across the Arab world.
Several Arab dictators who had held power for decades have already been ousted or forced to announce that they will retire.
But protesters in Cairo, Tunis, and Sana want much more.
They also seek efficient governance, economic reforms to stimulate growth, the ouster of collaborators, democratic rights, freedom of religion (and perhaps also from religion) – in short, a comprehensive social transformation.
Everywhere, incumbent regimes have mounted resistance. The unforgettable scene of camel- and horse-riding Mubarak supporters beating tech-savvy Egyptian protesters signals that the old order will not yield without a fight.
The revolts themselves caught seasoned observers, even Arab leaders, off guard.
Had the United States known what lay ahead, Secretary of State Hillary Clinton would not have remarked, after demonstrations broke out in Egypt, that the Egyptian government was “stable.”
Arab leaders now showering their key constituencies with pay raises and food subsidies would have done so earlier, thus avoiding the impression of vulnerability.
Longtime regime opponents, too, were caught off guard.
For days after Egypt erupted, the Muslim Brotherhood did not know how to react, making it seem out of touch with the “Arab street.”
For decades, most Arabs, however unhappy, kept their political grievances private, for fear of persecution if they turned against their leaders publicly.
Through private discussions with trusted friends, everyone sensed that discontent was common, yet no one knew, or could know, the extent of it.
Even harder to gauge was what it would take for the disaffected to say “enough is enough” and begin challenging their regime openly, defiantly, and in concert.
If a sufficient number of Arabs reached that threshold at the right time, the long-docile Arab street would explode in anger, with each group of new protesters encouraging more to join in, giving people elsewhere in the Arab world the courage to initiate protests of their own.
That much was understood widely by entrenched Arab dictators, who saw to it that their intelligence and security corps extinguished any flame before it could spread.
History will record that the match Bouazizi lit on December 17, 2010, became the fortuitous spark that ignited an Arab prairie fire.
The fire spread so fast that by the time Arab leaders understood what it would consume, it was beyond anyone’s control, and in more than one country.
The overthrown Tunisian dictator must now regret that his security forces did not arrest Bouazizi and lock him up, rather than allow his public self-immolation.
As it turned out, by the time the seriousness of the rebellion became clear, fear was already changing sides even within the halls of Tunisian power.
President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali’s aides had started worrying more about being caught on the wrong side of Tunisian history than about facing the wrath of their beleaguered boss.
Fissures within the Egyptian regime suggest that in Hosni Mubarak’s entourage, too, fear is in flux.
The mechanisms underlying this political unpredictability are not unique to the Arab world.
Unforeseen uprisings are possible wherever repression keeps people from expressing their political preferences openly.
In 1989, the fall of repressive East European regimes in quick succession stunned the world, including dissidents who had long recognized communism’s vulnerabilities.
Just before the Iranian Revolution of 1979, a CIA report characterized the Iranian monarchy as an “island of stability.”
A month before the Russian Revolution of February 1917, Lenin predicted that his country’s great explosion lay in the distant future.
All of these cases involved the mushrooming of public protest by long-quiescent constituencies with no prior record of coordinated action.
The aftermath of an unanticipated revolution will itself present surprises.
In Egypt, Tunisia, and Yemen, no one knows where power will lie in the months to come.
As in Iran in 1979, demonstrators united in opposition to the old regime have wildly differing goals.
Their biggest demands – secure jobs, faster growth, low food prices – are not necessarily compatible, and they may require policies that inflict pain.
Divisions within the opposition movements are thus inevitable.
If the Arab societies now in turmoil had democratic traditions, they could be expected to find compromises peacefully, through open and honest debate.
Alas, given their histories of autocratic rule, giant leaps forward to full-blown democracy are unlikely.
Though steps toward democracy are possible, when the euphoria of the moment passes, political contenders will realize that, if only in self-defense, they must restrict their opponents’ freedoms.
Adding to the complexity of the situation are the Islamists, who have so far kept a low profile.
They themselves are divided, with preferences ranging from Sharia rule in one form or another to a “Turkish model” involving mild Islamism capable of achieving mass support through the ballot box.
Several things are certain. The Arab street has changed the calculus of fear not only in the countries that have witnessed major protests, but also in the rest of the Arab world, where rulers are on notice that discontent need not remain submerged forever.
Arab leaders old and new will implement policies designed to alleviate popular dissatisfaction.
They will consider both easing repression, in order to gain sympathy, and tightening it, in order to prevent uncontrollable protests.
But, whatever they do, they – and the rest of the world – must now expect surprises.
The Politics of Values
The debate about the American elections has still not abated.
How did President George W. Bush manage to get three million votes more than Senator John Kerry, and, in addition, to have a Republican majority elected in both houses of Congress?
There is not much agreement on the answers, but two themes recur in many explanations.
One is personality.
At a time of uncertainty and threat, people had more confidence in the president they knew than in the candidate who seemed unproven.
The second theme is values.
People voted for a set of values rather than for specific policies.
Indeed, some (it is said) agreed with Kerry’s policies but nevertheless gave their vote to Bush, because they felt “at ease” with his general attitudes.
Clearly, the United States is now deeply divided in electoral terms.
An arch of blue (Democratic) states in the East, North, and West spans a huge red (Republican) area in the middle and the South.
More than that, the divisions are reproduced at the local level.
Gerrymandering – the drawing of electoral boundaries to benefit a particular political party – is no longer necessary.
People actually tend to move to areas in which a majority of others share their values, whether Republican or Democratic.
What exactly are these values?
They have to do, or so we hear, with “god, guns, and gays.”
Religion plays a part in them, including the literal truth of the bible when it comes to the story of the creation.
The possession of a gun is the ultimate test of individualism, and using guns in wars is not abhorrent.
Gays and other “modern” practices are rejected as self-indulgent.
As the political scientist Andrew Hacker recently put it, “the Bush candidacy was framed to make a majority by giving some 60 million people a chance to feel good about themselves.”
Is all this an American phenomenon, or are there similar trends elsewhere?
One answer is that as an American phenomenon, the politics of values may command a majority now, but it is by no means general.
Europe and other parts of the world are equally divided.
Personality undoubtedly matters, and beneath overt political differences there may also be issues of values that have not yet come to the fore.
But traditional political differences based on disagreement over fundamental values play a diminishing part in elections.
For example, Prime Minister Tony Blair, the next major leader to face an election, plays the personality card and talks about policies, but he represents above all a set of middle-class values.
When he speaks of “modernization,” or of “bringing things into the twenty-first century,” he manages to suggest a strange but appealing mixture of change and stability.
This has left the Conservative opposition without an effective response.
Even questions like tax cuts and stricter asylum rules do not quite hit the value chords that the Republican Party in the US has managed to touch.
The picture is similar in Germany, where the overt influence of value politics is even smaller.
The German debate is still largely a policy debate.
When the opposition offers the government talks on health-care reform or, most recently, on combating unemployment, the underlying competition is about competence rather than values.
Yet underneath the common battlegrounds of political debate in Britain and Germany and elsewhere in Europe, value clashes are lurking. Parties fight for those who can be made “to feel good about themselves,” but they may not fully realize that this is only partly a matter of policy.
Religion is not likely to become a major factor in European politics; opinion polls show that religious observance marks one of the few major differences between Americans and Europeans.
Guns also have a different place in the European mind; it is their absence that most Europeans regard as important.
A pacifist streak of values is also unmistakable in Europe.
But the issue of political correctness (“gays”) plays a so-far underrated part in Europe as well.
Most importantly, the Europe itself divides Europeans, as the “national question” arises in each European state.
It is an issue of values, inspired by fear.
People want to know where they belong, and in the process they turn against the US and toward Europe, or against Europe and toward their country.
Either way, we leave the realms of policies, and even of politics, and enter the murky domain of symbols and myth.
This, at any rate, is the main risk that democratic countries face, for the politics of values is a dangerous development.
It reintroduces fundamental divisions in societies whose greatest democratic achievement was precisely to banish fundamentalism from politics.
Enlightened public debate must be a dispute about policies contained by a community of values.
Insisting on this is therefore a primary objective of the politics of freedom.
The Post-Nuclear Transition
BERLIN – The Fukushima disaster in March reminded the world, 25 years after Chernobyl, that nuclear energy is anything but clean, secure, and affordable.
Unfortunately, another nuclear catastrophe was needed to trigger a fresh debate on the use of nuclear power.
Germany’s decision in June to phase out nuclear power by 2022 has provoked irritation among its pro-nuclear neighbors.
Other European countries have yet to indicate whether they will follow Germany’s example; a world free from nuclear energy is hard for its supporters to imagine.
Europe’s economic and ecological future, however, depends upon the rising opposition to this high-risk technology, such as in Italy, where a recent referendum delivered a large popular majority against nuclear energy.
In Germany, the idea of a nuclear phase-out has been gaining support ever since the Chernobyl disaster.
Over the past few decades, anti-nuclear activists, together with their political representatives in the Green Party, have succeeded in mobilizing hundreds of thousands of protesters.
In 2000, growing political pressure finally led to a consensus between the German government and energy companies, which agreed to limit the life span of nuclear-power plants to 32 years.
Chancellor Angela Merkel’s coalition government withdrew from this agreement in 2010, but Fukushima forced the authorities to reconsider – and to permanently end the use of nuclear energy.
German energy policy now depends once more on the future deployment of renewable energy sources.
The Renewable Energy Sources Act, for instance, introduced in 2000 by a Social Democrat-Green government, has enabled the country to exceed all growth expectations in the alternative-energy sector, which now accounts for 20% of Germany’s total electricity consumption.
But, while Germany is now heading in the right direction, the security risks of nuclear power plants in neighboring countries, such as France and the Czech Republic, remain.
There must be a general shift in both European and global energy policies.
The current European stress tests of nuclear-power plants are a first step; but, as long as they are voluntary and under the operators’ control, they will be nothing more than political window dressing.
For example, there are no plans to test any of the 143 nuclear power plants currently operating in the European Union for core safety risks, such as a terrorist attack or a plane crash.
The economic argument for renewable energy is also compelling.
Nuclear power is an antiquated technology that requires billions of euros in subsidies; so far, German taxpayers have contributed €196 billion for this purpose.
A German government study has estimated that, between 2010 and 2050, Germany could save more than €700 billion by relying on non-nuclear renewable energy instead of nuclear power or imported fossil fuels such as coal, gas, and oil.
The expansion of renewable energy production also holds great potential for boosting economic growth.
Over the past decade, 370,000 new jobs have been created in the sector, and exports of renewable-energy technology are rising rapidly, totaling roughly €30 billion from 2006 to 2008.
At the same time, it would be short-sighted to assume that fossil fuels, especially coal, are a profitable and sustainable energy source.
First, increased reliance on fossil fuels runs contrary to the 1997 Kyoto Protocol’s targets for reducing carbon emissions, as well as to the EU’s own climate-change objectives.
Moreover, fossil-fuel costs fluctuate wildly with oil prices, and the centralized nature of nuclear and coal-fired power stations creates distribution problems.
The last decade has shown that increases in renewable-energy production actually reduce its costs.
Wind energy is now competitive with conventional power plants, while rising gas and coal prices and the steady decline in renewable-energy costs imply that, within a few years, fossil fuels will be even less attractive.
Moreover, revenues from “home-grown” energy tend to remain where they are generated, while the import bill for fossil fuels would be eliminated.
All of this can be done without having to bear the immense risk (and costs) of a nuclear catastrophe.
Indeed, the idea of a “nuclear renaissance” is a myth.
Nuclear accidents, public opposition, and high capital costs have already provoked a drastic drop in nuclear-energy investment; in the United States, no nuclear-power plant has been commissioned since the late 1970’s.
In Europe, the number of nuclear plants is declining, as old plants are decommissioned and public opinion in even traditionally pro-nuclear countries like France begins to shift: almost two-thirds of the French now believe that nuclear power stands in the way of an increase in renewable energy.
In Italy, more than 90% of voters rejected Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi’s plan for a return to nuclear-power generation, and the Japanese government recently announced that it plans to phase out nuclear energy in stages.
More needs to be done to accelerate the post-nuclear transition.
More money from the EU budget now goes to nuclear research than to non-nuclear research and development, and more infrastructure funding goes to carbon capture and storage (CCS) and conventional energy than to renewable energies.
The forthcoming negotiations on the EU’s 2014-2020 European budget are an opportunity to change direction and cut the funding for unpromising mega-projectslike the International Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor (ITER) effort in southern France.
Shifting to renewable-energy sources will require enormous effort and major infrastructure investment.
High-voltage transmission lines across the EU and storage facilities to overcome the problem of meeting basic energy demands will be crucial, as will decentralized distribution grids and higher investment in energy conservation.
Germany has taken the first step, but the transition to a fully renewable-energy-based economy must be a common European effort.
Robots on the Brain
CALGARY – When Harvey Cushing and William Bovie introduced electrocautery (which uses a high-frequency current to seal blood vessels or make incisions) in 1926, their innovation transformed neurosurgery.
Given the precision required to operate on an organ as delicate as the brain, the convergence of mechanical technologies with the art of surgery catalyzed progress in the field.
Neurosurgical advances always pursue minimalism.
As in any other surgical field, the less the procedure interferes with the body, the less likely it is to affect the patient’s quality of life adversely, and the sooner the patient will be able to return to normal activity.
This imperative is even more pronounced when it comes to sensitive neurological procedures.
Tasks like maneuvering small blood vessels that are 1-2 millimeters in diameter, or removing a brain tumor without damaging the surrounding tissue, require technologies, such as the operating microscope and multimodal imaging tools, that complement surgeons’ skills and augment their abilities.
A step further would be to allow a human-controlled robot to enter the brain.
Robots are capable of performing repetitive tasks with a higher degree of precision and accuracy than are humans, and without muscle fatigue.
And they can be upgraded periodically to integrate new features seamlessly.
What robots lack is the human brain’s executive capacity.
Given that comprehending – and reacting appropriately to – the immense number of variables that can arise during surgery would require enormous computing power, surgical robots aim to integrate human experience and decision-making ability with mechanized accuracy.
One example of this convergence is neuroArm, developed by my research team at the University of Calgary in conjunction with engineers at MacDonald, Dettwiler and Associates.
The neuroArm actually has two arms, which can hold various surgical tools while the surgeon maneuvers them from a remote workstation.
The workstation provides a multitude of data – including magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), a three-dimensional image of the surgical field, sonic information, and quantifiable haptic (or tactile) feedback from tool-tissue interaction – that enable the surgeon to experience the surgery through sight, sound, and touch.
Because the human brain makes decisions based on sensory input – and, of course, experience – such data are essential for the surgeon to make the most informed choices possible during surgery.
Technologies like MRI can help in surgical planning, resection control, and quality assurance.
Magnetic-resonance-compatible robotics allow for real-time imaging, providing information about anatomical structures and changes in the brain relative to surgical pathology while operating, thereby minimizing risk.
Given that the robot receives the MRIs and provides haptic feedback, electronic highways or surgical corridors can be established before the procedure, as can “no-go” zones.
Tool manipulation can thus occur only within the predetermined corridor, preventing unintended injury to the brain.
Furthermore, robotic surgery has the potential to progress beyond the scope of unaided human capability.
Motion scaling – which allows the robotic arms to mimic the exact movements of the surgeon’s hands, but on a much smaller scale – will enable surgeons to manipulate tissue that is too small for the naked eye to detect.
With the development of smaller microsurgical tools and high-performance cameras and monitors, operating at the cellular level will be possible.
A related area with important implications for neurosurgery is virtual reality.
Building on simulation technology, virtual reality will allow surgeons to rehearse procedures, including with surgical robots, in a digital environment.
The ability to map out complex cases and practice rare procedures before performing them on a patient will undoubtedly lead to better surgical performance and improved medical outcomes.
Virtual reality will also enhance surgical training, by providing students with a wider range of experience and enabling quantification of their performance.
Surgeons operating manually know how much force they exert only by the way it feels; a surgical simulator, by contrast, could measure that force and indicate when a trainee is applying excessive or insufficient pressure.
Moreover, instructors will be able to program controlled scenarios to assess how a trainee copes in challenging circumstances.
The ability to reset and retry surgeries without any risk or additional cost will enhance neurosurgical training significantly.
After all, practice makes perfect.
To be sure, virtual reality remains a relatively young technology.
Given that realistic neurosurgical simulations, which must account for a large number of variables and potential outcomes, are particularly difficult to develop, virtual reality is not yet being used widely in the field.
But surgical-simulation technology is advancing rapidly, bolstered by developments in parallel computing.
As these simulations become more realistic, their training value will increase.
The merging of human surgical experience with machines and computerized technologies is driving neurosurgical advancement, with robotic surgery serving as an important model of the benefits of the human-machine interface.
Add virtual reality to the equation and the future of neurosurgery takes shape – a future in which the discipline is elevated to new levels of excellence.
The Powerlessness of the Powerful
NEW YORK – Elites are under siege in every corner of the world.
“Tea Party” activists in exurban America rant and rage against the so-called liberal elites of New York, Washington, and Hollywood.
In Europe, populist demagogues, such as Geert Wilders in the Netherlands, rant and rage against the elitist “appeasers” of Islam.
In Thailand, red-shirted demonstrators from the country’s rural northeast rant and rage against the military, social, and political elites of Bangkok.
The first principle of democracy is that government must be based on popular consent, even if the government is made up of parties for which many people did not vote.
It is clear from the worldwide rage against elected governments that this consent is becoming dangerously threadbare.
More and more people in democratic countries feel unrepresented, anxious, and angry.
And they blame the elites.
The phenomenon is worldwide, but its causes differ from country to country.
American populism is not the same as Thai populism.
Culture and race play important roles in the United States – the culture of carrying guns, for example, and the discomfort at having a black, Harvard-educated president who talks like a law professor.
In Thailand, the rage stems from the perceived neglect of the rural poor by the ruling class, backed by big business, the army, and the king.
The populist billionaire and former Prime Minister, Thaksin Shinawatra, appeared to be different.
He used some of his vast wealth to shower money on rural areas.
Rural people, grateful for his largesse, voted for him twice.
Authoritarian, crude, and somewhat megalomaniacal (almost as though he were a king himself), Thaksin was a Thai version of Silvio Berlusconi.
He was removed from office in 2006, following a bloodless military coup that was supported by the Bangkok middle class, whose members took to the streets in yellow T-shirts (the color of the Thai monarchy).
Today’s ongoing pro-Thaksin red-shirt rebellion is a form of revenge.
In Europe, the power of the European Union, often-uncontrolled immigration, and economic globalization are challenging feelings of national belonging, of being represented by national governments, or of sharing national cultures.
Demagogues who denounce multiculturalism and warn of the “Islamization” of the West are exploiting the resultant fears about the loss of national identity.
The sense that globalization is creating new classes of haves and have-nots is a factor that inflames most current forms of populism, regardless of national differences.
At the same time, new technology, without which globalization would not be possible, is being used to mobilize people for populist causes, too.
The heroine of the US Tea Party movement, Sarah Palin, is as much a creature of twittering and the vast new blogosphere as she is of television and radio – perhaps more so.
Indeed, the shift of public debate from the mainstream press to the Internet has helped to break down the authority of traditional elites: newspaper editors, political columnists, academics, politicians.
In cyberspace, anyone can have his or her say.
This is more democratic, no doubt, but it has made it harder for people to sift nonsense from truth, or demagoguery from rational political debate.
The tone of populist movements, whether in Europe, Asia, or the US, would suggest that the elites are too powerful, that they dominate the little people, whose voices are drowned out by the liberals, the multiculturalists, and the city slickers.
This is a common form of populist paranoia, promoted in the US by radio talk-show hosts and Fox television, and in Europe by men like Wilders.
To some extent, the elites have themselves to blame.