And, in the absence of stability and security, the objective of the IMF’s $750 million stand-by arrangement to cover the “temporary external financing gap” and to sustain “the confidence of markets and investors” will not be met.
The challenge now is to redesign Georgia’s aid package to focus primarily on the provision of “reconstruction aid” that promotes investment and employment.
While “humanitarian aid” cannot be neglected, it should be recognized that such aid promotes consumption rather than investment, creating price distortions and work disincentives.
Georgia must be weaned from humanitarian aid as soon as the situation allows it.
Reconstruction aid to improve infrastructure, promote start-up companies, and reactivate micro- and small enterprises, services, mining, and other sectors, and to improve agricultural yields and irrigation, should start right away and should be the main focus of international aid commitments.
Laissez-faire will not do it.
Such merit is usually understood to be academic achievement, a combination of talent and training.
This is measured by academic degrees, which in turn are graded on merit: A, B, C, D, or First, Upper Second, Lower Second, Third.
Who would not wish to live in a meritocracy?
It is certainly preferable to a plutocracy, in which wealth determines status, or a gerontocracy, in which age leads one to the top, or even an aristocracy, in which what counts are inherited titles and properties.
So meritocracy seems preferable, at least at first sight.
But, on closer inspection, things are not so simple.
For many, France has long been the epitome of meritocracy.
Most of those in the top reaches of not only the civil service and the judiciary, but also politics, business, and academia used to be graduates of the famous grandes écoles .
Many then went through the rigorous training to become inspecteurs de finance , senior state officials.
Yet the French elites today are increasingly held in suspicion, and even reviled, by part of the population.
Certainly, French leaders are not immune to corruption. The uneasy relationship of money and politics has given rise to several high-profile scandals in recent years.
It is no longer clear that France’s highly educated leaders are better able to run the country’s affairs more efficiently and more honestly than others.
Japan’s meritocratically selected bureaucracy, too, faces much the same public opprobrium.
Indeed, the bureaucracy itself is often blamed for the country’s rigidity and ongoing stagnation.
In Britain, a government heading for its third term in office has said more than once that it wants the country to be “meritocratic.”
Chancellor Gordon Brown, Tony Blair’s heir apparent, is particularly eager to go down that road.
Yet it was a British social scientist (and Labour Party politician), Michael Young, who forty years ago wrote a much debated book entitled The Rise of the Meritocracy .
His was not a description of the road to the promised land, but a dystopian vision of almost Orwellian dimensions.
Meritocracy was Young’s “1984.”
Two central questions raised by Young remain topical today.
First, if academic achievement is the entry ticket to power and status, what about the rest?
What about those who do not make it to university?
How do the other 50% fare in a meritocratic world?
They are, Young argued, confined, even condemned to lower-level jobs, with no chance to rise to eminence, or even to a comfortable position of responsibility.
According to Young, those who have at least some talent will form a “pioneer corps” of plumbers and builders and other skilled workers.
Those who do not even make that grade will remain in a “home help corps” of unskilled laborers.
Young’s bleak picture bears an eerie resemblance to today’s world.
The new underclass is the other side of the meritocratic elite.
Immigrants, in particular, do not enjoy the equality of opportunity that the word “merit” suggests.
Indeed, nowadays meritocracy seems to be simply another version of the inequality that characterises all societies. It may in fact be a particularly cruel form of inequality, as those who do not succeed cannot argue that they were unlucky or kept down by those in power.
Instead, they must conclude that they personally failed, and that no amount of effort can save them.
To this must be added another feature that Young described: meritocracy means only that another ruling group closes the gates behind it once it has achieved its status.
Those who made it on “merit” now want to have everything else as well – not just power and money, but also the opportunity to determine who gets in and who stays out.
Sooner or later, Young argued, meritocratic elites cease to be open; they see to it that their children have a better chance than the offspring of the “pioneer corps” or “home help corps.”
Like all elites before them, they become firmly established – and use all available means to keep it that way.
There is no need to follow Young’s argument all the way to the eventual revolution.
There is a need, however, for a healthy skepticism towards the claims of a meritocracy based on academic achievement alone.
Such a society is not the answer to all our prayers for decency and fairness, or even for sensible and good decisions.
It is far better to remember that when it comes to leadership, many qualities other than a first-class degree come into play.
As far as institutions are concerned, we should not allow any one criterion to determine who gets to the top and who does not.
Diversity is a better guarantee of openness than even merit, and openness is the real hallmark of a liberal order.
The Rise of Drug-Resistant Tuberculosis
BALTIMORE &#45;&#45; Tuberculosis, one of the most deadly infectious diseases, is back with a vengeance, especially in Africa.
Extensively drug-resistant tuberculosis (XDR-TB) is a difficult to treat strain of TB which, attacks where health systems are historically weak, especially in areas of high HIV prevalence.
Failure to contain local outbreaks, develop tools and strategies for identifying and treating XDR-TB, and invest in longer-term improvements in TB control could transform our pharmacological magic bullets for TB into blanks.
The development of TB chemotherapy from the 1940’s through the 1970’s transformed the once deadly “white plague” into a curable disease.
But TB treatment has been shadowed by the specter of drug resistance since the dawn of the antibiotic era.  Fifteen years ago, an epidemic of multidrug-resistant tuberculosis (MDR-TB) in New York City induced near panic, before a massive infusion of funds into the public health infrastructure turned the tide in the United States, and public interest waned.
However, the problem of drug resistance has persisted, and efforts to contain it globally have not been sufficient.
Enter XDR-TB.
The World Health Organization estimates that there were 425,000 new MDR-TB cases in 2004, with China, India, and Russia accounting for just over 60%.
But it was an outbreak of XDR-TB in HIV-infected people in KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa, that turned the global spotlight on issues of extensively drug-resistant organisms.
In a study at the Church of Scotland Hospital in rural KwaZulu-Natal province of 535 patients who had confirmed tuberculosis, 221 had MDR-TB, a level 10 times greater than in the province as a whole.
More alarmingly, 53 of the 221 had a strain that was also resistant to the two most clinically useful classes of second-line TB drugs.
Fifty-two of the 53 died in a median of just 16 days from the time of sputum collection.
Molecular typing of the isolates indicated that 85% were clonally related, implying epidemic transmission of XDR strains, most likely in HIV clinics and hospital wards.
How did this localized outbreak of XDR-TB emerge?
Are similar localized outbreaks going unrecognized elsewhere?
More importantly, can XDR-TB be controlled?
Resistance to anti-TB drugs arises from selection of naturally occurring mutants with innate resistance to drugs.
Poor adherence to the therapeutic regimen, improper prescribing by clinicians, and drug interactions or malabsorption can result in partial suppression of bacterial growth and the emergence of resistant organisms.
Once this resistance develops, treatment is compromised, further resistance can evolve, and resistant organisms can be transmitted to other people, leading to primary drug resistance that may fail to respond to standard therapy.
Effective treatment and cure of MDR-TB requires prolonged use (typically two years) of a combination of drugs, including second-line drugs that for the most part are less potent than first-line agents, more toxic, or both.
For the past six years, a global effort (called DOTS-Plus) to treat people with MDR-TB under strict conditions has been underway, reaching thousands with previously untreatable TB.
An unfortunate consequence of treating MDR-TB with second-line drugs, however, is the inevitable emergence of further drug resistance.
If the same factors that produce MDR-TB remain in play, then MDR-TB becomes XDR-TB.
There is no magic bullet for controlling XDR-TB.
Addressing drug-resistant TB cannot be divorced from overall TB control efforts.
Moreover, TB control strategies targeted at populations with high HIV burdens are critically important.
Such strategies include widespread implementation of TB preventive therapy with isoniazid  – which is vastly underused, despite its low cost and known efficacy – and improved detection in HIV-infected people, many of whom die of TB without a diagnosis.  Attention must also be paid to infection control in hospitals and clinics: many of the XDR-TB cases in South Africa were acquired in HIV clinics or wards.  Access to HIV care, including ART, is also urgently needed, and reducing HIV incidence would substantially reduce the TB burden over the longer term.
Moreover, the capacity for prompt, accurate laboratory-based diagnosis of TB and drug resistance must be strengthened.
This will require infrastructure development, as well as reliable systems for procuring supplies, maintaining equipment, and training and retaining personnel.
Enhanced surveillance also is needed.
The Global Project on Anti-Tuberculosis Drug Resistance Surveillance has collected information on prevalence, patterns, and trends of drug resistance since 1994, focusing on resistance to first-line drugs and contributing much to our understanding of MDR-TB.  But surveillance for XDR-TB has been more limited, as drug susceptibility testing for second-line drugs is not well-standardized and for some drugs is poorly reproducible, while few countries perform such testing within the context of their national TB programs.  
Priorities for XDR-TB surveillance include facilitating access to reliable susceptibility testing to second-line drugs and incorporating this, together with information about HIV testing, into existing TB surveillance activities.
Last, but not least, the importance of effective advocacy for a more vigorous response to the global TB epidemic cannot be overstated.
This includes promoting new drugs lines that can enhance the potency of first-line regimens, thereby shortening treatment duration and preventing the emergence of resistance in the first place.  But new drugs are not enough.
On the contrary, introducing them into settings where treatment compliance is not assured and where drug susceptibility testing is not available would likely contribute to even more resistant organisms. 
Ultimately health systems must be strengthened to enable health care providers to find TB that is present in communities with more sensitive and specific diagnostic tests, treat TB according to the class of the organism with the latest and most potent drugs, and prevent TB among those who are at risk.  These steps may very well ensure that XDR-TB does not engulf the advances made in the past century in the global fight against TB. 
The Rise of Mid-Level Powers
The security environment since the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks on the United States has clearly demonstrated the limits of the United Nations, or even the US as the world’s sole military superpower, to maintain international security.
However, like-minded mid-level powers with similar intentions could complement what the UN or the US lacks, effectively generating sufficient clout to stabilize the global security environment.
Japan, Australia, Germany, or Canada might be just such powers.
They share common values as free and democratic countries.
Moreover, they are non-nuclear powers with no permanent seats in the UN Security Council.
All are long time allies of the US.
In fact, over recent years these countries have already had many opportunities to demonstrate their ability and willingness to contribute to international security if called for, for they all also share a recognition that global stability directly serves their own national interests.
Nevertheless, subtle differences among these countries may influence their bilateral cooperation or coordination with the UN or the US.
As a result, they must compliment each other’s advantages, characteristics, and interests in order to optimize their role in promoting international security.
For many years, Japan has been taking very cautious steps into this area, but substantial changes have occurred recently.
In March 2007, Japan agreed to enter a “semi-alliance” with Australia, and issued a “Joint Communiqué on Japan-Australia Security Cooperation.”
In early June, the two countries’ defense and foreign ministers held the first regular security meeting (the so-called “2+2 meeting”) in Tokyo, agreeing to promote defense cooperation in various fields, including international security.
Under Japan’s last two prime ministers, Japan has steadily been making practical contributions to the stabilization of the international security environment as a way to benefit its national and international interests.
Japan is thus helping to create conditions to allow mid-level powers to act jointly and effectively to provide an essential international “public good.”
Such practical proposals address key global issues, including international terrorism, strengthening of mechanisms for arms control, arms reduction, and non-proliferation, efforts to contain attempts by North Korea and Iran to develop nuclear weapons, encouraging transparency in China’s military, restraining Russia’s imperial ambitions, and building a global ballistic missile defense network against missiles that could be launched by rogue regimes.
However, efforts to promote this kind of cooperation should not be confined to these mid-level powers.
There are many other potential mid-level democratic countries that should take part.
Various approaches may be available for building a coalition of such powers, including the use of the UN and seeking to influence US foreign policy.
To advance such efforts, it may be necessary for mid-level powers such as Japan, Canada, Australia, and Germany to strengthen ties with other like-minded mid-level countries that possess nuclear weapons and hold permanent seats on the UN Security Council, such as the United Kingdom and France, or with smaller nuclear powers without permanent Security Council seats, such as India.
Once such a coalition gains a sure footing, the next step would be to participate actively in the negotiation of major security issues, such as international arms control, arms reduction, and non-proliferation, while encouraging the involvement of China and Russia.
The goal should be to build and exercise influence within the international community to the point that the coalition becomes tantamount to a permanent “sixth” member of the Security Council.
China’s E-Tail Revolution
SHANGHAI – When you think about centers of technological innovation, Silicon Valley, Seattle, and Seoul are probably the first places that come to mind.
After all, they are the homes of Amazon, Apple, Facebook, Google, Intel, Microsoft, and Samsung – companies whose innovations transform the way other sectors, from financial services to telecoms and media, do business.
Now, however, the rise of “e-tail” (consumer-facing e-commerce) in China is enabling Hangzhou – the base of Alibaba, China’s largest online retailer – to join their ranks.
Indeed, on April 29, Alibaba signaled its ambitions by buying an 18% stake in Sina Weibo, China’s version of Twitter.
And, as with technology hubs elsewhere, innovations born in Hangzhou are determining the development path of related industries.
China’s e-tail market is the world’s second largest (after that of the United States), with an estimated $210 billion in revenue last year.
Since 2003, the market has posted a compound annual growth rate of over 110%.
By 2020, China’s e-tail market could be as large as today’s markets in the US, Japan, the United Kingdom, Germany, and France combined.
Despite a broadband penetration rate of only 30%, e-tail commanded 5-6% of total retail sales in China in 2012, on par with the US.
And the sector is already profitable: Chinese e-tailers are logging margins of 8-10% of earnings before interest, taxes, and amortization, which is slightly larger than the average margin for physical retailers.
Two features of Chinese e-commerce stand out.
First, roughly 90% of Chinese e-tail is conducted on ad-funded virtual marketplaces.
On these platforms – which resemble eBay and Amazon Marketplace – manufacturers, retailers, and individuals offer products and services to consumers through online storefronts.
By contrast, in the US, Europe, and Japan, roughly 70% of the market is composed of e-tailers running their own Web sites, whether online-only merchants like Amazon or traditional brick-and-mortar retailers such as Carrefour, Dixons, and Walmart.
Moreover, according to a study by the McKinsey Global Institute, online purchases in China do not simply replace offline purchases.
Rather, e-tail supports incremental consumption: $1 of online consumption seems to generate roughly $0.40 of additional sales.
And incremental spending as a share of total spending is even higher in China’s less-developed cities, where a shortage of brick-and-mortar retailers means that online shopping provides access to otherwise unavailable products and brands.
Mass consumption in China and other emerging economies is coming of age in the Internet era.
Given that industry structures are still developing in many of these countries, e-tail is set to shape not only the retail landscape, but also the manufacturing and financial-services industries – and even the urban landscape itself.
In most countries, the retail sector has typically developed in three stages: first, local or regional players dominate, before a smaller number of national companies takes over, with e-tailers ultimately challenging traditional businesses.
But China lacks national leaders, with the top five Chinese retailers in different product categories commanding less than 20% of the market, compared to up to 60% in the US.
And establishing a strong physical presence throughout the country will be time-consuming and expensive.
By contrast, Alibaba (which owns marketplaces such as Taobao) and 360buy.com (which focuses on electronics) rank among China’s top ten retailers, and already provide national coverage through the reach of express delivery companies.
As a result, China’s retail sector seems more likely to follow a two-stage development path, with e-tailers emerging as the major national players.
The ability afforded by online marketplaces to new players to attain national – and international – prominence without massive upfront investment will profoundly affect how both retailers and manufacturers approach new consumer markets.
The Japanese retailer Uniqlo, for example, used such marketplaces to expand into China in 2009.
Likewise, by removing some of the benefits of scale and specialization that characterize the consumer-goods industry elsewhere, e-tail enables new manufacturers to join the market, selling goods like apparel and cosmetics directly from workshops and factories to consumers.
Such businesses are also leveraging their broad access and widely recognized brands to expand their role in the financial-services sector.
Finally, e-tail could shape China’s urban development and transform leisure activities.
Urban centers worldwide revolve around shops, whether on main street or at the mall, with many consumers viewing shopping as a leisure activity.
China’s evolution will likely entail smaller main streets and malls, with large distribution centers near city limits.
Citizens will spend more free time engaging in other activities, such as dining out.
All of these changes could alter the use and pricing of real estate.
Other emerging markets are likely to follow a similar course.
Chinese e-tailers are already using their advantages in exporting products from the country’s factories to expand internationally.
And enterprises in other countries are adopting a similar online business model.
China may have largely missed the Industrial Revolution in the nineteenth century.
But its approach to e-tail is poised to be one of the forces shaping the emerging-market Internet revolution of the twenty-first century.
The New Economy of Fealty
PRINCETON – Since the 2008 financial crisis, most industrial economies have avoided anything like the collapse that occurred during the Great Depression of the 1930’s.
But, despite large-scale fiscal and monetary stimulus, they are not experiencing any dramatic economic rebound.
Moreover, the pre-crisis trend of rising income and wealth inequality is continuing (in marked contrast to the post-Great Depression period, in which inequality declined).
And survey data show a rapid decline in people’s satisfaction and confidence about the future.
The explanation of the post-crisis malaise – and people’s perception of it – lies in the combination of economic uncertainty and the emergence of radically new forms of social interaction.
Long-term structural shifts are fundamentally changing the nature of work, and thus of the way that we think of economic exchange.
In the early twentieth century, a large share of even advanced economies’ populations was still employed in agriculture.
That proportion subsequently fell sharply, and the same decline could later be seen in industrial employment.
Since the late twentieth century, most employment growth has come in services, particularly personal services – a pattern that looks like a reversal of a previous historical trend.
At the beginning of the twentieth century, upper-middle-class households had a substantial staff of cooks, maids, nannies, and cleaners.
In the interwar years, these employees largely disappeared from the lives of all but the ultra-rich.
The iconoclastic British historian A. J. P. Taylor quipped that laments about the decline of Britain were really generalized reflections of Oxford academics’ view of the “servant problem.”
By the end of the twentieth century, however, many of these old service occupations were reappearing on a large scale, as dual-career households needed additional “help.”
The employment of nannies, au pairs, babysitters, and day mothers reflected carefully differentiated approaches to the problem of looking after children.
After child care, there followed hordes of private tutors, test coaches, and university admissions consultants.
And, beyond childhood and adolescence, the need for specialized personal support only grew.
Some of the new services would stretch the imagination of previous ages.
Dating agencies have developed increasingly complex algorithms to sort out their clients’ romantic lives.
Lawyers work out prenuptial contracts, and then the complexities of divorce negotiations.
Design consultants choose our interiors and clothing.
Personal trainers look after our fitness.
Cosmeticians, skin-care specialists, and tattoo artists shape our appearance.
Two of the largest areas of service-employment expansion have been education and health services.
And yet this has not been a result of adding more teachers or doctors.
Instead, a new division of labor has surrounded the classical providers of education and healing with more and more layers of administration.
Doctors need experts to deal with insurance forms, negotiate with other doctors and pharmaceutical providers, and manage legal risks.
Educational specialists fill every conceivable logistical and administrative gap, run sports and arts programs, guarantee diversity, and oversee technology transfer to the private sector.
Indeed, a rapidly growing army of administrators is overrunning our universities.
None of these new services can easily be standardized, or dealt with at long distances (as can some types of clerical legal and financial work).
The caregivers and consultants need to be on location. And that raises a question of control.
How can child-care providers be trusted?
Cautious parents seek agents to select their employees and technology to monitor them as they work.
So, to find out about the reputation of service providers, we need still more service providers: ratings and surveys and agents to tell us about agents.
The new service economy extends market relations to areas of life in which, previously, informal assistance and guidance within family units prevailed.
To the extent that employment and income in the new services can be easily recorded, this change implies an increase in measurable economic wealth and output, because unpaid household services are ignored in GDP calculations.
Experts might thus interpret the macroeconomic consequences as largely positive.
But the element of personal dependence is a throwback to the preindustrial world.
The zenith of the old service economy was the court of Louis XIV, where specialist courtiers attended to the Sun King’s every need, even the most intimate (there was a Groom of the King’s Close Stool).
In that pre-modern world, private life was extraordinarily public, whereas the social movements of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries dramatically expanded the realm of individual privacy and self-definition.
Today’s new service economy is driven by the resulting uncertainty over identity.
We need advice on every aspect of life, provided in a complex world by people whom we think to be experts in ever-narrower and more specialized fields.
We can easily monitor that advice and subject it to statistical testing: are our children doing better on tests?
Are we more fit?
Are we dating more people who share our perceived interests?
Paradoxically, the new technological possibilities are also eliminating privacy.
We are moving back to the Sun King’s world, in which everything personal is known, rumored, or whispered.
But now, with electronic surveillance, personal dependence has never been more extreme, more humiliating, and more depressing.
This might explain some of the public dissatisfaction captured in so many surveys, even when economic conditions are not dire.
Subjectively, modern growth feels problematic, and perhaps even immoral.
The Rise of the Beijing Consensus
BRUSSELS – President Barack Obama’s first appearances outside North America – in London, Strasbourg, Prague, and Istanbul – galvanized world attention.
But what that trip singularly failed to do was paper over a startling fact: the “Washington Consensus” about how the global economy should be run is now a thing of the past.
The question now is what is likely to replace it.
Although China is often said to lack “soft power,” many of its ideas on economics and governance are coming into ascendance.
Indeed, in pursuit of national economic stability, the Obama administration is clearly moving towards the kind of government intervention that China has been promoting over the past two decades.
In this model, the government, while continuing to benefit from the international market, retains power over the economy’s “commanding heights” through strict control over the financial sector, restrictive government procurement policies, guidance for research and development in the energy sector, and selective curbs on imports of goods and services.
All these factors are not only part of China’s economic rescue package, but of Obama’s stimulus plan as well.
China is clearly pleased to see that the United States is now also placing cool calculation of its national interests at the forefront of its foreign policy.
“In delivering a better life for people on the ground, one should be more concerned with substance than with form,” Obama stated in an interview just before his inauguration.
Rather than obsessing about elections, the US now seeks to build pragmatic alliances to buttress its economic needs.
This requires, first of all, cozying up with China and the autocratic Gulf states – the main lenders to the US Treasury – as well working with Iran and Russia to limit the costs of the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq.
As the US backtracks on its liberal standards, it is flirting with what can be called the “Beijing Consensus,” which makes economic development a country’s paramount goal and prescribes that states should actively steer growth in a way that suits national stability.
What matters in this worldview is not the nature of any country’s political system, but the extent to which it improves its people’s wellbeing.
At the diplomatic level, this implies that national interests, not universal norms, should drive cooperation.
This diplomatic and economic realism is more than a reversal of the neo-conservative muscle-flexing of the George W. Bush years. It is an attempt by a declining power to use its restrained capabilities in a more economical way.
For example, in times of crisis it is no shame for a government to be mercantilist, but by behaving in this way, the US has lost the moral high ground as a champion of free trade.
America’s new pragmatism is also the consequence of a process of “reverse socialization.”
Over the past two decades, the US and its European allies believed that they could inculcate the rest of the world with their economic and political principles.
Countries like China became enmeshed in a web of multilateral organizations and subjugated to conditional engagement strategies.
Nowadays, the West does not have the leverage to enforce these conditions. Moreover, the majority of developing countries now actively embrace multilateral bodies as part of their development strategies.
As we move from a unipolar international order to one with multiple regional powers, realism should allow them to vie for influence while keeping the costs as low as possible.
The result will be a new concert of powers, tied together by their fixation with national economic growth and the objective of discouraging others from causing instability that risks intervention.
Instead of entrusting America with the arduous task of safeguarding international stability on its own, the BRICs (Brazil, Russia, India, and China) will assume a more prominent role in policing their own backyards.
Russia can have its Caucasus, and if the generals in Myanmar should go mad, it would become China’s and India’s problem to sort out.
America’s policy shift will inevitably erode the Western liberal axis.
America has the flexibility, capacity, and leadership to adapt to the new rules for pursuing diplomacy, but Europe simply does not.
Its strategic relevance, even in the transatlantic partnership, is destined to weaken further.
Realism will give the US more maneuverability in the short term, but it will have to sacrifice some of its soft power to achieve this.
Whether America is able to strengthen its global influence in the future will depend not so much on its moral esteem, but on the extent to which it succeeds in revamping its economy and forging new alliances.
The same will apply for other powers.
But this rising Beijing Consensus offers no guarantee of stability.
A concert of powers is only as strong as its weakest pillar, and requires a great deal of self-discipline and restraint.
It remains to be seen how the American public will respond to its national U-turn.
If one main player slides back into economic turmoil, nationalism will reduce the scope for pragmatic bargaining.
Overlapping spheres of influence and frozen conflicts could again cause major conflict.
And, if China comes out of the crisis as the big winner and continues to boost its power, zero-sum thinking will soon replace win-win cooperation.
The Rise of the BRICs
PRINCETON &#45;&#45; The winners of the great globalization push of the 1990’s were small states such as New Zealand, Chile, Dubai, Finland, Ireland, the Baltic Republics, Slovenia, and Slovakia.
The East Asian tigers that pushed themselves onto the world economy’s center stage were small units, and in some cases – Singapore, Taiwan, or Hong Kong – were not even treated as states.
Even South Korea, which is a giant in comparison, was only half a country.
Such states are vulnerable, and the past is littered with small and successful globalizers that lost out because of power politics: the Italian city states of the Renaissance, the Dutch Republic, or, in the twentieth century, Lebanon and Kuwait.
Small states frequently became the victims of larger but poorer neighbors envious of their success and eager to seize their assets, while oblivious to the fact that such seizure actually destroys the source of wealth and dynamism.
In the world of pure globalization, small states do best, because they are more flexible and can adapt more easily to rapidly changing markets.
Small states are better at public policy adjustments, freeing up labor markets, establishing a solid framework for competition, and facilitating cross-border takeovers and mergers. 
The urgency of such a program has been underscored in much recent analysis of the poor performance of the major continental European economies – France, Germany, and Italy – compared with smaller and much more dynamic economies in northern and central Europe.
But, at the same time, small states are also more likely to be successful in defending crucial aspects of the welfare state.
A larger state can inevitably do more to control the economy, and hence is exposed to the costly temptation to intervene in response to political pressure from vested interests.
In a small-state setting, imposition of a dense network of controls is likely to lead to the loss of mobile factors of production, while in a large state it is harder for labor or capital to escape.
On the international stage, large states try to make international rules, and often build their domestic legitimacy on their claims to be able to shape a larger world: they think in terms of what French thinkers call “harnessing globalization.”
Instead of accepting the international system roughly as it is, with all its imperfections, they think that they can use their weight to alter the rules – in their favor.
Small states’ nervousness and fear began to increase roughly in 2000.
The new political realities were highlighted by the Iraq war, China’s search for energy sources in developing countries, and Russia’s assertiveness in foreign and domestic policy.
In today’s world, it looks as if the new winners are big states with large populations and rapid growth: Brazil, Russia, India, and China (BRICs), in addition to the United States.
These dynamic giants terrify the wealthy populations of the industrialized world with the potential power of their low-cost competition, cheap products, and outsourcing of services.
The BRICs (we might rewrite the term as Big and Really Imperial Countries) project power more easily, but they also need to project power to compensate for their weaknesses.
They have their own problems, but at the same time they are likely to behave more like traditional big states, and will try to shape globalization rather than simply accepting it as an inevitable process.
There are at least three obvious flaws that afflict these big globalizers much more than the small globalizers who had done so well previously.
First, highly populous countries must integrate their poor and ill-educated underclass (in China and India mostly rural) as they engage with world markets.
Second, China and Russia have financial systems that lack transparency, while Brazil and India are financially underdeveloped, putting further integration in the world economy at risk and increasing prospects for a financial crisis. 
Third, Russia is already facing massive demographic decline and an aging and sickening population; China faces the near certainty of a Japanese-style demographic downturn from the 2040’s onward, a belated legacy of its one-child policy. 
Flawed geo-political giants have in the past been a source of instability (Germany before World War I is an obvious analogy), and there are good reasons to see them presenting increased risk in the twenty-first century.
But for the moment they are unquestionably powerful. 
The result is that the BRICs will look for compensating power, and military and strategic influence and prestige, as a way to solve internal problems.
Gone are the 1990’s, when for a brief moment in the immediate aftermath of the end of the Cold War, the world looked as if it would be permanently peaceful and unconcerned with power. 
That hope soon proved illusory.
Many commentators, indeed, were stunned by the rapidity with which tensions returned to the international system.
While many blame US behavior, these tensions have in fact been fueled by the unfolding of a new logic in international politics.
The Rising Power of NGO\u0027s
When Human Rights Watch declared last January that the Iraq War did not qualify as a humanitarian intervention, the international media took notice.
According to the Internet database Factiva, 43 news articles mentioned the report, in publications ranging from the Kansas City Star to the Beirut Daily Star .
Similarly, after the abuses of Iraqi detainees at the Abu Ghraib prison were disclosed, the views of Amnesty International and the International Committee of the Red Cross put pressure on the Bush administration both at home and abroad.
As these examples suggest, today's information age has been marked by the growing role of non-governmental organizations (NGO's) on the international stage.
This is not entirely new, but modern communications have led to a dramatic increase in scale, with the number of NGO's jumping from 6,000 to approximately 26,000 during the 1990's alone.
Nor do numbers tell the whole story, because they represent only formally constituted organizations.
Many NGO's claim to act as a "global conscience," representing broad public interests beyond the purview of individual states.
They develop new norms by directly pressing governments and businesses to change policies, and indirectly by altering public perceptions of what governments and firms should do.
NGO's do not have coercive "hard" power, but they often enjoy considerable "soft" power - the ability to get the outcomes they want through attraction rather than compulsion.
Because they attract followers, governments must take them into account both as allies and adversaries.
A few decades ago, large organizations like multinational corporations or the Roman Catholic Church were the most typical type of transnational organization.
Such organizations remain important, but the reduced cost of communication in the Internet era has opened the field to loosely structured network organizations with little headquarters staff and even to individuals.
These flexible groups are particularly effective in penetrating states without regard to borders.
Because they often involve citizens who are well placed in the domestic politics of several countries, they can focus the attention of media and governments onto their issues, creating new transnational political coalitions.
A rough way to gauge the increasing importance of transnational organizations is to count how many times these organizations are mentioned in mainstream media publications.
The use of the term "non-governmental organization" or "NGO" has increased 17-fold since 1992.
In addition to Human Rights Watch, other NGO's such as Transparency International, Oxfam, and Doctors without Borders have undergone exponential growth in terms of mainstream media mentions.
By this measure, the biggest NGO's have become established players in the battle for the attention of influential editors.
In these circumstances, governments can no longer maintain the barriers to information flows that historically protected officials from outside scrutiny.
Even large countries with hard power, such as the United States, are affected.
NGO's played key roles in the disruption of the World Trade Organization summit in 1999, the passage of the Landmines Treaty, and the ratification of the Framework Convention on Tobacco Control in May 2003.
The US, for example, initially had strong objections to the Convention on Tobacco Control, but dropped them in the face of international criticism.
The Landmines Treaty was created despite the opposition of the strongest bureaucracy (the Pentagon) in the world's largest military power.
Similarly, transnational corporations are often targets of NGO campaigns to "name and shame" companies that pay low wages in poor countries.
Such campaigns sometimes succeed because they can credibly threaten to damage the value of global brand names.
Royal Dutch Shell, for example, announced in 2003 that it would not drill in any spots designated by UNESCO as World Heritage sites.
This decision came two years after the company acceded to pressure from environmentalists and scrapped plans to drill in a World Heritage site in Bangladesh.
Transnational drug companies were shamed by NGO's into abandoning lawsuits in South Africa in 2002 over infringements of their patents on drugs to fight AIDS.
Similar campaigns of naming and shaming have affected the investment and employment patterns of Mattel, Nike, and a host of other companies.
NGO's vary enormously in their organization, budgets, accountability, and sense of responsibility for the accuracy of their claims.
It is hyperbole when activists call such movements "the world's other superpower," yet governments ignore them at their peril.
Some have reputations and credibility that give them impressive domestic as well as international soft power.
Others lack credibility among moderate citizens but can mobilize demonstrations that demand the attention of governments.
For better and for worse, NGO's and network organizations have resources and do not hesitate to use them.
Do NGO's make world politics more democratic?
Not in the traditional sense of the word.
Most are elite organizations with narrow membership bases.
Some act irresponsibly and with little accountability.
Yet they tend to pluralize world politics by calling attention to issues that governments prefer to ignore, and by acting as pressure groups across borders.
In that sense, they serve as antidotes to traditional government bureaucracies.
Governments remain the major actors in world politics, but they now must share the stage with many more competitors for attention.
Non-governmental actors are changing world politics.
After Abu Ghraib, even US Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld must take notice.
The Rising Sons of North Africa
LONDON – The role played by Libyan ruler Muammar al-Qaddafi’s son, Saif al-Islam, in gaining the release of the Lockerbie bomber Abdelbaset Ali al-Megrahi, and Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak’s state visit to Washington accompanied by his son, Gamal, suggest that dynastic successions are underway in both countries.
They are not alone.
Mubarak and Qaddafi, along with Tunisia’s Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali and Abdelaziz Bouteflika of Algeria, are among the world’s oldest and longest-serving heads of state.
All four face the ticklish problem of succession, and speculation has been mounting for some time of possible attempts to keep power in the family.
That solution is becoming pretty commonplace, from the Aliyevs of Azerbaijan to the Kims of North Korea to the Assads in Syria.
Dynastic succession safeguards the immediate and frequently extensive interests of the ruling family as well as those of the wider political and business elite.
But the possibility of near simultaneous successions in North Africa is striking nonetheless.
All four North African rulers have, to greater or lesser degrees, made themselves the center of highly opaque power structures.
Everything in their countries depends on the person and family rather than the office.
Yet, despite these authoritarian leaders’ apparently solid grip on power, ensuring that a relative takes over is not as simple as it seems.
The problem boils down to overcoming possible resistance – from both the elite and the public – that could derail the handover or undermine the successor’s authority.
Dealing with elite interests requires ingenuity.
Lucrative business opportunities can be allocated to soothe the successor’s political adversaries, while renegades can be targeted to discourage others – for example, by being stripped of property or dismissed from positions of influence.
Where members of the ruling family hold direct commercial interests – as in Libya and Tunisia – the political transition is certain to cause collateral economic damage.
For example, if Qaddafi’s fourth son, Muatasim, emerges as the successor, he could take away Saif al-Islam’s business holdings and ability to profit from foreign contracts.
In Tunisia, a successor from the Trabelsi branch of the Ben Ali clan – linked to the president through his second wife, Leila Trabelsi – could target the extensive interests of families related to Ben Ali’s daughters from a previous marriage.
Securing popular legitimacy requires equal dexterity, which has played an important role in preventing North African leaders and family members from openly admitting their preparations for dynastic successions.
In Egypt, where such preparations are the most obvious, Gamal and other senior figures have stubbornly denied his presidential ambitions.
At the same time, room has been made for Gamal to build a public profile of his own through his senior role in the ruling party, and a constitutional framework has been put in place that will allow him to be elected in multi-candidate elections, thus establishing a façade of republican legitimacy.
This strategy may find imitators.
Ben Ali’s son-in-law, Sakhr el-Materi, was last year elected to the central committee of the ruling Rassemblement Constitutionnel Démocratique party.
In Algeria, Bouteflika’s brother, Said, has been linked to a “grassroots” movement that – it is rumored – could eventually serve as a basis for his succession bid.
But these two cases are at much earlier stages, and their prospects for success more uncertain.
In Libya, Saif al-Islam has sought to distinguish himself as an agent of democratic change by setting up “non-governmental” organizations, establishing “independent” media outlets, and even sponsoring his own private drafting committee for a new constitution.
But he has encountered stubborn resistance from key elite groups, who regard his agenda as a threat to their vested interests.
The legitimacy question is particularly problematic if the ruler’s biography or charisma is closely tied to the legitimacy of the regime.
In Libya, the regime’s founding myth is inextricably linked to Qaddafi’s 1969 coup and his eclectic political theories.
His departure would expose the anachronistic nature of the state’s ideological foundation; family ties will do nothing to protect his successor from the resulting shock to the system.
The Algerian situation is similar.
The regime’s legitimacy is based on the war of independence, with all presidents to date having played important roles in it.
But Bouteflika’s most likely successors, including his brother, almost certainly will not have this tie.
As in Egypt, public opposition to a succession seen to threaten the republican order could sharpen the army’s understanding of itself as guardian of the state, prompting it to intervene.
This is much more likely in Algeria than in Egypt.
Another public-relations problem concerns business interests.
In Egypt, Gamal Mubarak will have to counter the widespread perception that his interests are aligned with close allies among the business elite, notably steel tycoon Ahmed el-Ezz.
Gamal could seek to dispel this perception by publicly making examples of regime cronies involved in excesses.
While business interests are not as openly discussed in Tunisia, they are no less unpopular.
Ben Ali’s successor could raise his profile by clamping down on cronyism.
The four rulers have deliberately played their succession cards close to their chests.
Keeping everyone in suspense helps prevent the emergence of organized opposition to a dynastic succession.
Moreover, they may worry that heirs apparent will seek to force them out of office prematurely.
Thus, Ben Ali has demoted prominent politicians back when they attained sufficient influence to be considered potential successors.
He is apparently concerned that one of them could imitate a coup like the one he led in 1987 that toppled Habib Bourguiba.
(He has since changed the constitution to prevent a repeat).
In Libya, the fortunes of Saif al-Islam and Muatasim have waxed and waned as Qaddafi enforces his authority to prevent the emergence of a challenger.
While few obstacles remain in Gamal’s path to power in Egypt, in Algeria, meanwhile, a bid to install Said would likely collapse against resistance from powerful regime interests.
The Rising Wealth of Nations
The new Penn World Table, Version 6.2, comparing standards of living across countries, has just been released.
The latest figures are for 2004, and, because of data lags, not all countries are included.
Yet these numbers are valuable because they are of exceptional quality and they correct systematically for relative price differences across countries, which sometimes leads to surprising results.
Among the 82 countries for which 2004 data are now available, there has been really good news: real per capita GDP has risen by an average of 18.9% between 2000 and 2004, or 4.4% per year.
People generally are a lot better off than they were just a few years ago.
At this rate, real per capita GDP will double every 16 years.
Many people who could not afford a car in 2000 now have one, and people who could afford only one car in 2000 now have two.
People who could not afford to send their children to a good school or college now can.
And so it is with many different goods and services that people consume.
One surprise is that there has been relatively little change in the ranking of countries by real per capita GDP since 2000.
Despite all the talk about the Chinese economic miracle, China’s ranking has risen only slightly, from 61st out of 82 countries in 2000 to 60th in 2004 – even though per capita real GDP grew by 44% between 2000 and 2004, or 9.6% a year, the highest of the major countries.
The reason China has not risen higher is that other countries have been growing too, and because the gaps between countries are enormous.
The range between the poorest and the richest countries in the world is a factor of more than 100.
The average real per capita GDP of the top 25% of countries is 15 times that of the bottom 25%.
Watching these countries progress is like watching a marathon.
At first, one is impressed by most of the runners, almost all of whom seem to be going fast.
As they pass by, all spread out, one sees that some runners seem to be gaining rapidly.
And yet they do not often overtake one another, because the distances between them are so large.
Indeed, other runners are out of sight, perhaps miles ahead.
China isn’t the only success story.
Other big winners in terms of real per capita GDP between 2000 and 2004 are Lithuania (up 48%), Romania (up 41%), Estonia (up 40%), Chile (up 33%), Hungary (up 32%), Greece (up 31%), New Zealand (up 28%), Australia (up 25%), Korea (up 23%), Ireland (up 23%), South Africa (up 23%), and Nigeria (up 22%).
Some of the worst performers among the major countries are Israel (a beleaguered country, with real per capita GDP up only 2% between 2000 and 2004) and Argentina (hit by a terrible financial crisis in 2001-2, up only 9% between 2000 and 2004).
Economic performance in several Latin American countries was relatively weak in this period, with Uruguay’s real GDP per capita actually recording a fall by a fraction of a percent.
But the overall picture is amazingly good.
If such growth rates continue, we will see relatively poor countries like India, Indonesia, the Philippines, or Nicaragua reach the average levels currently enjoyed by advanced countries in 50 years.
But, of course, they will not have caught up with these countries, for those countries will have moved ahead too.
It is hard to imagine now what that world will be like with a doubling or quadrupling of just about every country’s GDP.
What would all these countries do with all that money?
In 1958, the economist John Kenneth Galbraith wrote the best-selling book The Affluent Society , in which he argued that the advanced world as typified by the United States had by that year finally emerged from “grim scarcity,” when dire necessity dictated our lives, to a “world of affluence.”
He wrote: “So great has been the change [in standards of living] that many of the desires of the individual are no longer even evident to him.
They become so only as they are synthesized, elaborated and nurtured by advertising and salesmanship, and these, in turn, have become among our most important and talented professions.”
But real per capita GDP in the US is now three times higher than it was in 1958.
What have people been spending all that extra money on?
Is it all dictated by advertisers and salesmen who are inventing needs?
According to my calculations comparing 1958 and 2005 data from the US Department of Commerce, Americans spent 27% of the huge increase in income between 1958 and 2005 on medical care, 23% on their homes, 12% on transportation, 10% on recreation, and 9% on personal business activities.
The kinds of things that advertisers and salesmen typically promote were relatively unimportant.
Food got only 8% of the extra money, clothing only 3%, and personal care 1%.
Unfortunately, idealistic activities also received little of the extra money: 3% for welfare and religious activities, and a similar share for education.
Thus, most of the extra money was spent on staying healthy, having a nice home, traveling and relaxing, and doing a little business.
That sounds like what really happened in the US. Maybe that is the way it will be around the world.
As long as we can keep worldwide growth going at its current rate, billions of people can look forward to the same kind of improvement.
And that should be truly inspirational.
The Risk of European Centralization
FRANKFURT – For many European leaders, the eurozone crisis demonstrates the need for “more Europe,” the final aim being to create a full-fledged political union.
Given the continent’s history of war and ideological division, and today’s challenges posed by globalization, a peaceful, prosperous, and united Europe that wields influence abroad is surely a desirable goal.
But major disagreements about how to achieve that goal remain.
Historically, monetary union was regarded as the route to political union.
In the 1950’s, the French economist Jacques Rueff, a close adviser to Charles de Gaulle, argued that “L’Europe se fera par la monnaie, ou ne se fera pas” (Europe will be made through the currency, or it will not be made).
Germany’s President Richard von Weizsäcker echoed this view almost a half-century later, declaring that only via a single currency would Europeans achieve a common foreign policy.
More recently, German Chancellor Angela Merkel asserted that “if the euro fails, Europe will fail.”
But the crisis confronting “Europe” is not so much about political union as it is about European Economic and Monetary Union.
If anything, efforts to hold EMU together may have taken us further from the goal of a common foreign policy by re-igniting within member states (regardless of whether they give or receive financial aid) nationalist resentments that we hoped had died long ago.
Politicians launched monetary union in 1999, despite warnings that the constituent economies were too diverse.
It wasn’t long before several states violated the Stability and Growth Pact.
Later, the eurozone’s “no bail-out” principle was abandoned.
The response to these failings, however, was a demand for greater economic integration, including such intermediate steps as the creation of a “European finance minister” or an EU commissioner with sweeping powers to facilitate closer integration.
Such ideas, of course, ignored the central issues of national sovereignty and democracy, and specifically the privilege of nationally elected governments and parliaments to determine their own taxes and public spending.
The fact that sovereign member states did not deliver on their European commitments is hardly a convincing argument for giving up sovereignty now.
In short, all of the measures that would implicitly support political union have turned out to be inconsistent and dangerous.
They have involved huge financial risks for eurozone members.
They have fueled tensions among member states.
Perhaps most important, they have undermined the basis on which political union rests – namely, persuading European Union citizens to identify with the European idea.
Public support for “Europe” depends to a large degree on its economic success.
Indeed, it is Europe’s economic achievements that give it a political voice in the world.
But, as the current crisis indicates, the best-performing EU economies are those with (relatively) flexible labor markets, reasonable tax rates, and open access to professions and business.
Moreover, the impetus for economic reform has come not from the EU, but from national governments, one of the most successful examples being “Agenda 2010,” launched a decade ago by then-German Chancellor Gerhard Schröder.
Numerous academic studies, following the work of the American economic historian Douglass North, support the notion that it is competition among states and regions that lays the groundwork for technological progress and economic growth.
The total failure of the Lisbon Agenda, launched in March 2000 to make the EU “the most competitive and dynamic knowledge-base economy in the world” demonstrated the weakness of a centralized approach.
Arguably, in earlier centuries, it was competition within Europe that generated unparalleled dynamism and prosperity across much of the continent.
To be sure, this was also a time of wars.
However, this does not mean that centralization is the best – much less the only –&#160;way to guarantee peace.
But, once again, EU leaders responded by concluding the opposite: the Lisbon Agenda’s failure was interpreted as justifying still more harmonization and centralization of national policies.
True to form, in his “State of the Union” address to the European Parliament in September 2012, European Commission President José Manuel Barroso called for a more powerful Commission.
This approach – harmonization, coordination, and centralized decision-making – continues to be regarded as a panacea for Europe’s problems.
It is the sort of pretense of knowledge that the economist Friedrich von Hayek denounced as a recipe for constraining freedom and ensuring economic mediocrity.
Indeed, the European project should start from the premise that appropriate institutions, property rights, and competition, together with a growth-friendly tax system and solid fiscal policies, are the basis of economic success.
The dangers of a centralizing approach can also be seen in the relationship between the 17 current eurozone members and the 11 non-eurozone EU states.
As the former press on with greater integration, the adverse economic consequences of doing so are likely to deter the latter from EMU participation (which may be another sign that institutional competition cannot be suppressed forever).
There are plenty of areas in which common action at the EU level is both appropriate and efficient.
Environmental policy is clearly one.
But centralization of economic decision-making, as an end in itself, cannot underpin a prosperous and powerful Europe.
Jean Monnet, one of the EU’s founding fathers, once said that, given the chance to start the European integration process again, he would have begun with culture – a dimension in which we neither need nor want centralization.
Europe’s cultural richness consists precisely in its diversity, and the basis for its finest achievements has been competition between people, institutions, and places.
Its current economic malaise reflects European leaders’ prolonged efforts to deny the obvious.
Green Sovereign Wealth
PARIS – At the end of 2011, sovereign-wealth funds’ assets under management amounted to $3 trillion, following 237 direct investments worth $81 billion that year.
Some experts even estimate SWFs’ assets to be worth $6 trillion.
This means that SWFs, the avatars of state capitalism, are now twice as rich as the world’s hedge funds, the totems of liberal capitalism’s excesses.
The growing might of SWFs is causing concern – and, in some cases, inciting virulent criticism – particularly in host OECD countries, where many fear the redistribution of financial, economic, and political power to emerging countries that have very different political regimes from their own.
In fact, of the seven SWFs that control more than two-thirds of all SWFs’ assets, three are from Asia (one from China and two from Singapore) and three are from the Middle East (Abu Dhabi, Kuwait, and Qatar).
European countries rank first among hosts for SWF investments, accounting for more than 40% of the total value of deals in 2011.
The United States, where opposition to such investments has been stronger, accounts for less than 10%.
These countries’ concerns are not entirely unfounded.
SWFs pose concrete risks, some of which have already materialized, to the global economy and to financial markets both at home and in host countries.
For example, some SWFs faced temporary, but significant, losses after America’s subprime mortgage bubble burst in 2008, and after the European Union’s sovereign-debt crisis erupted a year later, owing to a high level of exposure to these economies’ property, financial, and sovereign-debt markets.
Those that have not been hit have been protected by host-country opposition to projects in strategic sectors, and by the fact that SWFs, aware of the sensitivity of their investments, and afraid of potential retaliation, have mostly taken small stakes (1-2%) in their targets.
There are some exceptions to this pattern.
The Chinese Investment Corporation’s biggest investment last year was a 30% ($3.2 billion) stake in the gas and oil exploration and production sector of the French energy giant GDF Suez.
CIC chose to take a significant share in one branch, rather than a small share in the whole group, because doing so offered both a strategic advantage (access to energy resources) and a monetary benefit (investment in dollar-denominated assets).
In general, however, opacity is a defining feature of most SWFs, exacerbating the risks that they pose.
While some SWFs, like Norway’s Government Pension Fund – Global, are transparent, little information is available on most SWFs’ size, portfolio holdings, investment strategy, performance, or mode of governance.
Enhancing transparency is one of the main aims of the Santiago Principles – a set of 24 voluntary guidelines that stipulate best practices for SWFs.
Twenty-five countries have signed on to the Principles since 2008.
But, while they are an important first step toward managing SWFs’ legal framework, institutional and governance structure, and investment and risk-management policies, they are unevenly applied, and are widely considered inadequate.
Given the geographical distribution of SWFs and their investments, truly global regulation is highly unlikely.
But, without closer monitoring, SWFs will inevitably face politically motivated restrictions by some host countries, so it is in their interest to intensify their efforts at self-regulation.
The need to increase the transparency of SWF operations should not be allowed to eclipse their potential benefits.
As long-term investors, SWFs can help to reduce market volatility through financial intermediation, as well as contribute to financing projects with positive but long-term rates of return.
Furthermore, SWFs have comparative advantages over other kinds of institutional investors.
Unlike insurance companies and pension funds, they have no long-term debt or future payment obligations.
And, as public investors, they are likely to have a better understanding of investment projects that depend on public policy.
Given these advantages, SWFs play a large – and growing – role in infrastructure finance.
New financial regulations – Basel 3 for banks and Solvency 2 for insurers – are reinforcing these advantages.
While the regulations are likely to reduce the likelihood and impact of financial crises, they will also make long-term loans more expensive and investments in illiquid assets riskier.
As a result, banks and insurers might disengage from infrastructure finance, creating more opportunity at lower cost for SWFs.
Given that infrastructure is crucial to sustainable development, this could eventually lead SWFs to become key players in this area.
To achieve this, SWFs must alter their investment pattern.
In 2011, SWFs invested $35.2 billion in financial services, $13.4 billion in property, $13.2 billion in fossil-fuel resources (mainly oil and gas), $6.5 billion in infrastructure and utilities, and $3.4 billion in aircraft, car, ship, and train manufacturers.
Given that SWFs’ primary objective is to transfer wealth to future generations, their high level of exposure to fossil-fuel markets is unsustainable.
Indeed, the remaining carbon-emissions “budget” until 2050, adherence to which is required to limit the global temperature increase to 2°C, is five times smaller than the carbon equivalent of proven fossil-fuel reserves.
This means that only 20% of these reserves, based on which SWF assets are valued, can be burned unabated.
Some SWFs in the Middle East and Asia seem to understand the risks associated with carbon-heavy investment portfolios, and are ready to work together to create a platform to finance resource-efficient, low-carbon, environmentally friendly infrastructure projects.
Indeed, the idea was discussed in January at the World Future Energy Summit and the International Renewable Energy Conference in Abu Dhabi.
This initiative should be supported unequivocally, serving as a springboard for a stronger focus on green investment among SWFs.
With the right approach, SWFs can offer significant long-term benefits to all.
Ten QE Questions
NEW YORK – Most observers regard unconventional monetary policies such as quantitative easing (QE) as necessary to jump-start growth in today’s anemic economies.
But questions about the effectiveness and risks of QE have begun to multiply as well.
In particular, ten potential costs associated with such policies merit attention.
First, while a purely “Austrian” response (that is, austerity) to bursting asset and credit bubbles may lead to a depression, QE policies that postpone the necessary private- and public-sector deleveraging for too long may create an army of zombies: zombie financial institutions, zombie households and firms, and, in the end, zombie governments.
So, somewhere between the Austrian and Keynesian extremes, QE needs to be phased out over time.
Second, repeated QE may become ineffective over time as the channels of transmission to real economic activity become clogged.
The bond channel doesn’t work when bond yields are already low; and the credit channel doesn’t work when banks hoard liquidity and velocity collapses.
Indeed, those who can borrow (high-grade firms and prime households) don’t want or need to, while those who need to – highly leveraged firms and non-prime households – can’t, owing to the credit crunch.
Moreover, the stock-market channel leading to asset reflation following QE works only in the short run if growth fails to recover.
And the reduction in real interest rates via a rise in expected inflation when open-ended QE is implemented risks eventually stoking inflation expectations.
Third, the foreign-exchange channel of QE transmission – the currency weakening implied by monetary easing – is ineffective if several major central banks pursue QE at the same time.
When that happens, QE becomes a zero-sum game, because not all currencies can fall, and not all trade balances can improve, simultaneously.
The outcome, then, is “QE wars” as proxies for “currency wars.”
Fourth, QE in advanced economies leads to excessive capital flows to emerging markets, which face a difficult policy challenge.
Sterilized foreign-exchange intervention keeps domestic interest rates high and feeds the inflows.
But unsterilized intervention and/or reducing domestic interest rates creates excessive liquidity that can feed domestic inflation and/or asset and credit bubbles.
At the same time, forgoing intervention and allowing the currency to appreciate erodes external competitiveness, leading to dangerous external deficits.
Yet imposing capital controls on inflows is difficult and sometimes leaky.
Macroprudential controls on credit growth are useful, but sometimes ineffective in stopping asset bubbles when low interest rates continue to underpin generous liquidity conditions.