In particular, he would seek to emulate Lula’s efforts to include vast sectors of the population in the benefits of a strong economy.
Today, with Venezuela’s economy mired in high inflation and overly dependent on oil, Chávez is fading as a regional model and guide.
He has also been startled by the rise of domestic opposition.
So Brazil’s mix of diversified economic growth and redistribution is a far more appealing example.
Indeed, a major reason for Humala’s victory was García’s inability to secure the benefits of growth for Peru’s poorest people.
Humala’s main campaign argument was that he would not risk the “success” of Peru’s economy, but would, on the contrary, strengthen it.
His fight against poverty and social exclusion would be undertaken as part of that effort.
Humala comes to power in a regional environment of moderation and growing economic integration, which he would disturb at his peril.
García recently signed an economic agreement with Chile, Colombia, and Mexico, called Pacto del Pacífico, which is destined to reorient Latin America’s economies.
These countries will jointly seek to develop a bigger presence in Asian markets, and to offer developed countries a safe option for capital investments in emerging markets.
Moreover, each of the countries has bilateral free-trade agreements with the others and with the United States (though the US Congress has yet to approve the United States-Colombia Trade Promotion Agreement, as it is officially known).
Breaking with these strategic policies would harm Peru’s economy.
It would also harm Humala’s domestic political base and isolate him in the region.
He would not be able to lean on Brazil, the moderating regional power, but would inevitably fall under the sway of Chávez and Morales, deterring foreign investors and harming the country’s foreign relations.
Cuba is out of the question as a patron, due to its preoccupation with Raúl Castro’s efforts to reshape its depleted economy in an improbable bid for Chinese-style capitalism in a one-party state.
So Humala’s Latin American options are limited: Venezuela, Brazil, or the countries of the Pacto del Pacífico.
Although the last two options might be difficult to merge –Mexico might not want the competition of such a large player as Brazil – they are not mutually exclusive.
In fact, Brazil’s leaders have good reason to be flexible: their country needs the access to the Pacific that Peru and Chile offer.
The local stock market’s fall immediately after Humala’s victory is a clear sign that the most influential forces in the Peruvian economy will continue to press for deeds, not promises – deeds that benefit their interests, of course.
Humala most likely will not follow market dictates robotically.
But he will not be able wholly to avoid them.
Finally, there is the question of political effectiveness.
Humala’s coalition, Gana Perú, will have a plurality of representatives in Peru’s congress, but will need the votes of ex-president Alejandro Toledo’s party to have a controlling majority.
Toledo, a Stanford graduate and a moderate politician, supported Humala during the campaign and provided him with economic advisers, which proved to be decisive in establishing the credibility of Humala’s retreat from radical policies.
Both the internal and external environments in which Humala finds himself – and the fact that he won by a margin of only three percentage points – seem to call for moderation and consensus.
Half of Peru’s citizens did not side with him.
Polarization may have proved functional to winning an election, but Humala will have to broaden his support in order to forge the consensus he needs in order to govern.
Olympian Economics
LONDON – As Olympic mania swept the world in recent weeks, it transported the host country, Great Britain, to a rare display of public exultation.
Indeed, the successes of “Team GB” produced an upsurge of patriotic rejoicing akin to victory in war.
Britain finished third in the gold medal count, behind the United States and China, much larger countries, but ahead of Russia, which traditionally competes with America for first place.
So, what is the secret of Olympic success?
The acquisition of medals, precisely because it gives so much satisfaction, has become the object of scientific inquiry and national endeavor.
Before the 2012 Games, the Financial Times combined four economic models to produce the following “consensus” prediction of gold medals (the actual results are in brackets): 1.
United States, 39 (46); 2.
China, 37 (38); 3.
Great Britain, 24 (29); 4.
Russia, 12 (24); 5.
South Korea, 12 (13); and 6.
Germany, 9 (11).
The gold medal rankings and overall medal placement (gold, silver, and bronze) were correctly predicted in all cases.
The most striking finding is that the medal count can be predicted with great accuracy from four key variables: population, GDP per capita, past performance, and host status.
Everything else – different training structures, better equipment, and so forth – is pretty much noise.
The impact of population and GDP is obvious: A large population increases the chance that a country will have athletes with the natural talent to win medals, and a high GDP means that it will have the money to invest in the infrastructure and training needed to develop medal-winning athletes.
Past performance is also important: the visibility and prestige of a sport increases after Olympic success, as does funding.
Medals attract money; failure results in cuts.
Finally, the “home advantage” includes not just the benefit of morale and the opportunity to train in the actual Olympic venues, but also the funding boost that host status brings.
In 2004, British athletes received £70 million ($110 million).
By 2008, after London was awarded the 2012 Games, the total was £245 million, and stood at £264 million this year.
Over the past ten Olympics, the host country has won 54% more medals on average than when it was not the host.
Hosting the Olympics boosts performance before the hosted Games, and has effects that outlast them.
Some sports are more sensitive to income and host-nation effects than others.
Equestrianism, sailing, cycling, and swimming, for example, are far more expensive than running, and this reduces the participation of low-income countries.
It is almost impossible for some countries to produce medal-winning athletes in some sports – Ethiopia has only one swimming pool per six million people.
Sometimes, poor countries are priced out of a sport.
India was historically strong at field hockey, winning almost all of the gold medals between 1928 and 1968, but, since the Games switched from grass to expensive synthetic turf, the Indians have won just one field hockey medal.
Some of the sports at which Britain has done particularly well, like cycling and rowing, are most highly influenced by income and host effects.
Brazil can therefore expect to improve considerably on its modest haul (15 medals) and 21st-place finish when it hosts the 2016 Games.
As for the others, the formula for success is fairly simple: select your potentially winning sports, pick the potential medalists in those sports, pour money into them, and stick with both the sports and the players until the medals roll in.
The funding can be corporate sponsorship (as in the United States), state money (as in China), or a mixture of National Lottery and state money (as in the United Kingdom).
Two questions arise.
First, why should a country concentrate on accumulating trophies at the expense of other desirable goods?
And, second, can the formula for “picking winners” in sports be replicated for competitive success in international trade?
The answer to the first is not obvious.
An economist would probably argue that money spent on education, housing, and health care brings more “welfare” than money spent in the quest for medals.
When all is said and done, sports is entertainment; the others are necessities.
But that argument ignores the effect of sporting success on national morale, an intangible factor in a country’s success in other, more “serious,” spheres of endeavor.
A country that can succeed in one sphere of peaceful competition is encouraged to feel that it can do well in others.
One can treat this claim with a certain degree of skepticism – after all, the 2004 Athens Olympics failed to produce a Greek economic miracle.
But it does lead to the second question: Can the methods that produce Olympic winners be applied elsewhere?
Nothing is more discredited in Anglo-American economics than the policy of “picking winners.”
The consensus has been that it inevitably leads to the state “backing losers.”
Economic success, on this view, is best left to the unfettered play of market forces.
This philosophy has been heavily jolted by two inconvenient facts: the financial collapse of 2007-2008 and the experience of countries like Japan, South Korea, Taiwan, Germany, and even the US, where economic success depended heavily on sustained government investment of the kind that has produced Olympic medals.
As in sports, so in economic life: government commitment can start a virtuous circle of success, while government neglect can trigger a vicious circle of decline.
Nevertheless, the popular hunger for sporting success, and the celebratory outpouring that it evokes, is bound to provoke some disquiet.
It seems to mark humanity’s retreat into infantilism.
But if the douceur of sports can channel aggressive passions into benign, if trivial pursuits, why should we deny our star performers their heroic stature?
An Economic Myth of Olympic Proportions
NORTHAMPTON – According to Olympic legend, hosting the Games is an economic boon for the chosen city and country.
In reality, the Games are more often a boondoggle, as Rio de Janeiro is finding out.
First, consider how the games are awarded to a host city.
The International Olympic Committee (IOC), an unregulated global monopoly, conducts a biannual auction whereby the world’s cities compete against one another to prove their suitability.
Business executives – often from the construction industry – who stand to gain from the Games’ preparation usually lead a prospective city’s bidding process.
Among other things, cities will offer lavish sporting venues, ostentatious ceremonial spaces, newly built transportation networks, luxurious accommodations for athletes, and media and broadcasting centers.
The outcome of this process is predictable: winning cities usually overbid.
The cost of hosting the Summer Olympics these days runs from $15 billion to $20 billion, including venue construction and renovation, operations and security, and additional infrastructure.
The total revenue for the host city from its share of international television contracts (roughly 25%, with the other 75% going to the IOC), international and domestic sponsorships, ticket sales, and memorabilia is $3.5-4.5 billion.
In other words, costs comfortably exceed revenues by $10 billion or more.
Those vying for their city to host the Games often argue that any short-term deficit will turn into long-term gain, because tourism, foreign investment, and trade will grow, to say nothing of improved national morale.
Again, the empirical evidence does not support this extravagant claim.
Consider tourism.
During July and August 2012, the number of tourists visiting London, the host city for the Summer Games that year, actually fell by 5%.
The shops, restaurants, theaters, and museums around the event space in Piccadilly Circus all reported next to no business during the 17 days of the Games.
As it happens, everyday tourists avoid Olympic host cities during the Games, owing to crowds, transportation delays, inflated prices, and possible security threats.
As a result, hosting the Games does more harm than good for tourism, which thrives on word of mouth.
If tourists are avoiding a city – or having a negative experience because of the Games – they will have nothing good to report back to their family and friends.
Beyond tourism, no smart business makes investment or trade decisions simply because a city has hosted the Olympics.
If anything, the expense to the city creates fiscal distress, implying a less favorable business environment in the future.
Another drawback to hosting the games is the public scrutiny a city receives.
Rio de Janeiro’s preparations to host this year’s Summer Games did its international image no favors.
A city once known for its natural beauty and fun-loving lifestyle is now known for corruption, violence, bad traffic, pollution, political instability, and the Zika virus.
One area where some host cities – but not all – can actually realize long-term gains is in infrastructure spending.
In Rio’s case, one could argue that the city will benefit from improvements to its international airport and downtown port.
But this is not a valid reason to become a host city; it is merely a consolation prize.
A billion dollars of productive infrastructure development does little to make up for the other $19 billion spent on the Games, which will not improve the city for most of its residents or regular visitors.
Consider the $2.9 billion subway line (originally budgeted at $1.6 billion) connecting the Games’ beachside event space to Barra da Tijuca, a wealthy suburb ten miles away.
This new infrastructure will boost property values in Barra da Tijuca, while doing nothing to improve Rio’s horrendous street traffic.
The bulk of Rio’s workers living north and west of downtown will have just as difficult a commute as ever.
Examples like this abound.
The city built a new golf course on the protected wetlands of the Marapendi Natural Reserve, which will degrade the ecosystem and consume vast amounts of water – a preciously scarce resource in Rio.
It also built bus lanes that run between Olympic venues, which will ease travel for IOC executives but only further congest the city’s now-narrower roadways for everyone else.
Along with pointless and disruptive infrastructure, the Rio Games have exacted a human cost.
To make room for the 32 sport venues, the athletes’ Olympic Village, the broadcasting and media center, the ceremonial green space, and to beautify the surrounding landscape, the Rio government has evicted more than 77,000 residents from shantytowns or favelas since 2009, the year the city was awarded the Games.
Ultimately, hosting the Olympic Games is a big economic gamble for any city.
Less developed cities with inadequate infrastructure must spend more to meet the IOC’s transportation, communications, and hospitality requirements; more developed cities have the infrastructure, but not necessarily the land, and risk disrupting thriving industries to bring the Games to fruition.
Olympic Gamesmanship
NEW YORK – China lobbied long and hard to host this summer’s Olympics, and thousands of Chinese literally danced in the streets when the decision was made to award Beijing the games.
This was to be a chance for the Chinese to show the world just how far they and their country had come.
I do not know if there is a Mandarin equivalent for “Be careful what you wish for,” but if there is, it surely applies.
China is getting a great deal of international attention, but not the sort it bargained for.
On the contrary, China is finding itself under intense international scrutiny for everything from its policy toward Tibet, human rights, and product safety to the level of its currency, its policy in Sudan, and global climate change.  What was meant to be a moment of celebration has turned into one of criticism.
Indeed, it is likely that several prominent world leaders, including British Prime Minster Gordon Brown, German Chancellor Angela Merkel, and United Nations Secretary General Ban Ki-moon, will not attend the opening ceremonies.
Several prominent American politicians have voiced support for a boycott.
Still other heads of state, including French President Sarkozy, are weighing staying away.
Of course, China merits criticism in many areas of its domestic and foreign policy.
But snubbing China is misguided. It ignores what the country has accomplished, and it risks consequences that are inconsistent with what the critics themselves want to see.
Some perspective is called for.
Modern China is only some six decades old.
Its economic growth has been and is truly astounding.
Hundreds of millions of Chinese have been lifted out of poverty.
Even the recent earthquake in Sichuan revealed how Chinese politics are changing.
Cameras were allowed in; senior officials were seen and heard.
There are also indications that China’s foreign policy is evolving.
China has played a helpful role of late in encouraging North Korean cooperation with demands to limit its nuclear capabilities.
In Sudan, China supported a UN Security Council resolution establishing an international operation and committed 315 engineers to the UN-African Union force.
None of this excuses or justifies the shortcomings in Chinese behavior at home or abroad, which are many and real.
But reality is not one-dimensional.
China is changing, in many ways for the better, and further change in the right direction is not likely to result from a policy of isolating or sanctioning China.   
If we want China to become a full participant, a stakeholder, in the international system, we are more likely to achieve this outcome by integrating China into the world’s institutions.
The Chinese need to see how they benefit from inclusion – and how they would suffer from not being one of the countries shaping and buttressing today’s international institutions.
We should seek China’s integration as a matter of self-interest.
In a globalized world, global challenges largely require global responses, which are impossible if a country of China’s size and population and wealth does not participate.
Stopping the spread of nuclear weapons, promoting more efficient energy use, taking action on climate change, and maintaining an open global economy – these and other tasks require Chinese participation, even cooperation, if globalization is not to overwhelm us all.
One useful step on our part would be to end the anachronism of bringing together many of the world’s principal leaders in the annual G-8 meeting of industrialized countries and not including China (or India or Brazil, for that matter) as a matter of course.
But integration will succeed only if China and its leaders are open to it.
Communism and socialism do not command public support as they once did.
Materialism and consumerism cannot be a substitute for political and religious freedoms, which remain severely constrained.
Nationalism can all too easily fill a void.
This is dangerous, as history demonstrates that leaders who allow or stimulate excessive nationalism can all too easily become trapped by it. 
This argues not simply for keeping nationalism in check, but for allowing greater political and religious freedom so that there are alternative sources of legitimacy and allegiance in Chinese society beyond that of economic advancement.
This is something that the Chinese will largely have to do by and for themselves.
Outsiders can and should make their views known, but mostly in private and without saying and doing things likely to stimulate the very nationalism we want to discourage.
All of which brings us back to this summer’s events in Beijing.
China needs to show respect for human rights and allow journalists to report.
Rather than boycott Beijing, the world’s leaders should embrace the Olympics and what they represent.
The Olympics are a venue in which individuals and countries compete, but in conformity with a set of rules.  This is exactly what we want from China in the twenty-first century.
Olympolitik
PARIS – Is there a link between economic power and Olympic medals?
Is a form of multipolarity in sports emerging as political multipolarity sets in?
In 1992, immediately after the Cold War’s end, the United States and the former Soviet Union’s “Unified Team” won a quarter of the medals in Barcelona.
Global bipolarity had not yet vanished.
By the 2008 Beijing games, the world had changed significantly. The Soviet-American duopoly had given way to a Sino-American duopoly, which won a combined 20% of the medals.
The London games confirmed this trend.
The Sino-American duopoly has loomed large in the medal count (22% of the total), but not outrageously so.
Europe remains strong, while Asia and the Caribbean have made significant headway.
There are, in fact, four factors behind Olympic power: population size, sports traditions, sports policy, and level of development.
Taken separately, none of these factors can explain a country’s Olympic record.
Collectively, however, their explanatory power is relatively large.
For starters, population size is a source of power simply because large countries can take advantage of their greater human potential to shine in a broad array of disciplines.
Countries with great demographic potential therefore inherently have great Olympic potential.
Conversely, Australia appears to be the only country with less than 50 million inhabitants gaining more than 3% of the medals at a Summer Olympic Games.
But, of course, a large population is not always a recipe for success.
The most striking example is India, one of the least sports-oriented countries in the world, given its demographics: six medals for more than 1.2 billion inhabitants – the same number as Croatia, which has a population of just 4.3 million!
Clearly, Indian society has a complex relationship with sports.
But the disparity between its demographic size and its Olympic success also shows that political multipolarity and sports multipolarity are not cast from the same mold.
India is probably the most spectacular counter-example, but it is not the only one.&nbsp; Countries like Brazil, Argentina, Turkey, and Mexico are dwarfed by countries like South Korea.
Overall, it is fair to say that South America and the Middle East remain fringe players at the Olympics.
The Caribbean, for example, far outranks Brazil.
National traditions are the second important factor in Olympic success.
First, there are physical and natural realities.
Ethiopians begin running in childhood as a means to reach, say, a distant school in the highlands.
And the Caribbean does not necessarily offer many sports activities besides track and field, for which relatively few material resources are needed to create champions.
This is one of the reasons why East Africa, the Caribbean, and to a lesser extent the Maghreb are prominently represented in Olympic running disciplines.
But traditions can also be created.
The French are not culturally or physically predisposed to dominate sports such as judo, canoeing, and swimming, in which they have achieved distinction for more than 50 years.
A national sports policy can be conducive to good results.
Such policies embody a country’s choice in developing one or several sports.
They can grant a great deal of autonomy to various federations (as in the US and Great Britain); devote significant public resources to sports for political purposes (as in Russia and other dictatorships); or insulate publicly financed sports institutions from partisan politics in order to ensure continuity (as in Italy and France).
On the other hand, the absence of a real sports policy (or its unraveling) can become a decisive handicap.
Indeed, how else to explain the poor performance of a country as well-endowed as Switzerland, or as highly populated as Nigeria?
And what accounts for South Korea’s exceptional performance if not a coherent sports policy?
Finally, a country’s level of development, as we have seen, is far from being decisive to Olympic success, especially in the running disciplines.
Runners can travel and train individually on the best tracks.
Obviously, however, development does play a significant role.
While sports like running are relatively inexpensive, others – including gymnastics, swimming, and even more so team games and equestrian events – require significant resources.
It is no coincidence that the Caribbean and Africa do not have a presence in these disciplines at the highest levels of competition.
Indeed, of the ten countries that received the most medals at the London games, all except China and Russia are OECD members.
There are no less-developed countries, with the possible exception of Ukraine, in the top 15.
Thus, while economic power is not a prerequisite to Olympic power, multipolarity in sports remains positively correlated with it.
Africa received only 3% of all medals in London.
But, if the continent can sustain its recent economic growth, that number will almost surely rise.
The Draghi Put on Trial
CAMBRIDGE – In the summer of 2012, European Central Bank President Mario Draghi pledged to do “whatever it takes” to save the euro, including purchasing “unlimited” amounts of struggling governments’ bonds.
The move, which has come to be known as the “Draghi put,” almost immediately reduced borrowing costs for Spain and Italy, and is widely touted as having pulled the eurozone back from the brink of disaster – without ever using the so-called “outright monetary transactions.”
That may sound like a resounding success: the mere announcement of the OMT scheme was enough to end the monetary union’s existential crisis.
But, according to the German Constitutional Court, the policy violates European Union treaties – a ruling that the European Court of Justice is now reviewing.
The ECJ’s decision will have important implications for the eurozone’s future, for it will define what authority, if any, the ECB has to intervene in a debt crisis.
And yet, in a fundamental way, the current debate about OMT misses the point.
Rather than asking whether the ECB’s mandate allows it&nbsp;to intervene in a debt crisis, EU leaders should be asking whether it should.
The Bundesbank’s position on this question is well known; a leaked submission to the Constitutional Court last year declared unequivocally that, “It is not the duty of the ECB to rescue states in crisis.”
But there is a strong case for allowing the ECB to act as lender of last resort.
One key argument for forcing central banks to adhere to strict inflation targets is that it eliminates the temptation to use “monetary financing” (purchases of government bonds) unexpectedly, either to stimulate the economy or to inflate away its debt.
After all, such action rarely works: markets anticipate it and raise interest rates to compensate lenders for expected inflation.
The result is typically both high inflation and high borrowing costs.
What is worse, the argument goes, the expectation of monetary financing would drive governments to borrow excessively.
This could trigger a vicious circle of mounting debt and uncontrollable inflation, with devastating consequences.
These are convincing arguments.
But they fail to account for one critical factor: historical context.
If a debt crisis results from government profligacy and mismanagement, rather than from a market failure, it is true that the central bank should not intervene.
If, however, the crisis results from a coordination failure among investors – when each investor refuses to roll over the government’s debt for fear that others will do the same, leading to a default – monetary policy can play an important role.
Indeed, by putting a floor on the price of sovereign debt and any accompanying inflation, central-bank intervention would reduce the real value of the debt and facilitate repayment.
Moreover, as the OMT announcement demonstrated, a credible promise to use monetary financing in the event of such a crisis can prevent it from arising in the first place – with no inflationary action required.
Without central-bank involvement, investors’ panicky prophecy would be self-fulfilling, with the resulting spike in borrowing costs making it impossible for the government to repay its creditors.
In other words, prohibiting the central bank from acting as lender of last resort can push solvent economies into a needless debt crisis, undermining output and employment.
By most accounts, this is precisely what happened to Spain and Italy in 2012.
In this context, the Draghi put was a highly defensible action.
Refusing to consider any amount of monetary financing, and continuing to adhere to a strict inflation target, would have been much more difficult to justify.
To be sure, central-bank intervention is not the only way to quell self-fulfilling crises in the eurozone.
Fiscal transfers, whereby eurozone countries commit to provide funds to their distressed counterparts, could also work.
But this approach is far less practicable, and thus less credible.
Opponents of central-bank intervention are right about one thing: monetary financing carries serious risks.
In order to ensure that it is as safe and effective as possible, it must be used primarily&nbsp;in the event of self-fulfilling debt crises.
In terms of institutional design, it is thus optimal for the central bank to maintain a strong commitment to keeping inflation low in normal times and to be willing to intervene in a crisis.
The ECB’s use of OMT satisfies both criteria.
One Big Union
PARIS – In the last few weeks, the idea of establishing a European banking union has become the latest remedy advanced as a solution to the long-running euro crisis.
But, whatever the merits of a banking union – and there are many – proposals to establish one raise more questions than can currently be answered.
The motivations of those who advocate a banking union differ markedly.
For some, particularly in southern Europe, it is seen as a means of shifting the burden of supporting their indigent banks to those with deeper pockets.
For others, especially in the European Union’s Brussels Eurocracy, it is seen as another leap forward in the construction of a European super-state.
Taking their cue from the sacred Rome Treaty’s reference to “ever closer union,” the European Commission’s theologians view every crisis as an opportunity to advance their federalist agenda.
The European Central Bank has been more thoughtful, though no less enthusiastic, arguing that a banking union should have three objectives.
First, stronger eurozone-wide supervision should reinforce financial integration, “mitigate macroeconomic imbalances,” and improve the conduct of monetary policy.
How a single EU supervisor would address the problem of imbalances is not explained, but it is surely a worthy aim.
The second objective should be to “break the link between banks and sovereigns,” which has been a particularly dangerous feature of the last year, while the third is to “minimize the risks for taxpayers through adequate contributions by the financial industry.”
The third aim could be achieved country by country, but it is certainly arguable that an across-the-board banking levy, or a Europe-wide financial-transaction tax, would eliminate competitive distortions.
Many individual countries have taken a generation to develop their own domestic schemes.
And, in this case, three big political issues have yet to be resolved.
First, the identity of the single European banking supervisor remains undecided, and the ECB has seen an opportunity for a power grab.
Central bankers in Europe have always resented the narrow monetary-policy mandate given to the ECB under the Maastricht Treaty.
Banking supervision was not included among the ECB’s objectives, though one article of the treaty gives the system of European central banks as a whole the task of contributing to effective supervision.
They now argue that the simplest solution would be to expand that remit and make the ECB the de facto pan-European supervisor.
That is not the outcome favored by the European Commission, which has only just set up the European Banking Authority.
The EBA is closely linked to the Commission itself, and is seen as the natural candidate for a broader role.
The Commission has a case, but it also has a problem.
During the political horse-trading that preceded the creation of the EBA (together with two equivalent bodies for securities and insurance), it was agreed that the new authority would be based in London.
That seemed logical at the time, but not if the EBA’s role is to be broadened.
How could a eurozone supervisor be based outside the eurozone?
The second unresolved question is how to achieve a banking union in legal terms.
Constitutional change on this scale would normally require a new European treaty.
But that would take time, and Europe’s leaders have run out of it.
Furthermore, there is no guarantee that voters in countries that require a referendum on treaty changes would support a further transfer of sovereignty.
So the likely outcome is that, in the EU’s time-honored fashion, the banking union will be constructed using existing powers, finessing the sovereignty question, and avoiding any reference to public opinion.
That points towards reliance on the ECB.
The final question is what such a eurozone banking union would mean for the single financial market, and especially for EU countries that are outside the single currency.
Many of them would sign up willingly, as they intend to join as soon as possible, in spite of the euro’s difficulties.
But that is not the case for the United Kingdom, and London remains the continent’s biggest financial center, by far.
I fear that the French and Germans have now lost patience with the troublesome British, and are reluctant to cut a deal.
And Euroskeptic British politicians see this as an opportunity to recast the UK’s relationship with the EU; indeed, for some, it means a chance to negotiate an exit.
Opinion in the City of London tends to favor a middle way, which would allow the UK to cling to the benefits of the single market, without conceding unified regulation.
That will be hard to pull off.
I suspect that a banking union of some kind will be implemented, and soon.
Otherwise, the eurozone banking system will collapse.
But the consequences of such a step for Europe’s great free-trade experiment could be serious, and, if not managed carefully, could lead to Britain’s withdrawal.
The political stakes are high, and the outcome is likely to reflect that.
One Crisis, One World
GENEVA – As recession spreads around the world, the global production networks that arose with the globalization of the world economy have become sources of cutbacks and job losses.
Postponing purchases of new winter coats in the United States means job losses in Poland or China.
These losses then translate into reduced demand for American or German machine tools.
Unemployment and reduced sales then feed back into new losses in banks’ loan portfolios, further weakening the battered financial sector.
As a result, anxiety, hopelessness, and anger are spreading, as what was a financial crisis becomes an economic and human crisis.
Unchecked, it could become a security crisis.
Trying to rescue the financial sector without supporting a recovery in terms of businesses, jobs, and family purchasing power will not work.
What is needed is a large worldwide fiscal stimulus to counteract falling private demand.
Different countries’ capacity to act depends on their indebtedness, foreign exchange reserves, and current-account deficits.
Germany and China can do more than others.
The US can do a lot, in part because of the dollar’s status as the main international reserve currency.
Low interest rates mean that the additional debt burdens that public borrowing will create can remain manageable.
Moreover, if the stimulus succeeds and leads to an early recovery, the additional income gained may more than offset the increase in debt.
Given the collapse of commodity prices and excess production capacities, there is no short-term inflation danger, even if part of the stimulus is financed directly by central banks.
The argument for a strong fiscal stimulus is overwhelming.
Several countries have already announced measures, but there is a need to evaluate what they all amount to in reality.
For example, some constitute “new” money, while others represent existing commitments brought forward.
We also need to assess the quality of these packages.
The argument is strong for providing stimulus through increased government expenditures rather than relying on, say, tax cuts, because panicked consumers might save the money instead of spending it.
Debt and inflation will reappear as medium-term problems, so it is critical that the fiscal ammunition used helps long-term productivity, growth, and sustainability.
Of course, fiscal stimulus does not mean just throwing money at the problem. There needs to be a strategy, priorities must be weighed, and empirical evidence analyzed.
We should also remember that what growth there is in the world economy in 2009-2010 will come mostly from developing economies. Policies supporting their growth are critical to prospects in the advanced economies, too.
Each country may hope that others will stimulate their demand while it preserves its fiscal headroom, thereby relying on exports as the engine of recovery.
Each country may also be tempted by protectionist measures, trying to preserve domestic jobs at the expense of imports.
Such “beggar-thy-neighbor” policies in the 1930’s aggravated and deepened the Great Depression.
The automobile industry is a good example.
Measures to keep the industry afloat in one country look like unfair competition to others.
But the answer is not to let a collapse in the world’s car industry fuel a deeper recession.
The answer is to coordinate a global recovery package, which creates the opportunity to point recovery in the direction of a new generation of fuel-efficient and low-carbon-emission vehicles and green jobs.
Sovereign countries will have the final say on their recovery packages, but global coordination will increase the effectiveness of everyone’s actions.
Moreover, fairness and security considerations demand that the most vulnerable, who had no role in the making of this crisis, receive support.
Extending social safety nets helps the most vulnerable and is likely to have high multiplier effects, as the need to spend is most urgent for the poorest people.
Training programs, including for green jobs, should be significantly increased.
Public expenditures must be focused on programs with strong employment content, such as in small- and medium-scale infrastructure projects and support to local governments.
Credit lines should be kept open to smaller businesses, which employ the bulk of the world’s workers but have the least access to credit.
The use of social dialogue for crisis management should be increased, because trust must be rebuilt.
Donors must maintain the promised (and very modest) levels of development aid for the poorer countries, and the drive to achieve the Millennium Development Goals must be renewed.
The availability and affordability of trade finance should be improved.
The Bretton Woods institutions have a key role to play.
The International Monetary Fund and central banks should increase liquidity in a coordinated fashion in the form of short-term credit to emerging-market economies suffering from cuts in capital inflows and export earnings.
The World Bank should increase lending to help finance growth-supporting expenditures in developing countries.
Tangible progress is needed in global trade negotiations in order to signal that the world economy will remain open.
While these recovery measures are put in place, the world must also build the institutions for the twenty-first-century economy.
The International Labor Organization’s Decent Work Agenda of employment and enterprise, social protection, sound labor relations, and fundamental rights at work creates a solid platform for fair globalization.
Any crisis is also an opportunity.
This crisis has demonstrated that the destinies of countries around the world are linked.
Policy coordination and a global strategy that instills confidence and creates hope will bring a quicker and stronger recovery to us all.
One Forest, Two Tigers
When Japan’s government recently decided to ignore Chinese protests and allow Taiwan’s former president, Lee Teng-hui, to visit Japan, China lashed out at its Asian neighbor, even threatening retaliation. But this latest dispute is characteristic of a remarkable flurry of anti-Japanese activity in China since 2003.
That August, construction workers in Qiqihar mistakenly ruptured mustard gas canisters left from the wartime Japanese occupation, injuring dozens and killing at least one.
The reaction by China’s public to the gory photos of the injured was furious.
One million signatures were rapidly gathered on an Internet petition demanding that the Japanese government thoroughly resolve the chemical weapons issue, while Internet chat rooms filled with anti-Japanese invective.
Two weeks later, 400 Japanese businessmen hired as many as 500 local Chinese prostitutes for a weekend sex party in a Zhu Hai hotel.
Racy reports in China’s press sparked another round of righteous fury, drawing on the trope of China as a raped woman, an image long suppressed under Mao.
Occurring on the 72nd anniversary of the 1931 Mukden Incident that led to the Japanese occupation of Manchuria, 90% of Chinese respondents to an Internet poll said they believed that the Japanese businessmen intended to humiliate China.
The following month, at a party thrown by Northwestern University in Xian, three Japanese students and one of their Japanese teachers performed a skit, during which they pranced around the stage with red bras over their t-shirts.
In Japan, such skits are apparently regarded as humorous; in China, the skit was seen as lewd and insulting.
The Japanese students received death threats.
Thousands of Chinese demonstrated on campus and through the city, shouting “Boycott Japanese goods!” and “Japanese dogs, get out!”
A Japanese flag was burned outside the foreign students’ dorm.
Even though the Japanese students apologized, they were expelled.
Then, last August, during the Asian Cup soccer tournament, Chinese fans in Chongqing, Jinan, and Beijing hurled insults at the Japanese team – and bottles at their team bus.
During the Cup final between China and Japan in Beijing, which Japan won, Chinese fans reportedly chanted “Kill!
Kill!
Kill!” and “May a big sword decapitate the Japanese!”
Sino-Japanese amity was hardly enhanced in mid-November, when a Chinese nuclear sub encroached into Japanese waters.
Nor did it help when Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao snubbed Japanese Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi’s invitation to visit his country.
Why has this popular nationalism emerged?
And why is it directed at Japan?
The short answer is that after a quarter-century of economic reform, Chinese today are much freer to express themselves.
Under Mao, when the Chinese Communist Party sought accommodation, diplomatic recognition, and overseas development aid from Japan, Chinese were not allowed to confront their past victimization at the hands of Western and Japanese imperialism.
Today, however, Chinese are facing past atrocities from the “Century of Humiliation” that ended with the Communist takeover in 1948, and a long suppressed anger has resurfaced.
To most Chinese, the Japanese are paradigmatic “devils,” not only because of the brutality of Japanese imperialism and the sheer number of Chinese killed by Japanese troops.
Anti-Japanese anger has an ethical justification rooted in the perceived injustice of “little brother” Japan’s impertinent behavior towards “big brother” China, from China’s loss in the Sino-Japanese Jiawu War and the humiliating Treaty of Shimonoseki of 1895 to the insulting “21 Demands” of 1915 and on to WWII atrocities like the Rape of Nanking.
The complexity and depth of these anti-Japanese sentiments helps sustain them and sets them apart from other, more fleeting and contradictory anti-foreign sentiments, such as those Chinese sometimes harbor towards Americans.
The emergence of a deep-rooted and popular anti-Japanese enmity in China does not bode well.
As the Party uses nationalist sentiment to keep China unified, these sentiments have become fiercer, and the political leadership is increasingly held hostage to nationalist opinion in formulating China’s foreign policy towards Japan.
As a result, Japanese increasingly fear China’s rise and possible future retribution for their country’s wartime aggressions.
Indeed, Japanese public-opinion surveys also reveal a marked decline in favorable views of China.
Meanwhile, an emergent Japanese nationalism argues that Japan should revise its pacifist constitution and develop its military capability – possibly including nuclear weapons to balance threats like that from North Korea.
The possibility of a Sino-Japanese arms race is becoming increasingly real.
Indeed, the Japan Defense Agency recently outlined three scenarios for a Chinese attack against Japan, and announced that it is planning to redeploy its troops from the north (where they were originally stationed to defend Japan against the former Soviet Union) to the south, facing China.
Pessimists now fret that Asia is not big enough for both China and Japan: you “can’t have two tigers in one forest.”
Optimists counter that China and Japan can cooperate, acting as the “dual engines” of Asian development.
Japan expert Feng Zhaokui takes the middle ground, arguing that Sino-Japanese relations will be marked by the coexistence of both cooperation and conflict.
Recent developments suggest that a purely cooperative bilateral relationship is unlikely, to say the least.
If we are lucky, Feng may be right. But if we are not, we could witness the emergence of a new and dangerous political fault line in East Asia.
One Number Says it All
NEW HAVEN – The number is 0.2%.
It is the average annualized growth of US consumer spending over the past 14 quarters – calculated in inflation-adjusted terms from the first quarter of 2008 to the second quarter of 2011.
Never before in the post-World War II era have American consumers been so weak for so long.
This one number encapsulates much of what is wrong today in the US – and in the global economy.
There are two distinct phases to this period of unprecedented US consumer weakness.
From the first quarter of 2008 through the second period of 2009, consumer demand fell for six consecutive quarters at a 2.2% annual rate.
Not surprisingly, the contraction was most acute during the depths of the Great Crisis, when consumption plunged at a 4.5% rate in the third and fourth quarters of 2008.
As the US economy bottomed out in mid-2009, consumers entered a second phase – a very subdued recovery.
We all knew it was tough for the American consumer – but this revision portrays the crisis-induced cutbacks and subsequent anemic recovery in a much dimmer light.
The reasons behind this are not hard to fathom.
By exploiting a record credit bubble to borrow against an unprecedented property bubble, American consumers spent well beyond their means for many years.
When both bubbles burst, over-extended US households had no choice but to cut back and rebuild their damaged balance sheets by paying down outsize debt burdens and rebuilding depleted savings.
Yet, on both counts, balance-sheet repair has only just begun.
While household-sector debt was pruned to 115% of disposable personal income in early 2011 from the peak of 130% hit in 2007, it remains well in excess of the 75% average of the 1970-2000 period.
And, while the personal saving rate rose to 5% of disposable income in the first half of 2011 from the rock-bottom 1.2% low hit in mid-2005, this is far short of the nearly 8% norm that prevailed during the last 30 years of the twentieth century.
With retrenchment and balance-sheet repair only in its early stages, the zombie-like behavior of American consumers should persist.
The 2.1% consumption growth trend realized during the anemic recovery of the past two years could well be indicative of what lies ahead for years to come.
Such an outcome would have three profound implications for the economic outlook: First, since consumer demand still accounts for 71% of real GDP, a protracted shortfall in trend consumption represents a major headwind for overall US economic growth.
While misguided Washington policymakers would like nothing better than for consumers to return to their old risky ways and start spending again, over-extended American households now know better.
The heavy artillery of monetary and fiscal stimulus is being wasted on attempts to short-circuit balance-sheet repair.
Second, persistent weakness in consumption and GDP growth puts the US economy on a much weaker growth trajectory than that which is built into the government’s long-term budget estimates.
The Congressional Budget Office is assuming 3.4% average growth in real GDP over the 2013 to 2016 period.
If the growth trend is one percentage point lower – a distinct possibility in an era of protracted consumption weakness – budget deficits would be a significantly higher.
Indeed, a CBO rule of thumb equates a sustained one-percentage-point shortfall in real GDP growth with budget deficits that are roughly $3 trillion larger over a ten-year period.
Needless to say, such an outcome would spell serious trouble for America’s already-contentious deficit-and-debt debate.
Finally, no other economy is capable of filling the void left by a protracted shortfall of US consumption.
Europe and Japan are in no position to take up the slack, and consumer sectors in the world’s major developing economies – especially China – lack the scale and dynamism to take over.
So enduring weakness in US consumption implies pressure on the growth of export-led developing economies.  The good news is that will force them to embrace long-overdue rebalancing strategies aimed at stimulating domestic consumer demand.
What can be done?
While measures adapted in the depths of the crisis – massive fiscal and monetary stimuli – were effective in placing a bottom under the free-fall, they have been ineffective in sparking meaningful recovery.
That should hardly be surprising in an era of balance-sheet repair.
Instead, the US needs a menu of policies tailored to the needs and pressures bearing down on American consumers.
Some possibilities: debt forgiveness to speed up the deleveraging process; creative saving policies that restore financial security to crisis-battered Americans; and, of course, jobs and the income they generate.
The US economy – as well as the global economy – cannot get back on its feet without the American consumer.
It is time to look beyond ideology – on the left as well as on the right – and frame the policy debate with that key consideration in mind.
One World, One Europe
PARIS – G-8, G-5, G-20, G-2, G-3, and now the G-14 (the G-8 plus the G-5 plus Egypt): never have the “mathematics” of world order seemed more complex and confusing.
Kofi Annan, on the occasion of the 60th anniversary of the United Nations in 2005, attempted to adjust the multilateral institutions of our world to fit its new realities.
It was a brave effort that came too soon.
The Northern industrial world was not yet ready to recognize the new weight of the emerging powers and the need to strike a new balance between North and South, East and West.
Has the current financial and economic crisis, given its traumatic depth and the obvious responsibility of the United States as its source, created the necessary conditions and a more favourable climate for a major re-foundation of the multilateral institutions?
It is too early to be confident that true change will come.
What is certain is that a rebalancing between North and South must start with an honest and hard-headed look at Europe’s current status in our multilateral system.
Nowadays, there is both too much and too little Europe, or, to put it differently, too many European countries are represented in the world’s premier forums, with too many voices.
But, in terms of weight and influence, there is not enough united Europe.
In the early 1980’s, a former French foreign minister, Jean François-Poncet suggested that France and the United Kingdom give up their seats on the UN Security Council in favour of a single European Union seat.
Germany would no longer seek a seat, Italy would not feel left out, and Europe’s international identity would be strengthened in a spectacular way.
Of course, this was not to be.
France and the UK were not willing to give up the symbol of their nuclear and international status.
They are probably are even less willing to do so today in the name of a Union that is less popular than ever, at least in the British Isles.
But let’s be reasonable: the absurdity of Italy’s presence in the G-8, together with the lack of official membership for countries such as China, India, and Brazil, is no longer acceptable or tenable.
Yet, because of that anomaly, Europe suffers from a grave deficit of legitimacy and presence internationally.
Of course, the US cannot be compared with a Union that is nowhere near becoming a United States of Europe.
But if the contrast between the two sides of the Atlantic, between the continent of “Yes, we can” and the continent of “Yes, we should,” is so immense, it is for reasons that Europeans are refusing to face or even to discuss.
The first one is the EU’s lack of anything that incarnates it.
It would be absurd to set US President Barack Obama and EU Commission President José Manuel Barroso against each other as equals.
Whereas Obama owes his election in large part to his charisma, Barroso is likely to succeed himself precisely because of his lack of charisma, because he says very little in so many languages.
But, for national leaders in the EU whose last ambition is to have to deal with a new Jacques Delors, i.e., a man with ideas of his own, a cipher like Barroso is just the man for the job.
On the other hand, the EU is paying a steep price for the bureaucratic anonymity of its leaders.
A process of escalating alienation and indifference between the Union and its citizens is at work, illustrated by low turnout in the last European Parliament elections.
As a result, there is less Union in Europe and less Europe in the world.
A strong European voice, such as Nicolas Sarkozy’s during the French presidency of the EU, may make a difference, but only for six months, and at the cost of reinforcing other European countries’ nationalist feelings in reaction to the expression of “Gallic pride.”
If Europeans want to regain self-confidence, pride and, collective hope, they must seize the opportunity that the necessary and inevitable adjustment of the multilateral system represents for them.
They should make of necessity an opportunity.
Of course, a single European voice in the major multilateral institutions appears more unrealistic than ever: who wants it, except maybe the EU’s smaller members?
But Europe’s last chance to be a credible actor in a multi-polar world rests precisely on its ability to present a single, united, responsible voice.
Europe currently exists as an economic actor, not as an international political actor.
If Europeans were to set for themselves the goal of speaking with one voice, of having one representative in the spectrum of multilateral institutions – starting with the UN Security Council – they would be taken more seriously.
In this case, one can really say that “less is more.”
Such a move would be deemed premature by numerous critics.
Twenty years ago, right after the fall of the Berlin Wall, one could say “I want Europe so much that I am willing to accept one Germany” – a revolutionary move if one had in mind the French writer François Mauriac’s famous joke, “I like Germany so much, I want two of them.”
In today’s global age, with the rise of emerging powers and the relative decline of the West, the only Europe that will be taken seriously is a Europe that can speak and be seen as one.
Job-Saving Technologies
SAN FRANCISCO – This is an age of anxiety about the job-killing effects of automation, with dire headlines warning that the rise of robots will render entire occupational categories obsolete.
But this fatalism assumes that we are powerless to harness what we create to improve our lives – and, indeed, our jobs.
Evidence of technology’s potential to help resolve our job concerns can be found in online talent platforms.
Digital platforms already have transformed many parts of the economy.
The online marketplaces built by Amazon and Alibaba, for example, have reshaped the retail landscape, partly by changing the local nature of retail markets.
Online talent platforms apply a similar approach to the world of work – with a similar impact.
By creating regional, national, and even global job markets, they allow employers to tap into broader talent pools and connect job seekers with a wider universe of opportunities.
In this way, they have transformed the typical job search, and are now approaching the critical mass needed to move employment numbers.
Such platforms take various forms.
Websites like LinkedIn, Monster.com, and Indeed.com – which match individuals with employers seeking to fill traditional jobs – have already engaged hundreds of millions of individual users and many of the world’s leading companies, and are generating the bulk of the economic impact.
But there are also the digital marketplaces of the “gig economy,” which connect freelancers with work assignments, from web development to chauffeuring passengers, thereby reducing underused labor and capital.
Digital platforms make markets more transparent and efficient, which is exactly the kind of disruption that today’s labor markets need.
In many countries, 30-45% of the working-age population is unemployed, inactive, or working only part-time. Meanwhile, companies are complaining that they cannot fill open positions in sectors ranging from technology to health care.
And those who are employed are often stuck in roles that do not take full advantage of their skills.
These issues represent a staggering waste of human and economic potential.
The problems stem from the fact that today’s labor markets provide crude, incomplete, and geographically restricted signals about the skills that actually are in demand.
As a result, mapping out an education, training, and career path entails quite a lot of guesswork.
That does not only hurt workers; it also means that companies’ needs can be left unmet.
Online talent platforms can boost labor-market efficiency by aggregating data on candidates and job openings in a broader geographic area, thereby illuminating for workers which positions are open today, as well as the actions they can take to gain more fulfilling work.
This dynamic could be especially important in Europe, where employment prospects differ radically across countries (and across regions within countries), and many feel trapped in stagnant local economies.
It is not likely that someone will move from Spain to Swaziland, even for a dream job; but that person might accept a better position a few hundred miles away.
Moreover, by facilitating faster matches, online talent platforms shorten the duration of unemployment, while the creation of flexible part-time opportunities can draw more inactive workers into the labor force and help part-time workers add hours.
At the same time, by connecting the right person with the right role, such platforms can boost productivity.
In short, while online talent platforms cannot boost weak demand in advanced economies, solve complex development issues in the emerging world, or create better jobs across the board, they can have a major impact on seemingly intractable issues like unemployment, underemployment, and low job satisfaction.
According to a recent McKinsey Global Institute research study, they could increase global GDP by $2.7 trillion annually by 2025; that is equivalent to adding another United Kingdom to the world economy.
Much of the impact of online talent platforms stems from the use of technology to bridge information asymmetries that impair labor-market performance.
In the past, these gaps were only partly bridged by signals carrying useful information. But online talent platforms aggregate much larger amounts of information efficiently, increasing the “signal density.”
With expanded data, companies can use predictive analytics to identify the best candidate for a given role.
Job seekers can augment their educational credentials and employment histories with samples of their work and endorsements from co-workers and customers, thereby conveying their potential value to employers more effectively.
Furthermore, platforms that aggregate anonymous reviews from current and former employees give individuals a better idea of what it is like to work for a given company, as well as the salary they can and should expect. As employee satisfaction becomes more widely reported, companies are facing pressure to ensure good working conditions in order to recruit the talent they need.
So far, the biggest winners from this shift have been educated and skilled professionals in the advanced economies.
In fact, the most sought-after engineers and software developers may not need to apply for jobs at all; companies are now increasingly recruiting “passive” candidates, sometimes forcing employers to increase the salaries of workers they want to retain.
But it is not all good news.
Now that employers have new tools for recruitment and assessment, they may find low-skilled workers easier to replace, potentially worsening income inequality in the short run.
In the longer term, however, a better overall system for skills upgrading could be designed – one that could be integral to facilitating upward mobility.
And there is another benefit in this regard. As the career outcomes associated with specific institutions and degree programs become more transparent, education and training providers will become more accountable for preparing their students for prosperous and productive lives.
With global smartphone subscriptions set to reach eight billion by 2025, online talent platforms have enormous room to expand into new regions and sectors.
As these technologies continue to evolve, they may change the world of work in ways we cannot even imagine today.
It seems that there is room in the labor market for a little optimism, after all.
Ending the Syrian Horror
RIYADH – No issue in the world today is of greater immediate importance than the need to end the civil war in Syria.
The past two and a half years have been a disaster for peace, stability, and our sense of common humanity.
Gut-wrenching images of unspeakable, indiscriminate violence against civilians have shocked the world.
According to the latest United Nations estimates, more than 100,000 Syrians, including many children, have lost their lives as a result of the criminal behavior of Bashar al-Assad’s regime.
There are now more than two million Syrian refugees in bordering countries and more than four million displaced persons inside Syria.
With the murder of peaceful protesters, the shelling of residential quarters, the execution of soldiers who refuse to fire on their countrymen, and the use of chemical weapons, a picture has emerged of a regime that is systematically defying the most basic international moral and legal standards.
Unless the world is content to watch the carnage continue, the Syrian regime and its instruments of oppression must be removed.
The international community’s shameful acceptance of impunity for Assad and his henchmen is a blot on the conscience of the world.
Western leaders’ dithering, and the callous, cynical, and cavalier support of Russia and China for Assad, is a stigma that they will bear forever.
Iran’s support for the regime is nothing less than a war crime.
The current charade of international control over Assad’s chemical arsenal would be amusing if it were not so blatantly perfidious.
While it has allowed US President Barack Obama to back down from his threat of military intervention in response to the regime’s use of chemical weapons, it has also allowed Assad to continue to butcher his people.
It is ludicrous to believe that US Secretary of State John Kerry’s “offhand” comment about destroying Syria’s chemical-weapons stockpile was anything but a well-choreographed opening for Russia to make its diplomatic play, thereby letting the US off the hook.
If the world, and especially the American people, believe that removing Assad’s chemical weapons will end his government’s slaughter of innocent men, women, and children, then all semblance of rational thought, humanitarian care, and regard for national interest has been thrown to the wind.
Preventing Assad from using his killing machine by any means, including targeted strikes on his air force and command-and-control centers, is the only way to end the bloodshed in Syria.
Yet, despite public promises by Kerry to supply the Syrian opposition with weapons – and even after Obama declared that Assad must go – Martin Dempsey, Chairman of the US Joint Chiefs of Staff, announced that the Pentagon had no such plans.
Why make such a statement, when it can bring only chagrin and despair to the victims, and comfort and solace to a criminal regime?
How one can reconcile such contradictions is beyond me.
If we continue to delay military action, we will have to intervene with greater force when the carnage spreads to Lebanon, Israel, Jordan, Turkey, and Iraq.
Indeed, Lebanon, following the collapse of Najib Mikati’s government, is already on the brink of civil war, as direct intervention in Syria by Hezbollah, Iran’s Lebanese proxy, to prevent Assad’s overthrow has exacerbated the country’s own longstanding sectarian tensions.
Witness the recent car-bomb attacks in a Hezbollah-controlled neighborhood of Beirut and in the northern city of Tripoli.
If law and order are to prevail, Hezbollah must be neutralized, and the Syrian-dispatched assassins of former Lebanese Prime Minister Rafik Hariri must be brought to justice.