Such an approach would not just address the NPL problem; by giving the private sector a stake in the SOEs, it would also help to spur performance-enhancing reforms.
After all, despite their grim financial performance, many of China’s SOEs have a lot going for them, including state-of-the-art equipment, first-rate technical staff, and competitive products.
Their problem is bad governance and poor management – a problem that, as China’s top leaders recognized in 2013, private-sector involvement can help resolve.
Of course, there are some obstacles to introducing debt-equity swaps between the public and private sectors, beginning with concern about the loss of state assets.
Given the severity of SOEs’ debt problem – the National Railway Company alone holds CN¥3 trillion (over $40 billion) in debt – discounts are inevitable when SOE debts are transferred to private AMCs.
This could cause some to assert that the private firms are realizing unjust gains.
In order to overcome this obstacle, China should engage in local experimentation – a tried-and-tested approach that has long guided the country’s reform efforts – beginning in the regions where the SOE debt problem is the most acute.
The resulting revitalization of SOEs would also help quell any doubts about debt-equity swaps with the private sector.
Another obstacle is the fear that, by allowing SOEs, yet again, to escape market discipline, debt-equity swaps would set a dangerous precedent.
But the improvements to corporate governance that would follow from the introduction of private shareholders would reduce substantially the likelihood that SOEs would continue to abuse the financial system.
Moreover, their NPLs are essentially sunk costs; debt-equity swaps are pretty much the only way to claw back anything at all.
By allowing private-sector participation in debt-equity swaps, China could kill three birds with one stone: advance SOE deleveraging, strengthen corporate governance in the state sector, and enhance economic efficiency.
With local experimentation, Chinese authorities map out that stone’s most effective trajectory.
Saving Face and Peace in the Gulf
PRINCETON – The West and Iran are playing a dangerous game.
In the past ten days, Iran threatened to close the Strait of Hormuz and warned the United States against sending an aircraft carrier back into the Persian Gulf.
The US predictably responded that its aircraft carriers could and would patrol wherever necessary to promote freedom of navigation.
Iran then announced that it would conduct naval exercises in the Strait.
In the game of “chicken,” two cars drive straight at each other at top speed; either one driver “chickens out” and swerves, or they collide in a fireball.
Governments around the world cannot stand by and watch that game play out across the world’s energy lifeline.
It is time for third parties to step in and facilitate solutions that allow Iran to save face while significantly and credibly reducing its supply of enriched uranium.
Iran may or may not be planning to go all the way to production of a nuclear weapon.
Nonetheless, it is in clear violation of its obligations under the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, as determined by the International Atomic Energy Agency, which is charged with monitoring the treaty.
Its continuing non-compliance is destabilizing the entire Middle East, with serious repercussions for global security.
Although the Iranian government could most likely be deterred from using a nuclear weapon, the price of a nuclear Iran could well be a regional arms race – a nuclear Saudi Arabia, possibly followed by Turkey and Egypt.
Nuclear weapons, components, and materials in a region that is already volatile and violent, and that determines the world’s oil prices, is an appalling scenario.
The market has already taken the measure of the past week’s tensions, driving up the price of some oil contracts to their highest levels in eight months.
Trying to force Iran to back down with steadily mounting sanctions has not produced results.
Despite the tightening economic noose – the US imposed sanctions on all companies that do business with Iran’s central bank, and the European Union plans to impose sanctions on Iranian oil exports by the end of January – many nuclear experts now estimate that Iran is very close to enriching enough uranium to build a bomb.
But how else can the US, the EU, and the United Nations make clear that the “international community” means what it says?
To go soft now is to lose all credibility with respect not only to Iran, but also to any other country thinking about pursuing a nuclear path.
The logic is compelling enough, except that the current course leaves Iran’s government no alternative between publicly backing down, which it will not do, and escalating its provocations.
After all, what government wants to be seen as “chickening out”?
And, in this case, decision-makers on both sides face domestic opponents who are only too ready to pounce at the least sign of weakness.
In the US, the Republican Party’s leading presidential candidate in this year’s election, Mitt Romney, declared at a recent debate, “If you elect me as President, Iran will not have a nuclear weapon.”
His principal challenger, Rick Santorum, told NBC News that he would “order air strikes” if it “became clear that [Iran] was going to get nuclear weapons.”
So this is no time for President Barack Obama to go wobbly.
Iranian politics is much harder to read.
In the ongoing power struggle between President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad and Supreme Leader Ali Khamenei, each is more likely to out-tough the other than to propose concessions to the West.
Moreover, many Iranian analysts point out that Khamenei and his inner circle are convinced that the US is ultimately bent on regime change – and is willing to use force to achieve it.
Hence Iranian missile tests, threats to close the Strait of Hormuz, and announcements of nuclear progress should be read as efforts to deter more than provoke.
The more publicly the West threatens Iran, the more easily Iranian leaders can portray America as the Great Satan to parts of the Iranian population that have recently been inclined to see the US as their friend.
The net effect is to keep Iran speeding down the road toward a crash.
It is time for cooler heads to prevail with a strategy that helps Iran step back.
The key players here are Brazil and Turkey, whose governments negotiated an ill-timed deal with Iran in May 2011, whereby Iran would transfer 1,200 kilograms of low-enriched uranium to Turkey in exchange for 1,200 kilograms of medium-enriched uranium for medical research at a Tehran reactor.
That deal quickly fell apart, but it could be time to try again.
The stage is already set in Turkey, which agreed on January 6 to host a new round of nuclear talks between Iran and the 5+1 group (the five permanent members of the UN Security Council + Germany).
A new deal would probably have to go beyond the swap proposed in May 2011, but there are other possibilities.
For example, add Egypt and Qatar to the equation and bring in the UN to provide an umbrella for a proposed regional nuclear-fuel bank, to which Iran would make the first contribution.
Bring in South Korea (a major customer for Iranian oil) and Russia and begin exploring options for a global fuel bank.
And ensure that all countries in the region reaffirm the basic rules of freedom of navigation in a way that allows them to claim vindication.
Where the political will exists to allow the other side sufficient margin to reach an agreement, creative solutions can be found.
Still, diplomats know that war can be preferable to humiliation, which is why saving face is just as important as threatening force – and why other countries should step in and provide the room that both sides need to avoid a head-on collision.
Saving France, Saving Europe
PARIS – The face of French politics changed dramatically in May and June.
First, after 17 years of center-right presidents, François Hollande, a Socialist, was elected.
Then, a month later, a center-left majority took control of the National Assembly, too, after ten years of right-wing domination.
Meanwhile, the Senate, the French parliament’s upper house, a conservative bastion between the two world wars and ever since, swung to a Socialist majority for the first time in history at the end of 2011.
The Socialists also control 20 of France’s 22 regional governments, a majority of the presidencies of the Departments, and most cities with more than 30,000 inhabitants. In short, we are now witnessing a stunning concentration of power that is unprecedented in French republican history.
All of this occurred very peacefully, with no wave of triumphalism, or even much enthusiasm.
Indeed, the abstention rate for a presidential election had never been higher before the contest between Hollande and Nicolas Sarkozy.
France’s profound political shift reflects the persistence of the economic crisis that began in 2008.
French electors did not vote for a dream.
The Socialist Party’s program and its presidential candidate’s campaign promises were considerably less ambitious than they were in 1981, when François Mitterrand was elected.
As a result, the campaign was quiet, almost cautious.
Indeed, most candidates, notably Sarkozy and Hollande, might have been too cautious: the current crisis and possible future threats received little emphasis, which means that it may be difficult for Hollande to claim a mandate for any painful reforms that he will have to propose.
And now there is no escape from the difficult reality that the budget deficit remains massive, at more than 4% of GDP in 2011.
Except for creating 60,000 new jobs in education (following controversial cuts last year) and restoring the right (rescinded under Sarkozy) to retire at 60 for roughly 200,000 individuals, Hollande’s administration has barely any room to maneuver, and severe economic measures will have to be introduced in the 2013 budget.
Moreover, France’s rapidly worsening foreign-trade deficit is boosting already-excessive debt levels, while output is falling and unemployment is rising.
Unfit for modern markets, France’s tax system actually stifles the country’s businesses, reflected in a disturbing increase in bankruptcies among small and medium-size companies.
In such conditions, France urgently needs to restore and maintain economic growth, and should seek to coordinate its policies with those of other eurozone member countries.
After all, because most of the eurozone’s 17 member states suffer from heavy debt burdens, they are all anxious to find fiscally responsible ways to promote growth.
Unfortunately, the eurozone’s institutions lack the powers needed to defend the monetary union effectively.
Greek debt amounts to less than 2% of European GDP.
Had the European Central Bank been entitled to deploy enough firepower when the Greek crisis first erupted, the threat would have lasted only two hours.
Instead, it took three weeks to grant the ECB only partial authorization to act, causing speculation to take hold and spread to Portuguese, Spanish, and Italian debt, thereby jeopardizing the euro’s survival.
Removing the risk of a euro implosion – which, given massive global imbalances, derivatives markets run amok, and the colossal scale of America’s budget deficit, could catalyze a major international crash – presupposes two fundamental changes in Europe.
The first is political and involves sovereignty: Full European solidarity can be achieved only through stronger fiscal and monetary federalism, which would enable the eurozone to act, despite minority dissent.
Europe has succeeded in missing this goal for a half-century; now it has no choice but to shoot straight.
The second change involves economic doctrine.
If markets self-correct, they do so only when defaults are registered and punished.
But countries and their public services cannot default without inflicting severe pain on entire populations.
Europe urgently needs an economic doctrine that, despite today’s deficits, preserves funding for the investments and research that promote growth. Here, Germany’s leaders, in particular, need convincing.
Hollande, backed by Spain and Italy, accomplished a small step in that direction at June’s European Union summit, which finally endorsed the idea of a banking union.
It is only the beginning, but Europe must start somewhere.
So must France, whose great concerns can be resolved solely within the EU – and only if the EU carries out the essential political and economic changes that all of its members need.
Saving Freedom of Movement in Europe
MUNICH – According to a YouGov opinion poll conducted on the day of the referendum on the United Kingdom’s membership in the European Union, migration was the single most important issue for “Leave” supporters, second only to a general preference for independence itself.
But those who consider Brexit voters xenophobic misunderstand the nature of the problem.
Thanks to the Commonwealth, the UK is one of the most open-minded countries in the world.
Accusing the British, of all people, of being xenophobic is absurd.
In reality, the referendum’s outcome reflects legitimate criticism of the EU’s design, which is largely based on open borders toward the outside world and a combination of freedom of movement and the so-called inclusion principle for EU citizens.
The EU should use this British no-confidence vote as an opportunity to change its migration rules fundamentally.
Former UK Prime Minister David Cameron was right to request more concessions in restricting the social inclusion of needy EU citizens.
And, in its own interest, the EU should now implement what Cameron demanded: delayed integration of migrant EU workers into host countries’ welfare systems.
If the EU doesn’t eliminate the current welfare magnet, it will disintegrate, because the migration issue is the most important for citizens in much of the Union.
Political parties that deny this are in for a nasty shock.
The fundamental problem is an intractable trilemma.
It is impossible to meet all of the following EU goals: internal freedom of movement, a welfare state, and inclusion of migrants in host countries’ welfare systems.
Today, a EU citizen who moves to another EU country will be integrated into the social-welfare system very quickly.
Those who are unable to work are fully entitled to tax-financed welfare benefits after five years at the latest.
Earlier access is a matter of national law, and in some cases of jurisdiction.
In Germany, according to a decision by the Federal Social Court of Germany, EU citizens who seek employment but don’t find any are entitled after only half a year to Hartz IV (unemployment and welfare) benefits, free health insurance, and rent payments for housing classified as adequate.
They are also entitled to child benefits for all children, and if they find work, even if the children still live in their home countries in the care of their grandparents.
Those who are self-employed are immediately entitled to supplementary Hartz IV benefits, housing allowance, and the child benefit (which, for a family with five children, is €1,018 ($1,335) per month – more than twice the net salary of an average worker in Bulgaria or Romania.)
If unchanged, the rules of access to national welfare systems will erode the EU’s welfare states, because the most generous countries will increasingly bear the burden of poverty mitigation.
The better-developed welfare states to which the poor flock may then find themselves in a ruinous deterrence competition, with local populations taking to the streets to defend “their” benefits.
This outcome can be prevented only by restricting either freedom of movement or the inclusion principle.
So the EU must acknowledge the tradeoff between the welfare state’s quality, freedom of movement, and inclusion, and it must decide which can be sacrificed.
The best option would be to restrict the inclusion principle for EU migrants, because reducing the size and scope of the welfare state would fuel social instability.
And restricting mobility would mean violating one of the EU’s fundamental freedoms.
Restricting the inclusion principle should not pose a fundamental problem, as all EU countries meet the requirements of the Acquis Communautaire (the body of EU law) and guarantee a minimum of social protection.
Hence, in the case of unearned welfare benefits, tax-financed benefits, and contribution-financed benefits granted during the first years in the new country of residence – the inclusion principle should give way to the home country principle.
In host countries, they will be granted only benefits that have been earned in an insurance system with fair premiums.
Furthermore, the EU needs to close its external borders.
Its labor market, infrastructure, legal system, and welfare benefits represent valuable club goods that cannot be made available for consumption by random economic migrants from all over the world.
Those who believe that a liberal society requires open borders do not understand that the protection of property is a prerequisite for freedom and efficient exchange.
Nevertheless, there is still the humanitarian imperative to grant asylum to the politically persecuted and include them in the welfare system.
But separating those few people (just 0.7% of all processed requests in Germany) who fall into this category from economic migrants requires application systems and reception camps, if necessary, where decisions can be made outside the EU’s borders.
Those who focus only on the angry nationalist rhetoric heard in some corners of the UK’s Leave campaign miss the larger truth.
Unless the EU abandons the inclusion principle, that rhetoric will grow louder – and more exits will become inevitable.
Saving Global Order
GENEVA – As 2015 begins, the values enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights are under threat.
Around the world, personal liberty, human rights, and democracy are at risk – even in countries that have embraced democratic ideals.
The international community is deeply divided, blocking progress on a host of global challenges, ranging from the crises in Syria, Iraq, and Ukraine to climate change and international trade.
Three factors – all likely to persist this year – are driving these unsettling trends.
First, globalization may have delivered many benefits, but it has also eroded the capacity of societies to determine their own destinies.
Many modern challenges – including tax avoidance, organized crime, cyber insecurity, terrorism, climate change, international migration, and financial flows, both licit and illicit – have one thing in common: the traditional instruments of a sovereign state have become inadequate to manage them.
Second, failed military solutions in Afghanistan and Iraq have played a large role in undermining the international community’s unity, and eroding confidence in intervention in general, even as established powers cut budgets and emerging powers shy away from taking on new responsibilities.
In 2014, leaders in my native Africa and elsewhere challenged the objectivity and effectiveness of the International Criminal Court, the creation of which was a major milestone in the struggle to end impunity for national leaders.
Finally, we have failed to modernize the international system’s institutional architecture.
The most important institutions – the United Nations Security Council, the World Bank, and the International Monetary Fund – remain dominated by the European and American victors of World War II, countries that represent an increasingly small minority of the world’s population and a shrinking share of its economic output.
The failure to reflect the changing balance of global power brought about by the rise of China, Brazil, South Africa, and other emerging countries undermines both the effectiveness and the legitimacy of today’s international system, particularly in the eyes of those who feel denied of proper recognition.
And yet, whatever the shortcomings of the international system, it is important to remember that never before in human history have so few people (as a proportion of world population) died from armed conflict.
It may not make headlines, but the international system, with its rules and institutions, allows states to settle most of their disputes peacefully, most of the time.
For better or worse, fighting epidemics like Ebola or preventing the most harmful consequences of climate change requires solidarity and cooperation.
Retreating into unilateralism, ultra-nationalism, or the politics of identity will produce nothing but a bitter, fragmented, parochial, and dangerous world.
The world desperately needs brave leaders who can take the long view.
In a world where power ebbs and flows, it is in everyone’s interest to adhere to a fair system of rules that respect both national sovereignty and individual rights.
The heads of the world’s historical powers need to recognize that it is in their interest, too, to follow the rules, and to allow rising states to help write these rules.
As I have often argued, the Security Council must be enlarged, and developing countries should be given greater voting rights in the Bretton Woods institutions: the IMF and the World Bank.
In exchange, the world’s newest powers must begin to take on a greater share of responsibility for the global order upon which their success depends.
They can no longer stand on the sidelines, denouncing the injustices of the past.
Instead, they must join their peers in building the future.
We often hear talk about the shortcomings of the UN, which stands at the heart of the international system.
Too seldom do we note its achievements and successes, of which there have been many.
Rather than retreat from a system that has yielded exceptional results, we must use the international community’s current crisis as a historic opportunity to reshape the existing order to better meet our modern challenges.
Bombing for Morality
NEW YORK – A gift for words was always US President Barack Obama’s strongest asset.
Now it looks as if his words have trapped him.
Having stated in March that the United States would “not tolerate the use of chemical weapons against the Syrian people,” and having spoken last year about a “red line” that could not be crossed, he will lose face if he fails to react forcefully to the murder, allegedly by the Syrian regime, of more than 1,000 civilians by sarin gas.
Of course, the risk of losing face is not a good reason for attacking another country.
But why did Obama fence himself in with such rhetoric in the first place?
Why this particular red line?
Secretary of State John Kerry was right to call the use of gas “a moral obscenity.” But so is torturing children, which is how the civil war in Syria actually began more than two years ago.
And is killing civilians with chemical agents morally more obscene than shelling, shooting, or starving them to death?
At least since the use of mustard gas in World War I, it has been a common assumption that certain weapons are more immoral than others.
Weapons of mass destruction, nuclear bombs in particular, certainly cause more damage faster than conventional armaments do.
But is there really a clear moral distinction between killing roughly 100,000 people in Hiroshima with one atom bomb and killing even more people in Tokyo in a single night of incendiary bombing?
Was it more immoral to gas Jews than to machine-gun them into open pits?
There is an argument, made by Nicholas Kristof in the New York Times, that a swift punishment might persuade Syrian President Bashar Al-Assad to stop using chemical weapons and use “more banal ways to slaughter his people.”
This does not make sense to me. The problem is surely the slaughter, not the methods used.
In any case, moral outrage, however justified, is not a sufficient reason for going to war.
Mao Zedong was responsible for the deaths of more than 40 million Chinese in the 1950’s and 1960’s.
No one in his right mind suggested that military intervention in China would be a good idea.
In the 1980’s, Saddam Hussein gassed hundreds of thousands of Iranians and Kurds.
The US supported him.
So is it a legal issue?
Using chemical weapons is indeed a breach of international conventions, including the Chemical Weapons Convention, which Syria has never signed, and the Geneva Protocol, to which it is a party.
So there are good reasons to treat Assad as a war criminal, in which case he should be indicted at the International Criminal Court (ICC) – established, incidentally, by a treaty that the US has never ratified.
But bypassing the United Nations and unleashing an illegal war to punish an illegal act is not an easy policy to defend.
Still, one might say, surely the “international community,” or the West, or the US as the major Western power, must draw the line somewhere.
How can responsible governments simply look away when innocent people are being killed in large numbers?
Tolerating genocide is intolerable.
But where exactly do we draw that line?
How many murders constitute genocide? Thousands?
Hundreds of thousands? Millions?
Or is it not a question of numbers?
Genocide, after all, is a matter of intent, of killing or persecuting people on the grounds of their race, ethnicity, or creed.
Technically, killing ten people for such reasons – or even two – could be a form of genocide.
There is another way of considering the matter.
The question to ponder before intervening with force in another country is whether doing so is likely to improve matters, save lives, and make the world more secure.
Yes, violence against citizens, whether by sarin gas or helicopter gunships, is a moral obscenity.
The issue is how to respond: What will work?
Justice and morality have little to do with this.
Like the ICC, “humanitarian intervention” has more chance of working in the case of a weak country (say, Serbia, Mali, or Sierra Leone) than where a big power is involved.
No one is going to shoot missiles into China or Russia for the sake of upholding human rights or international standards of warfare.
Syria, as many people have pointed out, is not Libya or Mali. Nor is it a great power.
But its civil war has already spread beyond its borders, implicating greater powers like Iran, Turkey, and Russia in the process.
One thing worse than the moral obscenities of a civil war would be a regional conflagration.
It is by no means certain that US intervention would do anything to reduce the risk of a wider war.
In fact, certain advocates of US intervention – both neo-cons and “liberal hawks” – seem to desire the opposite outcome; they want a war against Iran.
And there is probably a clear link in Obama’s mind between the red line in Syria and the one he has drawn for Iran, perhaps equally unwisely, to prevent it from developing nuclear weapons.
So what is to be achieved by a US strike on Syrian targets, which Obama has already assured the world is not meant to change the Syrian regime?
It will not stop the civil war.
But even one missile would turn the US into a direct participant, provoking yet more violence.
Saving Obama’s honor hardly seems worth that risk.
This is the view of many people in Syria, even among the rebels.
It is the view of most people in Europe.
It is also the view of most people in the US. Perhaps it is even the view of Obama himself, which is why he is playing for time, desperately turning over approval of an attack on Syria to the US Congress.
His relations with Congress have been far from smooth.
But now he needs it more than ever – in order, as they say in America, to cover his ass.
Saving Resources to Save Growth
NEW YORK – Reconciling global economic growth, especially in developing countries, with the intensifying constraints on global supplies of energy, food, land, and water is the great question of our time.
Commodity prices are soaring worldwide, not only for headline items like food and energy, but for metals, arable land, fresh water, and other crucial inputs to growth, because increased demand is pushing up against limited global supplies.
Worldwide economic growth is already slowing under the pressures of $135-per-barrel oil and grain prices that have more than doubled in the past year.
A new global growth strategy is needed to maintain global economic progress.
The basic issue is that the world economy is now so large that it is hitting against limits never before experienced.  There are 6.7 billion people, and the population continues to rise by around 75 million per year, notably in the world’s poorest countries.
Annual output per person, adjusted for price levels in different parts of the world, averages around $10,000, implying total output of around $67 trillion.
There is, of course, an enormous gap between rich countries, at roughly $40,000 per person, and the poorest, at $1,000 per person or less.
But many poor countries, most famously China and India, have achieved extraordinary economic growth in recent years by harnessing cutting-edge technologies.
As a result, the world economy has been growing at around 5% per year in recent years.
At that rate, the world economy would double in size in 14 years. 
This is possible, however, only if the key growth inputs remain in ample supply, and if human-made climate change is counteracted.
If the supply of vital inputs is constrained or the climate destabilized, prices will rise sharply, industrial production and consumer spending will fall, and world economic growth will slow, perhaps sharply.
Many free-market ideologues ridicule the idea that natural resource constraints will now cause a significant slowdown in global growth.
They say that fears of “running out of resources,” notably food and energy, have been with us for 200 years, and we never succumbed.
Indeed, output has continued to rise much faster than population.
This view has some truth.
Better technologies have allowed the world economy to continue to grow despite tough resource constraints in the past.
But simplistic free-market optimism is misplaced for at least four reasons.
First, history has already shown how resource constraints can hinder global economic growth.
After the upward jump in energy prices in 1973, annual global growth fell from roughly 5% between 1960 and 1973 to around 3% between 1973 and 1989.
Second, the world economy is vastly larger than in the past, so that demand for key commodities and energy inputs is also vastly larger.
Third, we have already used up many of the low-cost options that were once available.
Low-cost oil is rapidly being depleted.
The same is true for ground water.
Land is also increasingly scarce.
Finally, our past technological triumphs did not actually conserve natural resources, but instead enabled humanity to mine and use these resources at a lower overall cost, thereby hastening their depletion.
Looking ahead, the world economy will need to introduce alternative technologies that conserve energy, water, and land, or that enable us to use new forms of renewable energy (such as solar and wind power) at much lower cost than today.
Many such technologies exist, and even better technologies can be developed.
One key problem is that the alternative technologies are often more expensive than the resource-depleting technologies now in use. 
For example, farmers around the world could reduce their water use dramatically by switching from conventional irrigation to drip irrigation, which uses a series of tubes to deliver water directly to each plant while preserving or raising crop yields.
Yet the investment in drip irrigation is generally more expensive than less-efficient irrigation methods.
Poor farmers may lack the capital to invest in it, or may lack the incentive to do so if water is taken directly from publicly available sources or if the government is subsidizing its use.
Similar examples abound.
With greater investments, it will be possible to raise farm yields, lower energy use to heat and cool buildings, achieve greater fuel efficiency for cars, and more.
With new investments in research and development, still further improvements in technologies can be achieved.
Yet investments in new resource-saving technologies are not being made at a sufficient scale, because market signals don’t give the right incentives, and because governments are not yet cooperating adequately to develop and spread their use.
If we continue on our current course – leaving fate to the markets, and leaving governments to compete with each other over scarce oil and food – global growth will slow under the pressures of resource constraints.
But if the world cooperates on the research, development, demonstration, and diffusion of resource-saving technologies and renewable energy sources, we will be able to continue to achieve rapid economic progress. 
A good place to start would be the climate-change negotiations, now underway.
The rich world should commit to financing a massive program of technology development – renewable energy, fuel-efficient cars, and green buildings – and to a program of technology transfer to developing countries.
Such a commitment would also give crucial confidence to poor countries that climate-change control will not become a barrier to long-term economic development. 
Saving the Stability Pact from Itself
At their meeting in Scheveningen, the Netherlands, the EU's economic ministers (Ecofin) once again confronted the need to reform the Stability and Growth Pact (SGP).
The issues surrounding reform remain controversial and unsettled, but this time, the ministers laid their cards on the table.
The SGP's fundamental problem is that it must strike a balance between two contradictory goals: it must retain bite against excessive debt accumulation, yet it must also give governments more maneuvering room to enact structural reforms and restore Europe's competitiveness.
As it stands, the SGP is an obstacle to such reforms.
European leaders waste political energy and capital to meet demanding budget targets, while nothing is done to address the really vital challenges: aging populations, high tax burdens, declining competitiveness.
The reason is that structural reforms tend to pay off in the long term, but cost money in the short term.
The SGP originally aimed to protect European citizens from myopic governments, but it has ended up forcing even more myopic behavior.
Take pension reform, which aims to reduce the scope of state-run, pay-as-you-go systems and expand private, fully funded schemes.
This requires cutting compulsory contributions to the public system, while maintaining benefit levels for current retirees.
The result is a temporary increase in budget deficits; the fiscal benefits appear only when private schemes start taking over pension liabilities from the state-run systems.
But the SGP's current rules discourage this kind of reform by prohibiting temporary increases in the budget deficit - even if they promise long-term fiscal consolidation.
European policymakers are becoming aware of the problem.
Some EU countries - particularly new members in Central and Eastern Europe - have committed themselves to use privatization receipts to finance pension reform.
But even this may not be enough to cover the cost.
To overcome the SGP's bias against structural reforms, the European Commission asked at this last Ecofin meeting for more discretion and to put more emphasis on (explicit) debt: countries with a lower debt-to-GDP ratio would have greater freedom in fiscal policy.
Economic ministers suggested that pension reform and long-term fiscal sustainability should also guide country evaluations under the SGP, while some countries insisted that it should be linked to the Lisbon agenda.
This would give more flexibility on budget deficits to countries that are making progress towards meeting the agenda's reform targets.
Some of these innovations would be useful.
But they risk giving too much discretion to the Commission or to future European Council decisions.
The rules-based approach of the SGP is fundamentally sound, but it requires operational criteria that can be defined with some precision.
Otherwise, the rules become unenforceable.
Consider the proposal to link the SGP to the Lisbon agenda, which contains more than 100 indicators.
What happens if a country makes progress in one dimension, but regresses in another dimension?
Inevitably, the Commission would have to decide the relevance of the different indicators - thus intervening in the national policymaking process with no political legitimacy.
At the same time, if so much unchecked discretion was left to the Council, rather than to the Commission, "peer pressure" to restore budget balance might easily turn into "peer protection."
So, can the SGP be made to work in favor, rather than against, structural reforms, without abandoning the rules-based approach of the SGP?
We think so.
The key is to select some comprehensive but operationally precise indicators of structural reforms, and then apply the same idea suggested by the Commission for public debt: countries that are making more progress on these indicators can get more leeway on their budget deficit.
An obvious indicator that would meet this purpose is the implicit debt of public pension systems - i.e., the present discounted value of all future pension expenditures under existing legislation.
Future deficits could, in theory, be reduced through higher contributions, but social security contributions are already far too high in Europe, inhibiting job creation and economic growth.
The only way to restore growth without compromising the future is through pension reform that reduces future outlays from the state-run system.
Of course, any estimate of the implicit pension debt requires caveats and arbitrary assumptions.
But so does the SGP's current implementation - for example, in the conventions that define how budget deficit are measured and what qualifies as government revenue.
Moreover, the Commission has already worked to harmonize the assumptions needed to forecast public pension outlays and achieve cross-country comparability.
Finally, to strengthen cross-country comparability further, the benchmark should be 
 variations
 in the stock of pension debt under given economic and demographic assumptions, rather than the debt level itself.
There is also a more fundamental reason to focus on 
 future
 variations in the stock of pension debt associated with pension reforms: the EU has no business interfering with pension liabilities of individual member states.
Why should the rest of Europe care if, say, Spain preserves a generous pension system?
The extra focus on implicit pension debts would also help to inform citizens.
Saving the Trees of Life
Nobody can get through the day without using a product that comes from a forest.
To a greater extent than most people realize, the paper we write on, the water that comes out of our taps, the medicine that heals us, the wood that builds our houses and furniture, all originate from forests.
Forests provide the fresh air we breathe and habitats for endangered species. They also provide us with recreational opportunities, increasingly important in our complex world.
Approximately 1.5 billion of the world’s rural poor directly depend on forests for basic needs like food and fuel-wood.
Yet deforestation continues.
Every year, we lose 14.6 million hectares (56,000 square miles) of forests – an area almost four times the area of Switzerland.
Irresponsible forest management, enhanced by poor governmental regulation and enforcement, and markets that reward illegal logging, are conspiring to denude the world’s most valuable and threatened forests.
Once forests start to disappear, a host of environmental, social, and economic ills usually follow, affecting us all in some way.
Indonesia’s Sumatra Island is a good example.
Pulp and paper companies are driving rampant and illegal destruction of forests that contain the richest diversity of plants in the world.
It is likely that plants not yet discovered will disappear along the way, as well as such endangered species as the Sumatran rhino and elephant, as well as the orangutan.
When Sumatra’s forests disappear, entire communities of people will also find themselves with no proper place to live and no decent way to make a living.
Moreover, the distortion to global markets caused by trading in illegally, cheaply produced products results in disadvantages for responsible corporate citizens.
Developing countries are losing $15 billion in tax revenues annually due to illegal logging.
To make matters worse, the demand for wood for reconstruction following last year’s tsunami is intensifying the already untenable demands being placed on Sumatra’s forests.
Similar threats to forests are evident in the Amazon and Congo Basin.
The recent UN Millennium Ecosystem Assessment (MEA) shows that forests in these and other critical regions are in serious decline due to mismanagement and will continue to disappear unless serious measures are taken.
Information released by the government of Brazil indicates that deforestation of the irreplaceable forests of the Amazon, due to factors such as agricultural conversion, reached 2.6 million hectares (roughly 10,000 square miles) in the past year, bringing the total deforested area of the Amazon to 17%. 
But the battle against deforestation is not lost.
Diverse organizations, environmentalists, and corporations concerned with the state of world’s forests are joining forces to reverse deforestation and improve forest management.
For example, the World Wildlife Fund (WWF) and the World Bank have helped Brazil’s government kick-start an initiative that established over 17 million hectares (69,000 square miles) of new forest-protected areas such as national parks.
The WWF/World Bank alliance also motivated partners to establish a trust fund to manage these protected areas in perpetuity.
Similarly, a summit among the leaders of the Congo Basin countries resulted in extraordinary cross-border cooperation on forest conservation and responsible management.
This in turn led to a $53 million initiative by the United States State Department to promote Congo forest conservation.
Since the leaders first met in 1999, 3.5 million hectares (more than 13,000 square miles) of new protected areas have been established in the Congo Basin. 
Nevertheless, given the effects of last December’s Asian tsunami, the weight of evidence provided by the MEA, and deforestation statistics from key forest regions, our efforts must continue.
The World Bank and WWF recently pledged to unite in an effort to assist in reducing the rate of global deforestation by 10% by 2010, and to work with other public and private sector institutions to pursue ambitious targets on forest conservation.
WWF studies show that if the world’s forests are allotted among a mix of uses and types – including protected areas, responsibly managed commercial forests, and restored forest landscapes – we can provide the world’s needs for forest products while conserving important environmental and social values for the foreseeable future.
Business leaders, governments, and civil society organizations must play their part in realizing this vision.
How to Save the World Bank
OXFORD – The World Bank is quietly sliding into insignificance, as its core fee-paying clients increasingly seek other lenders.
If it is to survive, its management will need to streamline its loan approval processes and leverage the unique assets that distinguish it from its competitors.
The Bank once comfortably earned enough to be self-sustaining.
Today, it is rapidly becoming welfare-dependent.
Periodic contributions from wealthy governments have propped up lending to poor countries, but these are unlikely to be increased, and some may be discontinued as donors redeploy aid budgets to refugee programs.
The problem is not that emerging economies have no desire to borrow; they desperately need funds for infrastructure and other investments.
The problem is that the Bank is too slow to process loans, which has increasingly made it the last choice for many of its potential clients.
Whereas a commercial lender might take three months to prepare and disburse a loan, the Bank takes more than two years.
And its efforts to speed up the process, which began in 2013, have reduced the average time only slightly, from 28 months to 25.2 months; in some regions (accounting for a third of the Bank’s lending), the wait has actually increased.
One clear indicator of the Bank’s performance is how high a premium governments are willing to pay to avoid it.
A 20-year loan from the World Bank has an interest rate of about 4%, and the poorest countries can borrow for less than 1% (“International Development Association loans”).
Nonetheless, many countries are choosing much more expensive commercial loans or bond issues.
For example, Ghana, despite being eligible for IDA loans, recently chose to raise money from the bond market, from which it received an interest rate several times higher.
No wonder emerging economies are excited by the establishment of the BRICS countries’ New Development Bank and the China-led Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank: Both institutions have promised faster lending.
If the World Bank is to survive, its management must streamline its complicated and unwieldy bureaucracy, fixing what internal reviews described over a decade ago as “fragmentation, duplication, and delay” in assurance, safeguards, and fiduciary processes.
At the same time, the institution must identify what it is uniquely positioned to do.
In 2013, the Bank declared a new goal – to eradicate extreme poverty by 2030.
But this makes it just one of a multitude of organizations seeking to address poverty.
What makes the World Bank special is that it is made up of 188 countries and can act on behalf of all of them, rather than being beholden to one or two.
Furthermore, its financial structure enables it to be more autonomous, self-sustaining, and resilient than most other multilateral institutions.
These are the attributes it must leverage.
For starters, the Bank is uniquely placed to play the role of a “balancer” in the international aid system, helping to ensure that funds flow toward the countries that most need them.
Individually, governments give a lot of aid, but most of it goes to recipient countries with which they have special ties or relationships.
This “bilateral aid” is subject to the whims and trends of the aid industry, sometimes flowing only into specific sectors or to back particular approaches.
The result is that some countries get more aid than they need, while others don’t get enough.
According to Britain’s Department for International Development, only five of the 30 countries deserving the largest aid allocations get close to the right level.
The Bank is uniquely placed to counterbalance the caprices of individual donors and ensure a better global allocation.
Until now, however, its lending has tended to follow donor fashions, rather than complementing them.
A second rationale for the World Bank is the need for “counter-cyclical” aid.
At present, when the rich part of the world catches an economic cold, the poorer countries face a double contagion: Their trade earnings plummet, and flows of aid and investment from richer countries dries up.
The resulting halts to projects or policies – half-built hospitals, unexpected shortages of medical supplies, bridges to nowhere – play havoc with their economies.
As the Bank reviews its financial-management practices, a more consciously counter-cyclical approach could be adopted.
A third rationale for the Bank has been its ability to share expertise and to develop and reinforce norms among the governments to which it lends.
In practice, however, the Bank has struggled to do this effectively.
Borrowers have often been reluctant to accept its advice, which they perceive as driven more by theory and ideology than by evidence and practice.
Local officials in charge of implementation know that if the Bank’s advice proves impractical, unrealizable, or flawed in some other way, it is they, not some technocrats sitting in Washington, DC, who will lose their jobs (or the next election).
Experience suggests that the Bank’s advice has influence only if its messenger is someone who really knows the country (ideally as a resident), is an expert on the issue at hand, and has the power to get approval in Washington.
Senior Bank staff deployed in regions for long periods, such as Jim Adams in Tanzania and Uganda, or David Dollar in China, have enviable track records.
The Bank as a whole, however, is unlikely to succeed if it continues to attempt to become a centralized provider of solutions.
In short, the World Bank’s management and member countries need to work together to create a faster, more responsive institution, one that exploits its unique advantages to balance aid flows, provide counter-cyclical support, and offer meaningful advice.
This approach could win back the fee-paying clients that comprise its self-sustaining resource base, provide it with its global reach, and allow it to continue to play a vital role in boosting economic growth and reducing poverty in developing countries.
Scandinavia’s Accounting Trick
While most of the world’s advanced countries face increasing difficulties in coping with the forces of globalization and competition from low-wage countries, the Scandinavian countries &#45;&#45; Denmark, Finland, Norway, and Sweden &#45;&#45; seem to have managed these challenges quite well.
To be sure, Scandinavian growth is mediocre.
With average yearly GDP growth of 2.2% from 1995 to 2005 it fell short of the non-Scandinavian countries of the EU-15, which grew by 2.8% on average.
But Scandinavia is good in terms of levels of per capita GDP and unemployment.
Its average per capita GDP was 39% above that of the other EU countries, and on average the unemployment rate stood at 6.7%, compared to 8% elsewhere in the old EU.
What is the secret behind Scandinavia’s success?
One explanation of Scandinavia’s strong performance is Sweden’s courageous product market liberalization, the reduced generosity of Denmark’s wage replacement system and the Nokia miracle in Finland.
However, while these factors may explain some of Scandinavia’s success, the low rate of unemployment and the high level of GDP per capita also have a much more straightforward explanation: the high share of government employment in the labor force.
In Germany, Europe’s largest economy, the government’s share of the workforce is only 12.2%.
So the high share of government employment contributes to the region’s low unemployment rate.
Moreover, it also contributes greatly to the high per-capita GDP figures, for the simple reason that the value-added created by these government jobs is part of GDP, even if it could never have been produced in the market economy.
According to the rules of national income accounting, in the absence of market prices, the contribution of the government sector to GDP is measured by the wages paid out by the government, regardless of how productive or useful the government jobs are.
Thus, the performance difference relative to Germany, say, could be caricatured as follows: while Germans collect part of the private value-added as taxes, which they then spend on unemployment benefits, Scandinavians in addition give their unemployed a desk and count the unemployment benefits as value-added in the government sector and, therefore, a contribution to GDP.
Apart from the accounting trick implicit in Scandinavia’s success, the high share of government in employment may also make a real contribution to solving one of the most fundamental problems western economies now face.
Prompted by capital flows to low-wage countries, specialization, outsourcing, and even immigration, the equilibrium price of unskilled labor has fallen throughout the western countries.
Yet these countries hesitate to let actual wages fall for obvious social reasons.
If they want to defend the incomes of the unskilled (or the less motivated), they have four options.
The best option is to better educate the unskilled, but this is a cumbersome, time-consuming process that offers no short-term solution.
Thus, only three options remain in the short and medium term.
The first option is to defend the wages of the low skilled through minimum-wage laws or paying social replacement incomes which imply minimum wage demands against the private economy.
This is the strategy that most EU countries, Germany in particular, have chosen. It results in mass unemployment that is inefficient and financially unsustainable.
The second option is to pay wage subsidies instead of wage replacement incomes to allow for the wage dispersion necessary for full employment without letting the incomes of the unskilled fall.
This is the strategy chosen by the United States with its earned-income tax credit.
Edmund Phelps, this year’s Nobel laureate in economics, has also long advocated it.
The third option is the Scandinavian way.
Here government demand for labor keeps wages high.
While many economists judge Germany’s strategy the worst and America’s the best, the Scandinavian strategy can be considered a second-best strategy.
Indeed, it is better to let people clean public parks, nurse children, and take care of the old in government facilities than have them do nothing, as in Germany.
Even though GDP is artificially inflated, some useful activities are carried out.
Nevertheless, it might be better to let the market decide what kinds of products the low-skilled and less motivated part of the workforce should and could reasonably produce, which speaks for the American way of subsidizing wages.
Thus, the Scandinavian way is more than a mere accounting trick, but it is also less than a truly recommendable strategy for coping with the challenges of globalization.
China’s Flawed Balance-of-Payments Position
BEIJING – The balance-of-payments figures that China’s State Administration of Foreign Exchange (SAFE) released in April should have triggered serious concern, if not alarm.
The data adjusted China’s investment-income deficit for 2011 from $26.8 billion to $85.3 billion – a massive revision that casts doubt on the reliability of China’s balance-of-payments statistics and exposes a flaw in the economy’s growth path.
But few people seem to care.
Two factors explain this anomaly.
The first is the high return on foreign investment in China.
In 2008, US corporations gained a 33% return on their investments in China, while other multinationals got a 22% return.
By contrast, the return on US government securities, which form the bulk of China’s foreign assets, was next to nothing.
Second, China’s foreign assets are denominated almost exclusively in US dollars, while its foreign liabilities are denominated mostly in renminbi.
As a result, whenever the US dollar declines, China’s net international-investment position (the difference between its external financial assets and liabilities) deteriorates – and so does its investment-income balance.
China’s drive for renminbi internationalization so far has made the balance-sheet structure even more unfavorable.
According to the economist Geoffrey Crowther, a country’s balance-of-payments position evolves in six stages, with the key variable being net assets – that is, the country’s net international-investment position.
In the first three stages, the country is a net borrower with a deficit on the investment-income account.
As an “immature debtor-borrower,” its trade balance and current account are also in deficit; as a “mature debtor-borrower,” its trade balance enters surplus; and, as a “debtor-repayer,” its current account moves to surplus.
In the later stages, the country becomes a net creditor, running an investment-income surplus.
As an “immature creditor-lender,” the trade balance and current account are in surplus as well; as a “mature creditor-lender,” the trade balance returns to deficit; finally, as a “creditor-borrower,” the country’s current account swings into deficit.
A country in the later stages of development can use investment income from its past accumulation of net foreign assets to compensate for the decline in citizens’ incomes due to aging and other changes.
China breaks Crowther’s mold.
Given that it has been running an investment-income deficit, a trade surplus, and current-account surplus, it seems that it should be classified as a “debtor-repayer.”
But China is a net creditor.
If China runs an investment-income deficit with net assets of almost $2 trillion, how will it make the transition to an investment-income surplus?
China’s investment-income deficit will probably persist in the foreseeable future.
Its stock of foreign capital will increase steadily as foreign firms invest and reinvest in China.
FDI in the country will continue to garner substantial returns, partly owing to local-government hospitality.
Meanwhile, China’s outward FDI will continue to encounter challenges, as various short- and long-term factors – from weak international demand to an aging population – cause its trade surplus to decline, diminishing its ability to export capital.
China’s investment in US government securities and other sovereign debt will continue to yield extremely low returns.
In fact, this investment will never be repaid in full, so a large write-off is inevitable.
The value of China’s assets as future claims on real resources has already been diluted by dollar depreciation, and calls in the US for inflating away America’s debt burden portend a further decline.
Moreover, while China may have profited from the rise in government-bond prices over the last few years, prices have been inflated artificially by expansionary monetary policy in advanced countries, which implies that the bubble could burst.
Whether through inflation or collapsing government-bond prices, China will suffer significant capital losses on its foreign assets, further damaging its investment-income balance.
Without fundamental changes in its economic-growth pattern, it is difficult to imagine how China can become an immature creditor-lender and a mature creditor-lender.
A more likely scenario is that China will continue to have a trade surplus (though much smaller) and an investment-income deficit, mirrored by America’s trade deficit and investment-income surplus.
If both countries have balanced current accounts, their balance-of-payments positions can be sustainable.
In such a scenario, the US exports to China what Ricardo Hausmann and Federico Sturzenegger have dubbed “dark matter” (unaccounted assets, such as knowledge, which US corporations export through their investments), while China exports consumer goods and services to the US.
But would China be happy with this division of labor?
China’s leaders should think hard about this question now – before it is too late to change the situation.
Schengen and European Security
BRUSSELS – Another key European project is under threat.
Some two decades after border controls were first abolished under the Schengen Agreement – which now includes 26 countries, including four non-members of the European Union – Germany has reinstated controls at its border with Austria, and France at its border with Belgium.
The controls are meant to be temporary, and the vast majority of other borders remain open.
But more openness does not seem to be the direction in which Europe is headed – and that is a serious problem.
The shift away from a “Europe without borders,” instigated by images of refugees walking across internal frontiers, was fortified by the news that most of those who carried out last month’s Paris attacks came from Belgium, and that some may have entered the EU via the Balkans, posing as refugees.
The underlying assumption – reinforced by many European politicians, especially interior ministers – is that there is a tradeoff between security and openness.
This is far from accurate.
In fact, the reinstatement of border controls seems to be an example of “security theater” – a policy intended to make the public feel like something is being done.
But, far from making Europeans safer, rolling back Schengen would actually hinder the fight against terrorism, because countries would be forced to devote valuable resources – thousands of police officers, if the agreement were to be abolished altogether – to checking documents at borders.
Those resources would no longer contribute directly to investigations into terrorist activities.
And those investigations need all the help they can get.
After all, the objective – to identify a few terrorists hiding among millions of law-abiding citizens, before they commit a violent act – is the equivalent of finding a needle in a haystack.
The recognition of the flawed logic behind reinstating border controls is probably why police officials have remained guarded in discussing the issue.
It should be remembered that when five countries – Belgium, France, Germany, Luxembourg, and the Netherlands – agreed in 1985 (in the village of Schengen, Luxembourg) to abolish border controls, they did not do so on a whim or because some politicians had a lofty vision.
However symbolic the agreement may have been, symbolism wasn’t the point.
Participating countries’ security establishments had recognized that stopping people at the internal borders did not help them counter major threats, such as organized crime and drug smuggling.
Truck drivers, who protested against long waits at customs stations, helped spur the effort.
But it took another decade of hard-nosed, detailed negotiations, entailing efforts to strengthen the EU’s external borders, to reach the point, in 1995, where internal border controls could actually be lifted.
The subsequent decision by non-EU countries like Switzerland to join the Schengen Area highlights the massive benefits, including for security, of maintaining open borders.
Rather than attempt to control the masses of tourists and business travelers entering the country from all sides – essentially an exercise in futility in Switzerland – the country decided to focus police resources specifically on security threats.
By joining Schengen, the Swiss police also gained access to the Schengen Information System and other important European databases on criminal suspects, stolen cars, and more.
Of course, there are flaws in the Schengen system.
Like the eurozone, the area began with only a small group of member countries, all of which had a similar outlook and capacity to implement common rules, but soon welcomed many others, some of which, it later became apparent, could not uphold agreed standards.
In the eurozone, imbalances in competitiveness and fiscal positions – which were not noted during the perfunctory check, based on formal criteria, that was conducted before approving new members – led to a protracted economic crisis.
In the Schengen Area, some countries’ inability to protect external borders adequately – owing to a lack of administrative capacity (especially true in Greece, but also, to some extent, Italy), together with geographic challenges like long and fractured coast lines – have undermined confidence in the face of the refugee crisis.
The eurozone survived its crisis for two key reasons.
First, a common institution, the European Central Bank, had the power to act.
Second, member states relinquished some control over their banks, in order to boost the system’s overall stability.
If the Schengen Area is to endure, it needs to evolve in a similar direction, establishing a common institution responsible for securing external borders, while reinforcing the framework for internal security.
As it stands, defense of Schengen’s external borders is up to individual member states, including one, Greece, that is already facing a devastating economic crisis.
The only EU-wide operation aimed at helping police the external border, called Frontex, is severely limited in scope.
What the Schengen Area needs is a true European coast guard, with its own budget, ships, and personnel.
The Mediterranean can be expected to remain the main security challenge for some time, owing both to illegal immigration and its proximity to terrorist training grounds.
It thus makes sense for the new coast guard, backed by EU funds, to start there.
Even a small fraction of the EU budget would far exceed the available resources of any individual country.
Moreover, a European coast guard would provide a flexible tool with which to allocate resources as effectively as possible at any given moment.
After all, even if security threats remain concentrated in the same broad area, the most urgent challenges can shift considerably over time.
Last year, the problem was Southern Italy.
Today, it is the Aegean.
Tomorrow it might be somewhere else.
Europe needs to prepare for any eventuality.
It is not only possible to have both openness and security; the former can actually bolster the latter.
The Schengen Area’s members need to recognize that the security rationale for abolishing internal borders remains as compelling today as it was when they joined.
A Generation Held Hostage?
LONDON – On April 14, 2014, the Islamist terrorist group Boko Haram kidnapped 276 schoolgirls from the government secondary school in Nigeria’s northern town of Chibok.
Many escaped, but 219 remain in captivity, their whereabouts still unknown.
So deep is the despair and desolation felt by the girls’ parents that they are now considering whether to declare their daughters “presumed dead.”
According to local custom, funerals are held after loved ones have gone missing for four months, so that a period of mourning can give families some closure.
The girls have now been held captive for over five months.
No one can overstate the families’ unspeakable anguish from not knowing if their daughters have been raped, beaten, or trafficked out of Nigeria – or even if they are still alive.
The rest of the world may have moved on, but the girls’ parents wake each morning to a day of uncertainty and resignation.
Hope is fast evaporating.
It is difficult to see how the girls could be returned safely.
Launching a military rescue operation would be highly risky.
It is believed that the girls have been split into separate groups, so that any attempt to rescue one group would imperil the others.
Despite talk of the government negotiating a deal with the captors, this option, too, would be fraught with danger.
Even if all of the girls eventually do come home, nothing will ever be the same again for them or their families.
For some, it is already too late.
Seven parents, despite being relatively young, have died of heart attacks or strokes, to which the intolerable strains of their situation may have contributed.
But amid the gloom, there is, perhaps, a glimmer of hope.
While we cannot know the future for the girls still in captivity, 15 of the 57 girls who escaped their kidnappers are now back at school, braving Boko Haram’s threats to return and abduct more students.
Hundreds of thousands of other girls in northern Nigeria are now too afraid to go to school, but these girls refuse to be cowed.
They are determined to make up for lost time.
This display of astonishing courage and determination to get an education should be an inspiration for us all in the fight against discrimination.
To support and encourage more girls to attend school in the face of abduction threats, the Nigerian Safe Schools Initiative has been launched to fund fortifications, telecommunications, and security measures aimed at allaying children’s fears about going to what should be a safe haven.
Sadly, the world’s response to pleas for donations has been slow and miserly.
This indifference mirrors similar reactions to other recent global appeals, such as for schooling for Syrian refugees in Lebanon.
The lack of concern seems particularly callous when one considers that the cost of educating a refugee child is no more than $8 a week.
There is simply not enough outrage – except from young people themselves.
They are more assertive in standing up for their right to education than the adults who are supposed to uphold that right.
It was particularly encouraging to see hundreds of global youth ambassadors from 100 countries descend on New York recently to demand the right to education and to support the Bring Back Our Girls campaign in Nigeria.
Bring Back Our Girls is the highest-profile campaign highlighting discrimination against girls.