A Farewell to (Glorious) War
In recent days, Italy’s government fell after losing a parliamentary vote on the country’s troop deployment in Afghanistan, while Britain and Denmark announced that they are to begin withdrawing their troops from Iraq.
Whereas the Bush administration is deploying an additional 21,000 American soldiers in Iraq, and is pushing for more allied troops in Afghanistan, America’s allies are rejecting its Middle East policy.
They are increasingly convinced that “victory” will be elusive in any asymmetric conflict between states, however powerful, and religiously driven armed insurgents.
Donald Rumsfeld’s dogma of military “transformation” – the technological upgrading of an army’s capacity to enable decisive victory with fewer troops – failed resoundingly in Iraq.
Nor could Israel, with its overwhelming technological advantage, defeat Hezbollah in Lebanon.
More rockets and missiles fell on northern Israel in 33 days than hit Britain during all of World War II.
So the Israelis now must reckon with an entirely new phenomenon: an asymmetric entity, Hezbollah, with nation-state firepower.
So the fierce debate over whether to increase the size of American ground forces in Iraq is beside the point.
Neither the Soviet experience in Afghanistan in the 1980’s nor NATO’s today vindicates the claim that troop numbers are what matter most on the modern battlefield.
When geo-strategic military front lines are non-existent, as in Kosovo, Afghanistan, and Iraq, mass no longer equals victory.
The great military thinker Carl von Clausewitz’s notion of “decisive battles” as the “center of gravity” of war is simply irrelevant to conflicts that have no visible “center of gravity.”
Indeed, while wars from the time of Hannibal’s defeat of the Romans in 216 B.C. to the Gulf War of 1991 had this center of gravity, with a massive concentration of force capable of bringing an enemy to its knees, such industrial inter-state wars have now become an historical anachronism.
Most states nowadays lie within borders that are widely accepted as legitimate, and they increasingly abide by international norms of behavior in times of war.
In fact, the obligation of states to abide by humanitarian rules of conduct while their enemies are free to barbarize warfare is what makes asymmetric wars especially insoluble.
Moreover, in an era of global media and international war crimes courts, the criteria for states’ use of military force have become more complex than ever.
Inter-state combat may still occur where strategic front lines can be found, such as Israel’s border with Syria, India’s border with Pakistan, and the border dividing the two Koreas.
In such cases, war, as the Egyptians showed in 1973, might still serve as an avenue to resolving a conflict.
The Syrians might be tempted to launch an offensive against Israel with the objective of breaking the deadlock over the future of the Golan Heights.
However, in the case of Kashmir, the asymmetric conflict currently fought by proxies and terrorist groups might not degenerate into all-out war precisely because India and Pakistan have mutual nuclear deterrence.
This changing nature of the battlefield essentially means that war as a conclusive event in an international conflict has become obsolete.
The facile Clausewitzian wisdom that military action ultimately leads to a political solution is no longer convincing.
“Victory” cannot bring peace, simply because there will always be a war after the war.
Thus, for example, the conventional war in Kosovo lasted for two months, only to usher in a six-year asymmetric conflict.
Likewise, America’s three-week “shock and awe” campaign in Iraq in 2003 ended in “victory,” but opened the gates of hell for occupiers and ordinary Iraqis alike.
And six months after the merciless pounding of southern Lebanon, Hezbollah is as strong as it was before.
Nor does the return of the Taliban in Afghanistan six years after their overthrow now seen too far-fetched.
It is during the war after the war that the occupier’s inferiority is revealed, with constant reinforcements increasing the number of targets for the insurgents far more quickly than the occupier can adapt to the changing battlefield.
The insurgents in Iraq, as the British admit, were able in just three years to cope with their enemies’ technological superiority in a way that the IRA in Northern Ireland was unable to do in 30 years.
The Iraq war and Israel’s wars with Hamas and Hezbollah show the limits of what military power can achieve, as well as vindicate diplomacy and conflict resolution.
When it comes to tackling complex political and cultural conflicts, forging international and regional alliances around a legitimate objective is more important than sheer military capacity.
That said, it would be dangerously naïve to believe that the exercise of power and the capacity to intimidate are unnecessary.
But the objectives of the use of force need to be linked to the recognition that in today’s asymmetric conflicts, victory is no longer achieved on the battlefield.
Only better-informed foreign policies that can address the genuine anxieties of civilizations in crisis will yield more sustainable results.
Affirmative Action for Europe
The violence in France, fueled by staggering unemployment and ruthless policing, reflects the utter failure of the French model of social integration.
But violence elsewhere in Europe, such as the London bombings of July and the brutal murder of Dutch filmmaker Theo van Gogh on the streets of Amsterdam in November 2004, had already made Europe’s failure to integrate its minorities painfully clear.
As the riots in France fade, French politicians are agonizing about how to proceed.
Forty years ago, after legal segregation of blacks and whites formally ended in America, the United States was confronted by similar problems.
America’s response shows, however, that integration cannot be viewed as a one-way street.
In addition to imposing demands and constraints on minorities to join the mainstream, society must be willing to demand of itself that it make room for all its citizens.
As a potential model to be followed, Europe should look at the so-called “affirmative action” policies that America enacted to provide opportunities to blacks.
Affirmative action, or “positive discrimination,” as some have called these policies, began with university admissions.
But, in the early 1970’s, President Richard M. Nixon expanded the scope of affirmative action.
As a result, ethnicity began to be weighed as a positive factor not only in university admissions, but also in public procurement decisions, credit facilities for small enterprises, and government hiring.
The rational for affirmative action in those early years was the fact that, after a long history of systemic injustice, merely outlawing discrimination based on race or gender would not ensure equal opportunity for all.
Such programs are often viewed as contradicting a basic American value, namely that admissions, lending, and hiring decisions should be based on the merits of the individual, not group distinctions.
But they remain in existence three decades later.
Indeed, leading American companies, like General Motors, General Electric, and Walmart, have created affirmative action programs for hiring and selecting suppliers at their own initiative.
Similarly, anchormen and anchorwomen from all ethnic backgrounds populate American television news programs.
In France, by contrast, the appointment of the black anchorwoman Audrey Pulvar was big news on its own, because most of her colleagues in France are white.
Affirmative action programs, of course, have always been vulnerable to attack by those who can’t benefit from them.
In 2003, a white student asked the US Supreme Court to declare that the use of race in the University of Michigan’s admission policies violated the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment of the US Constitution.
The Supreme Court, however, ruled that the program was constitutional, citing a “compelling state interest” in racial diversity.
“Effective participation by members of all racial and ethnic groups in the civil life of our nation,” the court said, “is essential if the dream of one nation, indivisible, is to be realized.”
In reaching its decision, the Supreme Court took into account a legal brief submitted by 60 major American businesses, led by General Motors, asking that affirmative action be upheld.
They argued that the skills needed in today’s global marketplace can only be developed through exposure to a wide diversity of people.
Retired military officers and commanders told the court that affirmative action was essential to maintaining an integrated officer corps.
What America’s affirmative action programs may not do is set quotas for minorities, as this prevents competition between different groups.
But, in comparing groups, it is permitted to use an individual’s status as member of an under-represented minority in his or her favor.
As a result, a university may select a black student with a satisfactory score on the admissions test, even if there is a white student with a better score.
From the current French viewpoint, however, laws and regulations based on ethnicity are regarded as an unwelcome encroachment on the Republican ideal.
French President Jacques Chirac vehemently opposes quotas for immigrants, out of fear that such a policy would stigmatize groups.
And French businesses don’t see it as their role to solve the problems of the suburbs.
Moreover, French Interior Minister Nicolas Sarkozy hasn’t done much except hand out some special grants to the smartest immigrants from the suburbs.
France does have affirmative action programs, but they address poverty, not ethnicity.
If European politicians are serious about preventing a schism between population groups, affirmative action is essential – not only at the workplace, but also for small business loans, home loans, public procurement, and school admissions.
Tony Blair, who in July was faced with the shortcomings of integration in the UK, should take advantage of the country’s current presidency of the European Union to make affirmative action programs the top priority at next month’s summit of European government leaders in Brussels.
Affordable Green Energy
COPENHAGEN – Public skepticism about global warming may be growing, but the scientific consensus is as solid as ever: man-made climate change is real, and we ignore it at our peril.
But if that issue is settled (and it should be), there is an equally large and important question that remains wide open: what should we do about it?
One prescription that is bandied about with increasing frequency certainly sounds sensible: the world should drastically cut the amount of greenhouse gases that it pumps into the atmosphere each day.
Specifically, we are told, the goal should be a 50% reduction in global carbon-dioxide emissions by the middle of the century.
Even its backers concede that achieving this target won’t be easy – and they are right.
In fact, they are so right that they are wrong.
Allow me to explain.
Our dependency on carbon-emitting fuels is more than enormous.
It is overwhelming.
For all the talk about solar, wind, and other hyped green-energy sources, they make up only 0.6% of global energy consumption. Renewable energy overwhelmingly comes from often-unsustainable burning of wood and biomass by people in the Third World.
Fossil fuels account for more than four-fifths of the world’s energy diet.
So, in order to cut global carbon emissions in half by the middle of the century, we would obviously have to start getting a lot more of our energy from sources that don’t emit carbon.
Can we do this?
According to the International Energy Agency, here’s what it would take to achieve the goal of cutting emissions by 50% between now and mid-century:
30 new nuclear plants; 17,000 windmills; 400 biomass power plants;Two hydroelectric facilities the size of China’s massive Three Gorges Dam; and42 coal and gas power plants with yet-to-be-developed carbon-capture technology.Now consider this: this list does not describe what we would have to build between now and 2050, but what we would have to build each and every year until then!
One more thing: even if we managed to do all this (which we obviously cannot), the impact on global temperatures would be hardly noticeable by 2050.
According to the best-known climate-economic model, this vast undertaking would likely wind up reducing global temperatures by just one-tenth of one degree centigrade (one-fifth of one degree Fahrenheit), while holding back sea-level rises by only one centimeter (less than half an inch).
That’s not a lot of bang for the buck.
Indeed, the projected costs of this approach – some $5 trillion annually by mid-century – are so much greater than its likely benefits that it makes no sense to call it a solution at all.
Fortunately, there is a better, smarter way to deal with global warming.
What if, instead of spending trillions of dollars trying to build an impossible number of power plants – or, more likely, condemning billions of people around the world to continued poverty by trying to make carbon-emitting fuels too expensive to use – we devoted ourselves to making green energy cheaper?
Right now, solar panels are so expensive – about 10 times more than fossil fuels in terms of cost per unit of energy output – that only well-heeled, well-meaning (and, usually, well-subsidized) Westerners can afford to install them.
But think where we’d be if we could improve the efficiency of solar cells by a factor of ten – in other words, if we could make them cheaper than fossil fuels.
We wouldn’t have to force (or subsidize) anyone to stop burning coal and oil.
Everyone, including the Chinese and the Indians, would shift to the cheaper and cleaner alternatives – and global emission targets would automatically be met.
Can we achieve this technological miracle over the next 20 to 40 years?
In a word, yes.
The price of solar energy has been dropping steadily for 30 years – by about 50% every decade – and we could likely accelerate that decline further with sufficiently large investments in research and development.
How large?
If we were willing to devote just 0.2% of global GDP (roughly $100 billion a year) to green-energy R&amp;D, I believe that we could bring about game-changing breakthroughs not just for solar power, but also for a wide variety of other alternative-energy technologies.
This belief in the potential of technological progress strikes some climate activists as naïve or even delusional.
But is it really?
Consider one of the miracles of the modern age – the personal computer.
These devices didn’t become household items because governments subsidized purchases or forced up the price of typewriters and slide rules.
No, what happened is that, largely as a result of the space race, the United States government poured lots of money into R&amp;D for solid-state physics and electronics engineering. The resulting breakthroughs not only got Neil Armstrong to the moon in 1969, but also made it possible for Apple to introduce the first Mac in 1976 and IBM to debut the first PC five years later.
We can do the same for clean energy.
Forget about subsidizing inefficient technologies or making fossil fuels too expensive to use. Instead, let’s fund the basic research that will make green energy too cheap and easy to resist.
Afghanistan Is Lost Without Better Governance
NEW YORK – President Obama's recent trip to Afghanistan highlighted the growing American and international perception that without better governance Afghanistan will fail.
As President Obama apparently made clear in his late night meeting with President Hamid Karzai, no matter what other progress is made, America and its allies cannot succeed in Afghanistan unless the Afghan government succeeds—and that government is moving in the wrong direction.
Until this changes, all other efforts will ultimately be in vain and current levels of international engagement with Afghanistan will become unjustifiable.
The United States and its Afghan and NATO allies have demonstrated unmistakable progress in Afghanistan this year.
The ongoing Marja campaign, the arrest of Mullah Abdul Ghani Baradar and two Taliban "shadow governors" in Pakistan, and the recent drone strike hitting top leaders of the Al Qaeda-affiliated Haqqani network are all clear steps in the right direction.
President Obama has defined America's goals in Afghanistan as denying Al Qaeda a safe haven, reversing the Taliban's momentum, and helping the country's security forces and government "take lead responsibility for Afghanistan’s future."
To this end, Obama launched an 18-month military "surge" with the backing of other NATO member countries, to be followed by the beginning of withdrawal.
To achieve these goals in such a short time, NATO and its Afghan partners must overcome three enormous obstacles.
First, they must fight far more successfully against the Taliban to create space for rebuilding and possible negotiation.
Second, they must convince Pakistan to begin actively opposing the Afghan Taliban and denying them the safe haven and support they currently receive in Pakistan.
Third, they must support the emergence of a legitimate Afghan government that is not, unlike the current government, seen as corrupt and ineffectual by its citizens.
Because the NATO strategy's success requires significant progress on each of these fronts, even the current preliminary signs of military progress and in Pakistan's relations with the Afghan Taliban will be for naught if Afghanistan's government cannot establish its legitimacy domestically.
Recent efforts by President Hamid Karzai’s administration to limit its public accountability demonstrate that the Afghan government in its current form lacks either the capacity or the willingness to do so.
For at least a year prior to the August 2009 elections, NATO officials recognized that ordinary Afghans' disgust with their government's massive corruption was among the Taliban's most effective recruitment tools.
At that time, these officials argued that the elections would give Afghanistan’s leaders a clear mandate for reform.
The deeply discredited elections put an end to those hopes.
The original flaw of the 2009 elections was structural. There was no voter list, and so it was nearly impossible to prevent ballot-stuffing.
The body empowered to conduct the vote, the Independent Election Commission, was run by commissioners all appointed by and partial to one candidate, Karzai.
One institution, the Electoral Complaints Commission—a hybrid Afghan-international oversight body with a majority vote controlled by United Nations-appointed commissioners—retained its credibility throughout the process.
Only the presence of the ECC, particularly its international commissioners, and the hope that it would ensure at least some fairness into the process prevented the electoral controversy from erupting into open conflict.
As flawed as the elections were and as contentious as the outcome ultimately was, the situation would have been far worse without the ECC.
After the election, many hoped that Karzai would recognize the need to build a more accountable government to help secure both Afghanistan's future and the future of international military and financial support.
In a high-profile speech in London this past January, Karzai pledged to make progress in fighting corruption and promoting government accountability.
Instead, the opposite appears to be happening.
Since his London speech, Karzai has actively opposed efforts to attack official corruption, sought to appoint warlords to his cabinet, failed to promote civil society, and weakened processes aimed at increasing the representation of women in parliament.
To make matters worse, Karzai issued a decree on February 13 permitting him to appoint all of the ECC's members, a measure clearly designed to strengthen the patronage system and weaken opposition movements’ prospects in future elections and a strong demonstration that his administration is not serious about establishing greater government accountability.
NATO and the international community must do everything possible to foster accountable government at all levels in Afghanistan.
Although Afghanistan's government does not need to be fully centralized, Afghanistan cannot succeed if the central government fails.
For this reason, unless the Karzai government changes course there is no justification for NATO member countries to risk the lives of their soldiers and commit other valuable resources to the struggle in Afghanistan if the Afghan government’s corruption and legitimacy deficit make current progress unsustainable and achievement of NATO’s goals impossible.
Karzai is free to lead his country as he pleases, but America and its allies cannot and should not maintain their current levels of commitment unless his government can establish itself as a viable partner.
The 18-month clock is ticking.
No Exit from Afghanistan
NEW DELHI – Despite frequent turmoil and repeated invasions, Afghanistan has remained virtually unchanged for centuries.
Nearly 120 years ago, Winston Churchill described the futility of warfare in the region: “Financially it is ruinous.
Morally it is wicked.
Militarily it is an open question, and politically it is a blunder.”
Churchill’s assessment undoubtedly rings true for many United States and NATO officials today, as they attempt to coordinate an exit from America’s longest overseas combat commitment in history.
While the war in Afghanistan may have resulted in fewer American deaths and injuries than previous US wars, the human cost remains substantial – especially after factoring in Afghan deaths and injuries.
Moreover, trillions of dollars have been wasted, with the few positive effects of the US-led military intervention already beginning to fade, and its many adverse consequences continuing to destabilize the region.
US President Barack Obama is now trying to negotiate a new “status of forces” agreement with the Afghan government in order to establish how many US troops will remain in Afghanistan and the terms of their deployment.
But the reality is that the US is scuttling from a conflict that it has lost, just as it did in Vietnam almost 40 years ago, leaving the beleaguered population to its own devices.
Rather than admit defeat, US officials are resorting to diversionary rhetoric.
For example, speaking recently in New Delhi, Secretary of State John Kerry said that the key to stabilizing Afghanistan is to build a “new silk road” connecting it with central Asia – a cynical contrivance apparently aimed at cloaking America’s failure in illusions of future commerce.
Kerry’s insistence that the US is not withdrawing, but “drawing down,” is a similarly transparent attempt at manipulation.
To be sure, America’s presence in Afghanistan has spawned important regional linkages; unfortunately, they are not the kind that support economic renewal.
The last decade of war and lawlessness has facilitated the Taliban’s proliferation across Pakistan and Afghanistan, leading the Taliban to consider itself an indefatigable force – a belief that could lead its leaders to undercut any progress toward stability.
In fact, the Taliban’s confidence already drove them to disrupt plans for peace talks with the Afghan government.
After agreeing to establish an office in Qatar exclusively to host the talks, in June the Taliban opened a quasi-embassy of the “Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan.”
The Afghan government responded by suspending talks with the Taliban, as well as the status-of-forces negotiations with the US.
Pakistan recommends seeking an alternate venue for the negotiations with the Taliban, rather than abandoning reconciliation efforts altogether.
This bodes well for the resumption of talks, given that Pakistan played a leading role in facilitating the Taliban’s emergence and is now home to the Afghan Taliban’s ruling council, including its leader, Mullah Omar, along with the Pakistani Taliban.
India’s former ambassador to Afghanistan, Vivek Katju, is confident that Afghan President Hamid Karzai’s anger at the Taliban’s gambit in Qatar will not delay negotiations for long.
(Indeed, Karzai has reportedly already met with Taliban representatives for secret talks aimed at restarting the stalled peace initiative.)
Katju attributes the talks’ inevitable resumption to America’s “strategic desperation,” which is so acute that the US would be unlikely even to follow through on Kerry’s pledge to call off the talks if any link to Al Qaeda were found.
After all, the US has already accepted the Taliban’s unrealistic assurances that it will not use Afghanistan as a base from which to “foment trouble” – that is, execute terrorist attacks – elsewhere.
Fortunately for the US, the Taliban is no longer a homogeneous group.
A decade of running and hiding from unrelenting surveillance and targeted drone attacks has caused the movement to splinter.
Yet, as the security expert Sajjan M. Gohel has observed, “the displaced and disillusioned Taliban youth of today” have “found solace and purpose in an extremely radical interpretation of Islam.”
The Taliban may no longer be a unified force, but they clearly remain a dangerous one.
All of these developments have put India in a difficult position.
In Afghanistan, America’s military was so tactically dependent on Pakistan that, on several occasions, the US encouraged India to curtail development projects, such as rebuilding Afghanistan’s infrastructure.
Following America’s military withdrawal, Afghanistan will most likely revert to pre-war conditions; Pakistan will revive state-sponsored terrorism against India; and extremism will spill into the Indian state of Jammu and Kashmir.
In order to make the best of a grim situation, India must be prepared to protect its own interests at all costs.
After all, as the US extricates itself from its Afghan quagmire, its own national interests will continue to trump all other considerations.
But China, Pakistan, and Iran also have their own important national-security interests in Afghanistan that each will now do their utmost to guarantee.
So, while US troops may be leaving Afghanistan, an end to the violence spawned by America’s war remains nothing more than a distant dream – especially for Afghanistan’s South Asian neighbors.
Afghanistan’s Customary Anguish
FARAH , AFGHANISTAN – When the problems riddling Afghan society are listed – violence, insecurity, corruption, religious fundamentalism – one dominating factor is usually left out: the influence of customary law.
In Afghanistan, there are three principal legal references:   constitutional law, the Koran, and the system of customary law known as Farhang , the most dominant and strictest version of which is called Pashtunwali (the way of the Pashtuns).
Originally an ancient honor code, Farhang ensures the dominance of the oldest male of any household, followed by married sons, unmarried sons, and grandsons, then wives (with the youngest at the bottom).
Collective decisions are taken by patriarchs in councils called jirgas , where all have to be in agreement.
This agreement includes including collaborating or not with the Taliban, cooperating with the Coalition forces, accepting or refusing poppy eradication in a village.
Everything else is left to patriarchal discretion.   Here, no one will intervene except to reinforce the application of   the patriarch's rights – say, in stoning a supposedly wayward girl, or turning a blind eye to so-called “honor killings” of women.
Every act of an Afghan male’s life is integrated in a form of reciprocity, in which nothing is free.
Melmastia , the basic tenet of hospitality means “I will give you shelter if you ask me to, even if you are a fugitive murderer; but, in exchange, you fight my battles.”
This sense of customary obligation is why so many of President Hamid Karzai’s cronies remain in place and Taliban leaders remain safe.
Women are excluded from collective decision-making, as they are mere objects.
Girls are literally sold upon marriage (the father is paid money for his daughter’s labor and reproductive capacity) and join their husband’s household.
The younger the girl, the higher the price.
Marriage, especially in the provinces, is routinely consummated on pre-pubescent bodies.
Yet women are precious in their own way.
A family’s principal “cultural capital” is its honor, which is ensured by denying women any opportunity to highlight male failings and therefore tarnish clan respectability.
As a result, women must be strictly secluded and made invisible when in public, for they are personally responsible for the desire that they could ignite in schools, hospitals, parks, or markets.
The all-covering burqa ensures sufficient anonymity to permit women a certain amount of freedom in public space.
Every female simultaneously carries her father’s and her husband’s honor, and will stoically submit to all forms of violence committed in its name.
This may mean dying in childbirth rather than risking the “dishonor” of giving birth in a public place, a hospital, in front of strangers.
Going to court is practically unheard of, as it would mean renouncing family practices.
From the male point of view, resorting to outside police or judicial intervention would signify an inability to fight one’s own battles – an admission of defeat and a symbolic castration.
This helps explain the intense corruption present in Afghan courts, where “honor” can be redeemed by bribing a judge to have a rapist or murderer released.
As violence is strictly a private matter, relinquishing justice to state institutions could be an unacceptable humiliation.
Customary law is not rigid in that it is made to fit round the demands of global economy.
It has become more rigorous in it s applications due to the influence of
For example, while the Koran allows for a measure of female inheritance, tribal custom does not authorize it, which explains the popularity of tribal councils to resolve inheritance problems and cheat women out of their rights.
Similarly, whereas the Koran requires four eyewitnesses as proof of adultery, mere suspicion of some unregulated, potentially sexual conduct by a woman warrants stoning under customary law.
Yet an awareness of alternatives is seeping in through the media, even in remote provinces.
Iranian films and the much loved Indian TV serials, not to mention the occasional American film, influence peoples' expectations.
Add to that the experience of having lived abroad as refugees in Pakistan and Iran.
Girls know that there are options to an unacceptable way of life: women are increasingly demanding more from life than what custom ordains.
This is especially true for those who have lived in Iran, a totally Muslim environment that allows women the freedom to study and work as well as access to adequate healthcare and family planning.
Once back in rural Afghanistan, forced into brutal marriages, many desperate women – especially returnees from Iran – resort to self-immolation.
Violence and murder of women are on the increase, perpetrated by men who feel that these alternatives pose a threat to their authority.
The West imagines that religion is the central issue in Afghanistan.
But the heart of the matter is the preservation of ancient patriarchal rights that go back to Biblical times, reformatted to fit the demands of globalized capitalism.
Governments and international aid organizations have failed to take into consideration the role of Farhang , perhaps because the power of unwritten law remains largely inconceivable in the West.
But Afghanistan cannot begin to solve its many problems until it criminalizes the privatized violence of this antiquated code.
Afghanistan’s Drug-Friendly Environment
Afghanistan’s President Hamid Karzai has stepped up international fundraising efforts in recent weeks, seeking a fresh package of military and reconstruction aid from the United States, together with stronger strategic guarantees.
But Karzai’s relationship with his sponsors has begun to sour, in part owing to charges that his government has failed to stop the resurgence of Afghanistan’s huge opium trade.
Underlying the opium trade issue is a security threat of another kind, one overlooked since the US-led invasion toppled the Taliban regime in 2001, despite the grave risk it poses to Afghanistan’s long-term stability, and that of the region.
In countries like Afghanistan, where 80% of the population lives on what they grow and many communities live far from any water source, environmental damage can be both economically devastating and politically momentous.
That lesson should have been absorbed and understood, not least by American strategists, long before the Taliban’s fall.
After all, desertification and deforestation helped fuel the rise, two decades earlier, of the Maoist guerilla group Sendero Luminoso (Shining Path) in Peru.
Sendero, which supplemented its income with drug production and timber smuggling, deliberately chose drought-weakened and deforested mountain villages as the stronghold of its insurgency.
Similarly, the Maoist insurgency in Nepal, which has claimed 10,000 lives, exploits the desperation of mountain villagers hit by flash floods – the result of deforestation higher up.
No Maoist group could ever gain a toehold in Afghanistan’s parched Pashtun south (these were, after all, people who, bare-knuckled, smashed the Soviets).
But the Taliban’s rapid rise in the 1990’s was inextricably linked to the failure of irrigation systems.
Villagers whose crops shriveled and whose livestock died in a prolonged drought saw joining the Taliban as an economic opportunity.
Had there been more irrigation, the Taliban’s gains might have been far less impressive.
The Taliban are now an increasingly spent force, but lack of water reinforced the logic of opium production across its former strongholds in the south.
Irrigation has failed or is inadequate in Helmand, Uruzgan, and Kandahar – three of the top five opium-producing provinces – where indebted farmers are hooked by the economics: opium brings in eight times as much cash as wheat and uses less water.
Without serious investment in irrigation, including construction of reservoirs to make use of the snowfall in the Hindu Kush, and in new cash crops such as saffron and rose oil, Afghanistan’s drift toward narco-statehood will continue, with all the instability that this implies.
Clear-cutting of old growth forests in the mountains bordering Pakistan may prove as problematic.
Agriculture there has been damaged by the cutting of walnut, apricot, and mulberry trees for winter fuel, and by a failure to replant poplar, willow, and tamarisk – the trees that hold fragile meadows in place.
These sorts of trees can be restored, given a concerted campaign and investment in nurseries to produce local varieties.
Loss of the ancient cedar, pine, fir, and oak forests on the slopes above is another matter.
This year’s snowmelt caused landslides and flooding – a warning of more soil erosion and destruction of arable land to come; hundreds died and thousands lost their livelihoods.
Forestry has always been a problem in Afghanistan.
In 1960, the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization spoke of wasteful logging practices, such as “head-skidding” (in which a log is rolled downhill, ripping up plants and soil).
Aerial photographers were called in, and a large budget was set aside.
But, in 1976, the FAO admitted in a new plan that forest and watershed management activities had “turned out to be quite limited.”
The 1976 plan called for sustainable logging and basic forest-fire control, but war intervened, costing Afghanistan half its forest cover.
Up to 60% of the old growth forest in Nangahar, the second largest opium-producing province, may have been cut during the war years.
Mujahedin factions and later the Taliban exported stands of fine-grained cedar by the truckload from Nangahar and surrounding provinces to Pakistan, often in return for arms.
Illegal logging continues today, with only ineffectual efforts made to stop it.
At the current rate, Afghanistan’s old growth forest could vanish within a decade.
The UN acknowledges the problem but is (rightly) unwilling to risk sending forestry experts into a tribal region where American and allied troops venture only in armored convoys.
Safety concerns and cost also limit intervention by international conservation organizations.
A new initiative called the Green Corps includes 300 forest rangers charged with stopping illegal logging, and the ministry hopes to boost their numbers within a year. But the initiative is unlikely to have much effect.
Illegal logging crews number 200 or more.
They have chain saws and trucks. They are armed and work with the backing of drug and emerald smugglers – and often of local officials.
The price of plank cedar in Lahore is incentive enough to corrupt, or kill, any Green Corps men brave enough to stand in their way.
Environmental issues are of paramount importance in marginal countries because their impact on human survival is immediate and direct.
The inadequate response to pressing questions of natural resource management, whether of water or trees, merely strengthens the hands of opium dealers and malcontents in what is already the most disaffected and sensitive part of Afghanistan – the clear-cut mountain slopes where intelligence officers believe Osama bin Laden is most likely holed up.
Afghanistan’s Feminist Revolution
On April 16, more than 300 Afghani women – many of them students – marched together in Kabul in protest of a new law passed by Parliament that would impose a series of Taliban-like restrictions on women.
The law would permit marital rape, limit women’s movements – say, for work or study – without male permission, and even make it illegal for a woman to refuse to dress as her husband wishes.
The women, facing a crowd of furious men calling them “whores” and other epithets, marched two miles under a rain of abuse and delivered their petition against the law to legislators.
Both houses of Parliament had approved the law, and President Hamid Karzai signed it.
The law now affects only the Shia minority, but threatens to affect pending legislation that could restrict the rights of non-Shia women as well.
When Western media sought quotes from the women, they frequently heard a Western-style feminist refrain: “These laws would make women into a kind of property.”
In the West, the counterpoint to the notion of woman as property has been a highly individualistic demand for personal autonomy – decision-making based primarily on a woman’s own wishes, rather than as wife, mother, community member, or worshipper.
But, while some Western feminist insights may be useful to Afghani women and other women in the developing world as they resist certain forms of male oppression, we should not assume – as Western feminists often have – that our job is to proselytize “our” feminism.
On the contrary, the feminism expressed by women such as these Afghani heroines should educate us in the West about our own shortcomings.
The core theory with which emerging feminists in more traditional and religious societies are working is far different from that of Western feminism – and in some ways far more profound and humane.
In India, for example, feminists articulated to me a vision of women’s equality that was family-centered rather than self-centered, and that valued service to community rather than personal gratification.
They did not see their struggle as a cultural or ideological clash between men and women, but rather as a very practical effort to live free from violence and sexual assault, forced child marriage and bride-burning, and legal exclusion from parity.
The emerging consensus in India in support of greater rights and freedoms for women, while certainly causing some upheaval and adjustment (especially within the growing middle classes) has not yet – and might never – poison the basic trust and warmth between men and women.
Nor does it seem likely to emulate the splintered, individualized, solitary society – and the commodified sexual revolution – that Western, self-based feminism reflects.
This version of feminism – the notion that women can claim equality and still have a valued role in the home, prize family above all, and view rights in the context of community and spirituality – seems like a much-needed corrective to some of Western feminism’s shortcomings.
Ideally, men’s drive for progress in the developing world would also evolve, uniting the idea of the autonomous self with support for family, community, and other ties, and Western men would learn from this as well.
Moreover, intellectually, these women remind us that Western feminism did not have to evolve the way it did, and can still change and grow to embrace a more satisfying and humane definition of equality.
Simone de Beauvoir, whose seminal book
The good news for all women, East and West, is that President Karzai, under intense international criticism – and not just Western criticism – changed the law less than one week after the march.
This global uproar is a testament to how three decades of Western feminist challenges to leadership have changed the world for the better.
But our (Western) moment of feminist leadership is over now – for good reasons.
We know by now what our problems are as women in the West, and we know the blueprint for solving them.
What we lack now is not analysis, but the organizational and political will to do so.
So the leadership role is shifting to women in the developing world.
Their agenda is more pressing, and their problems, frankly, far more serious than ours, which makes it much more urgent for them to develop theories appropriate to the challenges they face.
If one of those courageous Afghan women who marched in Kabul wrote – as I hope she or one of her sisters in the developing world is doing right now – the seminal text for the next 50 years on non-Western feminism, it would no doubt be equality-driven and practical.
And perhaps, in its likely view of the world as being more than the sum of consuming, competing autonomies, or gender warfare, it would be a valuable challenge to truisms that we Western feminists – and the men who love us – have thought we had to take for granted.
Afghanistan’s Opium War
When NATO leaders meet for their summit in Riga at the end of this month, there will be a ghost at the feast: Afghanistan’s opium.
Afghanistan is in danger of falling back into the hands of terrorists, insurgents, and criminals, and the multi-billion-dollar opium trade is at the heart of the country’s malaise.
Indeed, NATO’s top general, James Jones, has called drugs the “Achilles heel” of Afghanistan.
This year’s record harvest of 6,100 tons of opium will generate more than $3 billion in illicit revenue – equivalent to almost half of Afghanistan’s GDP.
Profits for drug traffickers downstream will be almost 20 times that amount.
Opium money is corrupting Afghan society from top to bottom.
High-level collusion enables thousands of tons of chemical precursors, needed to produce heroin, to be trucked into the country.
Armed convoys transport raw opium around the country unhindered.
Sometimes even army and police vehicles are involved.
Guns and bribes ensure that the trucks are waved through checkpoints.
Opiates flow freely across borders into Iran, Pakistan, and other Central Asian countries.
The opium fields of wealthy landowners are untouched, because local officials are paid off.
Major traffickers never come to trial because judges are bribed or intimidated.
Senior government officials take their cut of opium revenues or bribes in return for keeping quiet.
Perversely, some provincial governors and government officials are themselves major players in the drug trade.
As a result, the Afghan state is at risk of takeover by a malign coalition of extremists, criminals, and opportunists.
Opium is choking Afghan society.
Within Afghanistan, drug addiction is rising.
Neighbors that used to be transit states for drugs are now major consumers, owing to similar dramatic increases in opium and heroin addiction.
Intravenous drug use is spreading HIV/AIDS in Iran, Central Asia, and the former Soviet Union.
In traditional Western European markets, health officials should brace for a rise in the number of deaths from drug overdoses, as this year’s bumper opium crop will lead to higher-purity doses of heroin.
What can be done?
First, the veil of corruption in Afghanistan must be lifted.
Afghans are fed up with arrogant and well-armed tycoons who live in mansions and drive top-of-the range Mercedes limousines – this in a country where barely 13% of the population have electricity and most people must survive on less than $200 a year.
It is time for the Afghan government to name, shame, and sack corrupt officials, arrest major drug traffickers and opium landlords, and seize their assets.
Donors have trained police and prosecutors and built courts and detention centers.
Now it is up to the government to use the judicial system to impose the rule of law.
It will be difficult, but not impossible, to re-establish confidence in the central government.
Putting major drug traffickers behind bars at the new maximum-security prison at Pul-i-Charki, near Kabul, would be a good start.
Of course, Afghanistan does not bear sole responsibility for its plight.
The heroin trade would not be booming if Western governments were serious about combating drug consumption.
It is a bitter irony that the countries whose soldiers’ lives are on the line in Afghanistan are also the biggest markets for Afghan heroin.
Furthermore, Afghanistan’s neighbors must do more to stop insurgents, weapons, money, and chemical precursors from flowing across their borders into the country.
Coalition forces should take a more robust approach to the drug problem.
Counter-insurgency and counter-narcotics are two sides of the same coin.
Improving security and the rule of law must include destroying the opium trade.
Allowing opium traffickers to operate with impunity gives them a free hand to raise money to pay for the arms and fighters battling the Afghan army and NATO forces.
The United Nations Security Council has authorized the International Security Assistance Force to take all necessary measures to fulfill its mandate.
NATO troops should be given the green light to help the Afghan army fight opium – destroy the heroin labs, disband the opium bazaars, attack the opium convoys, and bring the big traders to justice.
And they should be given the tools and manpower to do the job.
There is no point in trying to win the hearts and minds of major drug traffickers.
Farmers are a different story.
Forced eradication risks pushing farmers into the hands of extremists, and thus will not lead to the sustainable reduction of opium fields.
Indeed, as we have seen in some Andean countries, it can be counter-productive.
Therefore, security and development must go hand in hand.
To achieve this, Afghanistan needs more development assistance.
International support so far has been generous, but it is still well below per capita equivalents for other post-conflict situations – and the need is much greater.
Farmers will be weaned off opium over the long term only if they have sustainable livelihoods.
At the moment, Afghanistan’s drug lords are prospering, and rural communities are suffering.
That situation needs to be reversed.
We must punish the traffickers and reward the farmers.
We cannot afford to fail in Afghanistan.
Recent history has given us graphic evidence of what would happen if we do.
But any solution in Afghanistan depends on eliminating its opium.
Afghanistan’s Terrorized Women
KABUL – Recently, the Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission (AIHRC) office in Kudoz province reported the rescue of a young woman who had been imprisoned in her in-laws’ dungeon for seven months.
Fifteen-year-old Sahar Gul was forced to marry an older man who serves in the Afghan army. She was then kept in the dungeon by her husband’s family and brutally tortured for months, because she refused to work as a prostitute.
Over the past ten years, the AIHRC has received more than 19,000 complaints related to violence against women.
Despite making some progress in investigating the complaints and referring them to the justice system, as well as in raising public awareness about the issue, the challenges remain huge.
Since 2002, many efforts have been made to improve women’s lives in Afghanistan.
The country has enacted several new laws and established a fairly advanced legal framework to end discrimination against women, including a new law that criminalizes any act that results in violence against women.
But laws and policies alone are not sufficient to protect women from horrific domestic abuse.
Indeed, the Gul case is hardly the only well-publicized case.
There was also Gulnaz, a young woman who was jailed for adultery after being raped by a relative (she was recently released after a presidential pardon, but may be forced to marry her attacker).
The Taliban, for example, have consistently used an anti-women policy to appeal to tribal and rural people.
Third, family pride and honor are deemed more important than a woman’s individual well-being and safety.
For example, if family members beat or abuse a woman, she has few options.
Often, her only choice is to remain silent or risk disgracing the family.
If she does report the matter to the authorities, the case will almost certainly never be properly investigated, nor the perpetrators ever prosecuted.
Gul, for example, complained to the police about her abusive in-laws, but she was returned to the family when some of their influential contacts intervened.
Fourth, laws are often arbitrarily applied, and sharia (Islamic law) frequently takes precedence over civil legislation, resulting in widespread impunity for crimes of violence against women.
For example, in October 2010, the Afghan Supreme Court ruled that women who run away from home can be charged with prostitution, unless they go to the police or an immediate relative's home.&#160;It is this mindset that led to Gul’s victimization.
Finally, while the Taliban lost power ten years ago, discrimination and violence against women has occurred in Afghan society for centuries.
Thus, despite some progress, public and official sensitivity to violence against women is only slowly emerging.
The Afghan government must take several steps to protect women fully.
Above all, perpetrators of violence against women should be prosecuted and tried under due process of law.
This will require strengthening the rule of law and ending the prevailing culture of impunity.
That, in turn, requires educating the public further about human rights and women’s rights through school textbooks, continuing education courses, and a vigorous media campaign.
It also requires persuading representatives and policymakers to develop policies and allocate budget revenues to combat violence against women, and training police and judges to handle cases of violence against women without deferring to claims of family honor.
Perhaps most importantly, non-constitutional justice systems, such as sharia, must be monitored and checked, if not prohibited altogether.
As for Sahar Gul, her case must be thoroughly investigated, and the police and judiciary must commit to bringing her torturers to justice.
Furthermore, Gul’s case, and others like it, should be studied in order to understand the roots of such crimes.
Until Afghanistan’s leaders begin to address this problem seriously, our country will continue to bear the scar of violence against women on its face.
A Flat World and a Round Ball
With the final stage of the World Cup approaching, now is a good opportunity for a mid-tournament appraisal.
This year’s Cup, unlike the previous one in Japan and South Korea in 2002, didn’t witness any real upsets in the first round.
Switzerland and Australia surprisingly reached the elimination round, and the Asian and African teams disappointed somewhat, with only Ghana advancing.
There have been just two ugly matches so far, full of fouls, nasty attacks, and unnecessary aggression, as well as numerous yellow and red cards: Italy vs. the US, and Portugal vs. the Netherlands.
Otherwise, we’re experiencing a wonderful Cup in Germany, in terms of both sportsmanship and the overall atmosphere.
As for Germany and the Germans, one hardly recognizes one’s own country and people.
Even Mother Nature has played along.
After a long winter and a non-existent spring, summer started promptly with the first kick-off – and virtually overnight, Germany has flaunted its sunniest and most delightful side.
The weather is Mediterranean, and all of a sudden, so are the people.
The Cup’s organization has been exceptional (as was to be expected), with excellent police work giving hooligans hardly a chance.
The whole of Germany has been celebrating a never-ending party with guests from all over the world (which was not expected).
And the German team has put on a wonderful display of heart warming and modern offensive soccer (which nobody could have expected!).
More importantly, not only in the German team, but also in the country as a whole, a young, cool, laid-back, and carefree Germany is raising its head – a Germany that is cosmopolitan, friendly, and good-humored.
Years of bad news appear to have passed the Germans by without a trace.
Doctors are on strike, taxes are on the rise, the parties in government are mauling each other, and Chancellor Angela Merkel herself proclaimed in a prominent speech that the country is in disastrous shape.
But the Germans, undaunted by it all, simply keep celebrating one great soccer party with their newfound friends from all over the world.
The black, red, and gold German tricolor adorns the entire country as never before, but almost nowhere are there nationalist undertones.
In fact, the flags of many nations fly alongside German.
In Berlin, as in other large German cities, taxis sport the flags of their drivers’ home countries – from Angola to Saudi Arabia.
Fans don not just their nations’ flags, but also fantastic costumes evocative of their home countries’ colors.
Flags are flown in hope of victory, but also serve to dry the tears of defeat.
In short, Germany during the World Cup is reminiscent of a Shakespearean midsummer night’s dream, with a touch of Woodstock to boot.
Outside the stadiums, public screenings of the games have become joyous mass “happenings.”
And how is the soccer?
This World Cup demonstrates three main developments that the sport has undergone.
First, Europe and South America are more dominant than four years ago and remain the unchallenged great powers of international soccer.
So we must hope that the World Cup in South Africa in 2010 will finally bring greater global parity.
Second, international soccer is witnessing the advent of a new generation.
Spain, Argentina, and Germany, to name but a few countries, have put forward very young teams that have played an impressive game.
On the French, English, and Portuguese teams, too, it is the young players that have shone – despite the continuing presence of Zidane, Beckham, and Figo.
Even the Brazilian squad is looking more aggressive and likely to score with young players like Robinho and Juninho than with their aging champions from 2002.
This generational change is accelerated by a third development.
At the top international level, soccer has become faster and more athletic, and the top teams can shrink space on the field more effectively.
A team that is unable to keep going at full speed for the full 90 (or more) minutes, switch from defense to offense quickly with the whole team, and maintain control of the ball to restrict their opponents' movements won’t stand much of a chance.
Here, soccer parallels today’s globalized markets, which make similar restructuring of national economies necessary.
Unlike economic globalization, however, it remains to be seen whether this new, fast-paced style of soccer will prevail (after all, the young blood of Spain lost to the Old Boys of France).
The sport and its fans will certainly profit if it does.
For now, we have a World Cup filled with soccer that is being shaped by a new, young generation both on and off the playing field – light-hearted, enthralling, and beautiful to watch.
Let’s hope that when the last whistle blows at the final in Berlin on July 9, we Germans retain as much of this positive spirit as possible.
Germany urgently needs this kind of optimism, because, unfortunately, two universal principles will continue to apply in the future: first, the winter will return, and, second, the ball is round and the next game is always the most difficult.
A Free Lunch for America
BERKELEY – Former US Treasury Secretary Lawrence Summers had a good line at the International Monetary Fund meetings this year: governments, he said, are trying to treat a broken ankle when the patient is facing organ failure.
Summers was criticizing Europe’s focus on the second-order issue of Greece while far graver imbalances – between the EU’s north and south, and between reckless banks’ creditors and governments that failed to regulate properly – worsen with each passing day.
But, on the other side of the Atlantic, Americans have no reason to feel smug.
Summers could have used the same metaphor to criticize the United States, where the continued focus on the long-run funding dilemmas of social insurance is sucking all of the oxygen out of efforts to deal with America’s macroeconomic and unemployment crisis.
The US government can currently borrow for 30 years at a real (inflation-adjusted) interest rate of 1% per year.
Suppose that the US government were to borrow an extra $500 billion over the next two years and spend it on infrastructure – even unproductively, on projects for which the social rate of return is a measly 25% per year.
Suppose that – as seems to be the case – the simple Keynesian government-expenditure multiplier on this spending is only two.
In that case, the $500 billion of extra federal infrastructure spending over the next two years would produce $1 trillion of extra output of goods and services, generate approximately seven million person-years of extra employment, and push down the unemployment rate by two percentage points in each of those years.
And, with tighter labor-force attachment on the part of those who have jobs, the unemployment rate thereafter would likely be about 0.1 percentage points lower in the indefinite future.
The impressive gains don’t stop there.
Better infrastructure would mean an extra $20 billion a year of income and social welfare.
A lower unemployment rate into the future would mean another $20 billion a year in higher production.
And half of the extra $1 trillion of goods and services would show up as consumption goods and services for American households.
In sum, on the benefits side of the equation: more jobs now, $500 billion of additional consumption of goods and services over the next two years, and then a $40 billion a year flow of higher incomes and production each year thereafter.
So, what are the likely costs of an extra $500 billion in infrastructure spending over the next two years?
For starters, the $500 billion of extra government spending would likely be offset by $300 billion of increased tax collections from higher economic activity.
So the net result would be a $200 billion increase in the national debt.
American taxpayers would then have to pay $2 billion a year in real interest on that extra national debt over the next 30 years, and then pay off or roll over the entire $200 billion.
The $40 billion a year of higher economic activity would, however, generate roughly $10 billion a year in additional tax revenue.
Using some of it to pay the real interest on the debt and saving the rest would mean that when the bill comes due, the tax-financed reserves generated by the healthier economy would be more than enough to pay off the additional national debt.
In other words, taxpayers win, because the benefits from the healthier economy would more than compensate for the costs of servicing the higher national debt, enabling the government to provide more services without raising tax rates.
Households win, too, because they get to buy more and nicer things with their incomes.
Companies win, because goods and workers get to use the improved infrastructure.
The unemployed win, because some of them get jobs. And even bond investors win, because they get their money back, with the interest for which they contracted.
So what is not to like?
Nothing.
How, you might ask, can I say this?
I am an economist – a professor of the Dismal Science, in which there are no free lunches, in which benefits are always balanced by costs, and in which stories that sound too good to be true almost inevitably are.
But there are two things different about today.
First, the US labor market is failing so badly that expanded government spending carries no resource cost to society as a whole.
Second, bond investors are being really stupid.
In a world in which the S&amp;P 500 has a 7% annual earnings yield, nobody should be happy holding a US government 30-year inflation-adjusted bond that yields 1% per year.
That six-percentage-point difference in anticipated real yield is a measure of bond investors’ extraordinary and irrational panic.
They are willing to pay 6% per year for “safety.”
Right now, however, the US government can manufacture “safety” out of thin air merely by printing bonds.
The government, too, would then win by pocketing that 6% per year of value – though 30 years from now, bondholders who feel like winners now would most likely look at their portfolios’ extraordinarily poor performance of over 2011-2041 and rue their strategy.
A French Presidential Primer
The late British Prime Minister Harold Wilson used to quip that “a week is a long time in politics.”
So, in the 30 or so weeks between now and the next French presidential election, any prediction made today could be reversed, and reversed again, before the vote.
But two candidates have emerged as clear and constant favorites in opinion polls: Nicolas Sarkozy on the right and Ségolène Royal on the left.
In fact, they have more in common than meets the eye, for each speaks of a rupture with the past while incarnating a form of continuity.
For Sarkozy, “rupture” reflects both mundanely tactical and deeply personal choices.
The 12 years of Jacques Chirac‘s presidency, together with France’s tradition of alternation in power, suggests a victory for the left.
Positioning himself as the candidate who represents a sharp break with today’s unpopular politics is the only means to escape that fate.
This is reflected in Sarkozy’s openly pro-American stance – an act of political courage in a France where anti-Americanism is running high.
Sarkozy’s message is that Chirac and Villepin were right in substance to oppose America’s military adventure in Iraq, but that their style was disastrously wrong.
Thus, his deep admiration for “American values,” while sincere, implies no embrace of President George W. Bush.
It also reassures the French business community, which was shocked by Dominique de Villepin’s flamboyant opposition to the United States when he was Chirac’s foreign minister.
At home, Sarkozy has aimed his message particularly at the young, issuing a patriotic call to the values of work and discipline, a counter-revolutionary revolution.
The revolution that must be overcome is that of May 1968, whose leaders and supporters, according to Sarkozy, may have lost politically to de Gaulle, but deeply weakened France over the succeeding decades with their emphasis on “false values.”
By contrast, rebelling against one’s parents’ generation and rediscovering traditional moral stances will save France – a message that is highly applicable to issues, such as education and immigration, that may dominate the electoral campaign.
In the case of Royal, the meaning of “rupture” is both more obvious and more visible.
She is seeking to become the first woman President of the French Republic.
To achieve her goal, she prefers to emphasize her “essence,” thereby countering Sarkozy’s stress on his record as a “doer.”
Her appeal to voters is simple: “I am a woman, and you have never tried a woman, so be modern and try one now.”
Hiding behind the originality (in French presidential politics) of her gender, Royal has avoided specifying a detailed program.
When challenged by inquisitive journalists demanding greater precision about her policy agenda, her highly effective line of defense (so far!) has been: “You would not dare to ask me such a question if I were not a woman!”
Thus, Royal’s program is her popularity.
In foreign policy, one can only guess what her priorities would be.
As far as Europe is concerned, she seems as “agnostic” as Sarkozy, who, like her, incarnates a new generation of “post-European” leaders.
In terms of values, Royal, too, seems to represent a rupture with May 1968, with her emphasis on discipline and family.
According to public opinion polls, Royal is the clear favorite of the left and the only candidate able to defeat Sarkozy.
Her support is particularly strong among women voters.
For the Socialist Party, which is eager to return to power but has not yet recovered from the humiliating defeat of Lionel Jospin in the first round of the presidential election in 2002, the question is whether it can afford to resist the wave of favorable public opinion behind Royal.
In the opinion of Royal’s many opponents among Socialist leaders and militants, the dominance of the media in the political process is leading to mediocrity: the qualities required to be elected are becoming nearly incompatible with those needed to govern.
According to Royal’s Socialist critics, the “Hollywoodization” of politics from which she benefits entails a new approach in which leaders follow and followers lead.
But the same criticism can be directed at Sarkozy.
Moreover, both candidates embody continuity – with Chirac’s Gaullist side for Sarkozy and with François Mitterrand for Royal – as much as rupture.
Royal openly claims Mitterand’s legacy as she searches for legitimacy, while Sarkozy’s rejection of Chirac’s legacy has more to do with form than substance.
To a large extent, Sarkozy can be seen as Chirac with more, whereas Royal is clearly Mitterrand with less.
When the voters decide in the spring of 2007, their choice may depend more on negative than positive considerations, as it did in 2002, when Chirac faced the odious nationalist Jean-Marie Le Pen in the second round.
As in 2002, the winner next year will be whomever the electorate dislikes or fears less.
But one way or the other, personalities will prevail over programs.
A Fresh Start for China and Japan?
Edmonton – Chinese President Hu Jintao will make a high-profile visit to Japan from May 6-10, making him the second Chinese head of state ever to travel there.
The trip is being carefully managed by both countries, and is being watched closely around the world, with good reason: Sino-Japanese relations over the past decade have been turbulent, to say the least.
When Hu’s predecessor, Jiang Zemin, traveled to Japan ten years ago, bilateral relations were deteriorating: China was unhappy with the Japanese government’s refusal to extend the same apology offered to South Korea for past aggression; Japan was worried about a rising China and thus turning more confrontational.
The Japanese media’s coverage of the visit was overwhelmingly negative, and it was remembered as a public-relations disaster.
Hu succeeded Jiang in 2002, almost as former Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi was coming to power in Japan, and encouraged “New Thinking” in China’s Japan policy, which would entail moving away from historical grievances and promoting better ties.
But, instead of accepting China’s olive branch, Koizumi implemented a more nationalistic agenda, including annual visits to the Yasukuni Shine, which is regarded as a symbol of Japanese militarism by Japan’s neighbors.
His hard-line approach isolated Japan and angered China, leading to an outburst of anti-Japanese demonstrations in China in 2005.
But both Japan and China recognize that further tension will serve neither country’s long-term interests.
Koizumi’s successors, Prime Ministers Shinzo Abe and Yasuo Fukuda, have sought to engage China over the past two years, with summits in Beijing and a successful visit by Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao to Japan last year.
Hu’s trip is likely follow the example set by Wen.
He will emphasize common strategic interests, highlight mutual economic benefits, generate positive public opinion, and promote further exchanges.
Japan is not only one of China’s largest trade and investment partners, it is also the most powerful neighbor with which China wants to be on good terms, partly to showcase that China’s rise is not a threat to Asia and the rest of the world.
Japan, whose economic recovery is attributable largely to its deepening ties with China in recent years, is also eager to demonstrate that it regards China not as a threat but as an opportunity, as least in economic terms.
It was 30 years ago that former Prime Minister Takeo Fukuda, the father of today’s prime minister, signed a Peace and Friendship Treaty with China.
The two governments will certainly use Hu’s visit to celebrate the anniversary with new programs designed to enhance bilateral understanding and friendship.
But, unlike three decades ago, when the Japanese regarded China as one of their most favored countries, public opinion in both countries nowadays registers more negative feelings than positive ones.
Behind the smiles, the polite interactions, and the cautiously worded diplomatic language, strong undercurrents of suspicion remain.
One problem is the disputed waters of the East China Sea.
Despite new joint projects in energy efficiency and environmental protection, areas in which China ranks Japan as the best performer among industrialized countries, the two sides remain in bitterly divided over these territorial waters, which contain huge potential oil, gas, and other mineral deposits. Even after many rounds of talks, no resolution is in sight, and Hu’s visit is not expected to produce any breakthroughs.
Then there are strategic suspicions.
Fukuda has dropped Abe’s talk about an “arch of freedom” – an effort to forge a bloc with the United States, Australia, and India.
But Japan remains concerned about China’s rapidly modernizing military, while China worries about a potential US-Japan containment strategy for China, especially in the case of a crisis in the Taiwan Straits.