Should Abe fail to deliver, the BOJ would be trapped.
If it stopped buying government debt, it could trigger a sovereign crisis and reduce the value of its own portfolio (especially if it started selling the bonds on its balance sheet).
But continuing its purchases would tighten the government’s grip.
Trust in the government is therefore vital for any central bank that embarks on QE.
This trust is missing in Europe.
Despite an accumulation of legal texts and procedures, the EU fiscal framework lacks credibility and does not give the ECB confidence that governments will continue to pursue sustainability after its bond purchases shelter them from market pressure even further.
Moreover, unlike its counterparts, the ECB does not face a single interlocutor, and none of the governments that hold it accountable is or feels in charge of the eurozone as a whole.
This is a deeply unfavorable situation, which explains why the ECB, once obsessed with the risk that governments would coalesce to assail its independence, has turned into the staunchest advocate of fiscal-policy coordination.
Concern is therefore understandable.
But it does not diminish the need for bold unconventional action against deflation, and it should not prevent the ECB from launching QE.
The parallel with Japan highlights the need for governments to behave responsibly, individually and collectively.
Europe’s elected national leaders have a large role to play, and they must not eschew their duties.
The more confidence they give to the ECB, the more effective QE will be.
Europe’s Trial by Crisis
BERLIN – Some 2,500 years ago, the ancient Greek philosopher Heraclitus concluded that war is the father of all things.
He might have added that crisis is their mother.
Fortunately, war between world powers is no longer a realistic option, owing to the threat of mutual nuclear destruction.
But major international crises, such as the current global financial crisis, remain with us – which might not be an entirely bad thing.
Just as in war, crises fundamentally disrupt the status quo, which means that they create an opportunity – without war’s destructive force – for change that in normal times is hardly possible.
To overcome a crisis requires doing things that previously were barely conceivable, let alone feasible.
That is what has happened to the European Union over the last three years, because the global financial crisis has not only shaken Europe to its foundations; it has assumed life-threatening proportions.
Compared to the beginning of 2009, we are now dealing with a significantly different EU – one that has become divided between a vanguard of member states that form the eurozone and a rearguard, consisting of member states that remain outside it.
The reason is not evil intent, but rather the pressure of the crisis.
If the euro is to survive, eurozone members must act, while other EU members with various levels of commitment to European integration remain on the fringe.
It is an impressive list: national responsibility for bank rescues; the sanctity of the EU treaty’s proscription of bailouts for governments; rejection of European economic governance; the ban on direct government financing by the European Central Bank; refusal to support mutual liability for debt; and, finally, the transformation of the ECB from a copy of the old Bundesbank into a European Federal Reserve Bank based on the Anglo-Saxon model.
What remains is the rejection of Eurobonds, but that, too, will ultimately disappear.
The only question is whether that taboo will fall before or after next year’s German general election.
The answer depends on the future course of the crisis.
Germany, Europe’s largest economy, is playing a strange, sometimes bizarre, role in the crisis.
At no point since the founding of the Federal Republic in 1949 has the country been so strong.
It has become the EU’s leading power; but it is neither willing nor able to lead.
Precisely for this reason, many of the changes in Europe have occurred despite German opposition.
In the end, the German government has had to resort to the art of the political U-turn, with the result that Germany, though economically strong, has grown institutionally weaker – a dynamic exemplified by its reduced influence in the ECB’s Governing Council.
The old Bundesbank was laid to rest on September 6, when the ECB adopted its “outright monetary transactions” program – unlimited purchases of distressed eurozone countries’ government bonds –&nbsp;over the objections of a lone dissenter: Bundesbank President Jens Weidmann.
And the undertaker was not ECB President Mario Draghi; it was German Chancellor Angela Merkel.
The Bundesbank did not fall victim to a sinister southern European conspiracy; rather, it rendered itself irrelevant.
Had it gotten its way, the eurozone would no longer exist.
Placing ideology above pragmatism is a formula for failure in any crisis.
Currently, the eurozone is on the threshold of a banking union, with a fiscal union to follow.
But, even with only a banking union, the pressure toward political union will grow.
With 27 members (28 with the approaching addition of Croatia), EU treaty amendments will be impossible, not only because the United Kingdom continues to resist further European integration, but also because popular referenda would be required in many member states.
These plebiscites would become a reckoning for national governments on their crisis policies, which no sound-minded government will want.
This means that intergovernmental agreements will be needed for some time to come, and that the eurozone will develop in the direction of inter-governmental federalism.
This promises to be exciting, as it will offer completely unexpected possibilities for political integration.
In the end, former French President Nicolas Sarkozy has prevailed, because the eurozone today is led by a de facto economic government that comprises member countries’ heads of state and government (and their finance ministers).
European federalists should welcome this, because the more these heads of state and government turn into a government of the eurozone as a whole, the faster their current dual role as the EU’s executive and legislative branch will become obsolete.
The European Parliament will not be able to fill the emerging vacuum, as it lacks fiscal sovereignty, which still lies with national parliaments and will remain there indefinitely.
Only national parliaments can fill the vacuum, and they need a common platform within the eurozone – a kind of “Euro Chamber” – through which they can control European economic governance.
Federalists in the European Parliament, and in Brussels generally, should not feel threatened.
On the contrary, they should recognize and use this unique opportunity.
National MPs and MEPs should come together quickly and clarify their relationship.
In the medium term, a European Parliament with two chambers could emerge.
This crisis offers a tremendous opportunity for Europe.
It has defined the agenda for years to come: banking union, fiscal union, and political union.
What remains missing is an economic-growth strategy for the crisis countries; but, given mounting unrest in southern Europe, such a strategy is inevitable.
Europeans have reason to be optimistic if they recognize the opportunity that their crisis has created – and act boldly and decisively to seize it.
Stability and Prosperity in Monetary Union
FRANKFURT – There is a common misconception that the euro area is a monetary union without a political union.
But this reflects a deep misunderstanding of what monetary union means.
Monetary union is possible only because of the substantial integration already achieved among European Union countries – and sharing a single currency deepens that integration.
If European monetary union has proved more resilient than many thought, it is only because those who doubted it misjudged this political dimension.
They underestimated the ties among its members, how much they had collectively invested, and their willingness to come together to solve common problems when it mattered most.
Yet it is also clear that our monetary union is still incomplete.
This was the diagnosis offered two years ago by the so-called “Four Presidents” (the European council president in close collaboration with the presidents of the European Commission, the European Central Bank, and the Eurogroup).
And, though important progress has been made in some areas, unfinished business remains in others.
But what does it mean to “complete” a monetary union?
Most important, it means having conditions in place that make countries more stable and prosperous than they would be if they were not members.
They have to be better off inside than they would be outside.
In other political unions, cohesion is maintained through a strong common identity, but often also through permanent fiscal transfers between richer and poorer regions that even out incomes ex post.
In the euro area, such one-way transfers between countries are not foreseen (transfers do exist as part of the EU’s cohesion policy, but are limited in size and are primarily designed to support the “catching-up” process in lower income countries or regions).
This means that we need a different approach to ensure that each country is permanently better off inside the euro area.
This implies two main things.
First, we have to create the conditions for all countries to thrive independently.
All members need to be able to exploit comparative advantages within the Single Market, attract capital, and generate jobs.
And they need to have enough flexibility to respond quickly to short-term shocks.
This comes down to structural reforms that spur competition, reduce unnecessary red tape, and make labor markets more adaptable.
Until now, whether or not to carry out such reforms has largely been a national prerogative.
But in a union such as ours they are a clear common interest.
Euro area countries depend on one another for growth.
And, more fundamentally, if a lack of structural reforms leads to permanent divergence within the monetary union, this raises the specter of exit – from which all members ultimately suffer.
In the euro area, stability and prosperity anywhere depend on countries thriving everywhere.
So there is a strong case for sharing more sovereignty in this area – for building a genuine economic union.
This means more than beefing up existing procedures.
It means governing together: shifting from coordination to common decision-making, and from rules to institutions.
The second implication of the absence of fiscal transfers is that countries need to invest more in other mechanisms to share the cost of shocks.
Even with more flexible economies, internal adjustment will always be slower than it would be if countries had their own exchange rate.
Risk-sharing is thus essential to prevent recessions from leaving permanent scars and reinforcing economic divergence.
A key part of the solution is to improve private risk-sharing by deepening financial integration.
Indeed, the less public risk-sharing we want, the more private risk-sharing we need.
A banking union for the euro area should be catalytic in encouraging deeper integration of the banking sector.
But risk-sharing is also about deepening capital markets, especially for equity, which is why we also need to advance quickly with a capital markets union.
Still, we have to acknowledge the vital role of fiscal policies in a monetary union.
A single monetary policy focused on price stability in the euro area cannot react to shocks that affect only one country or region.
So, to avoid prolonged local slumps, it is critical that national fiscal policies can perform their stabilization role.
To allow national fiscal stabilizers to work, governments must be able to borrow at an affordable cost in times of economic stress.
A strong fiscal framework is indispensable to achieve this, and protects countries from contagion.
But the crisis experience suggests that, in times of extreme market tensions, even a sound initial fiscal position may not offer absolute protection from spillovers.
This is a further reason why we need economic union: markets would be less likely to react negatively to temporarily higher deficits if they were more confident in future growth prospects.
By committing governments to structural reforms, economic union provides the credibility that countries can indeed grow out of debt.
Ultimately, economic convergence among countries cannot be only an entry criterion for monetary union, or a condition that is met some of the time.
It has to be a condition that is fulfilled all of the time.
And for this reason, to complete monetary union we will ultimately have to deepen our political union further: to lay down its rights and obligations in a renewed institutional order.
Europe’s Shadow Budget
MUNICH – More details about the European Commission’s €315 billion ($390 billion) investment plan for 2015-2017 have finally come to light.
The program, announced by European Commission President Jean-Claude Juncker in November, amounts to a massive shadow budget, twice as large as the European Union’s annual official budget, that will finance public investment projects and ultimately help governments circumvent debt limits established in the Stability and Growth Pact.
The borrowing will be arranged through the new European Fund for Strategic Investment, operating under the umbrella of the European Investment Bank.
The EFSI will be equipped with €5 billion in start-up capital, produced through the revaluation of existing EIB assets, and will be backed by €16 billion in guarantees from the European Commission.
The fund is expected to leverage this to acquire roughly €63 billion in loans, with private investors subsequently contributing some €5 for every euro lent – bringing total investment to the €315 billion target.
Though EU countries will not contribute any actual funds, they will provide implicit and explicit guarantees for the private investors, in an arrangement that looks suspiciously like the joint liability embodied by Eurobonds.
Faced with German Chancellor Angela Merkel’s categorical rejection of Eurobonds, the EU engaged a horde of financial specialists to find a creative way to circumvent it.
They came up with the EFSI.
Though the fund will not be operational until mid-2015, EU member countries have already proposed projects for the European Commission’s consideration.
The public projects will presumably involve EFSI financing, with governments assuming the interest payments and amortization.
The PPPs will entail mixed financing, with private entities taking on a share of the risk and the return.
The private projects will include the provision of infrastructure, the cost of which is to be repaid through tolls or user fees collected by a private operator.
Unlike some other critics, I do not expect the program to fail to bolster demand in the European economy.
After all, the €315 billion that is expected to be distributed over three years amounts to 2.3% of the EU’s annual GDP.
Such a sizeable level of investment is bound to have an impact.
But the program remains legally dubious, as it creates a massive shadow budget financed by borrowing that will operate parallel to the EU and national budgets, thereby placing a substantial risk-sharing burden on taxpayers.
Because every country, regardless of its creditworthiness, can borrow at the same interest rate, projects will be undertaken in countries that recently have burned such huge amounts of capital that they can no longer tap financial markets for funding.
Just like the many other “protective” measures taken during the crisis, this distortion of market processes will help to cement the sub-optimal allocation of European investment capital, hampering economic growth for years to come.
Making matters worse, only a fraction of the new borrowing enabled by the mutualization of liability will be factored into national budgets.
This will render meaningless EU-wide debt-management agreements, including the Stability and Growth Pact, which limits the overall deficit to 3% of GDP, and the 2012 “fiscal compact,” which stipulates that countries whose debt-to-GDP ratios exceed the 60% limit should reduce them by one-twentieth annually until they are in compliance.
In recent years, banks have been berated for using shadow budgets, in the form of special-purpose vehicles and conduits, to take on excessive risk.
It is worrisome, to say the least, that the EU is now resorting to similar tricks.
Ecb Is Now Europe’s Anchor
The European Central Bank is making its reputation at this time of turmoil and crisis.
Barely a month after the rejection of the European Union Constitution in France and the Netherlands, the EU Summit in Brussels ended in a surprisingly acrimonious orgy of national egoisms and no deal. Then the terrorists struck in London.
With all this trouble, the ECB is showing itself to be an “anchor of stability” by steadfastly sticking to its mandate of insuring price stability. 
Europe suffers from a profound crisis of confidence.
Its economy, for example, cannot recover properly because consumers, lacking confidence in the ability of their political leaders to solve the economy’s manifold economic problems (budget deficits, pensions, etc.), are saving for a rainy day they feel is just around the corner—and businessmen are reluctant to invest, because they don’t trust government to make the necessary economic reforms.
The public’s lack of confidence in the EU’s political leadership is totally justified.
Instead of actually doing something constructive about Europe’s essential problem --reforming expensive welfare states to ensure global competitiveness--Europe’s political leaders are hiding behind straw man arguments about “ultra liberal Anglo Saxon models,” and pressuring the ECB to lower interest rates as if European economic weakness were Frankfurt’s fault.
Europe’s finance ministers portray the ECB as closed to dialogue.
When testifying before the EU Parliament’s Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee, Luxembourg prime minister and Euro-group chairman Jean-Claude Juncker said there should be “open and frank” talks between the euro-group ministers and the ECB—and French finance minister Dominique de Villepin said the same thing.
According to a knowledgeable ECB source, however, Europe’s finance ministers regularly meet in secret with the ECB leadership for a mutual and frank exchange of views on monetary policy and other issues.
The dialogue already exists though the public does not know it. Such disingenuousness does little to boost confidence in Europe’s political leadership.  
The ECB has done all it can for growth by giving Europe a prolonged period of monetary stability at record low interest rates.
Does anyone really believe consumers are holding back on spending —and businessmen postponing their investments—in anticipation of that next drop in interest rates?
To paraphrase Keynes, you can lead a horse to water but you can’t make him drink.
“The last thing Europe needs now is an interest rate cut,” says one influential member of the ECB Governing Council in a candid assessment of the current situation.  Capitulating to outside political pressure is no one’s definition of an “anchor of stability.”
The euro would collapse, and the ECB finished as a creditable central bank.
Moreover, ECB chief economist Otmar Issing predicts long- term interest rates would go up—not down—as inflationary expectations increased.
So cutting interest rates would not only be stupid—it would be crazy.
But the ECB is not going to cut rates even though, for public relations reasons of keeping the political wolves at bay, it deceptively hints it might.
Don’t be fooled by such feints. The ECB is holding fast and, in doing so, demonstrates to Europe’s peoples that there is at least one EU institution they can trust.
This is vital.
History shows political turmoil often leads to inflation, which only fuels further turmoil.
Europeans can bet their last euro the ECB will not let the fledgling common currency be ravaged by inflation because their political leaders, having failed to do their jobs, now fear they might lose them.
Indeed, the courage currently demonstrated by the ECB in sticking to its guns should serve as a model for Europe’s future politicians.
Once they realize they can’t bully the ECB into unwanted and self-destructive interest rate cuts, EU leaders actually might summon up the will to lead—which is, after all, what they have been elected to do.
The ECB Goes Rogue
TILBURG – The European Central Bank has done it again.
At its recent meeting in Frankfurt, the ECB Governing Council decided to increase bond purchases further, from €60 billion ($67 billion) to €80 billion per month, with corporate bonds now also eligible for purchase.
The deposit rate, too, was reduced once again, and now stands at -0.4%.
This is far from a neutral policy – and it takes the ECB far beyond its mandate of preserving monetary stability.
The motivation behind the recent policy moves is clear: ECB President Mario Draghi is committed to curbing deflation, a serious threat to economic growth.
After all, in a deflationary environment, it is more difficult to repay debt, so companies will tend to postpone investment.
Recent Eurostat figures, which show that the annual consumer-price index fell by 0.2% last month, heighten concerns.
But while what is happening is technically deflation – that is, sustained price-level decreases that may be reflected in employment or other contracts – it is not structural deflation.
Instead, it largely reflects low oil prices, which have fallen by more than 70% since June 2014.
In fact, if we discard energy and food prices, the eurozone is in a situation of structural low inflation.
That, together with the oil price, should actually benefit the economy, as it gives a boost to consumption and investment.
So why has the ECB’s massive quantitative easing (QE) program, which has put plenty of money into circulation, failed to stimulate demand for goods and services?
One problem is that banks are reluctant to pass the negative deposit rate through to the savings rate, for fear of losing depositors.
They are thus forced to increase further their margins on mortgages and loans to small and medium-size enterprises.
As a result, contrary to the goal of QE, they are extending less credit to households and companies.
Meanwhile, banks, households, and small and medium-size enterprises are still excessively leveraged, and need time to pay down their debts.
While this might seem to suggest that the ECB’s focus on boosting inflation is the right one, the reality is that a straightforward expansion of the bond-purchase program ignores the underlying structural issues afflicting the eurozone’s weaker economies.
Worse, by enabling those economies to borrow cheaply, QE permits them to avoid implementing difficult structural reforms.
Draghi and the doves on the ECB Governing Council – namely, the presidents of southern European countries’ central banks – seem to think that they can get a car moving simply by giving it more gas, even if its clutch is broken.
The hawks in the ECB Governing Council, such as Bundesbank President Jens Weidmann and De Nederlandsche Bank President Klaas Knot, see the folly in this approach, but they are in the minority.
QE was effective in spurring economic growth in the United States, because it functioned via the capital market.
But, in Europe, where there is no unified capital market to allow portfolios to rebalance, the policy works through the bank lending channel, so it inflates – and distorts – the prices of bonds and stocks.
More problematic, the ECB policy results in a substantial redistribution of wealth from savers (including retirees) in the stronger northern eurozone countries – namely, Germany, Finland, and the Netherlands – to the debtors in the southern eurozone countries, including France, Greece, Italy, Portugal, and Spain.
Such transfers were never supposed to be a feature of the Economic and Monetary Union, and it is clearly not within the ECB’s mandate to force fundamental changes to the EMU system – especially if those changes favor one group of countries.
The problems with the ECB’s current policy approach are serious.
Yet the ECB seems committed to it – not least, it seems, because QE’s beneficiaries outnumber those who are footing the bill.
The longer the ECB keeps up this bizarre and irresponsible policy, the greater the chances that, when the car finally does get going, it will careen out of control.
Is the ECB Doing Enough?
FRANKFURT – Konrad Adenauer, Germany’s first chancellor after World War II, famously said: “Why should I care about the things I said yesterday?”
What he meant was that events can sometimes unfold at a speed that outpaces our ability to understand them.
So, as 2014 winds down, it is worth asking ourselves, with the benefit of hindsight: Have we at the European Central Bank reacted swiftly enough to maintain price stability in the face of threats, as our mandate requires?
I think the answer is yes.
We noticed that our monetary policy was no longer having the effect on private borrowing costs to which we were accustomed.
It was obvious that the lending channels in the banking system had become dysfunctional; excessively restrictive borrowing conditions were suppressing demand.
In response, the ECB did precisely what any central bank would have done: we acted to restore the relationship between our monetary policy and the cost of borrowing, aiming to bring down the average rate that households and firms have to pay.
In June, we introduced a series of targeted longer-term refinancing operations (known as TLTROs) to provide funding for banks at very low fixed rates for a period of up to four years.
The TLTROs were designed to maximize the chances that banks would pass on the funding relief to borrowers.
Our programs to purchase asset-backed securities and covered bonds were tailored to help lubricate further the transmission of lower funding costs from banks to customers.
Together, these measures offer a powerful response that addresses the root causes of impaired bank lending, thereby facilitating new credit flows to the real economy.
And tentative evidence suggests that they are delivering some initial tangible benefits to the euro area’s economy.
At the same time, inflation has continued trending down.
In November, annual inflation in the euro area fell to a cyclical low of 0.3%, largely owing to the sharp fall in oil prices since the end of the summer.
But falling core inflation (which excludes volatile energy and food prices) also points to weak aggregate demand.
And, indeed, the ECB’s latest staff projections entail a notable downgrading of the macroeconomic outlook.
Falling oil prices and the prospect of a prolonged period of low inflation also seem to have affected inflation expectations.
Given the potency of the recent oil-price shock, the risk is that inflation may temporarily slip into negative territory in the coming months.
Normally, any central bank would welcome a positive supply shock.
After all, lower oil prices boost real incomes and may lead to higher output in the future.
But we may not be able to celebrate. After all, because well-anchored inflation expectations are indispensable for medium-term price stability, monetary policy must respond to a risk of de-anchoring.
That is why the ECB Governing Council has reiterated its unanimous commitment to use additional unconventional instruments within its mandate should it become necessary to address a prolonged period of low inflation, or should the monetary stimulus fall short of our intention to move our balance sheet toward its size in early 2012.
This would imply altering the scope, pace and composition of our measures early next year, and staff from the ECB and national central banks have stepped up technical preparations for further measures, if needed, with a view to implementing them in a timely manner.
If we were to judge that the economy is in need of further stimulus, one option could be to extend the ECB’s outright asset purchases to other asset classes.
But it is important to remember that asset purchases are not an end in themselves.
They are an instrument, not a target, of monetary policy.
An important criterion for the choice of additional measures should be the extent of their influence over broad financing conditions in the private economy.
For example, purchases of bonds issued by euro-area non-financial corporations (NFCs) would probably have some direct pass-through effect on firms’ financing costs.
But, compared to other asset classes, the market for NFC bonds is relatively thin.
It would be a different matter if we were to decide to buy bonds issued by euro-area sovereigns – the only market where size would generally not be an issue.
Interventions in this market would likely entail a stronger signal that the ECB is committed to maintaining an accommodative monetary policy for an extended period of time.
The effectiveness of interventions in the sovereign-bond market – that is, their ability to lower the borrowing costs of households and firms further – will also rest on the state of the banking sector.
Higher capital ratios, lower exposure to bad loans, and more transparent balance sheets increase the chances that the ECB’s quantitative impulses will be transmitted to the wider economy.
That is why the completion of the ECB’s comprehensive assessment of banks’ balance sheets and the start of Europe-wide banking supervision will help revitalize sluggish lending in the euro area.
In particular, increased clarity and transparency about banks’ balance sheets, together with a better-capitalized banking sector, will create a more supportive lending environment.
But a decision to purchase sovereign bonds would also need to build on and factor in the institutional specificities of the euro area, including the limits set by the EU Treaty.
We take these limits very seriously.
The year ahead will be challenging and rife with uncertainty.
But if the past holds any lesson, it is that, if our ability to fulfill our mandate is at risk, we will not hesitate to act.
The New Philosophers
PRINCETON – At the recent meeting of G-20 finance ministers in Australia, US Treasury Secretary Jack Lew noted “philosophical differences with some of our friends in Europe,” before urging Europeans to do more to boost their anemic growth rate.
The terminology is striking, and underscores the difficulty of Europe’s search for a way out of its current malaise.
Canada’s finance minister, Joe Oliver, joined the call for fiscal expansion in Europe – a position for which there seems to be some support within the European Central Bank.
Indeed, ECB President Mario Draghi has advocated higher spending by more fiscally strong countries like Germany.
And ECB Executive Board member Benoit Coeure, together with his former colleague Jörg Asmussen, currently Germany’s deputy labor minister, recently suggested that Germany should “use its available room for maneuver to promote investments and reduce the tax burden of workers.”
In fact, most of the world believes that Germany should adopt a more expansive fiscal policy.
According to this view, austerity is counter-productive, because it induces slowdowns and recessions that make long-term fiscal consolidation more difficult.
But Germans – as well as some other Northern Europeans, and perhaps some Chinese economists – remain reticent.
They believe that responding to calls for stimulus would simply lead to more such calls, creating a log-rolling, pork-barrel dynamic in which any hope for fiscal consolidation is ruled out.
The stimulus-versus-austerity debate is an old one.
In the 1970s and 1980s, the United States regularly called on Germany and Japan to act as locomotives for the global economy.
But, until recently, the divergences were viewed in terms of interests, not “philosophies.”
Americans wanted additional demand for their goods and higher prices, while the Germans and Japanese defended their export industries.
The problem today, as Lew’s recent statement highlighted, stems from deeply entrenched differences between the opposing sides’ belief systems, with ideological questions about fairness and responsibility trumping pragmatic discussion of the best way forward for everyone.
As the historian Robert Kagan argued in 2002, Americans and Europeans do not only have different worldviews; they occupy entirely different worlds.
Philosophical differences are extremely difficult to reconcile.
Just as Platonists and Aristotelians struggled against one another for millennia, Kantians and utilitarians have been at one another’s throats for centuries.
Such deep theoretical conflicts have real-world consequences, as they impede constructive debate and cooperative action in crisis situations.
Fundamental ideological divisions over the 2003 Iraq war have strained global politics for more than a decade.
Modern political processes and structures are simply not well suited for conducting – much less settling – philosophical disputes.
Democratic institutions are designed for making deals between competing interests, with parliaments specializing in finding the right combination of concessions to enable agreement on a generally accepted solution.
Likewise, international forums like the G-20 exist precisely to persuade a large number of vastly different countries to set aside philosophical questions for the sake of their shared economic, political, or security interests.
Philosophies do not just give a little here and there, blurring over the difficult bits in the hope that everything will work out in the end.
Imagine asking a Kantian to add just a bit of utilitarian calculation to the categorical imperative.
Of course, resolving a philosophical debate is not impossible.
It was standard pre-modern practice to overcome such differences with a formal disputation.
In the early sixteenth century, the German princes attempted to settle the philosophical challenge presented by Protestant reformers by engaging Martin Luther to debate a prominent orthodox Catholic theologian, Johannes Eck.
There are not that many modern varieties of this sort of practice, but the 1944 United Nations Monetary and Financial Conference at Bretton Woods comes close.
By systemically engaging with the economic issues involved in building a viable international system, experts created a new global economic and political order.
In a sense, central banks have begun to resemble medieval philosophical faculties, with discussions addressing the issues underlying policy decisions, rather than just the policies themselves.
In the ECB, for example, a debate is underway to determine under which conditions deviation from fiscal orthodoxy might be stabilizing in the long term.
How that debate is resolved could lead to a new kind of international cooperation.
At a time when political processes are stalled on both sides of the Atlantic, the US Federal Reserve and the ECB have been engaging in a series of policy innovations, feeling their way toward a solution that could promote and sustain economic recovery.
On this basis, the ECB is recasting itself as the incubator of a new intellectual and philosophical synthesis.
But central banks’ new role as supreme arbiters of policy truth is fraught with hazard.
Given that the solutions that emerge from their disputations and analyses will be the product of technocratic – not democratic – processes, they are likely to trigger populist backlashes.
Moreover, the policy approaches that central banks produce may be too complex and interlinked to function efficiently.
In particular, the attempt to make expansionary policies conditional on the implementation of a host of microeconomic reforms is problematic.
If only some parts of a complex package linking fiscal leeway with structural reform are realized, the outcome is likely to disappoint – or even prove counterproductive.
When it does, the old philosophical divisions are likely to resurface.
The ECB’s Faulty Weapon
BRUSSELS – With inflation in the eurozone stubbornly remaining on a downward trajectory, pressure on the European Central Bank to do “something” to prevent outright deflation is growing.
This “something” is usually understood to be massive asset purchases, or quantitative easing (QE).
But would QE actually do the trick?
The discussion has so far followed easily predictable national patterns: Creditor countries do not object to deflation, because it increases the real value of their investment, whereas debtor countries’ repayment burdens would grow heavier.
In a closed economy, to every credit there must a corresponding debt.
But consider individual countries: some run a large foreign debt, while others maintain a large creditor position.
The United States and Germany are at opposite extremes of the creditor-debtor scale.
The US, benefiting from the “exorbitant privilege” of issuing debt denominated in its own currency, has run current-account deficits for more than 30 years.
The total foreign debt of US residents (most of which is in US dollars) is above $7 trillion.
This implies that any reduction in US interest rates would benefit the country as whole, relative to creditor countries, like Germany, where interest income would fall.
Within the eurozone, where until recently external accounts were nearly balanced, a similar creditor/debtor spectrum has emerged, with Germany and the Netherlands at one end, and much of the eurozone south at the other.
This partly explains both the hostile stance toward QE adopted in the German financial press and the over-indebted periphery countries’ increasingly desperate calls for more action by the ECB.
In the eurozone, however, QE is a questionable response to such calls.
QE is a special instrument used when a central bank’s short- and medium-term policy rates are already at zero and it wants to lower long-term interest rates.
This implies that QE can be effective only in economies in which changes in long-term (market) interest rates play an important role in the private sector.
But this is not the case in Europe, where most investment is financed via bank loans that typically do not have long-term maturities – often less than five years – because banks themselves have little secure long-term financing.
Moreover, the interests rates charged on these loans are not linked to market rates, but rather to the bank’s refinancing cost, which is already close to zero.
In the eurozone, lower long-term rates for government bonds are thus unlikely to improve the corporate sector’s financing conditions and boost investment demand.
By contrast, in the US, a much larger proportion of investment is financed by issuing bonds, which can have a longer maturity than bank loans.
Moreover, these bonds are priced as spreads on the government-bond yield curve, implying that QE will have an immediate impact on enterprises’ financing costs.
For households, the main impact of lower interest rates is felt through mortgages.
But most of southern Europe relies mainly on floating rates.
This implies that QE would not reach, say, Spanish households, whose mortgages are indexed to short-term rates, which are already close to zero.
In the US, households have a prepayment option on their mortgages should interest rates fall.
Moreover, mortgages are usually securitized. This implies that a fall in the rate at which bundles of mortgages can be sold on the market can have a strong impact on household spending, because lower long-term rates typically lead to waves of mortgage refinancing, leaving households with lower monthly payments – and thus higher disposable income.
When the central bank buys large amounts of bonds, all asset prices, including housing, tend to increase.
Here, too, the US, where higher house prices stimulate consumption, is a misleading example for Europe.
Owner occupancy rates are high in the US, and the financial system allows households to extract the equity in their homes relatively cheaply, either by second liens or by refinancing the entire mortgage.
This is not possible in most of Europe, and especially not in Germany, where loan-to-value limits remain conservative, refinancing is costly, and most banks would frown on any attempt to cash in on “home equity” to finance a vacation or a new car.
Moreover, higher house prices and rents distribute income from poorer households (which typically rent) to richer households (which own the houses).
But the poor have a much higher propensity to spend than the rich.
A housing boom in a nation of renters might actually lead to lower aggregate consumption.
Differences in financial structure thus matter profoundly in the effort to prevent deflation.
Though QE might work in a debtor economy with a flexible financial system like the US, it could backfire in a creditor economy with a conservative financial system.
This, rather than the fear that the ECB might end up buying the bonds of untrustworthy governments, is the real argument against QE in the eurozone.
Putting Deflation First
CAMBRIDGE – The European Central Bank is moving, hesitantly but ineluctably, toward quantitative easing.
The threat of deflation – and the ineffectiveness of its previous measures – leaves it no choice.
The question is whether the ECB will be able to move quickly enough.
The ECB has already attempted to ease credit conditions by purchasing high-quality asset-backed securities.
It has bought securities backed by cash flows from private-sector mortgages, so-called covered bonds, and it has floated the idea of buying corporate bonds and multilateral securities issued by the European Investment Bank.
But it is clear that this will not be enough.
Supplies of private-sector securities are limited, reflecting the dominance of bank lending in Europe and depressed sentiment in securitization markets.
Augmenting the supply of such securities will take time, which is not something European policymakers possess.
For all these reasons, purchasing private-sector securities alone will not enable the ECB to achieve its stated goal of expanding its balance sheet by €1 trillion ($1.2 trillion).
Unable to vanquish the specter of deflation, ECB President Mario Draghi will need to continue working to build a consensus – even better, unanimity – within the bank’s governing board for purchases of government bonds.
But Draghi and his colleagues will proceed in small steps, given fears in Germany that quantitative easing is just another name for runaway inflation.
Initially, the ECB will buy a small volume of government bonds; when this fails to produce economic Armageddon, it will begin to scale up its purchases.
We can expect to see the first of these baby steps in January.
The problem is that this kind of incrementalism will not work.
When the problem is deflation, quantitative easing will help only by transforming expectations.
When deflationary expectations are entrenched, as they are in Europe today, consumers and investors delay spending on the ground that prices and costs will be lower tomorrow.
Those expectations become self-fulfilling, because less spending means even less inflation and, in the worst case, falling prices.
Deflationary expectations can be transformed into inflationary expectations – thereby encouraging more spending – only by policies that induce shock and awe.
Dramatic measures are needed to convince households and firms that the future will be different from the past.
The central bank needs to convince them that it will do “whatever it takes,” as Draghi put it in July 2012, to jolt the economy out of its deflationary lethargy.
That is what the Bank of Japan, under Governor Haruhiko Kuroda, is attempting to do.
But the ECB seems temperamentally incapable of adopting the same approach, given fear and loathing in northern Europe of radical monetary action.
Opponents of quantitative easing worry that it augurs inflation – a peculiar position, given the European economy’s current slack.
They worry that securities purchases will sow the seeds of another financial bubble and bust.
This too, is a peculiar fear, given that financial markets are now subject to much more stringent regulation.
The most influential objection to quantitative easing is that it will relieve the pressure on European governments to reform.
According to this moral-hazard argument, the authorities will push ahead with painful labor- and product-market reforms and pursue the fiscal consolidation needed to gain the confidence of investors only if they remain under the gun.
If the ECB purchases their bonds, governments will be able to ignore market pressure.
In fact, those who advance this view – which is the most powerful obstacle to radical ECB action – have their analysis upside down.
Under current conditions, with the inflation rate dangerously close to zero, governments are reluctant to do anything that increases the risk of deflation.
And structural reform and fiscal consolidation are both deflationary in the short run.
Fiscal consolidation means less public spending.
And less spending means less upward pressure on prices – which is the last thing Europe needs in a deflationary environment.
Structural reform that increases the flexibility of labor and product markets is deflationary as well.
Enhancing wage flexibility in an environment in which unemployment exceeds 11% will allow firms to cut wages, and lower labor costs will permit them to cut prices in an effort to gain market share.
Deregulation that intensifies product-market competition will similarly lead to lower prices (that being what competition does).
In other circumstances, these would be positive outcomes.
Indeed, Europe does stand to reap significant benefits from fiscal consolidation and structural reform – but in the long run, not in the short run, when the problem is deflation.
And European governments know it.
It follows that the best thing the ECB could do to encourage fiscal consolidation and structural reform is to banish the specter of deflation.
Only full-bore quantitative easing can do that.
Those who object that such audacity would discourage fiscal consolidation and structural reform should consider what deflation would do.
The Lemmings of QE
NEW HAVEN – Predictably, the European Central Bank has joined the world’s other major monetary authorities in the greatest experiment in the history of central banking.
By now, the pattern is all too familiar.
First, central banks take the conventional policy rate down to the dreaded “zero bound.”
Facing continued economic weakness, but having run out of conventional tools, they then embrace the unconventional approach of quantitative easing (QE).
The theory behind this strategy is simple: Unable to cut the price of credit further, central banks shift their focus to expanding its quantity.
The implicit argument is that this move from price to quantity adjustments is the functional equivalent of additional monetary-policy easing.
Thus, even at the zero bound of nominal interest rates, it is argued, central banks still have weapons in their arsenal.
But are those weapons up to the task?
For the ECB and the Bank of Japan (BOJ), both of which are facing formidable downside risks to their economies and aggregate price levels, this is hardly an idle question.
For the United States, where the ultimate consequences of QE remain to be seen, the answer is just as consequential.
QE’s impact hinges on the “three Ts” of monetary policy: transmission (the channels by which monetary policy affects the real economy); traction (the responsiveness of economies to policy actions); and time consistency (the unwavering credibility of the authorities’ promise to reach specified targets like full employment and price stability).
Notwithstanding financial markets’ celebration of QE, not to mention the US Federal Reserve’s hearty self-congratulation, an analysis based on the three Ts should give the ECB pause.
In terms of transmission, the Fed has focused on the so-called wealth effect.
First, the balance-sheet expansion of some $3.6 trillion since late 2008 – which far exceeded the $2.5 trillion in nominal GDP growth over the QE period – boosted asset markets.
It was assumed that the improvement in investors’ portfolio performance – reflected in a more than threefold rise in the S&amp;P 500 from its crisis-induced low in March 2009 – would spur a burst of spending by increasingly wealthy consumers.
The BOJ has used a similar justification for its own policy of quantitative and qualitative easing (QQE).
The ECB, however, will have a harder time making the case for wealth effects, largely because equity ownership by individuals (either direct or through their pension accounts) is far lower in Europe than in the US or Japan.
For Europe, monetary policy seems more likely to be transmitted through banks, as well as through the currency channel, as a weaker euro – it has fallen some 15% against the dollar over the last year – boosts exports.
The real sticking point for QE relates to traction.
The US, where consumption accounts for the bulk of the shortfall in the post-crisis recovery, is a case in point.
In an environment of excess debt and inadequate savings, wealth effects have done very little to ameliorate the balance-sheet recession that clobbered US households when the property and credit bubbles burst.
Indeed, annualized real consumption growth has averaged just 1.3% since early 2008.
With the current recovery in real GDP on a trajectory of 2.3% annual growth – two percentage points below the norm of past cycles – it is tough to justify the widespread praise of QE.
Japan’s massive QQE campaign has faced similar traction problems.
After expanding its balance sheet to nearly 60% of GDP – double the size of the Fed’s – the BOJ is finding that its campaign to end deflation is increasingly ineffective.
Japan has lapsed back into recession, and the BOJ has just cut the inflation target for this year from 1.7% to 1%.
Finally, QE also disappoints in terms of time consistency.
The Fed has long qualified its post-QE normalization strategy with a host of data-dependent conditions pertaining to the state of the economy and/or inflation risks.
Moreover, it is now relying on ambiguous adjectives to provide guidance to financial markets, having recently shifted from stating that it would maintain low rates for a “considerable” time to pledging to be “patient" in determining when to raise rates.
But it is the Swiss National Bank, which printed money to prevent excessive appreciation after pegging its currency to the euro in 2011, that has thrust the sharpest dagger into QE’s heart.
By unexpectedly abandoning the euro peg on January 15 – just a month after reiterating a commitment to it – the once-disciplined SNB has run roughshod over the credibility requirements of time consistency.
With the SNB’s assets amounting to nearly 90% of Switzerland’s GDP, the reversal raises serious questions about both the limits and repercussions of open-ended QE.
And it serves as a chilling reminder of the fundamental fragility of promises like that of ECB President Mario Draghi to do “whatever it takes” to save the euro.
In the QE era, monetary policy has lost any semblance of discipline and coherence.
As Draghi attempts to deliver on his nearly two-and-a-half-year-old commitment, the limits of his promise – like comparable assurances by the Fed and the BOJ – could become glaringly apparent.
Like lemmings at the cliff’s edge, central banks seem steeped in denial of the risks they face.
The ECB and Its Critics
PARIS – In Northern Europe, especially Germany, the European Central Bank’s decision to embark on quantitative easing (QE) has triggered an avalanche of indictments.
Many are unfounded or even baseless.
Some are confusing.
Others give greater weight to speculative dangers than to actual ones.
And few point to real problems, while ignoring potential solutions.
Judging by the criticism, one might consider zero inflation a blessing.
But if that were true, central banks around the world would have set it as a target long ago.
Instead, all of them define price stability as low, stable, but positive inflation.
That is because zero inflation has three overwhelmingly negative consequences.
First, it erodes the effectiveness of standard monetary policy (because if interest rates went much below zero, depositors would withdraw cash from banks and put it in safes).
Second, it makes relative wages (of, say, manufacturing versus services employees) more rigid, because wage contracts are generally set in euro terms.
And, third, it increases the burden of past debts and makes exiting from a private or public debt crisis even more painful.
But, say the critics, there is no reason to worry, because the eurozone’s near-zero inflation is merely the result of the sharp drop in oil prices.
Unfortunately, there is indeed plenty of reason to worry.
Consumer price inflation in the eurozone has been below target for 22 consecutive months – long before the price of oil started collapsing.
Cheaper oil is a boon for growth; but it also lowers long-term inflation expectations, which are the true target of monetary policy.
Then there is the critics’ claim that below-target inflation is needed to restore competitiveness.
This is just confusing.
It is true that rebalancing competitiveness within the eurozone has not yet been completed, and that some countries thus need to record below-average inflation to cut above-average costs.
But this is not true of the eurozone as a whole.
Eurozone-wide competitiveness depends on product quality and the euro exchange rate, which is flexible.
Inflation is irrelevant in this respect.
Nonetheless, the ECB’s critics fear the sorcerer’s apprentice: monetary initiatives like QE will ultimately cause runaway inflation.
This reasoning is strange, at best.
If the critics’ point is that central banks make mistakes, it seems worth pointing out that the mistake made in the eurozone was to let inflation reach excessively low levels.
Now the ECB is reacting with force, but, as Japanese policymakers have found, exiting from deflation is far from easy.
ECB President Mario Draghi may fail to bring inflation back to 2%.
Or he may overshoot.
Nobody knows.
But it is odd to claim that a speculative danger should prevent the ECB from fighting one that is all too real.
Then comes the claim that QE is illegal.
But the ECB’s primary responsibility is to achieve and maintain price stability.
When conventional interest-rate policy becomes impotent, its duty is to rely on other instruments.
The purchase of government bonds is explicitly authorized by the EU Treaty.
This is not to say that QE has no downside.
It probably will create asset-price bubbles.
Ultra-low interest rates lift asset prices in two ways: they increase the present value of the future income stream of a stock or a fixed-income bond; and they make credit and property purchases more affordable.
So asset-price inflation is likely, and policymakers will have to contain it through regulatory tools, such as credit limits.
Moreover, QE probably will increase inequality.
The rise in the price of stocks, bonds, and land will increase their owners’ wealth.
Obviously, those without property will not benefit.
But the ECB’s monetary initiative will also help reignite growth and create jobs, thereby benefiting the poor.
It is governments’ task to address the rise in inequality resulting from QE, and they have an instrument for that: taxation.
When the United States Federal Reserve embarked on QE, it was accused of exporting its problems, because aggressive monetary easing inevitably weakens the currency.&nbsp;The same charge is now being leveled against the ECB.&nbsp;But this is misleading.
Ultimately, the US recovery helped its trade partners more than it hurt them.
In today’s world of global monetary interdependence, the rule of the game is that every currency union should pursue its own price stability.
The ECB has not departed from this standard.
Another major concern in Germany is that QE could be a backdoor means of creating Eurobonds.
But a Eurobond is a pact among issuers offering each other mutual guarantees.
The ECB, however, is not an issuer; it is an independent agency, and the decision to buy is its own.
Furthermore, 80% of the risk will be borne by national central banks individually.
Northern European opposition to Eurobonds reflects moral-hazard concerns that monetary activism will discourage structural reforms.
But, in the current context of protracted stagnation, the TINA (there is no alternative) argument for reform is losing strength by the day.
Absent a visible payoff, reform fatigue is setting in.
The new policy mix should combine macro-level support and micro-level change.
The argument that QE will destroy fiscal discipline cannot be rejected out of hand, because both its proponents and its adversaries seem to agree that its days are over.
But, though it is true that ECB bond purchases will shelter governments from market pressure, such pressure was already fairly ineffective.
It is governments’ job to uphold their end of the bargain and ensure that they do not shirk their responsibilities.
This is what the EU’s “fiscal compact” is for.
Finally, German critics complain that the ECB’s monetary policy is not geared to German economic conditions.
This is both true and unavoidable.
The ECB is responsible for the eurozone as a whole.
Its monetary policy cannot be perfectly suited to all members’ needs all of the time.
For the euro’s first ten years, the ECB’s policy was too lax for Spain; now it is too lax for Germany.
The ECB should not be blamed for doing its job.
The ECB’s New Macroeconomic Realism
NEW YORK – The European Central Bank has finally launched a policy of quantitative easing (QE).
The key question at this stage is whether Germany will give the ECB the freedom of maneuver needed to carry out this monetary expansion with sufficient boldness.
Though QE cannot produce long-term growth, it can do much to end the ongoing recession that has gripped the eurozone since 2008.
The record-high stock-market levels in Europe this week, in anticipation of QE, not only indicate growing confidence, but are also a direct channel by which monetary easing can boost both investment and consumption.
But some observers, such as Nobel Laureate Paul Krugman and former US Treasury Secretary Larry Summers, continue to doubt whether QE can really be effective.
As Krugman recently put it, a “deflationary vortex” is dragging down much of the world economy, with falling prices causing an inescapable downward spiral in demand.
The World Bank and International Monetary Fund seem to agree, as both recently lowered their growth forecasts a few notches.
Pessimists argue that the world economy suffers from an insurmountable shortage of aggregate demand, leading to a new “secular stagnation.”
Monetary policy is seen to be relatively ineffective, owing to the notorious zero lower bound (ZLB) on nominal interest rates.
With policy interest rates near zero, the argument goes, central banks are more or less helpless to escape the deflationary vortex, and economies become stuck in the infamous liquidity trap.
In this scenario, the demand insufficiency feeds on itself, pushing down prices, raising real (inflation-adjusted) interest rates, and lowering demand further.
This perspective has been prominent among Keynesian economists in the United States and the United Kingdom since 2008.
Krugman argues that Japan was only the first of the major economies to succumb to chronic deflation, back in the 1990s, and has now been followed by the European Union, China, and most recently Switzerland, with its soaring franc and falling prices.
The US, in this view, remains near the vortex as well, prompting the Keynesians’ repeated calls for more fiscal stimulus, which, unlike monetary policy, is seen by the pessimists to be especially efficacious at the ZLB.
In my view, the pessimists have exaggerated the risks of deflation, which is why their recent forecasts have missed the mark.
Most notably, they failed to predict the rebound in both the US and the UK, with growth rising and unemployment falling even as deficits were cut.
Without a proper diagnosis of the 2008 crisis, an effective cure cannot be prescribed.
The pessimists believe that there has been a large decline in the will to invest, something like the loss of “animal spirits” described by Keynes.
Even with very low interest rates, according to this view, investment demand will remain low, and therefore aggregate demand will remain insufficient.
Deflation will make matters worse, leaving only large fiscal deficits able to close the demand gap.
But the causes of 2008’s deep downturn were more specific, and the solutions must be more targeted.
A large housing bubble preceded the 2008 crisis in the hardest-hit countries (the US, the UK, Ireland, Spain, Portugal, and Italy).
As Friedrich Hayek warned back in the 1930s, the consequences of such a process of misplaced investment take time to resolve, owing to the subsequent oversupply of specific capital (in this case, of the housing stock).
Yet far more devastating than the housing bubble was the financial panic that gripped capital markets worldwide after the collapse of Lehman Brothers.
The decision by the US Federal Reserve and the US Treasury to teach the markets a lesson by allowing Lehman to fail was a disastrously bad call.
The panic was sharp and severe, requiring central banks to play their fundamental role as lenders of last resort.
As poorly as the Fed performed in the years preceding the Lehman Brothers’ collapse, it performed splendidly well afterward, by flooding the markets with liquidity to break the panic.
So, too, did the Bank of England, though it was a bit slower to react.
The Bank of Japan and the ECB were, characteristically, the slowest to react, keeping their policy rates higher for longer, and not undertaking QE and other extraordinary liquidity measures until late in the day.
Indeed, it required new leaders in both institutions – Haruhiko Kuroda at the BOJ and Mario Draghi at the ECB – finally to set monetary policy right.
The good news is that, even near the ZLB, monetary policy works.
QE raises equity prices; lowers long-term interest rates; causes currencies to depreciate; and eases credit crunches, even when interest rates are near zero.
The ECB and the BOJ did not suffer from a lack of reflationary tools; they suffered from a lack of suitable action.
The efficacy of monetary policy is good news, because fiscal stimulus is a weak instrument for short-term demand management.
Ironically, in an influential 1998 paper, Krugman explained why.
He argued at that time, and rightly in my view, that short-term tax reductions and transfers would be partly saved, not spent, and that public debt would multiply and create a long-term shadow over the fiscal balance and the economy.
Even if interest rates are currently low, he noted, they will rise, thereby increasing the debt-service burden on the newly accumulated debt.
With all major central banks pursuing expansionary monetary policies, oil prices falling sharply, and the ongoing revolution in information technology spurring investment opportunities, the prospects for economic growth in 2015 and beyond are better than they look to the pessimists.
There are rising profits, reasonable investment prospects for businesses, a large backlog on infrastructure spending almost everywhere in Europe and the US, and the opportunity to finance capital-goods exports to low-income regions, such as Sub-Saharan Africa, and to meet the worldwide need for investment in a new, low-carbon energy system.&nbsp;
If there is a shortfall of private investment, the problem is not really a lack of good projects; it is the lack of policy clarity and complementary long-term public investment.
European Commission President Jean-Claude Juncker’s plan to finance long-term investments in Europe by leveraging relatively small amounts of public funds to unlock large flows of private capital is therefore an important step in the right direction.
Obviously, we should not underestimate the capacity of policymakers to make a bad situation worse (for example, by pressing Greek debt service beyond the limits of social tolerance).
But we should recognize that the main threats to growth this year, such as the unresolved Greek debt crisis, the Russia-Ukraine conflict, and turmoil in the Middle East, are more geopolitical than macroeconomic in nature.
In 2015, wise diplomacy and wise monetary policy can create a path to prosperity.
Broad recovery is within reach if we manage both ingredients well.
The Drag on E-Cigarettes
RENNES – Michael Russell and Murray Jarvik, two pioneers of smoking-cessation research in the 1970s, would probably have welcomed the development of the electronic cigarette or “personal nicotine vaporizer” (PNV).
Beyond serving as a temporary aid for people attempting to quit smoking cigarettes, such new nicotine-delivery systems could act as long-term alternatives to tobacco – making it possible to eliminate tobacco consumption almost entirely.
We have long known that people smoke for the nicotine, but die from the smoke.
Indeed, the vast majority of cigarette-related diseases and deaths arise from the inhalation of tar particles and toxic gases, including carbon monoxide.
Though nicotine replacement therapy (NRT) has helped many smokers quit, the cigarette habit remains pervasive in many countries.
The use of nicotine in non-combustible forms like smokeless tobacco, or PNV, would enable millions of current smokers to reduce considerably the harm that their nicotine consumption is doing to their health.
In Sweden, the widespread use of snus – a smokeless tobacco product with a lower concentration of carcinogenic nitrosamines – has contributed to a dramatic decline in the incidence of lung cancer, to the world’s lowest levels.
The benefits of phasing out tobacco consumption could not be more compelling.
That is why PNVs should be actively promoted as an alternative to tobacco products, aided by endorsements from health authorities, tax advantages, and support from the anti-smoking movement.
But, so far, none of this has occurred, largely because nicotine is viewed as a highly addictive and toxic substance, with even smokers hesitating to try NRT or PNV for this reason.
In fact, nicotine has been the primary target of anti-tobacco campaigns for more than three decades.