For starters, the central or federal government should retain significant fiscal powers.
It must be responsible not just for defense and foreign policy, but also for key economic policies.
And it must have the resources to implement those policies.
Consider, for example, policy toward the banking system.
With the defeat of the Scottish referendum, it is clear that the UK will still have a single integrated banking and financial system for the foreseeable future.
In the US, which similarly has an integrated banking system, the federal government steps in when banks in a state are in serious trouble.
Americans have learned the hard way that bad financial events, even when initially localized, can quickly infect the entire system.
Specifically, the federal government steps in through the agency of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, which has a credit line with the US Treasury.
With the federal government raising roughly two-thirds of all tax revenues, there is no question about the Treasury’s ability to provide the financial backstop needed to prevent contagion.
This implies that transferring the majority of revenue-raising capacity to the regions would be a mistake for the UK, because doing so would give the country a banking union without a fiscal backstop.
And that, revealingly, is precisely what the eurozone has.
That is not somewhere the UK should want to go.
In the US, control over social policy is delegated to the states, allowing local legislatures to tailor programs to local tastes and use resources efficiently.
But those local policies are still subject to federal oversight.
The federal government steps in – and has the capacity to do so – when, for example, civil liberties are being violated.
And yet there also is the danger that federal authorities will assign responsibilities to state and local governments but not give them the resources they need to carry them out.
And even where revenues are otherwise adequate, states have an incentive to spend more on social programs and, pointing to the resulting deficits, ask for additional federal transfers.
To counter this deficit bias, federations in which states do much of the spending and the central government raises most of the taxes typically impose balanced-budget rules on subnational governments.
Forty-nine of the 50 US states, for example, have such rules in one form or another.
The Scotland Act of 2012 caps the region’s deficit at 10% of its budget and limits how much the Scottish government can borrow.
These issues are now likely to be reopened with further devolution.
But reconsidering debt and deficit limits on regional governments is not the same thing as abandoning them.
The experience of other federations shows that the latter would be a mistake.
At the same time, rigid rules limiting deficit spending by regional governments could place the UK in the same fiscal straitjacket as the eurozone, where member states are prevented from borrowing in recessions.
Fiscal policy would then become dangerously procyclical, aggravating business fluctuations.
Simply put, if fiscal policy is to play a stabilizing role in the UK economy, it will have to be conducted at the federal or central level.
The central government and its revenue-raising capacity cannot be allowed to wither away.
Devolution is coming, and its appeal is undeniable.
But it is important to know where devolution ends and dysfunction begins.
Sudan and Africa’s Future
JOHANNESBURG – It has been said, correctly, that Sudan is a microcosm of Africa.
For this reason, the entire continent will follow events in Sudan over the next few months with the greatest interest.
On January 9, 2011, the people of South Sudan will vote in a referendum to decide whether they will remain part of a united Sudan or form a new independent state.
If they choose the latter option, the new state will come into being on July 9, 2011.
During the same period, even as Sudan is addressing the issue of its North-South relations, it will also have to arrive at a comprehensive agreement to end the conflict in Darfur.
During its nearly 55 years of independence, Sudan has experienced a succession of violent conflicts, in the South, the West (Darfur), and the East.
It is commonly accepted that what lay at the root of these conflicts was the failure of independent Sudan – one of Africa’s most racially, ethnically, religiously, and culturally diverse countries – to construct a polity informed by the principle and practice of unity in diversity.
This challenge faces almost all African countries as they seek to construct stable and peaceful societies.
Virtually all civil wars and other violent conflicts in post-colonial Africa have occurred because of the failure to manage properly the diversity that characterizes these countries.
These conflicts have taught Africa that, in order to contain the centrifugal pressures that encourage fragmentation within our relatively new states, a conscious effort must be made to nurture and entrench national unity, which must include democratic practices.
Conflict has also communicated the unequivocal message that unity cannot be secured and maintained by force alone.
Rather, it is only by respecting our diversity – ensuring that each social group enjoys a shared sense of belonging, rather than feeling marginalized and excluded – that the state’s unity and peace can be guaranteed.
Sudan has learned these lessons through harsh practical experience, including war.
A turbulent and unstable Sudan would not therefore be a catalyst of peace and stability in Africa, and vice versa.”
Unfortunately, failure to implement policies based on genuine respect for this perspective plunged Sudan into its second costly North-South war, fueled the violent conflicts in Western and Eastern Sudan, and created the possibility of the South’s secession.
Given this history, it is clear that the governments of Sudan and South Sudan, as well as the overwhelming majority of the Sudanese people, have had enough of war and passionately desire peace.
The processes in which the Sudanese parties are currently engaged – the preparations for the South Sudan referendum, negotiations on post-referendum arrangements, and the search for a negotiated settlement in Darfur – are all informed by this desire for peace.
For this reason, Africa is following Sudan’s evolution with intense interest – and is eager to see this country “at the heart and crossroads of Africa” give substance to al-Nimeiry’s vision.
But, regardless of the outcome of the South Sudan referendum, the impending developments in Sudan will result in important changes to the structure of the Sudanese state.
In this context, the Sudanese parties – North and South – have accepted the important principle of establishing “two viable states” if the South secedes.
As happens during periods of major and rapid change, the country will experience social tension, uncertainty, and unease.
Africa is keen that the Sudanese leadership cooperate effectively to manage this delicate situation, in the interest of the continent as a whole.
This requires that Sudan’s various leadership collectives have sufficient strength and cohesion to bring their constituencies into the settlement, and therefore that no one, from near or afar, does anything to weaken any of these collectives.
It is in Africa’s interest to see Sudan’s people living together in peace and cooperating with one another for their mutual benefit – fully respecting one another’s diverse but not mutually exclusive interests, whether they live in one country or two.
A Sudan that truly embodied “the exemplary essence” of respect for diversity of which al-Nimeiry spoke would serve as a catalyst for peace and stability on our continent.
It is to be hoped that the sustained and enormous international focus on Sudan has as its objective providing the necessary support to the Sudanese people to help them achieve this goal, including building two viable states, as may be necessary.
Sudan between Peril and Hope
ALGIERS – The future of Sudan hangs in the balance. National elections are due in April.
A referendum on the future status of the south of the country is supposed to follow in 2011. Both were key ingredients of the 2005 Comprehensive Peace Agreement, which ended 20 years of civil war between north and south.
Both polls hold real promise. But they also are in real doubt.
Sudan’s political leaders are backtracking on the commitments under the peace agreement.
Cooperation and consensus are hard to find.
The terrible tragedy of the country’s western Darfur region continues unabated.
It was the support of the international community that helped bring Sudanese parties together in 2005.
Many key countries in Africa and the West guaranteed the agreement.
Sudan urgently needs the same efforts now.
With the right international support, Sudan could move decisively towards peace and democracy in the coming months.
If the international community fails the challenge, conflicts and tensions that have already cost hundreds of thousands of lives will continue and worsen.
We dare not let this happen.
Ever since Nelson Mandela brought together a group of former global leaders to form The Elders, we, its members, have focused on Sudan’s plight.
We chose the country for our first visit as a group, and over the past two years have closely monitored the humanitarian catastrophe in Darfur and other parts of the country.
During our 2007 visit, we met political and civil-society leaders from across the country, as well as representatives from United Nations agencies, the African Union, and diplomats.
But it was our meetings with the ordinary people of Sudan that left the deepest impression.
We heard personal stories of unimaginable heartbreak, pain, and despair.
Violence, displacement, human-rights abuses, and poverty had clearly taken a huge toll.
Sudan has been ravaged for decades by bitter conflicts rooted in abject poverty, struggles over resources, and ethnic and religious tensions.
But, despite widespread depravity and injustice, we also found a remarkable resilience and optimism.
Just like people all around the world, the Sudanese are determined to build a better life for their children and grandchildren.
They long for peace, stability, and a say in shaping their country’s future.
They want educational and economic opportunities to lift themselves and their families out of poverty.
So far, these hopes have been dashed.
This is not just a tragedy for Sudan’s long-suffering people, but is also having a damaging impact across the region and the wider world.
After all, Sudan is not a small, insignificant country; it is the tenth largest – the biggest in Africa and in the Arab world.
It occupies a pivotal position on our continent, bordering Egypt to the north and Kenya to the south, as well as seven other countries.
Fighting has displaced two million of Sudan’s 40 million people since 2003, with large numbers forced to take refuge in neighboring countries. And refugee flows are only way Sudan’s instability has spilled across borders.
We should need no reminders of the threat that failed states pose to international security. 
While Sudan’s people may be among the poorest in the world, their country is rich in natural wealth, including oil and precious metals.
Properly developed in a stable and secure country with accountable leadership and good governance, these resources could be used to improve standards of living and tackle Sudan’s many challenges.
But there is little hope of this unless the people and leaders of Northern and Southern Sudan come together and fully implement the Comprehensive Peace Agreement.
Indeed, unless the proper groundwork is laid for the upcoming elections and the referendum, Sudan faces even greater peril.
As a first step, it is crucial to ensure that the elections are free, open, and inclusive.
All people and regions of the country must participate, including the internally displaced and citizens in Darfur’s rebel-controlled areas.
Moreover, full and unfettered access by international election observers to monitor next year’s elections and the referendum in 2011 is essential.
Only then will the Sudanese population have confidence in the results, thereby providing a foundation on which to build genuine democracy and reform.
Otherwise, there is a real danger that the elections will heighten, not reduce, tensions and violence.
These polls, though vitally important, are not the only challenges that Sudan and its people face.
The country’s complex and inter-linked problems cannot be tackled in a piecemeal fashion.
Nor can individual countries and regional organizations, pursuing different agendas, help Sudan overcome its problems.
Their efforts may be well intentioned, but, without better coordination, they will remain ineffective.
We urgently need the international community to put in place a clear, coherent, and comprehensive strategy aimed at the elections, the referendum, and beyond.
In particular, there must be far greater regional and international support for efforts to prepare the ground for a mediated agreement in Darfur and to resolve outstanding disputes between the leaders of north and south on preparations for the elections, referendum, and other key aspects of the peace agreement.
More generally, the international community – and African nations in particular – must put the needs of Sudan’s people before the interests of its leaders.
The door to a better future for Sudan remains open. But success depends on keeping to the timetable for progress set out in the Comprehensive Peace Agreement.
Without swift and bold action from the international community – particularly from those who guarantee the peace agreement – to ensure that promises are kept, this opportunity will be lost.
The consequences could be disastrous.
Time is fast running out. 
The Problem With Secular Stagnation
DELHI – In a recent exchange between former US Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke and former US Treasury Secretary Larry Summers on the plausibility of secular stagnation, one point of agreement was the need for a global perspective.
But from that perspective, the hypothesis of secular stagnation in the period leading up to the 2008 global financial crisis is at odds with a central fact: global growth averaged more than 4% – the highest rate on record.
The same problem haunts Bernanke’s hypothesis that slow growth reflected a “global savings glut.”
From a Keynesian perspective, an increase in savings cannot explain the surge in activity that the world witnessed in the early 2000s.
Supporters of the secular-stagnation hypothesis, it seems, have identified the wrong problem.
From a truly secular and global perspective, the difficulty lies in explaining the pre-crisis boom.
More precisely, it lies in explaining the conjunction of three major global developments: a surge in growth (not stagnation), a decline in inflation, and a reduction in real (inflation-adjusted) interest rates.
Any persuasive explanation of these three developments must de-emphasize a pure aggregate-demand framework and focus on the rise of emerging markets, especially China.
Essentially, the world witnessed a large positive productivity shock emanating from the emerging markets, which accelerated world growth while reinforcing disinflationary pressures that had already been set in motion by the so-called Great Moderation in business-cycle volatility.
This key development helps to reconcile two of the three major global developments: faster growth and lower inflation.
The real puzzle, then, is to square rising global productivity growth with declining real interest rates.
Bernanke correctly emphasized that long-term real interest rates are determined by real growth.
So the positive productivity shock should have raised the return to capital and, hence, equilibrium real interest rates.
Moreover, this tendency should have been accentuated by the fact that the productivity shock reflected a decline in the global capital-to-labor ratio implied by the integration of Chinese and Indian workers into the global economy.
But this did not happen: instead, global real interest rates declined.
Central to understanding this puzzle are two distinctive features of the emerging-market productivity shock: it was resource-intensive and mercantilist in origin and consequence.
Both features increased global savings.
For starters, because relatively poor but large countries – India and especially China – were the engines of global growth, and were resource-hungry, world oil prices soared.
This redistributed global income toward countries with a higher propensity to save: the oil-exporting countries.
Even more important were mercantilist policies.
China and other emerging-market countries pursued an economic strategy that defied the standard tenets of growth and development theory.
Mercantilist growth was based on – and to some extent required – pushing capital out rather than attracting it.
By limiting foreign inflows and keeping domestic interest rates low, China was able to maintain a relatively weaker currency, which served to sustain its export-led growth model.
This led to massive current-account surpluses (more than 10% of GDP at one point), which sent capital flowing to the rest of the world.
Recognizing the significance of this strategy exposes a common fallacy whereby the global savings glut is attributed to emerging-market countries’ desire to insure themselves against financial turmoil by acquiring dollar reserves.
That may have been true in the immediate aftermath of the Asian financial crisis of the late 1990s, but it was quickly overtaken by the growth imperative.
In other words, the self-insurance motive might explain China’s first trillion dollars of reserve holdings, but it has nothing to do with the subsequent three trillion.
Further contributing to the savings glut was growth itself.
As incomes rose, already-prudent Asians became even more prudent, and profitable companies became even more profitable.
This endogenous response to rapid productivity growth was a key factor contributing to the savings glut.
Old development verities that savings drive growth had to be re-assessed, because, to some extent, emerging-market growth drove savings.
Here lies the explanation of the interest-rate puzzle.
As savings (and hence the global supply of loanable funds) increased, real rates came under downward pressure.
Low rates, in turn, provided the lubrication needed to finance the asset bubble in the US and elsewhere.
According to Summers, high savings caused weak growth; under the alternative explanation offered here, it was primarily rapid growth – and its distinctive features – that drove high savings.
Today, as world growth decelerates, secular stagnation seems plausible once again.
But secular stagnation is an ailment of countries at the economic frontier.
For the rest of the developing world, the real worry is not a shortfall of demand; it is the need to sustain high rates of productivity growth so that they can catch up with the advanced economies.
As policymakers gather in Washington for their ritual conversations this week, they should not lose sight of that key distinction.
Summertime Blues
FLORENCE – Summer is a time for beaches and relaxation – and, historically, for all sorts of destructive crises.
Time and again, it has proven dangerous for the world to be on holiday.
August is an especially bad month for financial markets.
On August 15, 1971, President Richard M. Nixon ended the commitment of the United States to a fixed gold price, and since then the world has lived with currency volatility and instability.
On August 13, 1982 (a Friday), Mexican Finance Minister Silva Herzog went to Washington to tell the International Monetary Fund and the US government that Mexico would be unable to make its scheduled debt payment the following Monday.
On August 17, 1998, Russian Prime Minister Sergei Kiriyenko announced that his country would simultaneously default and devalue.
And in the first week of August 2007, IKB Deutsche Industriebank disintegrated, as the US subprime crisis spread.
The roots of this seasonal periodicity of crises predate World War I, in the era of the classic gold standard.
The explanation at that time was usually found in the predictable timing of the international payments mechanism.
In the late summer, farmers in the Western Hemisphere brought their crops to traders for export, and demanded cash payment, which the traders needed to raise from their banks.
The consequence was a demand for gold in the US and mounting exchange-rate pressure on Britain and other European importers.
The same pattern of selling pressure on the pound sterling was repeated in the interwar era.
Finally, in September 1931, Britain departed from the restored gold standard, which led to the collapse of the system as a whole.
Europe’s central bankers had been nervous, even superstitious, about the late summer long before 1931.
But the technical side of crises masks a much more dramatic story.
How summers and crises go together was obvious in the event that triggered the first big collapse of the gold standard, the outbreak of WWI in 1914.
Indeed, this was the Urkrise – the event that made the twentieth century so terrible.
Crises are in part about gamesmanship, about taking the other side by surprise.
A country poised to embark on some radical and uncharted course of action often believes that vacations produce additional scope for delaying or frustrating the other side’s counter-move.
The logic of a summer provocation was abundantly clear in 1914.
Austrian Archduke Franz Ferdinand was assassinated in Sarajevo on June 28, but the subsequent diplomatic discussions dragged out for weeks.
Germany’s top officials ostensibly went on vacation in order to create the impression that the tensions could easily be resolved.
Meanwhile, the Germans waited for the French prime minister and president, who had both been visiting Russia (France’s ally), to leave St. Petersburg, at which point they rapidly pressed Austria to deliver an ultimatum that they knew the Russians could not accept.
The news would arrive while the French leaders were at sea, and would thus find it more difficult to produce an effective and coordinated response.
Vacation logic was also used to maximize bargaining power in recent cases of default or threatened default.
Mexico’s action in August 1982 took officials elsewhere completely by surprise.
In the US, Treasury Secretary Donald Regan was playing golf with President Ronald Reagan, while vacationing European central bankers were hard to reach in an era before mobile telephones.
A predictable funding problem was left unresolved until the moment when creditors would be least likely to present a united front, and most likely to give in to pressure to undertake crisis-management measures.
In August 1998, Russia had only just concluded a gigantic IMF program that appeared to stabilize the country.
That arrangement provided enough funds for insiders to exchange their rubles for foreign assets.
Once the insiders had saved their own positions, they no longer saw any need to maintain the exchange rate.
The IMF was in summer mode, and all of the consultations required complicated conference calls from remote locations.
When a compromise package has been agreed that makes the summer look calm, when the negotiators think that they have earned a good rest – this is the moment for the brilliant surprise.
A debtor’s negotiating strategy is to make creditors believe that a collapse would produce some much bigger catastrophe, which can be avoided only by more concessions and more support.
That sense is always more likely when the debtor’s action comes without warning – the financial equivalent of a pre-dawn attack.
The eurozone leaders’ summit on June 28-29 in Brussels now looks like the most far-reaching and satisfactory recent attempt at European diplomacy.
But it might look very different in September.
The Sunni Arc of Instability
ABU DHABI – While international observers fixate on the Sunni-Shia rivalry’s role in shaping geopolitics in the Islamic world, deep fissures within the Sunni arc that stretches from the Maghreb-Sahel region of North Africa to the Afghanistan-Pakistan belt are increasingly apparent.
Moreover, it is Sunni communities that produce the transnational jihadists who have become a potent threat to secular, democratic states near and far.
What is driving this fragmentation and radicalization within the ranks of Sunni Islam, and how can it be managed?
The importance of addressing that question cannot be overstated.
The largest acts of international terror, including the September 11, 2001, attacks on New York and Washington, DC, and the 2008 Mumbai attack, were carried out by brutal transnational Sunni organizations (Al Qaeda and Lashkar-e-Taiba, respectively).
The Sunni militant group Boko Haram, known internationally for abducting 276 schoolgirls in April and forcing them to marry its members, has been wreaking havoc in Nigeria for years.
And the Sunni extremists of the Islamic State, whose dramatic rise has entailed untold horrors to Iraq and Syria, are seeking to establish a caliphate, by whatever means necessary.
The influence of these organizations is far-reaching.
Just last month, individuals inspired by these groups’ activities carried out two separate attacks, one in the Canadian parliament and another on police officers in New York.
Political and tribal sectarianism in the Sunni Middle East and North Africa is both a reflection and a driver of the region’s weakening political institutions, with a series of failed or failing states becoming hubs of transnational terrorism.
A lawless Libya, for example, is now exporting jihad and guns across the Sahel and undermining the security of fellow Maghreb countries and Egypt.
Several largely Sunni countries – including Syria, Iraq, Yemen, Libya, Somalia, and Afghanistan – have become de facto partitioned, with little prospect of reunification in the near future.
Jordan and Lebanon could be the next states to succumb to Sunni extremist violence.
The Sunni tumult has underscored the fragility of almost all Arab countries, while diluting the centrality of the Israel-Palestine conflict.
The post-Ottoman order – created by the British, with some help from the French, after World War I – is disintegrating, with no viable alternative in sight.
The sectarianism plaguing the Sunni belt is affecting even the relatively stable oil sheikdoms of the Gulf, where a schism within the Gulf Cooperation Council is spurring new tensions and proxy competition among its members.
Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates view Qatar’s efforts to aid Islamists like the Muslim Brotherhood as an existential threat, even as their own wealth has fueled the spread of Salafi jihadism and Al Qaeda ideology.
Both countries, along with Bahrain, have recalled their ambassadors from Qatar.
This rupture is compounded by a rift between the Middle East’s two main Sunni powers, Egypt and Turkey, whose relationship soured last year, after the Egyptian military ousted the Muslim Brotherhood government, backed by pro-Islamist Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan.
Egypt recalled its ambassador from Ankara and expelled the Turkish ambassador from Cairo.
In September, the Egyptian foreign ministry accused Erdoğan of seeking to “provoke chaos” and “incite divisions in the Middle East region through his support for groups and terrorist organizations.”
A similar divide exists between Afghanistan and Pakistan over the latter’s provision of aid and sanctuary to Afghan militants – a divide that will only deepen when the United States-led NATO coalition ends its combat operations in Afghanistan this year.
Pakistan’s support has spawned two incarnations of the Taliban: the Afghan Taliban, sponsored by the Pakistani military, and the Pakistani Taliban, the Pakistani military’s nemesis.
Successive Afghan governments have refused to recognize the frontier with Pakistan known as the Durand line, a British-colonial invention that split the large ethnic Pashtun population.
Such conflicts are spurring the militarization of Sunni states.
The UAE and Qatar have already instituted compulsory military service for adult males.
And Kuwait is considering following in Jordan’s footsteps by reintroducing conscription, which is already in place in most Sunni states (and Iran).
Against this background, efforts to tame the deep-seated Sunni-Shia rivalry (by, for example, improving relations between Saudi Arabia and Iran), though undoubtedly important, should not take priority over a strategy to address the sectarianism plaguing the Sunni belt.
That strategy must center on federalism.
Had federalism been introduced in Somalia, for example, when the north-south rift emerged, it probably would not have ended up as a failed state.
Today, federalism can allow for the orderly management of key Sunni countries, where a unitary state simply is not practical.
The problem is that federalism has become a dirty word in most Sunni countries.
And the emergence of new threats has made some governments, most notably Saudi Arabia’s, staunchly opposed to change.
What these countries do not seem to recognize is that it is the petrodollar-funded export of Wahhabism –&nbsp;the source of modern Sunni jihad – that has gradually extinguished more liberal Islamic traditions elsewhere and fueled the international terrorism that now threatens to devour its sponsors.
Stagnation is not stability.
On the contrary, in the Sunni arc today, it means a vicious cycle of expanding extremism, rapid population growth, rising unemployment, worsening water shortages, and popular discontent.
Political fissures and tribal and ethnic sectarianism add fuel to this lethal mix of volatility and violence.
It is time for the Sunni world to recognize the need for a federalist approach to manage the instability and conflict that plagues it.
Even the US must reconsider its regional policy, which has long depended on alliances with despotic Sunni rulers.
In a region ravaged by conflict, business as usual is no longer an option.
Stalking a Killer Fungus
SINGAPORE – Warnings of the rise of so-called superbugs – disease-causing microbes that are resistant to many (or all) antibiotics – have been coming thick and fast in recent years.
What many people seem not to realize is that superbugs are already here – and they are already killing people.
A prime example is Candida auris, a multidrug-resistant fungal infection that is emerging as a serious global health threat.
C.auris was first identified in Japan in 2009, in the ear of a patient who complained of an infection. (Auris is Latin for ear.)
Since then, C. auris has been documented as the cause of wound infections, bloodstream infections, ear infections, and respiratory infections in countries across four continents, including India, Kuwait, Pakistan, South Africa, South Korea, and countries in South America.
In the United States, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention reports that the fungus infected 13 people from May 2013 to August 2016, four of whom have died.
While it remains unclear whether those deaths were due to the C. auris infection or to underlying health conditions, the need to address the scourge of C. auris – which has led to the deaths of up to 70% of those infected – cannot be disputed.
There is evidence that C. auris is spread in health-care settings.
Indeed, the fungus seemed to have a greater effect on people with serious long-term conditions.
As they frequent hospitals, and nursing homes, they come into contact with many health-care professionals, caregivers, and pieces of medical equipment, all of which could spread the fungus onto their skin or into their bodies.
In the United Kingdom, 50 C. auris cases were reported at London’s Royal Brompton Hospital alone from April 2015 to July 2016.
Of the 13 US cases, four – two in Illinois, one in Maryland, and one in New Jersey – occurred at the same health-care institutions at different times, and genome sequencing showed that patients treated in the same hospital in New Jersey had nearly identical strains.
Not only are Candida infections particularly common in hospitals, but their fatality rates also seem to be higher among patients in hospitals and, specifically, intensive-care facilities.
After all, such patients are already in an immune-compromised state, and have been using antibiotics, which can kill off healthy bacteria.
But the main reason C. auris represents such an acute threat is that treatment options are severely limited.
While most C. auris infections are treatable with a class of antifungal drug called echinocandins, some have demonstrated varying levels of resistance to echinocandins, as well as to the other two classes of antifungal drugs, azoles and polyenes.
Even when the drugs do work, they are relatively toxic: azoles and polyenes are nephrotoxic (damaging to the kidneys), and echinocandins are hepatotoxic (damaging to the liver).
Most are also fungistatic, meaning that they stop fungi from replicating, but do not kill them.
And they interact with drugs that patients may be taking for other long-term conditions, such as chemotherapy agents and immunosuppressants.
Moreover, developing new antifungal drugs is not a priority for pharmaceutical manufacturers.
Antifungal drugs are more difficult to develop than antibacterial drugs, because fungal cells are eukaryotic, like human cells, rather than prokaryotic like bacterial cells. As a result, drugs must be selective enough to work on the fungal cells, without damaging human cells.
And, while the global market for human antifungal therapeutics is worth over $6 billion and growing, owing to population aging and growing risks from fungal infections, generic competition is strong.
So even if companies do invest in breakthrough drugs, cheaper options will soon be available, reducing profit margins considerably.
In lieu of effective treatments, controlling the spread of C. auris becomes all the more critical.
This requires, first and foremost, better diagnosis.
C. auris is not easy to identify.
Because biochemical-based tests cannot differentiate between C. auris and other invasive Candida infections, several cases of C. auris were initially misidentified as C. haemulonii.
Many microbiology laboratories currently do not routinely differentiate Candida isolates or use yeast identification methods.
Hospitals and medical centers need molecular techniques to identify C. auris accurately.
Once diagnosed, C. auris patients need to be isolated; medical equipment must be thoroughly disinfected; and strict precautions need to be enforced for health-care workers.
Otherwise, outbreaks among already vulnerable people could become even more common.
The spread of C. auris highlights the need for coordinated local and international public-health initiatives to address the emerging problem of drug-resistant infections in hospitals.
If private pharmaceutical companies are not going to invest in the development of novel or more effective drugs and new and better diagnostics, the public sector has to step in.
The rise of the super-fungi must be stopped.
Super-Sizing the IMF is Wrong
CAMBRIDGE – As the global financial crisis radiates out from the developed economies into emerging markets, it is ravaging not only governance-challenged economies such as Venezuela, Russia, and Argentina.
The crisis is also striking countries like Brazil, Korea, and South Africa, which appeared to have made substantial and lasting progress towards macroeconomic stability.
For this reason, the future shape of the International Monetary Fund is rapidly moving to the top of the agenda for world leaders as they prepare to meet in Washington in mid-November to discuss the future of the global financial system.
Just a short time ago, the IMF seemed relegated to a sustained period of irrelevance as it failed to modernize either its euro-centric political representation or its arcane government-to-government lending facilities.
Suddenly, the Fund has moved to center stage as the only agency seemingly capable of stemming the vicious downward spiral that is currently seizing emerging-market stocks and bonds. 
World leaders should be happy that the IMF stands ready to take the lead in the next phase of the global financial crisis, even if its lending resources of approximately $250 billion are inadequate to stem the current run on emerging markets.
Emerging-market companies alone have hundreds of billions coming due in the next twelve months, far more than their governments’ reserves can cover if credit markets do not normalize.
Unlike United States Federal Reserve chairman Ben Bernanke, most emerging-market central bankers are in no position to extend blank checks across their economies without a boomerang effect on interest rates and exchange rates.
(We will see how investors judge the dollar once the smoke clears and the huge expansion of US money and debt becomes evident.)
But it would be a terrible mistake simply to super-size the IMF in its current guise by greatly scaling up its lending facilities, as many propose.
Rather, the Fund’s role, even in the current crisis, should be sharpened as an interlocutor between lenders and developing country borrowers, rather than simply as a replacement for all other loan sources.
The key reforms for the IMF remain (1) improving governance by reducing European representation while increasing that of Asia, and (2) focusing the Fund’s mission on monitoring and surveillance rather than as a direct provider of bailout loans.
Contrary to popular opinion, now is exactly the right time to make these changes.
Rich country governments, led by central banks, should provide the large scale funding needed to stem the run on developing country finances.
The Fund’s main role should be in monitoring.
Without its own currency, the IMF is poorly positioned to intervene with the overwhelming force needed for lender-of-last-resort operations.
In principle, the IMF could be allowed to print money (it already has its own accounting unit, the so-called Special Drawing Rights).
But this is not realistic, given the lack of an adequate system for global governance.
Even the euro area, which is far more cohesive than the world as a whole, has not quite figured out how to use its central bank as lender of last resort. 
The IMF’s lending resources have shrunk dramatically relative to world trade and income compared over the past 50 years.
But increasing its resources to a trillion dollars or more is not a realistic option, either.
The IMF does not have an adequate framework for handling the massive defaults that could easily attend a huge surge in lending, much less the political will to distinguish between countries that are facing genuine short-term liquidity problems and countries that are actually facing insolvency problems.
So what should world leaders do with the IMF?  In the short run, the IMF could help coordinate additional loans from countries such as the US, Japan, and China, to help maintain economic and political stability in the developing world.
But super-sizing the Fund, without sufficient governance improvements and lending constraints, would give the world too much of a good thing.
The Global Economy on the Fly
ISTANBUL – In the last four weeks, I have traveled to Sofia, Kuala Lumpur, Dubai, London, Milan, Frankfurt, Berlin, Paris, Beijing, Tokyo, Istanbul, and throughout the United States.
As a result, the myriad challenges facing the global economy were never far away.
In Europe, the tail risk of a eurozone break-up and a loss of market access by Spain and Italy were reduced by last summer’s decision by the European Central Bank to backstop sovereign debt.
But the monetary union’s fundamental problems – low potential growth, ongoing recession, loss of competitiveness, and large stocks of private and public debt – have not been resolved.
Moreover, the grand bargain between the eurozone core, the ECB, and the periphery – painful austerity and reforms in exchange for large-scale financial support – is now breaking down, as austerity fatigue in the eurozone periphery runs up against bailout fatigue in core countries like Germany and the Netherlands.
Austerity fatigue in the periphery is clearly evident from the success of anti-establishment forces in Italy’s recent election; large street demonstrations in Spain, Portugal, and elsewhere; and now the botched bailout of Cypriot banks, which has fueled massive public anger.
Throughout the periphery, populist parties of the left and right are gaining ground.
Meanwhile, Germany’s insistence on imposing losses on bank creditors in Cyprus is the latest symptom of bailout fatigue in the core.
Other core eurozone members, eager to limit the risks to their taxpayers, have similarly signaled that creditor “bail-ins” are the way of the future.
Outside the eurozone, even the United Kingdom is struggling to restore growth, owing to the damage caused by front-loaded fiscal-consolidation efforts, while anti-austerity sentiment is also mounting in Bulgaria, Romania, and Hungary.
In China, the leadership transition has occurred smoothly.
Moreover, the power of vested interests that oppose reform – state-owned enterprises, provincial governments, and the military, for example – has yet to be broken.
As a result, the reforms needed to rebalance the economy may not occur fast enough to prevent a hard landing when, by next year, an investment bust materializes.
But the challenges are daunting.
It is not clear if deflation can be beaten with monetary policy; excessive fiscal stimulus and deferred austerity may make the debt unsustainable; and the structural-reform components of Abenomics are vague.
Moreover, tensions with China over territorial claims in the East China Sea may adversely affect trade and foreign direct investment.
Then there is the Middle East, which remains an arc of instability from the Maghreb to Pakistan.
Turkey – with a young population, high potential growth, and a dynamic private sector – seeks to become a major regional power.
But Turkey faces many challenges of its own.
Its bid to join the European Union is currently stalled, while the eurozone recession dampens its growth.
Its current-account deficit remains large, and monetary policy has been confusing, as the objective of boosting competitiveness and growth clashes with the need to control inflation and avoid excessive credit expansion.
But risks remain.
Unemployment and household debt remain stubbornly high.
The fiscal drag from rising taxes and spending cuts will hit growth, and the political system is dysfunctional, with partisan polarization impeding compromise on the fiscal deficit, immigration, energy policy, and other key issues that influence potential growth.
In sum, among advanced economies, the US is in the best relative shape, followed by Japan, where Abenomics is boosting confidence.
The eurozone and the UK remain mired in recessions made worse by tight monetary and fiscal policies.
Among emerging economies, China could face a hard landing by late 2014 if critical structural reforms are postponed, and the other BRICs need to turn away from state capitalism.
While other emerging markets in Asia and Latin America are showing more dynamism than the BRICs, their strength will not be enough to turn the global tide.
Surviving Motherhood
Mothers’ Day is upon us in many countries around the world.
Children of all ages will give flowers, make breakfast, call home.
This is as it should be.
On my travels around the world, particularly to its poorest and most troubled places, I have learned that it is mothers who keep families together — indeed, who keep entire societies intact. Mothers are society’s weavers.
They make the world go round. Yet too often, the world is letting mothers down.
Becoming a mother – the rite of passage that Mothers’ Day celebrates – can carry a terrible burden of fear, anxiety, and loss for many women and their families.
Women such as Leonora Pocaterrazas, 21, who died in childbirth not long ago in the mountain village of Columpapa Grande, Bolivia, leaving her husband to raise three other children on his own.
Or Sarah Omega, just 20, who spent 18 hours in labor at a hospital in Kenya. Her baby died, but she survived, despite terrible injuries, determined to speak out so that others would not have to endure the same ordeal.
“Life lost its meaning,” she told American lawmakers in 2008. Her testimony helped persuade Congress to commit more development aid to maternal health.
These are just two of the very personal stories behind the shocking statistics reported by the United Nations’ Population Fund.
The figures show the chasm that exists between rich and poor countries where motherhood is concerned. It is a divide that the UN is determined to bridge.
In the rich world, when a mother dies giving birth, we assume that something went wrong.
For women in the developing world, by contrast, dying in childbirth is simply a fact of life.
In some countries, one woman in eight will die giving birth.
Complications from pregnancy and childbirth are the leading cause of death among girls aged 15 to 19 worldwide.
In poor countries, pregnant women often must fend for themselves; they have no healthcare and nowhere to turn.
They may struggle to find proper nutrition and work long hours in factories and fields until the day they go into labor. They give birth at home, perhaps with the help of a midwife who most likely has no medical training.
I myself was born at home, in a small village in the Korean countryside.
One of my childhood memories is asking my mother about a curious custom. Women who were about to give birth would gaze at their simple rubber shoes, which were kept by the back door.
My mother explained that they were wondering if they would ever step into those shoes again.
Giving birth was so risky that they feared for their lives.
In the United States, just 100 years ago, women were roughly 100 times more likely to die in childbirth than they are today.
We know how to save mothers’ lives.
Simple blood tests, a doctor’s consultation, and someone qualified to help with the birth can make a huge difference.
Add some basic antibiotics, blood transfusions, and a safe operating room, and the risk of death can almost be eliminated.
Recent figures show that we are making progress in helping women throughout the world.
Yet we still have very far to go. Every year, hundreds of thousands of women die in childbirth, 99% of them in developing countries.
That is why, as Secretary-General, I have spoken out for the needs of mothers and pregnant women at every opportunity.
Last month, the UN launched a joint action plan with governments, businesses, foundations, and civil-society organizations to advance this vital cause.
I am counting on people around the world to back us in ending this silent scandal.
No woman should have to pay with her life for giving life.
On Mothers’ Day, let us honor mothers around the world by pledging to do everything we can to make motherhood safer for all.
Surviving the Great Capital Flood
Despite recent financial market turbulence, the underlying dynamic of the world economy remains essentially unchanged.
The big issue is not how to deal with a downturn, but rather how to sustain today’s global boom and the capital flows that go with it.
With the world expected to continue growing rapidly, there are excellent investment opportunities that will be funded only if capital continues to move into countries that can use it productively.
The good news is that some countries have large savings that they want to invest in other countries, and are not put off by short-run market gyrations.
In fact, our projections show that gross (or total) capital inflows to emerging markets will increase from US$400-500 billion just before the Asian crisis of 1997 to US$800-900 billion both in 2007 and 2008.
These inflows are expected to top US$1 trillion in the not-so-distant future.
With 20-20 hindsight, it is clear that in 1997-98, weak bank regulation and corporate governance aggravated the depth of the economic contraction that followed the “sudden stop” of capital flows.
But what exactly does this imply for how middle- and low-income countries today should set their capital-account policies amid the current flood?
Should a country with weaknesses in its financial system simply avoid letting capital in?
While this has become more difficult, countries can still choose – at least to some degree – how open they are to capital inflows.
But capital controls are not the only variable that determines financial openness.
The evidence suggests that other factors such as the quality of economic and political institutions are at least as important in determining how much capital a country will attract.
But what determines the extent to which countries benefit from financial globalization?
A recent study by the IMF’s research department, using data from the past 30 years to assess the effects of financial globalization, conveys two messages.
First, countries should be cautious about external financial liberalization when financial sector development and institutional quality are below key thresholds.
In other words, don’t jump into the water unless you can swim.
Second, caution has costs: financial openness may itself catalyze improvements in fundamentals that enhance the benefits of globalization.
Capital controls, whatever their benefits in terms of mitigating the risks associated with volatile capital flows, are costly in a variety of ways.
In other words, everyone really should learn to swim.
The first message will resonate with those who believe that a key lesson of the Asian crisis a decade ago is that countries opened themselves to certain types of flows – especially foreign currency debt – before they were ready.
The implication is that countries should first strengthen their domestic financial sectors and corporate governance, and only later open the capital account.
But even if capital controls could still fully insulate a country from the forces of financial globalization, such a goal would not be desirable.
Opening up to foreign direct investment and other non-debt capital flows may serve to boost economic growth without adverse side effects on macroeconomic volatility or a risk of crisis.
This is the case for countries with both relatively weak and strong fundamentals.
One conclusion, therefore, is for countries to be cautious about removing capital controls when they have not yet reached the relevant “safety” thresholds, but equally to stress the sizable net benefits for countries that exceed the thresholds.
The latter, in turn, provides strong incentives for countries to address institutional shortcomings so that they can reap the potential benefits of external financial liberalization.
Of more pressing immediate concern is the fact that capital is currently flowing to many countries regardless of whether they are ready to receive it.
There are large current-account surpluses among emerging markets (a big change from 1997, when most emerging markets had deficits).
Indeed, several large oil exporters and Asian manufacturing exporters will have sizable surpluses for as long as we can forecast.
This capital has to be invested somewhere.
We think that capital from these countries is increasingly flowing not so much “uphill” to developed countries (as it did over the past five years), but rather “around the hill” to other emerging markets and poorer developing countries.
But is everyone really ready to receive such large amounts of capital and to carefully manage its macroeconomic impact?
The risk today is not imminent crisis, but rather that the capital flows arising from the global boom will not be well managed, leading to the buildup of vulnerabilities.
So the danger is that, when the party ends – and it is hard to know when that will be – a lot of mopping up will need to be done.
Earth Calling the Financial Sector
NEW YORK – Financial markets serve two crucial purposes: to channel savings toward productive investments, and to enable individuals and businesses to manage risks through diversification and insurance.
As a result, the sector is essential to sustainable development, which represents unprecedented global-scale investment opportunities and risk-management challenges.
That is why, when world leaders meet this July in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, at the Conference on Financing for Development, the financial industry should be ready to offer practical, global solutions to the challenges associated with financing economic growth, poverty reduction, and environmental sustainability.
We have now entered the Year of Sustainable Development.
At three back-to-back global summits – the conference in Addis Ababa, September's meeting at the United Nations to adopt Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), and the UN Climate Change Conference in Paris in December – 193 governments will attempt to ensure that global growth and poverty reduction continue within a safe natural environment.
It will be a close call.
The global economy, despite all of the huge bumps in the road, is delivering aggregate annual growth of 3-4%, leading to a doubling of output every generation.
Yet the global economy is not delivering sustainable growth in two basic senses.
In many parts of the world, growth has been deeply skewed in favor of the rich; and it has been environmentally destructive – indeed, life-threatening when viewed on a century-long time scale, rather than according to quarterly reports or two-year election cycles.
Climate change is the greatest of these environmental threats (though by far not the only one).
Given the current trajectory of global fossil-fuel use, the planet's temperature is likely to rise by 4-6 degrees Celsius above its pre-industrial level, an increase that would be catastrophic for food production, human health, and biodiversity; indeed, in many parts of the world, it would threaten communities' survival.
Governments have already agreed to keep warming below 2º Celsius but have yet to take decisive action toward creating a low-carbon energy system.
The financial industry has a central role to play in catalyzing the global transition to inclusive, sustainable growth.
After all, effective financial markets should convey accurate long-term information to savers and investors, thereby enabling businesses, pension funds, insurance pools, sovereign wealth funds, and others to allocate their resources to projects that provide solid long-term payoffs, and protect their savings from financial calamities.
Given climate change, that means accounting for whether, say, entire low-lying coastal areas or agricultural regions will be able to cope.
Effective financial markets should also channel far more global saving from high-income countries with relatively weak long-term growth prospects to low-income regions with relatively strong growth prospects, owing to new opportunities to leapfrog development with smart, information-based infrastructure.
Just a decade ago, hundreds of millions of rural Africans lived outside of the flow of global information.
Now, with the rapid spread of broadband, once-isolated villages benefit from online banking, transport services, and ICT-enabled agribusiness and health and education programs.
To seize the benefits of these new technologies at scale, and to avoid investments that aggravate cascading environmental crises, the finance industry will need to understand how the SDGs will reshape the investment landscape.
The time has come to embrace the concept of true long-term investing, which requires marshaling the capacity of institutionally mobilized capital to support investment opportunities that will secure a sustainable future for all.
We know that enormous public and private investment is required for the transition toward a low-carbon economy, to win the global fight against poverty and disease, and to provide high-quality education and physical infrastructure worldwide.
Today's savvy investors, and the financial industry as a whole, need to look ahead, beyond today's market prices and policies to the market prices and policies of the future.
For example, today there is no global price on carbon to shift energy investment from fossil fuels to renewable sources; but we know that, in order to keep global warming below the 2º limit, such a price is coming soon.
As stewards of long-term capital, today's investors cannot ignore the coming carbon price and the shift toward low-carbon energy sources.
That means devising practical ways to finance and encourage the required shift.
We believe that financial leaders want their industry to play its vital role in sustainable development, and we urge them to contribute actively to the unique opportunity that this year represents.
Today's financiers can choose to be remembered either for the 2008 crisis, over which they presided, or for their creative and resourceful efforts to encourage long-term sustainability.
Assuming that they choose the latter, the financial industry should work with governments to create a global investment framework that includes appropriate incentives to take on the challenges of sustainable growth.
This implies the continued globalization of finance, which will be essential to allocate money from capital-rich regions to their poor, capital-scarce counterparts, as well as to develop local capital markets that can facilitate capital formation and protect countries from the vagaries of global sentiment.
Financial leaders should also involve citizens (the savers) in the journey to a fairer and more sustainable global economy.
That means encouraging responsible investing by adopting ever higher standards of stewardship – for example, by requiring companies' portfolios to meet certain sustainability targets.
It also means contributing to a new framework for global infrastructure investment that steers resources away from environmentally destructive projects and reduces the wastage often associated with political patronage.
Since the Industrial Revolution, finance has been a powerful enabler of human progress.
The great task of this generation's financial leaders is to mobilize investment in the skills, infrastructure, and sustainable technologies that can end poverty, spread prosperity, and protect the planet.
Those who act first will be the wiser – and wealthier – for it.
Pelestarian Alam di Era Trump
COPENHAGEN – Kelompok-kelompok yang berupaya untuk melawan pemanasan global dan berjuang untuk meningkatkan pelestarian alam harus bersiap menghadapi cobaan berat sebagai dampak dari kemenangan Donald Trump dalam pemilu Amerika Serikat.
Jika dilihat dari retorika Trump selama masa kampanye, dan dari pernyataan pendukungnya di Partai Republik, pelestarian alam akan mengalami perubahan yang besar dalam bentuk deregulasi dan dorongan kepada produsen minyak, batu bara, dan gas dalam negeri.
Para pegiat lingkungan hidup sedang memperkirakan potensi kemunduran dalam pelestarian alam dan mengembangkan strategi untuk menghindari serangan dari kelompok paling anti pelestarian alam dari semua yang pernah menguasai kongres Amerika. Banyak sekali kelompok yang akan dirugikan dalam hal ini.
Dalam skenario yang paling buruk, Amerika mungkin tidak akan memperhatikan kelestarian lingkungan serta memberikan pengaruh yang buruk bagi kerjasama internasional untuk pelestarian alam.     
Pada pertemuan konferensi perubahan iklim (COP 22) baru-baru ini di Marrakesh, perhatian para delegasi dicurahkan untuk menganalisa berbagai cara yang mungkin diambil Pemerintahan Trump untuk mengakhiri perjanjian tentang perubahan iklim yang dicapai di COP 21 di Paris pada tahun lalu.
Trump mungkin mengakhiri perjanjian tersebut secara langsung dengan cara keluar dari perjanjian yang ada.
Atau bisa juga dengan cara yang lebih halus, yaitu dengan menolak untuk melakukan kewajiban yang diamanatkan oleh perjanjian tersebut.
Atau cara lain yang lebih menyiksa adalah dengan meminta negara-negara lain untuk melakukan lebih banyak kewajiban dibandingkan dengan Amerika.
Tentunya masih lebih banyak lagi cara untuk mengakhiri perjanjian ini, namun kami lebih memilih untuk tidak membahasnya.
Kita tidak perlu dan seharusnya tidak melakukan hal-hal tersebut.
Sangat sedikit sekali yang kita ketahui mengenai apa yang akan betul-betul dilakukan Pemerintahan Trump.
Beberapa orang berharap bahwa Pemerintahan Trump akan melakukan hal yang logis, apalagi jika kita melihat bahwa pasar sekarang sedang gencar melakukan transisi ke arah yang ramah lingkungan.
Namun, ada juga yang melihat bahwa Pemerintahan Trump tidak akan melakukan hal yang logis.
Tapi faktanya adalah kita tidak tahu apa yang akan dilakukan oleh Trump, karena dia juga belum mengetahui hal tersebut.
Kebijakan lingkungan hidup Pemerintahan Trump masih belum pasti; dan ketidakpastian ini sering berujung pada kondisi yang lebih buruk.
Seburuk apa dampak yang akan ditumbulkan oleh kelompok anti pelestarian alam dan kelompok lobi batu bara juga ditentukan oleh seberapa banyak usaha yang kita lakukan.    
Hal ini berarti kita harus memfokuskan usaha kita untuk memobilisasi kekuatan dalam meyakinkan orang-orang agar Amerika tetap menjadi bagian dari gerakan global untuk mencapai kelestarian lingkungan hidup.
Hal ini tidak akan meyakinkan orang yang anti pelestarian, namun akan mempertahankan kelompok moderat. 
Jadi, siapakah yang dimaksud dengan “kita” dalam hal ini?
Pertama, yang dimaksud dengan “kita” adalah Pemerintahan Amerika dan lembaga legistaltifnya, lembaga swadaya masyarakat, komunitas lokal, dan pihak swasta.
Semua lembaga-lembaga ini perlu menggalang dukungan masyarakat Amerika untuk perlindungan lingkungan hidup di dalam negeri dan berkontribusi terhadap solusi global.
Kedua, yang dimaksud dengan “kita” adalah komunitas internasional: 200 negara anggota PBB yang pada tahun 2015 setuju untuk menerapkan Tujuan Pembangunan Berkelanjutan dan perjanjian iklim Paris.
Penting bagi seluruh anggota PBB, baik negara besar atau kecil, untuk bersikeras agar kedua hal tersebut tetap menjadi acuan pengambilan kebijakan global, apapun kebijakan yang diambil oleh Trump. 
Pemerintahan Amerika yang baru perlu benar-benar paham bahwa kepentingan ekonomi dan lingkungan hidup dalam menerapkan agenda pelestarian alam akan terus mendorong negara-negara dan perusahaan-perusahaan untuk bertindak sesuai dengan hal tersebut.
Hal ini sangat terbantu oleh keputusan Tiongkok untuk tidak melewatkan peluang mereka untuk melakukan transisi ke arah yang ramah lingkungan dan oleh kemungkinan bahwa mereka akan memimpin upaya global tersebut jika Amerika memutuskan untuk tidak ambil bagian di dalamnya.
Dan Tiongkok tidaklah sendirian dalam hal ini.
Walaupun tidak adanya kepemimpinan Amerika dalam hal ini, dan adanya kemungkinan Pemerintahan Trump melakukan upaya yang berseberangan dengan perlindungan lingkungan, pengaruh Amerika sudah tidak sebesar sebelumnya.
Negara-negara lain akan mengisi kekosongan ini dan mendapatkan manfaat, dan mereka harus melakukan upaya ini secara terang-terangan.
Pemerintahan Trump bisa saja tidak ambil bagian dalam upaya perlindungan lingkungan, namun mereka tidak bisa menghentikannya.
Negara-negara lain akan meneruskan upaya ini.    
Perusahaan Amerika dan pasar modal harus memperkuat pesan tersebut, bukan sebagai pernyataan politik, namun sebagai peringatan bahwa jika perekonomian Amerika tidak sejalan dengan agenda pelestarian alam, maka perekonomian ini akan lebih tidak menarik bagi investor – dan sebagai dampaknya akan menjadi kurang makmur.
Bulan lalu, 365 perusahaan dan investor Amerika memperkuat pesan ini dengan mengeluarkan pernyataan terbuka agar Trump tidak meninggalkan perjanjian iklim Paris.
Jika Trump ingin menciptakan lebih banyak lapangan kerja dan pendapatan yang lebih tinggi bagi pendukungnya, salah satu cara yang bisa dilakukan adalah dengan mendukung agenda ramah lingkungan dalam bidang efisiensi energi dan energi terbarukan.    
Komponen ke empat yang dimaksud dengan “kita” adalah konsumen yang sadar akan lingkungan hidup diseluruh dunia.
Demonstrasi di jalan sambil meneriakkan slogan-slogan tidak akan menghasilkan perubahan.
Namun aksi untuk mengorganisasi konsumen di tingkat lokal, nasional, regional, dan global dapat menghasilkan perubahan.
Pesan ini perlu untuk disampaikan tidak hanya oleh konsumen perorangan, namun juga oleh organisasi dengan kemampuan untuk menggalakkan dan memperkuat pesan tersebut: “Kami tidak akan membeli produk dan jasa yang tidak sesuai dengan agenda pelestarian alam, dan kami lebih memilih produk berkualitas dan merek yang menghormati dan mendukung pelestarian alam.”
Apapun jenisnya, pesan ini harus disampaikan secara langsung dan transparan, dan pesan ini juga harus menyasar perusahaan Amerika yang mengambil keuntungan dari standar perlindungan lingkungan dan emisi yang longgar.   
Kebanyakan dari kita tidak memilih Trump, dan kita tidak mempunyai kewajiban untuk mengikuti kebijakannya.
Justru sebaliknya, semakin kuat kita mengorganisir dan memperkuat upaya untuk menghentikan pemanasan global dan mendukung perlindungan alam, lebih besar kemungkinan orang-orang pragmatis di kelompok mayoritas untuk meminimalkan kerusakan lingkungan di dalam dan luar negeri.
The Year of Sustainable Development
NEW YORK – The year 2015 will be our generation’s greatest opportunity to move the world toward sustainable development.
Three high-level negotiations between July and December can reshape the global development agenda, and give an important push to vital changes in the workings of the global economy.
With United Nations Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon’s call to action in his report “The Road to Dignity,” the Year of Sustainable Development has begun.
In July 2015, world leaders will meet in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, to chart reforms of the global financial system.
In September 2015, they will meet again to approve Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) to guide national and global policies to 2030.
And in December 2015, leaders will assemble in Paris to adopt a global agreement to head off the growing dangers of human-induced climate change.
The fundamental goal of these summits is to put the world on a course toward sustainable development, or inclusive and sustainable growth.
This means growth that raises average living standards; benefits society across the income distribution, rather than just the rich; and protects, rather than wrecks, the natural environment.
The world economy is reasonably good at achieving economic growth, but it fails to ensure that prosperity is equitably shared and environmentally sustainable.
The reason is simple: The world’s largest companies relentlessly – and rather successfully – pursue their own profits, all too often at the expense of economic fairness and the environment.
Profit maximization does not guarantee a reasonable distribution of income or a safe planet.
On the contrary, the global economy is leaving vast numbers of people behind, including in the richest countries, while planet Earth itself is under unprecedented threat, owing to human-caused climate change, pollution, water depletion, and the extinction of countless species.
The SDGs are premised on the need for rapid far-reaching change.
As John F. Kennedy put it a half-century ago: “By defining our goal more clearly, by making it seem more manageable and less remote, we can help all people to see it, to draw hope from it, and to move irresistibly toward it.”
This is, in essence, Ban’s message to the UN member states: Let us define the SDGs clearly, and thereby inspire citizens, businesses, governments, scientists, and civil society around the world to move toward them.
The main objectives of the SDGs have already been agreed.
A committee of the UN General Assembly identified 17 target areas, including the eradication of extreme poverty, ensuring education and health for all, and fighting human-induced climate change.
The General Assembly as a whole has spoken in favor of these priorities.
The key remaining step is to turn them into a workable set of goals.
When the SDGs were first proposed in 2012, the UN’s member said that they “should be action-oriented,” “easy to communicate,” and “limited in number,” with many governments favoring a total of perhaps 10-12 goals encompassing the 17 priority areas.
Achieving the SDGs will require deep reform of the global financial system, the key purpose of July’s Conference on Financing for Development.
Resources need to be channeled away from armed conflict, tax loopholes for the rich, and wasteful outlays on new oil, gas, and coal development toward priorities such as health, education, and low-carbon energy, as well as stronger efforts to combat corruption and capital flight.
The July summit will seek to elicit from the world’s governments a commitment to allocate more funds to social needs.
It will also identify better ways to ensure that development aid reaches the poor, taking lessons from successful programs such as the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis, and Malaria.
One such innovation should be a new Global Fund for Education, to ensure that children everywhere can afford to attend school at least through the secondary level.
We also need better ways to channel private money toward sustainable infrastructure, such as wind and solar power.
These goals are within reach.
Indeed, they are the only way for us to stop wasting trillions of dollars on financial bubbles, useless wars, and environmentally destructive forms of energy.
Success in July and September will give momentum to the decisive climate-change negotiations in Paris next December.
Debate over human-induced global warming has been seemingly endless.
In the 22 years since the world signed the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change at the Rio Earth Summit, there has been far too little progress toward real action.
As a result, 2014 is now likely to be the warmest year in recorded history, a year that has also brought devastating droughts, floods, high-impact storms, and heat waves.
Back in 2009 and 2010, the world’s governments agreed to keep the rise in global temperature to below 2° Celsius relative to the pre-industrial era.
Yet warming is currently on course to reach 4-6 degrees by the end of the century – high enough to devastate global food production and dramatically increase the frequency of extreme weather events.
To stay below the two-degree limit, the world’s governments must embrace a core concept: “deep decarbonization” of the world’s energy system.
The SDGs can create a path toward economic development that is technologically advanced, socially fair, and environmentally sustainable.
Agreements at next year’s three summits will not guarantee the success of sustainable development, but they can certainly orient the global economy in the right direction.
The chance will not come along again in our generation.
Data for Development
NEW YORK – The data revolution is rapidly transforming every part of society.