But, for truly democratic societies, the challenge of reconciling divergent interests never goes away.
The Federalist Threat to Europe
STOCKHOLM – The world is fundamentally different after the “Brexit” referendum in the United Kingdom.
It will be decades before we know the full effect of British voters’ decision to leave the European Union.
One thing we can know for sure, however, is that it is in the EU’s best interest to maintain strong ties with the UK, despite the fact that British voters made their decision unilaterally.
Too much is at stake to allow the process to be dominated by petty power games that overshadow or undermine common interests, as happens so often in European politics.
Economically, growth in the EU will undoubtedly benefit from an open trading relationship with Britain.
A free-trade agreement that includes financial services will minimize the damage from Brexit for all parties involved, because European firms will still rely on London as the region’s only global financial center.
Even if banking services migrate elsewhere in the eurozone, companies like Volvo, Siemens, and Total will still need London if they are to compete with companies like Toyota, GE, and Exxon.
Politically, the EU and the UK will benefit from maintaining close cooperation because neither side is spared from the problems afflicting the region today.
These include increasing aggression from Russia and its president, Vladimir Putin; the rise of ISIS and the threat of homegrown terrorism; and refugees fleeing to Europe from the Middle East and North Africa.
Moreover, the Brexit vote does not change the strategic importance of NATO, where continued cooperation is necessary and where the EU needs the UK as much as the UK needs the EU.
So, what should the EU do?
European Commission President Jean-Claude Juncker has called for more federalism – for more power to be delegated to the EU’s governing institutions.
I consider Juncker a close friend, but I strongly disagree with him about this idea.
Moving toward deeper integration or centralized control would be a dangerous path to take, for it would increase the risk of other members choosing to leave the EU.
And, beyond that hazard, there are other reasons to avoid federalist measures.
Consider the main economic argument offered by federalists: the eurozone needs a common fiscal policy to harmonize policy decisions, such as taxation.
This is wrong for two reasons.
First, the EU’s fundamental economic problems are structural.
Europeans will continue to gravitate toward populism if they do not see improvements in their standard of living, which will happen only with higher productivity growth.
A single fiscal policy would not bring this about – and could make the problem worse.
What Europe needs, instead, is a reform strategy that increases competitiveness and reduces barriers to competition.
In particular, EU policymakers should pursue policies that make labor markets more flexible.
These would include lower marginal tax rates, tighter criteria for determining benefits eligibility, stricter requirements for job searches, more resources for skills training, and less restrictive employment-protection regulation.
The second reason is political.
Put plainly, there is no political support for the higher taxes and spending cuts that would be necessary with a common fiscal policy.
Brussels would be accused of wasting taxpayers’ money, and any effort to disregard public opinion and impose fiscal integration on EU members would only backfire and fuel the wave of populist rage that carried the Brexiteers to victory.
Today, supporters of the EU must face the facts: an ever-closer union is not the European people’s will, even in the member states that would never choose to leave it.
If the European Commission forces the post-Brexit narrative in this direction, the result will be the opposite of what was intended.
In fact, federalism is probably the single greatest threat to the future of the EU.
Those who want the EU to survive should resist the temptation to assert more control.
We need a Europe that stands united because it wants to, not because it is forced to by new political super-structures that lack any underpinning of popular support.
Europe’s Barbarians Inside the Gate
BERLIN – I am on a two-week European tour at a time that could make one either very pessimistic or constructively optimistic about Europe’s prospects.
First the bad news: Paris is somber, if not depressed, after the appalling terrorist attacks earlier this month.
France’s economic growth remains anemic, the unemployed and many Muslims are disaffected, and Marine Le Pen’s far-right National Front is likely to do well in the upcoming regional elections.
In Brussels, which was semi-deserted and in lockdown, owing to the risk of terrorist attacks, the European Union institutions have yet to devise a unified strategy to manage the influx of migrants and refugees, much less address the instability and violence in the EU’s immediate neighborhood.
Outside the eurozone, in London, there is concern about negative financial and economic spillover effects from the monetary union.
And the migration crisis and recent terrorist attacks mean that a referendum on continued EU membership – likely to be held next year – could lead the United Kingdom to withdraw.
This would probably be followed by the breakup of the UK itself, as “Brexit” would lead the Scots to declare independence.
In Berlin, meanwhile, German Chancellor Angela Merkel’s leadership is coming under growing pressure.
Her decision to keep Greece in the eurozone, her courageous but unpopular choice to allow in a million refugees, the Volkswagen scandal, and flagging economic growth (owing to the slowdown of China and emerging markets) have exposed her to criticism even from her own party.
Frankfurt is a divided city, policy-wise: the Bundesbank opposes quantitative easing and negative policy rates, while the European Central Bank is ready to do more.
But Germany’s thrifty savers – households, banks, and insurance companies – are furious about ECB policies that tax them (and others in the eurozone core) to subsidize the eurozone periphery’s alleged reckless spenders and debtors.
In this environment, the full economic, banking, fiscal, and political union that a stable monetary union eventually requires is not viable: The eurozone core opposes more risk sharing, solidarity, and faster integration.
And populist parties of the right and left – anti-EU, anti-euro, anti-migrant, anti-trade, and anti-market – are becoming stronger throughout Europe.
But of all the problems Europe faces, it is the migration crisis that could become existential.
In the Middle East, North Africa, and the region stretching from the Sahel to the Horn of Africa, there are about 20 million displaced people; civil wars, widespread violence, and failed states are becoming the norm.
If Europe has trouble absorbing a million refugees, how will it eventually handle 20 million?
Unless Europe can defend its external borders, the Schengen agreement will collapse and internal borders will return, ending freedom of movement – a key principle of European integration – within most of the EU.
But the solution proposed by some – close the gates to refugees – would merely worsen the problem, by destabilizing countries like Turkey, Lebanon, and Jordan, which have already absorbed millions.
And paying off Turkey and others to keep the refugees would be both costly and unsustainable.
And the problems of the greater Middle East (including Afghanistan and Pakistan) and Africa cannot be resolved by military and diplomatic means alone.
The economic factors driving these (and other) conflicts will worsen: global climate change is accelerating desertification and depleting water resources, with disastrous effects on agriculture and other economic activity that then trigger violence across ethnic, religious, social, and other cleavages.
Nothing short of a massive, Marshall Plan-style outlay of financial resources, especially to rebuild the Middle East, will ensure long-term stability.
Will Europe be able and willing to pay its share of it?
If economic solutions aren’t found, eventually these regions’ conflicts will destabilize Europe, as millions more desperate, hopeless people eventually become radicalized and blame the West for their misery.
Even with an unlikely wall around Europe, many would find a way in – and some would terrorize Europe for decades to come.
That’s why some commentators, inflaming the tensions, speak of barbarians at the gates and compare Europe’s situation to the beginning of the end of the Roman Empire.
But Europe is not doomed to collapse.
The crises that it now confronts could lead to greater solidarity, more risk sharing, and further institutional integration.
Germany could absorb more refugees (though not at the rate of a million per year).
France and Germany could provide and pay for military intervention against the Islamic State.
All of Europe and the rest of the world – the US, the rich Gulf States – could provide massive amounts of money for refugee support and eventually funds to rebuild failed states and provide economic opportunity to hundreds of millions of Muslims and Africans.
This would be expensive fiscally for Europe and the world – and current fiscal targets would have to be bent appropriately in the eurozone and globally.
But the alternative is global chaos, if not, as Pope Francis has warned, the beginning of World War III.
And there is light at the end of the tunnel for the eurozone.
A cyclical recovery is underway, supported by monetary easing for years to come and increasingly flexible fiscal rules.
More risk sharing will start in the banking sector (with EU-wide deposit insurance up next), and eventually more ambitious proposals for a fiscal union will be adopted.
Structural reforms – however slowly – will continue and gradually increase potential and actual growth.
The pattern in Europe has been that crises lead – however slowly – to more integration and risk sharing.
Today, with risks to the survival of both the eurozone (starting with Greece) and the EU itself (starting with Brexit), it will take enlightened European leaders to sustain the trend toward deeper unification.
In a world of existing and rising great powers (the US, China, and India) and weaker revisionist powers (such as Russia and Iran), a divided Europe is a geopolitical dwarf.
Fortunately, enlightened leaders in Berlin – and there are more than a few of them, despite perceptions to the contrary – know that Germany’s future depends on a strong and more integrated Europe.
They, together with wiser European leaders elsewhere, understand that this will require the appropriate forms of solidarity, including a unified foreign policy that can address the problems in Europe’s neighborhood.
But solidarity begins at home.
And that means beating back the populists and nationalist barbarians within by supporting aggregate demand and pro-growth reforms that ensure a more resilient recovery of jobs and incomes.
Europe’s Leadership Crisis
BRUSSELS – The European Union’s list of crises keeps growing.
But, beyond the United Kingdom’s “Brexit” vote to leave the bloc, Poland’s constitutional-court imbroglio, Russian expansionism, migrants and refugees, and resurgent nationalism, the greatest threat to the EU comes from within: a crisis of political leadership is paralyzing its institutions.
As if to prove the point, EU member states’ leaders (with the exception of UK Prime Minister Theresa May) met recently in Bratislava, Slovakia, in an attempt to demonstrate solidarity, and to kick-start the post-Brexit reform process.
The attendees made some progress toward creating a European Defense Union, which should be welcomed, and toward admitting that the EU’s current organizational framework is unsustainable; but there was scant talk of meaningful institutional or economic reform.
Meanwhile, Italian Prime Minister Matteo Renzi’s refusal, at the close of the summit, to appear onstage with French President François Hollande and German Chancellor Angela Merkel all but confirmed fears that rudderless leadership is fueling institutional dysfunction.
A summit that was supposed to be a display of unity revealed only further division.
EU leaders must take responsibility for this latest failure.
For starters, they must stop issuing empty declarations.
The EU’s institutional impotence is apparent, especially to its enemies.
So now it faces a stark choice: a leap forward toward unification or inevitable disintegration.
Few Europeans want to make that choice.
Many politicians are afraid of paying a high domestic political price for pursuing an agenda of EU reform.
They argue that pushing for further integration in the current political climate is reckless, and that the EU should focus on doing less, better.
But that is a false trade-off.
The EU could build a more integrated economic-governance model to increase investment and create jobs, while at the same time streamlining its operations to address common complaints about red tape and dysfunction.
Few European leaders seem to understand that the real risk to the EU – and to their own political futures – is the status quo.
And with populist movements across Europe pummeling traditional parties in the polls, the window for delivering real change is quickly closing.
It does not have to be this way.
Too many leaders are paying lip service to domestic nationalists and populists, mistakenly thinking that this will preserve their domestic poll ratings, when they should be showing genuine leadership and fighting for the common good.
Upcoming national elections in France and Germany will be bellwethers for the future of European leadership.
In recent German state elections, Merkel’s Christian Democratic Union and its government partner, the Social Democratic Party, experienced notable losses, which could mean that Germany’s grand coalition is at risk ahead of next year’s election.
Meanwhile, support for the far-rightAlternative for Germany (AfD) continues to grow.
Merkel has two choices: She can move to the right, as former French President Nicolas Sarkozy has done in his latest bid for the French presidency, or she can fight to hold the center by addressing the AfD’s simplistic arguments head on.
The choice is clear: Merkel should stand and fight, while also advancing an alternative vision for modernizing the EU.
Defeating populism will require leaders to acknowledge the people left behind as a result of globalization, but also to dispel the myth that there is a quick fix, or that globalization can simply be reversed.
Contrary to populist arguments, protectionism will not reduce youth unemployment or income inequality.
If EU countries reject trade deals currently under discussion, including the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership and the Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement, the EU’s share of world trade will decrease, and the European economy will suffer for it.
Likewise, if the eurozone fails to integrate further by strengthening its economic-governance structures, Europe’s ongoing financial crisis will only continue, impeding social mobility and undermining social justice.
It is time for EU leaders to make these arguments more effectively.
Across the West, the 2008 financial crisis triggered a political fight that is still in progress.
It has changed from a battle for accountability and reform to a clash between visions of open and closed societies, between a global consensus and policies still operating at the national, local, or even tribal level.
If the EU is going to quell the revolt against globalization, free trade, and open societies, it will need more leaders and fewer managers.
European leaders, frankly, should know better than to blame EU institutions, hypothetical trade deals, and refugees for their own failures to tackle unemployment and reduce inequality.
The EU’s current crisis-management playbook is running out of pages.
We in Europe can either put our heads in the sand while the European project slowly dies, or we can use this crisis to start a new project of renewal and reform.
Here, too, the right choice is clear: EU leaders should offer Europeans a new social contract, based on the understanding that people’s legitimate fears about globalization should be met with a collective, progressive European response.
The EU has been a major force behind globalization, and only the EU has the power to help manage the consequences.
European leaders must explain to their voters why nationalism cannot.
Democracy or Bust in Europe
BERLIN – “Europe will be democratized or it will disintegrate!”
That maxim is more than a catchphrase from the manifesto of the Democracy in Europe Movement – DiEM25, the group I just helped to launch in Berlin.
It is a simple, if under-acknowledged fact.
Europe’s current disintegration is all too real.
New divisions are appearing seemingly everywhere one looks: along borders, within our societies and economies, and in the minds of Europe’s citizens.
Europe’s loss of integrity became painfully evident in the latest turn in the refugee crisis.
European leaders called upon Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan to open his country’s borders to refugees from the war-torn Syrian city of Aleppo; in the same breath, they chastised Greece for letting the same refugees into “European” territory, and even threatened to erect fences along Greece’s borders with the rest of Europe.
Similar disintegration can be seen in the realm of finance.
If an American citizen won some lottery jackpot, she would not care whether her prize dollars were deposited in a bank domiciled in Nevada or New York.
This is not so in the eurozone.
The same sum of euros has very different “expected” value in a Portuguese, Italian, Greek, Dutch, or German bank account, because banks in the weaker member states are reliant on bailouts from fiscally stressed governments.
That is a sure sign of the single currency’s disintegration.
Meanwhile, political rifts are dividing and multiplying in the European Union’s heartland.
The United Kingdom is torn on whether to exit or not – a reflection of its political establishment’s own chronic unwillingness both to defend the EU and to confront its authoritarianism.
The result is an electorate prone to blaming the EU for everything that goes wrong, but with no interest either in campaigning for more European democracy or in leaving the EU’s single market.
More ominously, the Franco-German axis powering European integration has fractured.
Emmanuel Macron, France’s Economy Minister, could not have put it more chillingly when he said that the two countries are edging toward a modern version of the Catholic-versus-Protestant Thirty Years’ War.
Meanwhile, southern countries languish in a state of permanent recession that they blame on Europe’s north.
And, as if this were not enough, another menacing fault line has appeared along the former Iron Curtain, with governments of formerly communist countries openly defying the spirit of solidarity that used to characterize (at least in theory) the European project.
Why is Europe disintegrating?
And what can be done about it?
The answer lies in the EU’s origins.
The EU began life as a cartel of heavy industries determined to manipulate prices and redistribute monopoly profits through a bureaucracy located in Brussels.
To fix prices across European borders, there was a need to fix exchange rates as well.
During the Bretton Woods era, the Unites States provided this “service.”
But as soon as the US ditched Bretton Woods in the summer of 1971, the Brussels-based cartel’s administrators began to design a European fixed exchange-rate system.
After a series of (often spectacular) failures, the euro was born to superglue exchange rates together.
As with all cartel managers, the EU technocrats treated genuine pan-European democracy as a threat.
Patiently, methodically, a process of de-politicizing decision-making was put in place.
National politicians were rewarded handsomely for their acquiescence, while anyone opposed to the cartel’s technocratic approach was labeled “un-European” and treated as an outsider.
Thus, although European countries remained democratic, the EU institutions, where sovereignty over crucial decisions was transferred, have remained democracy-free.
As Margaret Thatcher explained during her last Parliamentary appearance as British Prime Minister, who controls money and interest rates controls the politics of Europe.
Handing Europe’s money and politics to a cartel administration did not only spell the end of European democracy; it has also fueled a vicious cycle of authoritarianism and poor economic results.
The more Europe’s establishment chokes off democracy, the less legitimate its political authority becomes.
That leads European leaders to double down on authoritarianism in order to stick to their failed policies when recessionary economic forces strengthen.
This is why Europe is the world’s only economy that has failed to recover since 2008.
It is through this vicious cycle that Europe’s crisis is turning its peoples inward and against one another other, amplifying latent jingoism and xenophobia.
Indeed, it is what has rendered Europe incapable of absorbing external shocks – like last summer’s refugee influx.
What we should do now is what democrats should have done in 1930 to prevent a catastrophe that is now becoming imaginable once again.
We should establish a pan-European coalition of radical, social, green, and liberal democrats to put the “demos” back into democracy, countering an EU establishment that sees people power as a threat to its authority.
This is what DiEM25 is about and why it is necessary.
Are we utopian?
Maybe.
But it is more realistic than the EU establishment’s attempt to hang on to our disintegrating, anti-democratic, cartel-like union.
If our project is utopian, it is also the only alternative to a dystopia in the making.
The real danger is not that we shall aim too high and miss.
The real danger is that Europeans train their eyes on the abyss and end up there.
Can the EU Survive Populism?
BRUSSELS – Another year, another threat to the European Union’s survival.
The good news is that the greatest disruption of 2016, Britain’s vote to exit the EU, appears manageable.
The bad news is that both France and Italy face the prospect of a populist political takeover this year. Either outcome could well spell the end of the EU.
The EU has lately become a prime target for populists.
The phenomenon first took hold in Greece, when the left-wing Syriza party came to power in January 2015.
But Syriza was not trying to pull Greece out of the EU; rather, it wanted a better deal with the country’s creditors, who had imposed devastating austerity measures on Greek citizens.
Syriza’s approach largely reflected the will of the people.
In a June 2015 referendum, voters overwhelmingly rejected a deal proposed by Greece’s creditors that would have meant even more austerity.
Yet the government’s acceptance of a largely unchanged deal just a few days later received broad support.
Greek voters understood that better terms were not worth losing eurozone membership.
To be sure, not everyone considered EU membership to be worth the sacrifice.
But there was an air of practicality in popular criticism of the EU, which largely focused on what the EU did, especially in the economic sphere.
That is why such criticism has been loudest in the countries that were hit the hardest by the euro crisis, or that faced austerity, or, more recently, that felt left behind by trade agreements.
That is no longer the case.
Right-wing populism has gained traction in strong economies (Austria) and in countries where the benefits of EU membership are palpable (Hungary and Poland).
In France, there was never any EU-imposed austerity; even European Commission President Jean-Claude Juncker admitted that the EU’s budget rules cannot actually be imposed on France, “because it is France.”
Now, populists are focused not on what the EU does, but what it represents.
Instead of asking whether the EU is making people richer or poorer, populists are focused on a more fundamental and powerful question: “Who are we?”
At a time of large-scale immigration, this shift is not surprising.
Societies that have long defined themselves according to shared background and culture now must struggle with the implications of multiculturalism.
That is why most observers of populist parties, especially of right-wing parties, have focused on attitudes toward foreigners and minorities.
With the shift toward identity politics – a terrain that is not particularly amenable to compromise – has come a shift in attitudes toward democratic institutions.
Populist leaders operate on the assumption that the will of the “people” – as defined by the populist – should not be institutionally constrained. This controverts the fundamental premise of liberal democracy: that the power of the majority must be limited, not least to protect minorities, electoral and otherwise.
Limits on the power of the majority of the moment are typically achieved through what Americans call “checks and balances,” which include, for example, an independent judiciary and super-majority requirements to alter fundamental elements of the political system.
And such limits usually work, at least for the most part.
In the United Kingdom, for example, three High Court judges ruled that only Parliament – not the government – can trigger Article 50 of the Treaty of Lisbon, the formal process for leaving the EU.
But populist politicians chafe under such constraints.
Hungarian Prime Minister Viktor Orbán has not only openly stated his preference for an “illiberal” democracy; he has worked to dismantle checks on his government’s power.
The same goes for Poland’s populist government, whose de facto leader, Jarosław Kaczyński, doesn’t even hold a formal position in the administration.
Given their contempt for independent institutions, it is not hard to see why populists oppose the EU, which is, in a sense, the quintessential liberal democracy: governed by impersonal rules, rather than by the majority of the moment, with most decisions requiring either a super-majority or unanimity.
For populists, the EU represents significant added constraints that are even harder to push past than domestic checks.
That makes it a problem.
In another sense, however, the EU suffers from insufficient democracy: as populist leaders routinely point out, its leaders in Brussels are unelected. (Populists use similar arguments to deny the legitimacy of, say, national courts.)
The reality, of course, is that democratically elected governments and parliaments install EU leaders and bureaucrats (and independent judges) precisely to place limits on the majority of the moment and future governments.
But populists reframe their followers’ understanding of this system, by declaring that such officials are part of the “elite,” selected by their fellow elites to frustrate the will of the people.
There is little that mainstream politicians, much less EU officials, can do to counter this narrative.
Some national politicians succumb to popular pressure, adopting the rhetoric – and even the program – of their populist adversaries.
But the EU can do no such thing, without effectively hastening its own demise.
When the problem was what the EU did, there was a possible solution: the EU could change tack on economic issues.
And, indeed, the Commission has de facto abandoned austerity.
Likewise, the EU’s new trade deal with Canada, signed in October, was concluded only after working out elaborate compromises.
But the EU cannot change what it represents.
It cannot accept, much less advance, the notion that checks and balances are obstacles to progress, or that foreigners threaten the European way of life.
It cannot offer the kinds of radical, impossible, or illiberal solutions that populists use to win support.
The EU must remain a bulwark of liberal democracy, with all of its unsexy yet necessary rules and procedures.
In the current environment, this lumbering embodiment of a multi-level democracy and open economy cannot compete with populists’ lofty promises.
When populists fail to deliver, however, it is back to the EU that the public will run.
One only hopes that there will still be an EU waiting for them.
A Europe of Citizens
MADRID – Last month was another cruel one for Europe, culminating in the horrific terrorist attacks in Brussels on March 22.
The aftermath has seen a new round of soul searching, with Europeans mulling over the European Union’s institutional failures and sheer incompetence, not to mention the existential challenge it currently faces.
Such considerations seem to arise frequently these days, as Europe encounters a seemingly endless series of emergencies, from the Greek crisis to the influx of refugees.
Yet complacency remains the order of the day, with EU leaders adopting to a crisis-response mentality that privileges reaction over action and perpetuates the cycle of destabilization.
The fact that crises have become the EU’s new normal has reinforced the notion, already ubiquitous among Europhiles and Eurocrats, that we will simply continue to muddle through.
This approach is both misguided and dangerous.
As it stands, European unity is disintegrating rapidly.
The just-concluded referendum in the Netherlands, in which Dutch voters overwhelmingly rejected an association agreement between the EU and Ukraine, is merely the latest example.
If the EU is to survive this slow-motion train wreck, let alone thrive in the long run, bold action – not just valiant rhetoric – is urgently needed.
It is time to decide whether the EU is a truly transnational undertaking or merely a vessel for inter-governmental arrangements.
If it is the latter, we should call a spade a spade.
But, in that case, we should understand that we – both the EU and individual countries – are effectively resigning ourselves to increasing irrelevance.
Paying little more than lip service to a common approach in critical areas leaves problems unaddressed and opportunities unexplored.
Simply put, with an “every man for himself” approach, everyone will sink.
A transnational undertaking is the superior option.
But it is also the more difficult one, because it demands deep and fundamental changes in how the question of European integration is approached.
The original sin of the European project is that, Brussels notwithstanding, there is no European constituency.
Events, policies, and challenges are all viewed through a national lens.
The refugee crisis has brought this into sharp relief; but every stress on the European system brings to the fore nationalist perspectives.
And why shouldn’t this be the case?
After all, political accountability – not to mention tax money – flows from citizens to the national capitals.
But the split between the EU and national governments is a false one.
Subsidiarity, properly applied and understood as decision-making power at the appropriate level of government, is and must remain a guiding principle of European action.
There are, however, times when collective action is needed.
For such action to be effective, the EU level cannot be a place for scapegoating and bloviating.
National political figures cannot continue to claim that Brussels or the European Commission is the source of all their problems, and pursue self-centered and shortsighted measures that ultimately exacerbate crises.
Nor can EU officials continue to shrug their shoulders and blame national politicians for failing to implement proposed EU-wide measures.
Instead, the EU needs real authority to execute policy.
One Brussels insider recently noted to me that the EU, propelled by its crises, is already entering a new phase of empowerment, where it, not its member states, has real implementing authority.
And, indeed, there are assorted examples of the EU assuming something of an executive position; notably, the EU is expected to play a leading role in implementing its recent deal with Turkey to resolve the refugee crisis.
But a genuine and legitimate shift to an effective EU executive requires a stronger connection between the people and those acting on their behalf.
In other words, we must create a transnational constituency.
This is not a new idea.
There has long been support for the idea of European citizenry, and the EU treaties include provisions that could serve as stepping stones to this end.
But limited progress on this front reflects popular sentiment.
In the five years since Eurobarometer began asking survey participants whether they feel like citizens of the EU, the number responding positively has increased by only 2% (from 62% in 2010 to 64% in 2015).
Deepening the political links among Europeans requires institutional reform based on collective action, awareness, and ownership.
The seeds of such an endeavor – from replacing the elegant but bloodless Spitzenkandidaten system with direct EU-wide elections for European Commission President to considering a limited but direct EU tax to establish a clear line of accountability – are already available.
Such efforts would certainly face serious political headwinds; the current system is, after all, quite comfortable for many.
But the process of unraveling is already underway.
Only a conscious European citizenry can weaken the centrifugal forces that emerge in every crisis, because only such a citizenry can ensure accountability at the EU level, compel officials to formulate and execute effective policy, and thereby break the cycle of blame that has become entrenched in European decision-making.
Creating this awareness would be a long-term process, but it is essential.
At a time of such difficult challenges, strengthening transnationalism might seem extreme and unachievable.
But unless we recognize the real reasons that we continue to be battered by crises, we will be doomed to continue muddling through until there is no EU left.
Betting on Ukraine
KYIV – A year ago, young Ukrainians were risking their lives on Kyiv’s Independence Square to defend an agreement that would bring their country closer to the European Union.
That uprising ended a corrupt regime and brought to power – after a free and fair election – what appears to be Ukraine’s most reform-minded government ever.
One might have expected the heroic commitment of Ukrainians to Europe’s democratic ideals to trigger a rush of Western support for the country in its battle against Russian aggression and economic instability.
But that has not been the case.
Indeed, though the last EU leadership summit of 2014 brought the courageous decision to “stay the course” on Russian sanctions, it produced little movement on aid to Ukraine.
Donald Tusk, the former Polish prime minister who was chairing his first summit as President of the European Council, supports additional financing for Ukraine.
But, as the Financial Times reports, several EU countries’ willingness to come up with the money remains “lukewarm at best.”
When confronted with a debt crisis in the eurozone, European leaders repeatedly kicked the can down the road.
The result was an unnecessarily deep and protracted recession.
Now, they are about to make the same mistake in Ukraine, with even more devastating potential consequences.
Ukraine is facing a steady drain on bank deposits, large fiscal and current-account deficits, and sizeable external debt payments in the next few years.
With its international reserves dwindling, the country cannot finance these gaps with its own dollar resources.
The International Monetary Fund has estimated that Ukraine will need $15 billion in outside help in 2015, in addition to the $17 billion bailout that it received last year.
The funding gap extends into 2016 and beyond.
Stabilizing Ukraine’s economy will, of course, require deep domestic reforms.
The government will have to cut energy subsidies to reduce the yawning deficit of Naftogaz, the state-owned oil and gas company.
At the same time, the central bank must continue to clean up and close insolvent banks and ensure the recapitalization of viable financial institutions.
And, with Transparency International’s corruption perceptions index ranking Ukraine 142nd out of 175 countries, drastic measures to improve and professionalize governance are imperative.
But these reforms can succeed only in an environment of financial stability.
With the fiscal deficit being financed through money creation, inflation is high and the hryvnia, Ukraine’s currency, has depreciated (though nowhere near as much as the Russian ruble).
An external aid package that is large enough to restore confidence and assuage financing doubts is a precondition for successful structural reform.
The other prerequisite is political legitimacy.
After all, reform demands tremendous sacrifices from citizens.
Elsewhere in Central and Eastern Europe, citizens readily accepted such sacrifices, because generous financial assistance from the West and the prospect of EU membership lent credibility to the promise of democracy and future prosperity.
Ukrainians must perceive that the pain of adjustment is being shared fairly, which means that the country’s oligarchs must become subject, at long last, to the rule of law.
But, given that a free, stable, and prosperous Ukraine is very much in Europe’s strategic interest, the EU’s member governments should also share the burden of financing reform.
The funding that Ukraine will need to stabilize its economy over the next four years looks paltry when compared to the more than $300 billion, from different sources, devoted to bailing out Greece – a country where there is far less at stake strategically.
During previous financial crises, from Mexico in 1994 to southern Europe recently, the international community has proved that it can be very creative when it comes to finding mechanisms to channel emergency funds.
This suggests that the problem today is not insufficient money or institutional constraints, but a lack of political will.
Skeptics in the EU and the German government acknowledge the urgency of Ukraine’s plight; but they fear that the money will go to waste in the absence of comprehensive reforms.
Cynics privately add that hyperinflation may not be such a bad thing after all, because it would force local politicians to reform.
But that ignores history: Ukraine suffered hyperinflation in the 1990s, only to elect governments headed by President Leonid Kuchma, whose misrule incited the Orange Revolution in 2004, and President Viktor Yanukovych, who was overthrown in February 2014.
Clearly, such complacent views are both wrongheaded and terribly dangerous.
The success of reform efforts can never be assured in advance.
But one factor that can guarantee failure – and lead to political and economic dislocation – is financial instability.
The current government in Ukraine has an unprecedented electoral mandate for change.
It has also drawn into public service some of the country’s best and brightest (including from the Ukrainian diaspora) to fight a war and stave off an economic meltdown simultaneously.
One hesitates to consider what might happen if they fail.
Plan B in Ukraine is surely not more reform, but less of it – and probably the kind of reckless economic populism that Latin America has witnessed in recent years, from Hugo Chávez’s Venezuela to Néstor and Cristina Kirchner’s neo-Peronist Argentina.
That possibility alone should be sufficient to spur the IMF, the United States, and, above all, the EU to act.
In the grey and depressing days of the Soviet Union, an independent and democratic Ukraine seemed unimaginable.
Yet it happened.
Today, economic and political reform seems similarly daunting; but it remains just as attainable.
For Western governments, coming to the aid of Ukraine is a gamble, but one that is surely worth taking.
Europe as a Task
For me as Prime Minister of the Czech Republic, Europe has a meaning that goes far beyond geography.
It is a synonym for a new beginning, new hope, the rule of the "better me" that exists in all of us.
It's an expression of prosperity, progress, and justice.
Perhaps these words sound exaggerated to cynical ears.
But they clearly express the changes that Europe has witnessed over the past half-century, changes for the good that all Czechs now want to secure for themselves, having been denied the fruits of European peace and prosperity for so long.
Throughout its history, Europe saw countless bloody conflicts; peoples and states clashed, with the Czech lands often the bloody crossroads of these battles.
The disasters of two world wars, and the half-century of Cold War, pushed Europe to embrace cooperation and integration in order to avoid another suicidal battle.
Those far-sighted Europeans who set Europe on its road to peace through unification deserve our heartfelt appreciation.
Simply put, the idea of European integration transformed our continent.
The open economic space and the principle of solidarity helped ensure that economically less developed countries that joined the European Economic Community and, later, the European Union, progressed at an astonishing pace, enhancing the living standards of their peoples.
Nowadays, indeed, instead of deepening disparities in standards of living in Europe, which was the historic norm, differences are actually blurring as the quality of life everywhere in Europe rises.
Yet this prosperous and peaceful Europe is not idyllic; sometimes Europe is not at all an easy place for its citizens to live, as the tumultuous Balkan Wars and painful postcommunist transitions of the past decade demonstrated.
But even in hard times, every European knows deep down that European integration has delivered peace with clear prospects for broadening Europe's zone of peace and stability.
On the other hand, to secure that promise of peace and stability, Europeans must recognize that the Union is not and cannot be perceived as a work set in stone.
The half-century of peace that integration has delivered involved constant changes.
Today, we must also continue forming and correcting the EU to maximize its ability to reflect the needs of its inhabitants in an ever-changing world.
These changes, however, must always be undertaken in the light of core European virtues.
Foremost among these, perhaps, is the Union's open character.
The European Union is neither closed nor static; it is a living organism.
The European Union, as I grasp it, is primarily a process, leading from worse to better; a process with only one end - the continuous development of European prosperity and peace.
Indeed, it is vital to understand that Europe's integration process is not mechanical but organic.
It is not a machine that goes on of its own accord, but is instead something that must be lived and worked for by Europeans.
For no one should be mistaken: there are alternatives to European integration - all of them bad, unwanted, and dangerous.
Unless all Europeans remain devoted to integration and the creation of an open Europe, the Continent's dark past may once again become its future.
There are a number of qualities that must be understood if integration is to continue to build an ever more open Europe.
Voluntary self-restraint, a voluntary sharing of our own rights and privileges with a wider collective, is paramount here.
While states once enforced their rights at the expense of others, they now transfer their rights in favor of others.
The heart of this miracle is that it benefits all - Europe's citizens, its states, the whole continent, and the world.
For states to voluntarily limit themselves is unique in human history.
Europe's states have been able to achieve this discipline primarily because they are democracies.
Europe's peoples have sanctioned limiting their own governments powers so as to achieve peace across Europe.
There would be no Union and no integration, were it not built on the principles of democracy.
This is why, having regained their democratic regimes, Central and Eastern European countries unequivocally voted to join the continent's integration process.
This is why these countries associate the future of their democracies with ever-closer and more integrated cooperation with other European states.
Of course, democracy does not automatically mean integration.
But without democracy, no genuine, fair, and universally beneficial integration would be possible.
The people of the Czech Republic, like most Europeans, wish to jointly build an irreversible system of mutual relationships among states, regions, municipalities, and their inhabitants.
Their desire is to eliminate violence and, at the same time, generate stable conditions for economic and social progress for everyone in Europe.
The end of history may not be at hand in Europe, but the end of Europe's dark history is clearly in sight - so long as Europeans continue on the path of integration.
Europe’s Brexit Hangover
NEW YORK – The market reaction to the Brexit shock has been mild compared to two other recent episodes of global financial volatility: the summer of 2015 (following fears of a Chinese hard landing) and the first two months of this year (following renewed worries about China, along with other global tail risks).
The shock was regional rather than global, with the market impact concentrated in the United Kingdom and Europe; and the volatility lasted only about a week, compared to the previous two severe risk-off episodes, which lasted about two months and led to a sharp correction in US and global equity prices.
Why such a mild, temporary shock?
For starters, the UK accounts for just 3% of global GDP.
By contrast, China (the world’s second-largest economy) accounts for 15% of world output and more than half of global growth.
Moreover, the European Union’s post-Brexit show of unity, together with the result of the Spanish election, calmed fears that the EU or the eurozone would fall apart in short order.
And the rapid government changeover in the UK has boosted hopes that the divorce negotiations with the EU, however bumpy, will lead to a settlement that maintains most trade links by combining substantial access to the single market with modest limits on migration.
Most important, markets quickly priced in the conclusion that the Brexit shock would lead to greater dovishness among the world’s major central banks.
Indeed, as in the two previous risk-off episodes, central-bank liquidity backstopped markets and economies.
But the risk of European and global volatility may have been only briefly postponed.
Leaving aside other global risks (including a slowdown in already-mediocre US growth, more fear of a Chinese hard landing, weakness in oil and commodity prices, and fragilities in key emerging markets), there is plenty of reason to worry about Europe and the eurozone.
First, if the UK-EU divorce proceedings become protracted and acrimonious, growth and markets will suffer.
And an ugly divorce may also lead Scotland and Northern Ireland to leave the UK.
In that scenario, Catalonia may also push for independence from Spain.
And without the UK, Denmark and Sweden, which aren’t planning to join the eurozone, may fear that they will become second-class members of the EU, thus leading them to consider leaving as well.
Second, upcoming elections promise to be a political minefield.
Austria will repeat its presidential election in September, the previous one having ended in a virtual tie, giving another chance to the far-right Freedom Party’s Norbert Hofer.
The following month, Hungary will hold a referendum, initiated by Prime Minister Viktor Orbán, on overturning EU-mandated quotas on the resettlement of migrants.
And, most important, Italy will hold a referendum on constitutional changes that, if rejected, could effectively jeopardize the country’s membership in the eurozone.
Italy currently is the eurozone’s weakest link.
Prime Minister Matteo Renzi’s government has become politically shakier, economic growth is anemic, the banks are in need of capital, and EU fiscal targets will be hard to achieve without triggering another recession.
If Renzi fails – as is increasingly possible – the anti-euro Five Star Movement (which recently did well in municipal elections) could come to power as early as next year.
Should that happen, the Grexit fears of 2015 would pale in comparison.
Italy, the eurozone’s third-largest member, is too big to fail.
But, with a public debt ten times larger than Greece’s, it is also too big to be saved.
No EU program can backstop Italy’s €2 trillion ($2.2 trillion) of public debt (135% of GDP).
Moreover, elections in France, Germany, and the Netherlands in 2017 create additional uncertainties as weak growth and high unemployment in most of Europe boost support for anti-euro, anti-immigrant, anti-Muslim, and anti-globalization populist parties of the right (in the eurozone core) and of the left (on the eurozone periphery).
At the same time, Europe’s neighborhood is bad and getting worse.
A revisionist Russia has become more assertive not just in Ukraine, but also in the Baltics and the Balkans.
And the consequences of the continuing turmoil in the Middle East are at least twofold: renewed episodes of terrorism in France, Belgium, and Germany, which may over time dent business and consumer confidence; and a migration crisis that requires closer cooperation with Turkey, which itself has become unstable since the botched military coup.
Until the coming round of elections is over, the EU is unlikely to take any steps to complete its unfinished monetary union by introducing more risk-sharing and accelerating structural reforms to encourage faster economic convergence.
Given the current slow pace of reforms (and population aging), potential growth remains low, while actual growth is on a very moderate cyclical recovery that is now threatened by post-Brexit risks and uncertainties.
At the same time, high deficits and debts, together with eurozone rules, constrain the use of fiscal policy to boost growth, while the European Central Bank may be reaching the limits of what even unconventional monetary policy can do to sustain the recovery.
The eurozone and the EU are unlikely to disintegrate suddenly.
Many of the risks they face are on a slow fuse.
And disintegration can of course be avoided by a political vision that balances the need for greater integration with the desire for some degree of national autonomy and sovereignty over a range of issues.
But finding ways to integrate that are democratic and politically acceptable is imperative.
Muddling through has resulted in an unstable equilibrium that will make disintegration of the EU and the eurozone inevitable.
Given the many risks Europe faces, a new vision is needed now.
Europe by Degrees
ROME &#45;&#45; A year ago, few people would have bet that the European Union, still reeling from the trauma of the Constitutional Treaty’s rejection in 2005, would be poised to ratify the new Reform Treaty, adopted in Lisbon last December.
For some, the fact that the United Kingdom might ratify it even earlier than traditionally “pro-European” countries like Italy merely underscores the Treaty’s lack of new and bold initiatives to accelerate European unification.
But they are wrong.
To be sure, impatient dissatisfaction has been a driving force behind European integration since its initial years.
But, as Robert Schuman wrote in his Declaration in 1950, Europe could not be built all at once.
Likewise, Altiero Spinelli, another of the EU’s founding fathers, wrote late in life that without visionary Europeans there would be no Europe, but without pragmatic statesmen, the visionaries would have gotten nowhere.
The Reform Treaty’s shortcomings are obvious.
Abandoning the name “Constitution” was probably necessary to bring all member states on board.
But not equally necessary is the enduring uncertainty about the common political platform upon which Europe’s voice in foreign policy will have to rely.
Moreover, the Area of Freedom, Security, and Justice still requires unanimity for essential decisions in the fight against crime and terrorism and therefore, implying excruciating slowness.
Nor does the Treaty do enough to strengthen coordination of Europe’s economic and budgetary policies.
But it is equally obvious that, as the European Parliament’s Resolution of February 20 puts it, “the Treaty of Lisbon is a substantial improvement on the existing Treaties, which will bring more democratic accountability to the Union and enhance its decision making.”
The adoption of EU legislation will be subject to a level of parliamentary scrutiny (both at the European and national levels) that exists in no other supranational or international structure.
Moreover, agencies such as Europol and Eurojust will be similarly subject to greater parliamentary scrutiny, and the budgetary procedure will be simpler and more democratic.
The EU Charter of Fundamental Rights will become legally binding and the judicial protection of citizens will be enhanced by facilitating their access to the European Court of Justice and by extending the Court’s jurisdiction.
The Union’s capacity as a global actor will be enhanced by merging the High Representative with the Commissioner for External Relations and establishing a single diplomatic service.
The list could continue, but we already have reason enough to conclude that getting the best out of the new Treaty will be the best that the EU and its member states can do.
The first ingredients of a common collective identity have been injected into the EU’s enlarged membership, which is still marked by diverse positions, sensitivities, and expectations.
Asking everyone to do more than what everyone is unanimously ratifying would undermine Europe’s fragile harmony.
Nothing, however, prevents smaller groups of member states from aiming at bolder goals through separate agreements, if their mutual trust and similarities encourage them to do it.
After all, this was how the Schengen Treaty – which later became part of the acquis communitaire (the body of EU law) – came into being.
More recently, the Prun agreement has elevated police cooperation to police integration among the participating states.
There is reason to hope that some of the EU’s member states will embark on this venture in fighting crime and terrorism, defense matters, or in financial and budgetary harmonization.
In whatever area, a group of more deeply integrated member states would give the Union a noyau dur (a hard core) , which might be very helpful in strengthening the EU as a whole.
But let them do it separately, and in the meantime let the Union be energized by the improvements that it has already adopted.
Fifty years later, this is the lesson for us of the Schuman’s declaration.
Payback Time in Schengen Land
FRANKFURT – The long-held dream of a borderless Europe, which became reality in the mid-1990s, is fading fast.
Italy is blocking a European Union decision to bribe Turkey to keep refugees from crossing over into Greece on their way to Germany, Sweden, or other northern European countries.
In response, German Finance Minister Wolfgang Schäuble has called for solidarity, warning that otherwise the border guards might soon be back at their posts, beginning with the German-Austrian frontier.
To be sure, the dissolution of the Schengen Agreement, which instituted passport-free travel within most of the EU starting in 1995, need not mark the end of the European project, at least not in principle.
Economically, border controls act just like taxes; they distort activity, by increasing transaction costs and reducing cross-border flows of goods and services.
Without them – and, more important, with a single currency – a market is more effective.
That does not mean, of course, that the single market cannot work with border controls or multiple currencies.
It simply means that such “renationalization” would carry enormous costs, in the form of substantially reduced productivity and significantly lower output.
Given these costs, European Commission President Jean-Claude Juncker has rightly stressed that “killing” Schengen would undermine the EU’s foundational goal of “ever closer union” – an objective to which, admittedly, several EU members have signed up only reluctantly.
The United Kingdom is the most vocal skeptic, but Poland, Hungary, Slovakia, and pretty much the rest of Eastern Europe have never been enthusiastic about shifting their focus from national prerogatives.
The refugee crisis has thrown this discord into sharp relief.
As a result, Europe’s densely knit network of interdependencies is beginning to unravel.
The benevolent hegemon, which used to be the French-German couple, is missing.
A focus on national (and in some places, like Catalonia and Scotland, regional) issues is gaining ground, in line with the incentives of policymakers, whose constituencies are national (or regional).
Italian Prime Minister Matteo Renzi’s call for a quid pro quo – a loosening of the eurozone’s fiscal rules in exchange for accepting the deal with Turkey – is entirely understandable in this light.
But it puts the EU on a slippery slope.
The irony in all of this is that Germany, which was perceived as ruthless during the European sovereign (and private) debt crises, is now calling for solidarity.
Supported by other northern European creditors, Germany enforced its fiscal principles relentlessly, despite the systemic consequences for those it was pressuring (Greece and Spain, for example, now have different governments).
Whether the adjustment policies have been successful remains a subject of heated debate; what is not in doubt is that they produced many losers – most notably among the most vulnerable, who now largely perceive the EU-Germany consensus as threatening.
Against this background, anti-establishment parties across Europe oppose policies that reflect this German-inspired approach.
This explains, for example, the similarity of the economic platforms offered by the far left and far right in France.
Even mainstream parties are under pressure to cater to this insurgent sentiment; defending EU policy proposals is a surefire way to lose an election.
That is why, as Germany struggles to cope with some 1.5 million refugees, Schäuble’s call for solidarity is falling on barren ground.
Everybody, beginning with France, is hiding.
It’s payback time.
Burden-sharing – that is, a “fair” allocation of refugees throughout the EU (to be hashed out politically) – appears to be a pipe dream.
Economically, accommodating refugees will be a challenge for quite some time.
But if one takes a longer view, absorbing the newcomers should be an opportunity – if it is appropriately handled.
In the meantime, however, not only Germany, but also Sweden, the Netherlands, Austria, and others, are running up against what is deemed to be politically feasible.
This implies that no EU-wide response can be expected, and thus that Schengen is probably doomed.
This would be more than a symbolic loss for European citizens.
And, of course, re-erecting national borders does nothing to address the underlying issue.
Refugees would just be pushed back to Greece, the most fragile and vulnerable link in the chain.
As uninspiring as this might sound, we must now consider the prospect of the end of the European Monetary Union and the EU as we have known it.
The goal is not simply to highlight the lost opportunities associated with such an outcome; those would clearly be sizable, especially if the currency union had to be untied.
The point is also to show that the minimal conditions for the EU and the eurozone to work in their current form are lacking.
Foremost among these conditions is a shared diagnosis of the EU’s problems and a common philosophy.
Renzi and Schäuble, for example, have strikingly contradictory views on crucial issues, from fiscal policy to the banking sector.
Renzi criticizes the EU, while laying the blame for the consequences of new creditor bail-in regulations squarely at Germany’s door.
For the same reasons, French President François Hollande puts internal security first (possibly in line with the preferences of his electorate), and honors fiscal rules inconsistently.
It doesn’t help that applying German or EU proposals on refugee policy would not exactly strengthen his re-election chances in 2017.
If EU member states were to pursue their enlightened self-interest, they would nurture ever closer union, with solidarity – fiscal and otherwise – between North and South.
Instead, they are increasingly scapegoating Europe and embracing a national discourse.
Once again, Europe seems to be sleepwalking into crisis.
One hopes that it wakes up in a safer place than it has in the past.
Europe’s Two Futures
PARIS – Once again, Europe seems to have reached a fork in the road.
In one direction lies the future as described by pessimists, who argue that rising populist movements and the plunge of the euro are evidence of the continent’s coming slide into geopolitical and economic oblivion.
In the other direction lies a steep upward path to Europe’s integration and reemergence as a global power – the course, optimists say, that the continent will take as it wakes up and recognizes that it must have the capacity to weather the harshest storms.
There is no telling which future will be realized.
Is Europe “a grandmother, no longer fertile and vibrant,” as Pope Francis put it when he addressed the European Parliament last November?
Or is it a phoenix, about to rise (yet again) from its ashes?
The outcome depends, of course, on how Europeans respond to their current travails.
And as they contemplate their choices, they would be wise to consider how the continent is perceived from the outside.
For starters, it is important to acknowledge that the outlook looks bleak.
Seventy years after the liberation of Auschwitz, Jews are still being attacked and murdered in European cities.
More than 50 years after the end of the Algerian War, European Muslims face more discrimination than ever.
With Russian-backed separatists – and maybe even Russian troops – battling government forces in Ukraine, the specter of war is once again stalking the continent.
And the election of a leftist government in Greece has raised the question of whether introducing the euro was a good idea.
On the other hand, Europe has faced worse – much worse – and emerged stronger than ever.
After the first half of the twentieth century – the bloodiest period of human history – the continent’s leaders returned from the battlefield to lay the foundations of lasting European peace.
Europe may never regain its standing as the center of the world, but it can continue to be both an important actor and an attractive model for others.
Indeed, with the benefit of distance, a broader picture emerges.
Seen from China, Europe is first and foremost an attractive investment opportunity; and the euro’s spectacular fall now makes it a particularly tempting one.
The continent may not be the island of stability it once was – Russian President Vladimir Putin and a few thousand European jihadists have seen to that.
But the risks it faces are mild when compared with the chronic instability and acute threats facing much of the rest of the world.
Europe’s bloodstained history also provides a useful warning for China and the rest of Asia, and can serve as an example for overcoming the region’s long-standing animosities.
Though tensions between China and its neighbors over territorial claims in the East and South China Seas have receded somewhat in recent months, the prospect of worsening Sino-Japanese relations, in particular, remains worrisome.
Reconciliation along the Franco-German model may not yet be in the cards, but the two Asian powers would be well advised to learn from Europe’s experience.
The view from the United States is completely different.
From the American perspective, Europe is less a model than a historical relic.
The continent’s national characteristics have returned to the fore: Germany with its economic power, France with its terrorists, Greece with its leftists, and so forth.
From the perspective of the poorest parts of the world, Europe represents the weakest link in the coalition fighting radical Islam, a battle that is taking its highest toll – despite the impression created by Western media coverage – primarily in the Middle East, South Asia, and Africa.
For many of those fleeing the conflicts in these regions, Europe is also the Promised Land – the object of the hopes and dreams of those risking their lives to reach the prosperous side of the Mediterranean Sea.
In the end, how Europeans view themselves will determine their collective fate.
If they do not seize this decisive moment to define themselves – by beginning to institute the difficult reforms their countries so desperately need, for example – they risk ending up on a path they never intended to take.
Europe Crosses the Rubicon
The so-called “European Neighborhood Policy” has, so far, been a curious thing.
There is much talk about it in the European Union, but little practical effect.
It was meant as an alternative to the ever-increasing number of accession rounds, say, involving the countries in the southern Caucasus.
But the war in Lebanon and its consequences have caused a sudden and fundamental change in the leisurely pursuit of this policy.
The Lebanon War has served as a harsh reminder to the European Union that it has “strategic interests” – security interests first and foremost – and that, should it choose to ignore them, the price will be high.
Moreover, the division of labor between the US and Europe isn’t functioning in the time-tested manner of old: the ongoing war in Iraq is gnawing at America’s military capabilities and resulted in a crisis of moral and political legitimacy of the US across the Arabic/Islamic world.
With the decision of its member states to send several thousand soldiers to Lebanon to implement the UN cease-fire resolution 1701, the European Union has taken the most significant decision yet within its Neighborhood Policy.
Can the EU in fact be able to emerge as a stabilizing political force in the most dangerous area of conflict within Europe’s immediate geopolitical neighborhood?
After the Balkan Wars of the 1990’s, the Near and Middle East is at once the most dangerous and also – given security considerations – the most important neighboring region for the EU today.
Why?
Because the main threats to European security at the beginning of the 21st century stem from that region.