Unfortunately, there is no country in a position to influence Iran to the extent that China can influence North Korea.
The situation is made more difficult by the fact that oil prices are already at a record high, while US ground forces are busy in Iraq, thus reducing the credibility of American military threats to Iran.
Iran’s leaders, though, would be unwise to proceed with an unconstrained nuclear program and discount the possibility of US military action.
This said, a US preventive strike at Iran’s nuclear-related installations is not in the interest of either country.
The potential for loss of life, for Iranian retaliation, and for global economic disruption is high.
Both countries – indeed, the world – would be better served by a diplomatic outcome in which Iran accepted severe limits on any independent uranium enrichment activity it could undertake and agreed to place all of its nuclear-related facilities under highly intrusive international inspection in exchange for economic benefits and security assurances. Better yet would be if Iran turned to Russia or the IAEA for uranium-generated electrical power.
Direct US-Iran talks should be convened if they are required to bring about any such agreement.
Iran’s calculations will not be affected by what happens between the US and India.
Rather, Iranian policy will be shaped by its domestic politics, by the ability of the international community to present a united front, and by the willingness of the US to put forth a reasonable diplomatic offer against the backdrop of sanctions and potential military strikes should diplomacy fail.
The stakes could hardly be greater.
It is Iran, not India, that we should all be worried about.
Modi’s Chauvinism Problem
NEW DELHI – As the New Year dawns, it has become increasingly clear that India’s new government faces a dilemma entirely of its own making – one that its predecessor never had to confront.
Narendra Modi’s election as Prime Minister in May 2014 was initially hailed worldwide as marking the advent of a more business-friendly government in the world’s largest democracy.
Encouraged by Modi’s pro-market sound bites – he vowed to “replace red tape with a red carpet,” declared that the government has “no business” in business, and campaigned on the slogan “Make in India” – investors rushed to praise him as a new messiah of development.
Modi’s Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) gained the first absolute majority in the lower house of parliament in a quarter-century, thereby freeing it from the pressures and constraints of coalition governance.
Modi’s trips abroad brought talk of new business opportunities, a wave of foreign investment, and joint ventures.
He vowed to improve India’s ranking in the World Bank’s global “Doing Business” report, from a dismal 142nd place to at least 50th.
Such talk continues, but it seems increasingly removed from the BJP’s central preoccupations.
In fact, Modi rose to power at the head of a family of right-wing organizations that largely do not share his economic priorities, and that are obsessed with so-called “cultural nationalism” – which is essentially just repackaged Hindu chauvinism.
The tension between Modi’s avowed economic reformism and the cultural nativism that animates his government’s electoral base is a major impediment to progress.
After all, the political majority that Modi needs to pursue his economic policies depends on the organizational capacity of the very people whose chauvinism is undermining him.
In fact, Modi’s rise was followed almost immediately by a series of attacks on India’s minorities, particularly Muslims.
A legislator from Shiv Sena, a far-right regional party allied with the BJP, forced a Muslim cafeteria employee to eat bread during the Ramadan fast.
A more tragic fate befell a young Muslim tech worker in Pune, who was beaten to death in “retaliation” for a defamatory social-media post with which he had no connection.
Then came a nationwide scare about “love jihad” – an alleged Muslim ploy to make India a Muslim-majority country by seducing Hindu girls into romantic entanglements that would lead to their conversion to Islam.
No sooner had this BJP-fueled hysteria been widely dismissed – Muslims comprise 13% of India’s population, and there have been only a handful of such marriages – than the inflammatory rhetoric mounted.
A prominent Modi supporter declared that all Indians had to acknowledge that they were culturally Hindu.
A member of the Council of Ministers divided the country into Ramzada (believers in the Hindu god Ram) and Haramzada (bastards) – and was allowed to retain her post.
Another BJP legislator declared Mahatma Gandhi’s Hindu-nationalist assassin to be a patriot, while a fringe party in the Modi camp announced a campaign to install the assassin’s busts throughout the country.
The galloping chauvinism has known no bounds.
Modi himself made the embarrassing declaration – in a speech at a new hospital, no less – that the figure of the Hindu god Ganesh, with its elephant’s head on a human body, attested to the ancient Hindus’ knowledge of plastic surgery.
The education ministry abruptly withdrew German as an optional third language in government schools, and replaced it with Sanskrit.
And the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh, a volunteer organization modeled on the fascist groups of the 1920s – complete with khaki shorts and staves – declared a campaign of Ghar wapasi (“return home”), or reconversion of minorities to the Hinduism from which their ancestors had allegedly lapsed in the distant past.
The resulting controversies have convulsed the country and dominated political discourse, sidelining Modi’s economic policies in the process.
Indeed, protests by opposition parties have paralyzed the parliament, making it impossible for the government to introduce – let alone pass – important elements of pending economic-reform legislation, such as a law raising the limit on foreign-owned stakes in the insurance sector to 49%.
Yet Modi has said nothing to quiet his supporters or mollify his critics, raising concerns among investors – especially foreigners – about his ability to manage his own constituents.
For example, Lorenz Reibling, of the German-American firm Taurus Investment Holdings, had a few questions – beginning with the implications of recent anti-Christian and Muslim tirades and conversion propositions – before committing to a major investment in India.
As Reibling put it, “Conversion and ethnic/religious cleansing doesn’t ring well here in Germany particularly.
The bizarre dream of a 100% Hindu India would be an India with little or no foreign support.
That is not what India deserves.”
If Christians, in particular, are exposed to an “inquisition in reverse,” he observed, they would scale back investment considerably.
Similarly, Reibling added, Middle Eastern investors would respond to an anti-Muslim policy by cutting India out of their portfolios.
Reibling is far from the only investor to harbor these fears; indeed, he was merely expressing what his fellow investors abroad have been discussing among themselves.
The alarm bells have already rung.
Modi has found himself in an unenviable position vis-à-vis his own supporters: He cannot live with them, and he cannot live without them.
Unless he can find a way to resolve his political dilemma, hope for a “Modi miracle” in India’s economy will ebb as rapidly as it rose.
The Modi Government Turns One
NEW DELHI – India’s Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) government, led by Prime Minister Narendra Modi, will mark its first anniversary in office this month.
While it is too early to assess its overall performance, the overwhelming sentiment across India so far is one of disappointment.
The BJP rode to power on a wave of expectations after a decade in opposition to the United Progressive Alliance government, led by Prime Minister Manmohan Singh of the Congress party.
(Full disclosure: I was a member of that government.)
Support for the BJP was so strong, in fact, that the party became the first in 30 years to win a majority in the Lok Sabha (the lower house of India’s parliament).
Early enthusiasm for the BJP government was based on the perceived contrast with its predecessor.
Here, at last, was a strong single-party government led by a decisive “man of action,” rather than a fractious coalition led by a reticent octogenarian, who was often unfairly caricatured as uncertain and vacillating.
Modi was marketed to voters through a clever (and lavishly financed) campaign that portrayed him as the business-savvy leader who had transformed the state of Gujarat into a lodestar of development – and who would do the same for the country as a whole.
Attracting young people with the promise of jobs, and older voters with the prospect of reform and growth, Modi won a mandate that stunned the country’s pollsters.
Congress, meanwhile, recorded its worst-ever performance.
Since the election, Modi has energetically strutted the global stage, touting his government as more hospitable to investors and urging foreign manufacturers to “Make in India.”
Yet his foreign travels have achieved little, beyond improving his personal standing, which had suffered considerably following accusations that, as Chief Minister of Gujarat, he had been at least negligent as more than a thousand people were killed in a 2002 anti-Muslim pogrom.
Modi’s domestic performance has also been underwhelming.
Although his speeches and sound bites continue to impress fans of his Hindi oratory, the gap between rhetoric and reality widens by the week.
Indeed, despite speaking eloquently of tolerance and accommodation, Modi has remained largely silent in the face of hate speech by BJP ministers and MPs that is alienating India’s non-Hindu minorities.
The BJP may preach development, but it is practicing bigotry – a contradiction that Modi could resolve only by repudiating the forces that helped ensure his electoral victory.
Likewise, Modi has not kept his vow of “minimal government, maximum governance”; on the contrary, he has created the most centralized, top-down, bureaucracy-driven, personality-cult-dominated central government since Indira Gandhi’s emergency rule in the mid-1970s.
Those who decried the alleged “paralysis of decision-making” under Modi’s excessively democratic, consultative, and consensual predecessor are now faced with a different kind of paralysis, as files pile up in Modi’s office, the only place where decisions are made.
Senior positions – including two on the indispensible three-member independent election commission – stand vacant, leaving vital institutions unable to function effectively.
Despite his talk about transparency and accountability, Modi has failed to appoint a central information commissioner, vigilance commissioner, or lokpal (the ombudsman who has jurisdiction over all corruption cases involving MPs and central-government employees).
With Modi too busy to keep up with all of the decisions he – and only he – can make, the government is adrift.
In some cases, it is pursuing blatantly contradictory approaches.
Consider economic policy.
Although Modi has declared that “the government has no business to be in business,” he has failed to question his government’s ownership and control of airlines and hotels.
Indeed, privatization of major public-sector behemoths is no longer mentioned.
Furthermore, labor-market liberalization, once considered indispensable to attract investors and promote industrial growth, is on the back burner.
Optimistic talk of reform has been replaced by officially articulated respect for “graduated incrementalism.”
Likewise, Finance Minister Arun Jaitley, who once derided “tax terrorism,” has unleashed the taxman on entirely new categories of victims, including the foreign institutional investors Modi is trying to attract.
Unsurprisingly, investor sentiment, which perked up during Modi’s campaign, has dampened considerably.
Modi’s government has also revealed a fine talent for announcing grandiose schemes and failing to finance them.
Worse, budgets for health, education, sanitation, and women’s security – all major talking points of the BJP’s election campaign – have been cut.
None of this has been lost on the public.
India’s farmers, for example, are up in arms, because the land-acquisition law passed by the previous government has been gutted through a series of amendments imposed by fiat (which are now, however, running into legislative resistance).
More generally, voters are not impressed by Modi’s transformation from the chai-wallah (tea-seller) of the election campaign, who had sacrificed domestic bliss to serve the nation, into an omnipresent, gaudily attired celebrity hobnobbing with other bold-face names.
The nadir was reached in January, when Modi received US President Barack Obama – “my friend Barack” – in a pinstripe suit with his own name embossed in gold on every stripe.
The public, appalled by this display, promptly humiliated the BJP in polls for the Delhi Assembly, which the party had nearly won the previous year.
Needless to say, the opposition, flattened electorally a year ago, is back on its feet.
In a sense, Modi is fortunate that his government’s failings have become so starkly apparent so early in his tenure; he now has time to address them.
He showed that he is capable of learning the right lessons when he quickly auctioned the pinstripe suit for charity.
Unfortunately, the rest of his errors cannot be so easily undone.
Realizing the Indian Dream
NEW DELHI – It is not often that I get to wear two hats at once.
But that is exactly what happened earlier this month, when I spent a few days in New Delhi.
I was in India primarily as part of my current role as Chairman of a review for the British prime minister on anti-microbial resistance (AMR).
But my visit coincided with the presentation of India's 2015-2016 budget, the first under Prime Minister Narendra Modi.
Given some of my other interests and experiences, I found what was presented to be very interesting.
Following recent revisions to its GDP figures, India's economy has recently grown – in real terms – slightly faster than China's.
A key feature of my research into the BRIC economies (Brazil, Russia, India, and China) more than ten years ago was that at some point during this decade, India would start to grow faster than China and continue to do so for dozens of years.
The reasoning is straightforward.
India's demographics are considerably better than China's, and the size and growth rate of a country's workforce is one of the two key factors that drive long-term economic performance – the other being productivity.
Between now and 2030, the growth rate of India's workforce will add as much to the existing stock of labor as continental Europe's four largest economies put together.
India is less urbanized than China, and it is in the early stages of benefiting from the virtuous forces that normally accompany that process.
But there is a catch.
When it comes to productivity, India has been a laggard.
Unless it finds a way to improve, the country's demographic profile could become a burden rather than a benefit.
In this regard, Modi's first full budget did not include anything dramatic.
My visits as chairman of the AMR review also allowed me to witness some encouraging signs.
In my book The Growth Map, I describe my unforgettable first visit to Gurgaon, a municipality near Delhi that serves as a regional financial and industrial hub.
Gurgaon is home to a lot of high-flying technology firms, and on this trip I visited one of India's leading diagnostics companies, SRL Diagnostic, which is developing tools that could improve the use of antibiotics.
The last time I made the trip from the Oberoi hotel in New Delhi to Gurgaon, it took well over 2.5 hours to travel the 30 kilometers.
Though a new freeway was under construction, the building site was full of cars and animals.
As a result, traffic was in a state of chaos, and it was impossible for any roadwork to be done.
I had always promised myself that the next time I took the trip, I would somehow repeat the exact journey.
I am pleased to say that the drive now takes less than an hour and the experience was much less dramatic.
Moreover, the hotel car that made the journey provided free Wi-Fi – the first time I have come across this anywhere in the world.
It is probably too early to say with certainty that India will soon take its place as the world's third largest economy, behind China and the United States.
But, given that India's investment climate seems to be improving, that moment might not be too far away.
By 2017, India could surpass Italy and Brazil to become the world's seventh largest economy; by 2020, there is a reasonable chance that it will overtake France and the United Kingdom to become the fifth largest.
Overtaking Germany and Japan, however, will require bolder steps, especially regarding education, health, and economic policy.
India will need to improve its education system dramatically, both at the secondary and tertiary level, and make similarly large advances in basic sanitation (not to mention implementing my review's recommendations for combating AMR).
These developments, along with a more stable framework for monetary and fiscal policy, could lead to the type of double-digit growth that China has enjoyed for the past three decades.
It is up to India's policymakers to realize this ambition.
Closing India’s Technology Gap
MUMBAI – It is a notable irony that India, which produces solutions to many of the knottiest information-technology problems faced by the world’s largest companies, has benefited little from technological progress.
Fortunately for India’s citizens, Prime Minister Narendra Modi intends to change that.
The gap between India and its emerging Asian counterpart China is significant.
Whereas China has created the world’s largest online bazaar and become a global leader in renewable energy, India has just begun to explore the potential of e-commerce; IT remains beyond the scope of millions of small and medium-size enterprises; and most citizens remain cut off from the digital economy.
To bring India up to speed, Modi’s government announced in August a national digital initiative: 1.13 trillion rupees ($19 billion) in investment to bring broadband communications to 250,000 villages, provide universal mobile access, expand online government services, and enable online delivery of all sorts of basic services.
Needless to say, this will do much to advance India’s e-government ambitions.
Technology trends are helping Modi’s cause.
The rapid decline in costs and increase in performance capabilities of a range of digital technologies – including mobile Internet, cloud computing, and expert systems – make large-scale adoption a distinct possibility in the coming decade, even in relatively poor India.
These digital technologies – together with advances in genomics (supporting agricultural and medical innovation) and unconventional energy (wind, solar, and shale oil and gas) – will enable financial inclusion for hundreds of millions of Indians and potentially redefine how services like education, food allocation, and health care are delivered.&nbsp;Research by the McKinsey Global Institute indicates that, by 2025, these factors are likely to contribute at least $550 billion – and as much as $1 trillion – to India’s annual income.
The gains would be distributed among a variety of sectors, even some that currently have low levels of technology adoption.
Existing applications in agriculture, health care, education, and infrastructure can collectively contribute $160-280 billion to annual GDP – and, more important, empower ordinary Indians.
Indeed, educational innovations – such as adaptive learning and remote teaching – could enable some 24 million workers to receive more years of education and find higher-paying employment.
Mobile financial services will give 300 million Indians access to the financial system, allowing them to build credit.
And precision agriculture – using geographic information systems and data to guide planting, watering, and other activities – can help 90 million farmers increase their output and reduce post-harvest losses, with access to timely market data bolstering their incomes.
Moreover, some 400 million Indians in poor rural areas can gain access to better health care in field clinics, where health workers can diagnose and treat some ailments using low-cost diagnostic tools, expert software, and online links to physicians.
Finally, by digitizing government services, such as food-distribution programs for the poor, India could eliminate the leakage that diverts, according to our estimates, half of the food from intended recipients.
For India to derive the full potential of these technologies, it will need to dismantle barriers to adoption.
McKinsey’s Internet Barriers Index for 25 countries classifies India as part of a cluster (along with Egypt, Indonesia, Thailand, and the Philippines) characterized by medium-to-high barriers in four key areas: infrastructure, affordability, incentives, and capability.
Even with low prices for devices and data plans relative to the rest of the world, Internet access in India remains beyond the grasp of close to a billion people.
Furthermore, network coverage and the adjacent infrastructure remain inadequate, particularly in rural areas.
And, though 48% of urban Indians are computer literate, only 14% of rural Indians are able to use a computer efficiently.
Indian policymakers should be working with the country’s tech industry and other private-sector actors to implement measures that would enable technology adoption.
These include ensuring ongoing investment in broadband backbone networks, establishing inter-operability standards, and creating a supportive environment for low-cost devices.
In order to spur growth in online-services delivery, the authorities must also address broader challenges to entrepreneurship, such as India’s cumbersome procedures for starting new businesses.
Moreover, as the experience of India’s mobile telephony sector clearly demonstrates, scaling up for massive impact requires more than start-up innovation; it also demands a regulatory environment characterized by a liberal approach to pricing, manufacturing, and distribution.
Sustaining the benefits of technological adoption and innovation will require continued investment and adjustment to compensate for its disruptive effects.
For example, the automation of knowledge work – the software and systems that are increasingly capable of performing human tasks that require judgment – could affect 19-29 million jobs by 2025.
Technology can help create new – perhaps better – jobs to replace those that are lost, but only if India’s education and training systems prepare workers adequately.
With thoughtful planning, productive collaboration between public and private institutions, and capable execution, India’s government can clear the way for technological progress.
The social and economic benefits of a successful strategy cannot be overstated.
Peace with Pakistan?
NEW DELHI – Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s surprise visit to Lahore, Pakistan, on Christmas Day brought his hyperkinetic year of global diplomacy to a headline-grabbing close.
It also raised serious questions about the direction of the highly fraught relationship between the two nuclear-armed neighbors.
Since Modi took office in May 2014, India-Pakistan relations have experienced more ups and downs than a child’s yo-yo.
The victory of a Hindu chauvinist hardliner – a man who had systematically blocked his predecessor’s peace-making efforts while in opposition and demonized Pakistan in his campaign speeches – was naturally assumed to portend a bilateral chill.
Instead, Modi invited Pakistani Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif to his inauguration.
Less than two months later, however, the two countries were exchanging artillery fire across the border, with Modi instructing the Indian Army to respond disproportionately to Pakistani provocations.
Talks between the two countries’ foreign secretaries were scheduled in New Delhi, only to be called off when the Pakistanis, like so many times before, met with Indian Kashmiri separatist leaders.
In November 2014, at the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation summit in Kathmandu, a photograph was taken of Modi reading a brochure, ostentatiously ignoring Sharif as he walked past.
(It was subsequently revealed, however, that the two leaders had met in the hotel suite of an Indian businessman who enjoys good relations with Sharif.)
Last February, Modi again initiated a thaw, calling Sharif to wish his country luck in the Cricket World Cup, and dispatching his foreign secretary to Islamabad.
But mistrust again prevailed, and a cold peace ensued.
An unexpected meeting of the two prime ministers in Ufa, Russia, in July produced little progress, with both sides immediately repudiating each other’s statements about what was discussed and agreed.
Soon after, yet another scheduled meeting of national security advisers in Delhi was called off at the last minute, again following a meeting between Pakistani officials and Kashmiri separatists.
But, with a brief encounter between Sharif and Modi on the sidelines of the United Nations climate change conference in Paris on November 30, the tone changed yet again.
Without any buildup or forewarning, the two countries’ national security advisers conferred in Bangkok in December.
Just days later, India’s external affairs minister, in Islamabad for the fifth Heart of Asia ministerial conference on Afghanistan, met with top Pakistani officials, including both Sharif and his foreign affairs adviser, before announcing that the two countries had decided to restart a comprehensive dialogue.
It is against this background that Modi made his impromptu visit to Lahore (to attend celebrations of Sharif’s birthday and his granddaughter’s marriage), raising hopes among some that the bilateral relationship may be undergoing a genuine sea change.
But within a week of the Christmas bonhomie, seven Indians were killed by militants at the Pathankot Air Force Base near the border with Pakistan.
Because such an attack was entirely predictable, it may not derail the diplomatic process completely.
But, because lives were lost, it cannot be ignored, either.
With two bilateral meetings – between the two countries’ foreign secretaries, and then between Modi and Sharif – scheduled to take place this month, we will not have to wait long to find out how much political damage the attack has caused.
But it should not be taken for granted that resuming a dialogue with Pakistan is appropriate, at least in the current context.
After all, Pakistan has not really done anything to warrant the diplomatic reward of a visit from India’s prime minister.
Indeed, it has failed to fulfill any of the minimum requirements for dialogue that Modi himself has cited.
It has not prosecuted the perpetrators of the 2008 Mumbai massacre, or constrained the terrorist forces that operate, with the complicity of the military establishment, on its territory.
It has not even handed over Dawood Ibrahim, the fugitive don of the Mumbai underworld.
Against this background, Modi’s unplanned Christmas excursion – which caught his own aides by surprise – seems more impulsive than statesmanlike.
Whereas such gestures are typically criticized as too little too late, this might be a case of too much too soon.
The question is why Modi did it.
While he has so far refused to share his vision for the bilateral relationship, even with members of his Bharatiya Janata Party, there are some potential clues.
During his election campaign, Modi once said that Hindus and Muslims could either fight each other or fight poverty.
Perhaps he believes that the same goes for India and Pakistan: They can focus either on their mutual enmity or on mutual development.
The day before he visited Lahore, he told Afghanistan’s parliament that he hopes “Pakistan will become a bridge between South Asia and Afghanistan and beyond,” and discussed how the region’s countries “can all prosper together.”
If this is Modi’s vision, he should articulate it to the Indian public, along with a coherent peace policy that he will pursue consistently.
But even then, there would be a serious potential hitch: Pakistan’s prime minister does not, ultimately, call the shots in his country.
The military does.
They are not impressed by theatrics like Modi’s Lahore visit, and they maintain their power precisely by sustaining a narrative that spurs hostility toward India.
Pathankot could be a signal that they are not reconciled to peace, and a reminder that they have many more arrows in their quiver.
Indians cannot afford to forget that the last time Sharif hosted a celebrated feel-good visit by an Indian prime minister in Lahore, in 1999, his army subsequently started a war with India on the Kargil heights and unseated Sharif himself within months.
As 2016 begins, votaries of peace can only hope that history will not repeat itself.
India’s Deadly Cities
SINGAPORE – China and India are driving Asia’s population and urbanization trends.
According to a 2010 McKinsey study, the two countries are expected to account for 62% of the growth in the continent’s urban population between 2005 and 2025, and a staggering 40% of such growth worldwide.
Statistics like these underscore the urgency of urban planning and growth management.
But it is equally important to acknowledge the critical differences between the two countries.
Variations in their urban growth paths, as well as differences in their approaches to environmental policy, are likely to make India’s population challenges far more difficult to address.
China may be home to 20% of humanity, but for more than two decades its fertility rate has been lower than the “replacement” level (that required to maintain the current population), with population growth expected to turn negative within the next two decades.
As a result, India, where population growth is projected to remain positive for the foreseeable future, is poised to become the world’s most populous country.
Most projections have India’s population exceeding that of China by 2022.
Indeed, over the next 35 years, India is expected to add more than 400 million urban residents (more than the entire population of the United States), while China will add just 292 million.
For the first time, the majority of Indians will be living in cities – a significant transformation for a country whose rural population currently constitutes two-thirds of the total.
India’s two largest urban centers – Delhi and Mumbai – are often described as emerging global megacities.
Delhi is already the world’s second most populous city, and it is expected to close the gap with Tokyo, the world’s largest city, almost entirely by 2030.
When population growth on this scale is combined with rapid urbanization, the associated environmental and social impacts become a formidable policy challenge.
In 2014, the World Health Organization (WHO) determined that Delhi has the world’s worst air quality (based on concentration of fine particulate matter), with Indian cities occupying the top four spots and 13 of the top 18.
China has been frequently – and often justifiably – criticized for poor environmental policies.
But, according to McKinsey, China has been more proactive than India in planning for rapid urbanization, demonstrating that it has the capacity and the resources to address environmental challenges.
In new cities across the country, urban plans already take into account such concerns, with riparian greenways and urban nature reserves complementing infrastructure projects that have environmental benefits (for example, extensive mass-transit networks).
By contrast, India’s cities have grown haphazardly, with little consideration of the functioning of urban systems as a whole.
The country’s urban areas often lack adequate regional transport networks, for example.
Large swaths of informal settlements have emerged in vacant inner-city districts and suburban peripheries, compromising environmental conditions, public health, and personal safety.
Land-use patterns interweave industrial and residential districts, exposing vulnerable (and growing) populations to a host of negative spillover effects.
The differences between urban development in China and India are clear not only in the substance of policy, but also in the two countries’ governance styles.
China’s leaders are placing heavy emphasis on pollution control.
In advance of the 2022 Winter Olympics in Beijing, the authorities are pushing for a regionally integrated plan to balance economic growth with environmental management, including the greening of manufacturing processes and the elimination of “excess capacity” in energy production.
Such multi-jurisdictional efforts require strong coordination and a stable vision, which China’s hierarchal governance system provides.
In India, by contrast, the central government has no role in managing air pollution, which is a state-level responsibility.
Whatever Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s administration decides to do, state governments under the control of different parties are likely to oppose his policies, or fail to devote adequate attention and resources to them.
According to the WHO, of the 4.3 million annual deaths resulting from “indoor air pollution” (burning of solid fuels), nearly one-third (1.3 million) occur in India.
A recent report argues that more stringent environmental regulation would add 3.2 years to Indians’ life expectancy.
This tangible welfare gain would also include economic benefits.
The resulting addition of more than two billion “life years” represents a significant amount of human productivity, creativity, and uncompensated contributions to families and society.
By failing to address the impacts of rapid urbanization adequately, India is leaving these benefits unclaimed.
A good-faith, well-publicized official declaration would signal to India’s citizens and the world that the country intends to save its growing population from the life-shortening effects of urban environmental degradation.
It would also provide a roadmap for improving the quality of life in India’s cities, benefiting local residents both directly and indirectly (by inducing foreign investment).
India’s competitive advantages in the new global economy are well known.
But transformative social progress will be possible only if the country launches a more comprehensive effort to address pathologies long brushed off as the unavoidable collateral damage of economic growth.
Railroading India’s Railways
NEW DELHI – Every February, the Indian Parliament performs a curious and unique ritual.
The railway minister (a portfolio that exists in few democracies nowadays) presents the “railway budget" to the lower house for its approval.
A packed chamber hangs on the minister's every word.
The practice began in the days of the British Raj, when the railway budget rivaled that of the rest of the Indian government.
Of course, railway revenues today, at $23 billion, no longer dwarf the country's budget, which now stands at some $268 billion.
But India's railways still produce other mind-boggling figures: 23 million passengers are transported daily (over eight billion per year, more than the world's entire population) on 12,617 trains connecting 7,172 stations across a 65,000-kilometer (40,000-mile) network.
And, with 1.31 million employees, the railways are the country's biggest enterprise.
In short, the railways are the lifeblood of India's economy, touching the lives of every segment of society and playing a key role in moving people, freight, and dreams across a congested landscape.
Yet much needs fixing.
India's trains carry four times the number of passengers as China's, despite covering only half as many kilometers, but still lose about $7 billion annually.
The problem is that a succession of railway ministers, viewing the trains as poor people's only affordable means of transport, have refused to raise passenger fares, squeezing freight instead.
This has proved popular with voters but disastrous for the country.
Though freight transport still accounts for 67% of railway revenues, with 2.65 million tons carried every day, the higher fares needed to subsidize passengers have deterred shippers.
As a result, the share of freight carried across India by rail has declined from 89% in 1950-1951 to 31% today.
Instead, an increasing volume of goods is shipped by road, choking India's narrow highways and spewing toxic pollutants into the country's increasingly unbreathable air.
By contrast, China's railways carry five times as much freight as India's, even though China has a far better road network.
Making matters worse, politicians have continued to add trains to please various constituencies – but without adding track.
Indeed, owing to land constraints, India has laid only 12,000 kilometers of rail track since independence in 1947, adding to the 53,000 left behind by the British.
(China added nearly 80,000 kilometers to its rail network over the same period.)
As a result, several lines are operating beyond their capacity, creating long delays.
Exacerbating this inefficiency are slow train speeds, which rarely exceed 50 kilometers per hours (and 30 kilometers per hour for freight), partly owing to the need to stop at an ever-rising number of stations to appease political interests.
But perhaps the biggest problem is how dangerous the railways are.
Aging rails, tired coaches, old-fashioned signals, and level crossings dating back to the nineteenth century combine with human error to take dozens of lives every year.
Yet the railway ministers continue to insist on their populist approach.
With the government losing $4.5 billion every year by subsidizing passenger fares, it has little money to spend on upgrading infrastructure, improving safety standards, or speeding up the trains.
As a result, the railways run out of money before running out of plans.
In the last 30 years, only 317 of 676 projects sanctioned by Parliament have been completed, and it is difficult to imagine how the railways will acquire the estimated $30 billion needed to complete the remaining 359 projects.
And if all of this were not bad enough, India's leadership seems not to recognize the challenges that the railways present.
In a country where rail passengers cannot even expect a clean toilet, let alone an on-time arrival, Prime Minister Narendra Modi has spoken of introducing bullet trains – the latest in a string of irrationally grandiose aspirations.
A technocratic new railway minister, Suresh Prabhu, has once again left passenger fares untouched and raised freight rates.
Though, unlike his predecessors, he has resisted the temptation to announce any new trains, his plans for India's railways remain inadequate.
Prabhu's pledges include improving and expanding rail lines, introducing wireless Internet at railway stations, eliminating unmanned level crossings, creating a 24-hour toll-free number for users to phone in complaints, and installing security cameras to protect women passengers.
These improvements seem to his critics to be marginal, at best, and have left his fellow MPs underwhelmed.
Prabhu's most impressive promise – to raise $140 billion from market lenders – is also his most problematic, as he has failed to clarify how exactly the railways would repay the loans.
Given how high interest rates would have to be to attract investors, this will be no easy feat, especially because the railways currently have an operating surplus of just 6%, or about $100 million annually – barely 1% of the amount needed to upgrade and modernize the network.
It is far from clear how Prabhu's grand vision of a safer, cleaner, and speedier Indian railway system will be achieved in practice.
The railway minister has created a dream budget –though “pipe dream" might be a more accurate description.
In fact, this is in line with the Modi government's approach thus far: lofty aspirations, soaring rhetoric, and quotable sound-bites have been accompanied by few specifics, no implementation plan, and no improvements in execution capacity.
India's overburdened trains cannot run on hot air, but that seems to be what they are being offered for now.
Faster Growth Through Stronger Regulation
WASHINGTON, DC – When India’s prime minister, Narendra Modi, was on the campaign trail, he promised to improve the way the country is governed.
Since taking office in May, he has strived to deliver.
Recently, he declared that he wants to boost India’s position in the World Bank’s “Doing Business” survey, which assesses the regulatory climate in 189 countries.
Modi’s goal is to lift India into the top 50 – a bold ambition given that the country currently sits at 142.
Cutting bureaucratic red tape can help foster a culture of entrepreneurship and dynamism.
But putting in place an effective regulatory and enforcement infrastructure can be equally important, especially in areas where consumers have difficulty assessing the value of products and the risks they can pose.
In all countries – but especially in developing economies – a robust regulatory system is essential to building trust in the marketplace.
Consumers need to know that the food they eat, the cars they drive, and the medicines they take are safe.
Confidence in local products boosts domestic consumption and makes exports more attractive in foreign markets.
Even as reputable firms ensure the quality of all their inputs, this loophole can allow unsafe products to enter the market, as occurred in 2008, when at least 81 Americans died after receiving doses of the blood thinner heparin that contained adulterated Chinese material.
By the same token, regulations should be based on international standards, where they exist.
For example, American, European, Japanese, and other drug regulators have developed guidelines, through the International Conference on Harmonization, that take advantage of their collective expertise.
Countries such as South Korea and Singapore are drawing on these guidelines to flesh out their own regulatory systems.
As a result, their citizens will enjoy quick access to new medicines, and their researchers will find it easier to participate in global clinical research, a boon to domestic industries.
Because a regulatory institution can only be as effective as the people who work for it, another area of focus for developing countries should be training skilled staff.
In China, fewer than 200 people work at the Center for Drug Evaluation, the agency that reviews applications for new drugs.
By contrast, the United States Food and Drug Administration employs 4,000 reviewers, and the European Medicines Agency has 3,000.
Predictably, China’s approval process for new drugs is one of the world’s slowest – eight years on average.
As a result, patients are denied access to the medicines they need.
Building intellectual capital and institutional competence can take years, but it can be done.
A decade ago, Japan’s drug-approval process was lethargic relative to that of other developed economies.
The country made the safe acceleration of the approval process a high priority, and tremendous progress has followed.
The median time taken to approve new drugs fell from 833 days in 2006 to 306 days in 2012, according to the London-based Center for Innovation in Regulatory Science.
For regulation to be truly effective, it must be backed by robust enforcement – with sanctions for noncompliance.
That calls for a legal system that can adjudicate disputes and ensure fair, equitable, and timely treatment.
For India, which has only 1.2 judges per 100,000 people (compared to 10.8 in the US), this will be a difficult challenge.
According to the Supreme Court of India, in March 2012 the country had 31.2 million cases pending, more than 80% of them in lower courts.
Such extraordinary backlogs have persisted – and can undermine the rule of law.
The world’s richer countries created their regulatory infrastructure over generations, during a time when there was little direct global competition.
Emerging markets need to create theirs in a greatly compressed timeframe.
This will not be easy anywhere.
It will require significant resources, and the process risks angering domestic companies that have become accustomed to a lack of regulatory oversight.
But, if implemented correctly, sound regulation can strengthen countries’ growth capacity, while protecting citizens and improving their long-term living standards.
Clicks over Bricks in India
SINGAPORE – After years of debate, India’s government recently announced that will open the country’s retail sector to foreign investment.
The move was met with howls of protest from those who argue that the entry of large hypermarket chains like Carrefour and Walmart will devastate the small shops that currently dominate India’s retail sector.
A country-wide strike called by opposition parties on September 20 brought many cities and towns to a halt.
So far, Prime Minister Manmohan Singh’s government has not relented, despite the loss of support from a key coalition ally.
The debate around opening the retail sector to foreign investment is currently being framed, on the one hand, by the need to modernize supply chains and, on the other hand, by the desire to protect small shopkeepers’ livelihoods.
Those who support the decision argue that India’s supply chains are simply too wasteful, and that only the finance and knowhow of big, international retail chains can upgrade them.
Opponents point to how big retailers decimated the traditional retail segment in the West.
But this debate misses a crucial point: the hypermarket model is itself under serious threat everywhere from online shopping.
Consumers worldwide are finding that they can access virtually unlimited choice on the Internet – including customized goods and services that big retailers simply cannot deliver.
As a result, large hypermarkets are suddenly finding that their business model is unraveling.
They watched in horror as Amazon, en route to becoming the world’s largest online retailer, pushed the bookstore chain Borders into bankruptcy, and have wondered if they will be next.
The American discount retailer Walmart, reportedly concerned that it is cannibalizing its own sales, has gone so far as to stop selling Amazon’s Kindle tablets.
Indeed, the Indian government’s decision to welcome foreign retailers coincided with French retailer Carrefour’s announcement that it will shut down its substantial operations in Singapore by the end of this year.
Meanwhile, its British counterpart, Tesco, is shifting away from the large hypermarket format and investing heavily in online systems.
Quite clearly, the established framework of retailing is being fundamentally overhauled.
Given these developments, India may simply skip the hypermarket stage and go online, just as it skipped fixed-line telephony and went mobile.
Of course, hypermarkets will do well in a few locations, but they are unlikely ever to dominate India’s retail sector.
For small shopkeepers, this poses both a challenge and an opportunity.
The challenge is that the rise of online shopping will increase competitive pressure, regardless of whether big foreign retailers enter the market.
While Indians have traditionally been wary of buying online, owing to their distrust of digital security, in recent years the urban middle class has become increasingly accustomed to using the Internet to purchase airline tickets, reserve hotel rooms, and order books.
As rising affluence and falling technology prices make online shopping accessible to a growing pool of customers, more products will follow.
Change is inevitable.
But this shift may also open an opportunity for small shops.
We know from international experience that online shopping undermines hypermarkets more than neighborhood stores, which often offer home delivery, credit, and the reassuring familiarity of personal relationships.
A local shop may be able to use the Internet to tailor more precisely its selection of goods to its customers’ tastes.
In other words, small shops may be more than capable of holding their own against big retailers if they adapt to the new environment.
Indeed, small shops’ advantages are so compelling that Tesco is investing heavily in expanding its network of convenience stores, Tesco Express, thereby effectively mimicking the traditional model of local grocery stores.
So India’s political debate over the entry of foreign retailers into the market, while heated, is probably already outdated.
The real question is how India’s creaking supply chains will respond when consumers leapfrog hypermarkets and go online.
No other country has created a logistical network directly for online retailing.
For investors and businesses – perhaps including India’s small shopkeepers – this is where the really interesting opportunities will emerge.
India’s Agony
MUMBAI – In most cities of South Asia, hidden beneath the grime and neglect of extreme poverty, there exists a little Somalia waiting to burst out and infect the body politic.
This netherworld, patrolled and nourished by criminals who operate a vast black-market economy, has bred, in Mumbai, a community that has utter contempt for the state, because it knows that its survival depends on corrupting the police.  Like underground magma, that underworld has now burst into the streets of Mumbai.
Because the denizens of this netherworld know neither patriotism nor morality, they are easily lured into partnership with terrorists, particularly when they have reason to feel aggrieved.
In Mumbai, a large proportion of them are Muslims who were denied space in the formal economy and have developed strong vested interests over the past 50 years.
Details about the Mumbai outrage, where terrorists killed over 100 people, are still unfolding.
But we do know that at least 30 men armed with AK47 rifles and grenades held India’s business and financial center hostage, targeting both Indians and foreigners, particularly Americans and British.
It is likely that this operation was propelled from Pakistan through the Lashkar e Tauba, a terrorist organization sustained by hatred of secular India and backed by shadowy Pakistani agencies and street support.
In the blood and drama of the events, however, we might miss a significant element of the story.
The attacks were an operation that must have required months of planning: serious weapons were deployed, a small army was mobilized, targets were studied, transport was organized, and weak points identified.
A plan of attack that involved hundreds of people was put in motion, and yet the massive infrastructure of India’s government discovered nothing.
The chief of India’s Anti-Terrorist Squad, Hemant Karkare (who lost his life in the battles that raged through the night) received a death threat from the nearby city of Pune, but his own unit did not bother to investigate it, since it was busy playing games on behalf of its political masters.
Complacency and politics gave the terrorists more protection than silence or camouflage ever could.
Indeed, the attacks represent more than a failure of police work.
They represent a collapse of governance; these are the wages of the sins of administrative incompetence and political malfeasance.
India is a tough nation.
No one should have illusions about that.
It has fought off Muslim terrorists in Kashmir, Sikh terrorists in Punjab, Christian terrorists in Nagaland, and Hindu terrorists in Assam and across the country.
It understands that you cannot blame the whole community for the sins of a few.
But under ineffectual governance, particularly during the last three years, India is in danger of degenerating into a soft state.
Instead of being an international leader in the worldwide war against terrorism, it is sinking into the despair of a perpetual victim.
Indeed, India stands only behind Iraq in the number of people killed each year in terrorist attacks.
Three years ago, Indian Prime Minister Manmohan Singh rather smugly told President George W. Bush in Delhi that Indian Muslims were not involved in any act of terrorism.
The implication was that the integration of Muslims in Indian society constituted a success story.  Muslims, Singh implied, also benefit from the virtues of democracy, a conclusion that Bush happily repeated.
But Singh certainly did not fool any of the terrorists, some of whom may have read his self-congratulation as a challenge for them to act.
I am an Indian and a Muslim and proud to be both.
Like any Indian, today I am angry, frustrated, and depressed.
I am angry at the manic dogs of war who have invaded Mumbai.
I am frustrated by the impotence of my government in Mumbai and Delhi, tone-deaf to the anguish of my fellow citizens.
And I am depressed at the damage being done to the idea of India.
India’s American Friends and Iranian Partners
NEW DELHI – The United States recently took the Iran-sanctions monkey off India’s back: it granted India an exemption from Iran-related financial sanctions in exchange for significant cuts in Indian purchases of Iranian oil.
Nevertheless, Iran continues to cast a pall over an otherwise brightening US-India relationship.
From India’s perspective, Iran is an important neighbor with which it can ill afford to rupture its relationship.
Indeed, India already seems locked geographically in an arc of failing or dysfunctional states, confronting it with external threats from virtually all directions.
If India joined the US containment strategy against Iran, it would have to bear serious strategic costs.
For starters, it would lose access to Afghanistan via Iran, which has served as a conduit for the substantial flow of Indian aid to Kabul.
Moreover, containment would undermine India’s energy interests.
Few countries are as dependent on the Persian Gulf region’s hydrocarbons as is India, which imports almost 80% of its consumption.
Iran is the world’s third-largest net oil exporter (with the world’s second-largest natural-gas reserves as well), and it is a strategically located gateway to other energy suppliers in Central Asia and the Middle East.
Iraq and Iran used to be India’s principal oil suppliers.
But the first fell prey to a long US occupation, and the second currently faces a US-led oil-export embargo designed to throttle it financially.
As a result, America’s efforts to give international effect to its new Iran Sanctions Act constitute a double whammy for India.
First, it threatens to sabotage India’s energy-import diversification strategy by making it overly dependent on the Islamist-bankrolling oil monarchies – including Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates, and Qatar – which have managed to ride out the Arab Spring.
Second, further isolation of Iran will make it very difficult for India to play a more active role in Afghanistan at a time when the US is hastening its military disengagement there and seeking to cut a deal with the Taliban.
India, one of the largest aid donors to Afghanistan, has no contiguous corridor to that country and must rely on Iran for access.
Both countries share a common goal in Afghanistan – to ensure that the Pakistan-backed Taliban does not return to power.
If the already-unstable situation there deteriorates after the end of US-led combat operations, India and Iran may be compelled to revive their strategic cooperation of the 1990’s.
It was the Northern Alliance, backed by India, Iran, and Russia, that overthrew the Taliban regime in Kabul in late 2001 with the help of America’s air war.
For the US today, containment of Iran is dictated by several geopolitical considerations.
One consideration is the need to neutralize the strategic advantage that Iran gained from the US overthrow of Saddam Hussein in neighboring Iraq – a development that helped to empower Iraq’s Shia majority.
President George W. Bush called Iran part of an “axis of evil,” yet his decision to invade and occupy Iraq benefited Shia-dominated Iran above all.
Moreover, regional geopolitics pits the powerful “Sunni Crescent,” led by Turkey, Saudi Arabia, Qatar, and the UAE, against the beleaguered “Shia Crescent” states – Iran, Iraq, Syria, and Lebanon.
The US has profited from a longstanding alliance with the Sunni bloc.
In addition to the strategic advantages, America’s close ties with the oil sheikhdoms – which are among the world’s leading holders of foreign-exchange reserves – contribute to propping up the dollar.
It is against this background that the Iranian nuclear program has come to symbolize the larger geopolitical tensions underlying the confrontation between the US and Iran.
Indeed, the nuclear issue has served to rationalize the face-off, with Iran’s leaders playing to their domestic audience by whipping up nuclear nationalism and the US playing to the international audience by harping on the proliferation threat.
India should seek to play the role of honest broker to defuse the threat of military hostilities, which would most likely shut down the world’s most important oil-export route, the Strait of Hormuz (a danger that Iran has said is also implicit in an oil-export embargo against it).
But, far from being able to play the role of bridge-builder between the US and Iran, India is being forced to walk a policy tightrope, and its desire to chart a neutral course has annoyed both sides.
Every time a senior Indian delegation visits Iran, or vice versa, the US warns India that its cozying up to Iran “raises obstacles” to building a closer strategic partnership.
Yet, by voting against Iran at the International Atomic Energy Agency’s governing board meetings in 2005 and 2006, India invited Iranian reprisal in the form of cancellation of a highly favorable 25-year, $22 billion liquefied-natural-gas deal.
The Iran issue, in effect, has turned into a diplomatic litmus test: Will India stand up for its strategic and energy interests in the region, or will it be co-opted to serve the short-term interests of its friend, the US?
The US, for its part, must reconcile its Iran-related pressure on India, which is likely to continue, despite the sanctions waiver, with the imperative to build deeper defense ties with India, thereby giving strategic heft to its declared “pivot” to Asia.
India’s Burma Dilemma
The world has been horrified by graphic images of the latest crackdown by Myanmar’s military junta.
But the bullets and clubs unleashed on Buddhist monks have worked.
The monks have retreated, and an eerie normalcy has returned to Yangon (Rangoon), Myanmar’s principal city and former capital.
That crackdown continues under cover of darkness.
When the sun sets in Myanmar, fear rises.
Everyone listens half awake for the dreaded knock on the door.
Any night, the military’s agents can come for you, take you away, and make sure you are never heard from again.
In recent nights, the junta’s henchmen have burst into monasteries, lined up sleepy monks, and smashed their shaved heads against the walls, spattering them with blood.
Scores of others, perhaps hundreds, have been carted off for interrogation, torture, or execution.
The nighttime assault on a United Nations employee and her family made international news, but hundreds of less well connected Burmese have been similarly abused.
For 45 years, Myanmar’s people have been subjected to the junta’s reign of terror.
My father was born in Rangoon long before the 1962 coup that brought the current regime to power.
Afterwards, many of my relatives, prosperous Indian merchants who had been settled in Myanmar for generations, abandoned homes and businesses in order to save their skins as chaos enveloped the city, later renamed Yangon.
A relative who now lives in Bangkok, but who returned part-time to Yangon in response to overtures from Myanmar’s cash-starved rulers, recalled those days: “We lived through hell.
We never knew when we woke up each morning what would happen.
People were being denounced left and right.
They could just come and take you away and take everything away from you.”
Those who couldn’t leave Myanmar, or didn’t want to, have lived with this fear ever since.
The United States and Europe have issued strong statements condemning the crackdown and calling upon Myanmar’s neighbors, especially India and China, to exert their influence on the regime.
The response from both has been muted (as it has from Thailand, which also has strong economic ties with Myanmar).
China balks at interfering in the “internal affairs” of a neighbor from whom it gets precious natural gas and potential access to the sea.
India, which “normalized” bilateral relations a few years ago, is reluctant to alienate Myanmar’s military, with which it has worked closely to counter rebels in India’s northeast who had been using the common border to tactical advantage.
To this end, India has provided aid, including tanks and training, to Myanmar’s military.
But the main reason for India’s good relations with Myanmar’s ruling thugs is the country’s vast and still largely unexploited energy reserves, which India desperately needs to fuel its economic boom.
India has invested $150 million in a gas exploration deal off the Arakan coast of Myanmar, and India’s state-owned Oil and Natural Gas Corporation and Gas Authority of India Ltd. have taken a 30% stake in two offshore gas fields in direct competition with PetroChina, which has also been given a stake.
India and China are simply doing what the US and European countries have done for so long: trump rhetoric about democracy and human rights with policies that serve their strategic and energy security interests.
US relations with Pakistan and Saudi Arabia are two examples, and America’s Chevron and France’s Total, two of the world’s oil giants, continue to do a brisk business in Myanmar, thanks to loopholes in the sanctions.
But the rise of India and China means that the time-tested posture of Western democracies toward emerging states to “do as we say, not as we do” will become less tenable.
If the EU and the US want democratic India to act according to its stated moral values and not its vital national interests when these appear to conflict, they had better be prepared to do the same.
Feeling the heat, including threats from some US senators to link America’s nuclear deal with India to its actions in Myanmar, India has announced that it is asking for the release of Burmese democratic opposition leader and Nobel Prize winner Aung San Suu Kyi from house arrest.
But the credibility of all democratic regimes, not just India’s, is at stake in what unfolds in Myanmar.
India’s Dalai Dilemma
As the world reacts to China’s crackdown in Tibet, one country is conspicuous by both its centrality to the drama and its reticence over it.
India, the land of asylum for the Dalai Lama and the angry young hotheads of the Tibetan Youth Congress, finds itself on the horns of a dilemma.
On one hand, India is a democracy with a long tradition of allowing peaceful protest, including against foreign countries when their leaders come visiting.
It provided refuge to the Dalai Lama when he fled Chinese occupation of Tibet in 1959, granted asylum (and eventually Indian citizenship) to more than 110,000 Tibetan refugees, and permitted them to create a government-in-exile (albeit one that India does not recognize) in the picturesque Himalayan hill town of Dharamsala.
On the other hand, India has been cultivating better relations with China, which humiliated India in a brief border war in 1962.
Though their bitter border dispute remains unresolved, and China has been a vital ally and military supplier to India’s enemies in Pakistan, bilateral relations have grown warmer in recent years.
Trade has doubled in each of the last three years, to an estimated $40 billion this year; China has now overtaken the US as India’s largest single trading partner.
Tourism, particularly by Indian pilgrims to a major Hindu holy site in Tibet, is thriving.
Indian information technology firms have opened offices in Shanghai, and Infosys’s headquarters in Bangalore recruited nine Chinese this year.
India has no desire to jeopardize any of this.
India’s government has attempted to draw a distinction between its humanitarian obligations as an asylum country and its political responsibilities as a friend of China.
The Dalai Lama and his followers are given a respected place but told not to conduct “political activities” on Indian soil.
When young Tibetan radicals staged a march to Lhasa from Indian soil, the Indian police stopped them well before they got to the Tibetan border, detaining 100.
When Tibetan demonstrators outside the Chinese Embassy in New Delhi attacked the premises, the Indian government stepped up its protection for the Chinese diplomats.
Indian Foreign Minister Pranab Mukherjee – who was noticeably less forthcoming on Tibet than his American counterpart during a press conference with Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice – has publicly warned the Dalai Lama against doing anything that could have a “negative impact on Indo-Sino relations.”
The Dalai Lama’s curious position has complicated India’s diplomatic dance with China.
He is simultaneously the most visible spiritual leader of a worldwide community of believers, a role that India honors, and a political leader, a role that India permits but rejects in its own dealings with him.
As a Buddhist, the Dalai Lama preaches non-attachment, self-realization, inner actualization, and non-violence; as a Tibetan he is admired by a people fiercely attached to their homeland, with most seeking its independence from China and many determined to fight for it.
He is the most recognized worldwide symbol of a country that he has not seen for nearly five decades.
The Dalai Lama’s message of peace, love, and reconciliation has found adherents among Hollywood movie stars, pony-tailed hippies, Irish rock musicians, and Indian politicians.
But he has made no headway at all with the regime that rules his homeland, and he has been unable to prevent Tibet’s inexorable transformation into a Chinese province.
His sermons fill football stadiums and he has won a Nobel Prize, but political leaders around the world shirk from meeting him openly, for fear of offending China.
Indians are acutely conscious that, on this subject, the Chinese are easily offended.
While India facilitated the highly publicized visit by Nancy Pelosi, Speaker of the US House of Representatives, to the Dalai Lama in Dharamsala last month, it almost simultaneously canceled a scheduled meeting between him and Indian Vice-President Mohammed Hamid Ansari.
When China summoned India’s ambassador in Beijing to the foreign ministry at 2 a.m. for a dressing-down over the Tibetan protests in New Delhi, India meekly acquiesced in the insult.
Though Prime Minister Manmohan Singh has publicly declared the Dalai Lama to be the “personification of nonviolence,” India has let it be known that it does not support his political objectives.
Tibet, India’s government says, is an integral part of China, and India lends no support to those who would challenge that status.
That position is not without detractors.
The opposition Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP, which led the previous government) has criticized the current administration for not “expressing concern over the use of force by the Chinese government” and instead “adopting a policy of appeasement towards China with scant regard to the country’s national honor and foreign policy independence.”
But few observers believe that the BJP would have conducted itself differently.
The stark truth is that India has no choice in the matter.
It cannot undermine its own democratic principles and abridge the freedom of speech of Tibetans on its soil.
Nor can it afford to alienate its largest trading partner, a neighbor and an emerging global superpower, which is known to be prickly over any presumed slights to its sovereignty over Tibet.
India will continue to balance delicately on its Tibetan tightrope.
What’s Troubling India?
CAMBRIDGE – India’s recent fall from macroeconomic grace is a lamentable turn of events.
Even the International Monetary Fund’s forecast of a modest improvement in 2013 is predicated on the government’s ability to breathe life into a spate of stalled economic reforms.
India’s recent torpor has underpinned a remarkable shift in global opinion.
Just a couple of years ago, India was developing a reputation as the cool place to invest.
Heads of state tripped over one another to meet business leaders in Mumbai, hoping to pave the way for a significant expansion of trade and investment.
Now their interest has faded, along with the macroeconomic numbers.
And yet changes currently afoot might just turn things around.
India’s octogenarian prime minister, Manmohan Singh, has recently awakened to the desperate need for renewed momentum.
Economists around the world have taken note of the arrival of Raghuram Rajan as chief economist in the finance ministry.
Rajan is a superstar academic researcher, a brilliant writer on political economy, and a former chief economist for the IMF.
But it is far from obvious that Sonia Gandhi, President of the Indian National Congress and the country’s most powerful politician, shares Singh’s reform agenda.
True, the cabinet is being reshuffled to elevate younger ministers.
But the process points to a continuation of the tradition whereby most ministers are appointed on the basis of their loyalty to the Gandhi family rather than their merit and accomplishments.
Unfortunately, for a country as poor as India, only sustained rapid growth can lead to enduring development gains.
India’s poverty rate (an indicator that is admittedly both conceptually and practically difficult to measure) fell by half between 1981 and 2010, to just under 30% – a remarkable achievement.
But faster-growing East Asia has experienced significantly greater progress, with the poverty rate falling from 77% to 14% over the same period.
Why has India’s growth acceleration fizzled?
For many years, India benefited from the long-lasting impact of economic liberalization in the early 1990’s.
Back then, Singh, as finance minister, played a central role.
He could count on the IMF – which had real policy leverage, owing to India’s need for a bailout program in 1991 – to provide external support to counter the huge internal obstacles to reform.
Today, however, there is no external counterweight to the domestic political pressure that is stalling further liberalization.
True, India’s government must now consider growing threats to the country’s investment-grade credit rating.
The major ratings agencies are increasingly complaining about the country’s lack of a growth strategy and its outsize budget deficits.
But the impact has been limited, owing to the authorities’ ability to stuff debt down the throats of captive local banks, insurance companies, and pension funds.
Indeed, this “financial repression” tax on domestic savers remains a huge opaque source of funding for India’s debt-ridden government.
It also prevents funds from being channeled to private-sector investment projects with far higher rates of return than the government can offer.
The good news is that, from an economic perspective, there is still plenty of low-hanging fruit for restoring growth.
Although India is right to avoid taking financial liberalization to the extreme that the United States did in the decades before the recent meltdown, it can do quite a lot without assuming inappropriate risks, as a commission headed by Rajan detailed a few years back.
The retail sector is a huge source of inefficiency that effectively places a massive tax on India’s poor by driving up prices.
Instead of suing foreign retailers like Wal-Mart, India should be finding ways to emulate and benefit from their hyper-efficient methods.
Infrastructure is slowly improving, but roads, ports, water access, and the electricity grid are still horrific across large parts of the country.
Of course, India’s democratic government cannot simply bulldoze through people and the environment to create infrastructure.
But the obstacles also include layers of corrupt bureaucrats and politicians – a vast network of resistance to reform.
Some argue that central-government paralysis is inevitable in a democracy of 1.2 billion people, and that the only way to re-energize India is to establish a looser confederation of its constituent states.