But Gaza’s people and their needs remain in what British Prime Minister David Cameron last year called an “open prison.”
Surely there is room across divides of party and nation to address these pressing humanitarian needs, which otherwise would only fuel future political trouble.
What makes the situation in Gaza even more infuriating is that the status quo is actually irrational.
It is not in anyone’s political interest.
Israel doesn’t become safer, nor do Hamas or Fatah become more popular.
One young mother at the nutrition center told me that she was just completing her accountancy degree – but there was no work.
Yusuf, age nine, working on a computer at the Qattan Center, told me that he wanted to be a pilot.
These people are not a threat to peace in the Middle East.
They are actually its hope.
What they need is a chance to shape their own futures.
Helmut Schmidt’s World
BERLIN – Germany lost one of its giants this week when former Chancellor Helmut Schmidt died at the great age of 96.
Schmidt was the country’s defense minister from 1969 to 1972, finance minister from 1972 to 1974, and federal chancellor from 1974 to 1982.
Our own day and age may seem particularly tumultuous; but the years when Schmidt governed Germany were anything but quiet.
His was the age of Ostpolitik and détente, of the first global oil crisis, of economic recession, stagflation, and the return to Europe of mass unemployment.
His generation confronted the scourge of domestic terrorism and witnessed revolution in Iran, the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, and the rise of Solidarity in Poland.
Schmidt is remembered as a hands-on pragmatist, but above all as an accomplished crisis manager.
He proved his judgment and his leadership abilities early on, when, as a city senator in Hamburg, he confronted the great flood of 1962, which devastated the city.
Schmidt reinforced his image as a pragmatist by consistently voicing his deep skepticism of grand designs and long-term visions, albeit without ever renouncing his fundamental belief that there was a moral basis for his political objectives.
So it should be no surprise that Karl Popper, with his pragmatic yet value-based approach, was his favorite philosopher.
But there was always more to Schmidt’s outlook on the world: As a son of Germany’s largest port city, he was a committed internationalist, genuinely interested in what lay beyond our borders.
As a student of Popper, and carrying the memories and scars of the catastrophe of the Nazi years, he was acutely aware throughout his life of both the strengths and the vulnerabilities of our open societies.
Schmidt understood that a practical politician had to deal with events as they unfolded, managing them as astutely as possible.
But he understood instinctively that daily events were shaped by powerful trends and forces: the strategic competition between East and West, the evolving international financial system in the age of global interdependence, and the consequences of decolonization.
He was one of the first in Germany to notice the rise of China and reckon with the implications of Asia’s return to a leading role on the world stage.
For Schmidt, thorough analysis was a necessary prerequisite for all political action.
He particularly abhorred an emotional approach to foreign policy.
He didn’t suffer fools gladly.
And, invariably, he acted on his convictions.
Together with French President Valéry Giscard d’Estaing, he pushed for the establishment of the Group of Seven to coordinate international economic policies, and played a leadership role at the G-7’s first summit, in Rambouillet in 1975.
That same year he sat next to East Germany’s leader Erich Honecker in Helsinki while signing the “Final Act” of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe – a major breakthrough for détente policy and in opening the closed societies of the USSR and Warsaw Pact.
Schmidt’s relationship with US President Jimmy Carter was difficult, as many people have chronicled.
Yet Schmidt was always a strong advocate of a close transatlantic partnership, which he saw as indispensable for Germany’s security and foreign policy.
In fact, his initiative to counter the Soviet deployment of SS-20 intermediate-range nuclear missiles, a plan he set out in a major speech in 1977, was motivated above all by concerns about a potential decoupling of Europe and its US ally.
Schmidt’s principled commitment to the so-called NATO Double-Track Decision in 1979, whereby intermediate-range nuclear missiles were eventually to be eliminated from Europe, came to the chagrin of many in his own party.
But it was informed by his careful and sober reading of the evolving strategic landscape.
Finally, Schmidt was a true European.
He had lived through the cataclysm that extreme nationalism had wrought in Germany.
He remained skeptical about notions of irreversible progress.
Change for the better could emerge only from practical initiatives, not from Sunday speeches.
Thus, European integration had to be created by real policies and institutions, not by decree.
So he and Giscard created the European Council (composed of the heads of Europe’s governments), which is now a major player in the European Union’s institutional set-up.
They pushed forward the idea of monetary integration, which came to fruition a generation later.
They embodied the Franco-German commitment to a unified, peaceful Europe, able to pull its weight globally only if and when it acts in unity and with a sense of purpose.
Schmidt remained a mentor to the German people for decades after leaving active politics.
International crises, global order, and the future of Europe remained his fundamental preoccupations, and he saw a role and a responsibility for his own country in addressing and shaping all three of them.
His thinking had a strong normative foundation, but his keen understanding of the world led him to approach foreign policy with a sense of humility and strategic patience.
It is this rare combination of morality and perseverance that is his legacy as a foreign policy thinker and practitioner.
We would do well to keep his priorities and his principles uppermost in our minds, now that he is no longer here to remind us of their necessity.
Remembering Robert McNamara
NEW YORK – I first met Robert McNamara, the US Secretary of Defense who presided over the American buildup in Vietnam, in the summer of 1967.
I had just returned from a trip to South Vietnam, where, as a reporter for The New Yorker, I witnessed the destruction, by American air power, of two provinces, Quang Ngai and Quang Tinh.
America’s policies were clear.
Leaflets dropped on villages announced, “The Vietcong hide among innocent women and children in your villages….If the Vietcong in this area use you or your village for this purpose, you can expect death from the sky.”
Death from the sky came.
Afterward, more leaflets were dropped, informing villagers, “Your village was bombed because you harbored Vietcong….Your village will be bombed again if you harbor the Vietcong in any way.”
In Quang Ngai province, some 70% of villages were destroyed.
I was 23 years old at the time, and had no notion of what a war crime was; but later it became clear that that was what I was witnessing.
(Five months later, in March of 1968, American troops committed the massacre at My Lai.)
The familiar figure with the glinting, rimless glasses and the rigid hair forced back, as if it were spun glass, greeted me at the door of his seemingly tennis court-size office.
I felt a prodigious, restless energy that I suspected he could not turn off if he wanted to.  Soon after I began to recount my observations, he took me to a map of Vietnam and asked me to locate the areas of destruction.
I felt that the request was a test – one that I was prepared to take, as I had carried maps with me in the forward air-control planes.
He seemed deeply engaged, but made no comment, asking me only if I had anything in writing.
I said that I did, but that it was in longhand.
He suggested that I produce a typed copy, and provided me with the office of a general who was away.
What he did not know was that the article was book-length.
It took three days to dictate it into the general’s Dictaphone.
I handed the finished project to McNamara, who thanked me, but said nothing further about the matter, either then or at any time thereafter.
Fifteen years later, in 1982, when Neil Sheehan was researching his book about the war, A Bright and Shining Lie, he came across documents concerning my Pentagon-assisted manuscript.
They showed that McNamara had sent the manuscript to the American Ambassador in South Vietnam, Ellsworth Bunker, who requested a certain Bob Kelly to write an overall report, with a view to discrediting my reporting, and arranged to get The Atlantic magazine (where Bunker mistakenly thought my article was scheduled to appear) to “withhold publication.”
A memo recommending these steps was circulated to McNamara, Under Secretary of State Nicholas Katzenbach, and Assistant Secretary of State William Bundy.
The “action” officer was Secretary of State Dean Rusk.
The forward air-control pilots, were re-interviewed, and affidavits were taken.
Two civilian pilots were dispatched to fly over the province and check my calculations of the damage.
Plans were considered to publicly rebut my findings.
But the resulting report inconveniently found that “Mr. Schell’s estimates are substantially correct.”
Perhaps frustrated by his failure to find factual errors in my reporting, the author of the report offered some editorial comments that epitomized the flawed thinking on which the war rested.
I had been unaware, he thought, of some extenuating factors for the destruction I witnessed.
I had not known, he thought, that “The population is totally hostile…” Indeed, in the eyes of the Viet Cong, “the Viet Cong are the people.”
Thus, the main reason for not fighting the war in the first place, namely the perfectly obvious hatred of the majority of the population for the American invasion and occupation, became a justification for the war.
When I next spoke at length with McNamara, in 1998, it was not about Vietnam but about nuclear arms, on which we agreed as much as we had disagreed about Vietnam.
We both believed that the only sensible thing to do with the bomb was to get rid of it.
McNamara’s turnabout on this issue was dramatic.
More than any other government official, he was responsible for institutionalizing the key strategic doctrine of the nuclear age, deterrence, otherwise known as mutual assured destruction.
Now he wanted to dispense with it.
But, in fact, by then we were closer on Vietnam as well, for he had, after two decades of silence regarding the war, published his book In Retrospect , in which he repudiated his former justifications for the war, famously writing of the Kennedy and Johnson administrations, “We were wrong, terribly wrong.”
Many of McNamara’s critics assert – rightly, I think – that he stopped short of full understanding, that he sought to hold fast to claims of noble intentions that the record could not sustain.
How noble are intentions when the facts showing their horrific results are readily at hand yet overlooked?
Should McNamara have been more forthcoming in his regrets?
He should.
Should he have expressed them earlier?
Certainly.
Should he never have recommended the war, or presided over it in the first place, and should there never been an American war in Vietnam?
Oh lord, yes.
The twentieth century left heaps of corpses in its wake, and now they are piling up again.
And yet, how many public figures of McNamara’s importance have ever expressed any regret for their mistakes and follies and crimes?
I can name only one: Robert McNamara.
In the unlikely event that a statue of him is ever unveiled, let it show him weeping.
That was the best of him.
Remembering the First \
In June, NATO's leaders commemorated the 60th anniversary of D-Day, the allied invasion of Nazi-occupied France.
This August, they passed up the opportunity to mark the 90th anniversary of the start of World War I, which led to calamities that echoed until the twentieth century's end.
But the lessons of the Great War are no less important today, particularly for the United States.
The causes of World War I have long baffled the public and historians.
Europe was at the peak of its economic power relative to the rest of the world.
Peace among the major European countries had reigned more or less continuously for decades.
A technology boom was revolutionizing, indeed globalizing, the world economy.
For increasingly rich Europeans, the summer of 1914 seemed a peaceful, lazy time.
It turned out to be their last real peace for decades.
That July, terrorists in Bosnia assassinated Archduke Franz Ferdinand of the Habsburg Empire.
Austria responded by invading Serbia, Bosnia's neighbor and an "upstart" Slavic power.
Russia mobilized to support Serbia, while Germany launched a "pre-emptive" war against France and Russia, invading France via Belgium.
Great Britain came to the defense of Belgium and France.
By September's end, a general conflagration was underway.
But why did the pieces of the puzzle fall into place as they did?
Was it bad luck, miscalculation, or bureaucratic error?
It turns out that the German Army Chief of Staff Helmuth von Moltke was eager for war in the summer of 1914.
As historian David Fromkin shows in his recent book Europe's Last Summer , von Moltke feared that Russia was gaining too much industrial strength, and that in a few years Russia could withstand a war with Germany.
Moltke wanted to invade and defeat Russia before it was "too late" for Germany to triumph.
The Archduke's assassination provided a perfect pretext.
The Germans encouraged their ally Austria to respond by invading Serbia, under the clear expectation that this would trigger war, but in a way that Germany would not be blamed.
Fromkin shows that the assassination of Ferdinand merely provided Germany an excuse to fight a European War while it still had, according to its calculations, a chance of winning.
Every calculation proved to be disastrously wrong.
Imperial Germany was not threatened by Russian industrial dominance in the way von Moltke feared, and its military calculations also failed.
Germany did not knock out France and then conquer Russia.
Instead, the war ground to a bloody stalemate.
Eventually, Czarist Russia collapsed, opening the way to the Bolshevik Revolution.
Germany's launch of WWI ninety years ago this month had a more devastating effect on the world economy than any single event in human history.
The war bled Europe of a generation of youth, and set the stage for a second war a generation later.
It opened the way for 75 years of Soviet communism, and set in motion the financial instability that led to the Great Depression as well as the collapse of the international trading system.
All of this matters now because last year America launched a war in which a terrorist attack was also an excuse, not the real cause.
The Bush administration wanted to fight Saddam Hussein well before the terrorist attacks on the US of September 11, 2001, but it could not have gained public support.
Just as Fromkin shows with regard to Germany in 1914, the Bush administration manipulated US public opinion to support the Iraq War as a war on terror, even though Iraq had nothing to do with any terrorist attack against the US.
The world was never fooled by the Bush administration's case, but most Americans were fooled, at least for a while.
We know from a long trail of documents, memoirs, and interviews that the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001 were a pretext.
Richard Cheney, Donald Rumsfeld, and Paul Wolfowitz wanted war with Saddam all through the 1990's, and urged "regime change" as a policy for President Clinton, who wisely rejected such irresponsible advice.
Their eagerness for war had several causes.
They wanted to seize control of Iraq's oil.
They wanted a new "home base" in the Middle East if Saudi Arabia soured.
They wanted to protect Israel from Saddam.
They also had exaggerated fears about American weaknesses, just as von Moltke had exaggerated fears about German weaknesses vis-à-vis Russia.
As we know from WWI, wars founded on lies are likely to produce a series of disastrous unforeseen consequences.
The ricochet effects of the Iraq War have combined to yield a mounting threat to stability and security.
Perhaps the aggressive actions of the US and a resulting backlash in the Islamic world will contribute to nuclear proliferation in Iran, or to nuclear Pakistan someday falling into the hands of extremists.
World leaders should still gather to commemorate WWI, in the hope that they might learn enough to avoid repeating its disaster in our time.
The Iraq War is not WWI.
We still have time to avoid further devastating mistakes, but only if we are honest about motives, means, and ends - and only if we are honest in the pursuit of peace.
Remembering the Gulag
"There is nothing more inconspicuous than a monument," said the Austrian writer Robert Musil a hundred years ago.
From the ruins of another empire, Russia's, I would add: There is nothing more conspicuous than an absent monument.
Monuments compose the body of a nation on display.
By looking at monuments, we feel how a nation-state affirms its continuity.
When revolutions disrupt this continuity, they wreak violence against monuments.
As the example of Saddam Hussein teaches us anew, to overturn a monument is easier than to try a dictator.
Post-revolutionary periods, however, allow for more variety. Sometimes, new monuments are erected.
Sometimes, old monuments return to their original spots. Sometimes, monuments are in absentia, like professors on sabbatical.
While Holocaust deniers have been purged from German universities, Russian universities employ a number of professors of Russian history who conspicuously maintain the Gulag's absence from their lectures.
Though terror in Nazi Germany and Communist Russia created many millions of victims, the memories of these events are vastly different.
The most arresting but unrecognized of all post-Soviet monuments to the Gulag is the 500 ruble banknote, issued in the late 1990's and widely used today.
Seemingly a testament to the nation's proud history, this banknote carries a hidden message.
It depicts the Solovki monastery, a historical complex on an island in the White Sea, which also served as the earliest and one of the most important camps in the Gulag.
Local historians at Solovki believe that the atypical cupolas illustrated on the note date the picture to the end of the 1920's, the time of the camp's peak development.
The design raises some challenging questions.
Is this one of those monuments that has been erected not by artists but by critics, who produce meaning not through creation but through interpretation?
Were officials of the Ministry of Finance being deliberately subversive?
Or is the choice of picture on the banknote a symptom of psychological trauma, an unconscious but realistic manifestation of the work of mourning?
The work of mourning, to use Freud's formula, is continuous.
But symmetrical evil does not mean symmetrical memorialization.
There are plenty of memorials on the sites of German concentration camps, and new ones are continually added.
In Russia, only two Gulag sites, in Solovki and in Perm, have small museums that show conditions in the camps, the techniques of torture and murder, the documents, and the portraits.
In some cases, monuments are erected not on the former murder sites, as in Germany, but near them.
This pattern represents not the old regime's eradication, but its coexistence with the new one.
Even such proximate memory is far from being the rule in Russia.
There is not a single plaque commemorating the Leningrad KGB's victims near the site of their suffering.
Such a monument is also notably absent from the vicinity of the Kremlin.
The museum on Solovki Island fills just a few rooms inside the functioning monastery.
Although about one million people were incarcerated there, there is only one heartbreaking plaque on a shed, which reads, "The children's barrack of the Solovki Camp."
Some local museums display fascinating objects.
In the Kargopol museum, for example, stands a clay pitcher, presented to the museum by the descendants of a guard who appropriated a prisoner's parcel - a pitcher full of honey.
In such exhibits, however, it is impossible to find answers to the most obvious questions: How many prisoners passed through this camp?
How many died here, and when?
Who were the administrators, guards, and executioners?
Close to the Belomorkanal, one of the Gulag's major construction sites, a large mass grave was uncovered at Sandarmokh.
The site is a pine forest near an old highway, distinguished by the small, regular depressions in the earth that are characteristic of such graves.
The Memorial Society meticulously compared their archeological findings with the "shooting protocols" kept in the KGB's archives.
The protocols never mention names, but they give the number of those who were shot on a specific date, classified by gender, e.g. 20 men, seven women.
By matching the number of skeletons and their gender, every "shooting protocol" was identified with a certain grave.
About 9,000 people were shot at Sandarmokh between 1937-1938.
Today, a wooden pole marks each mass grave.
Designed as a local symbol of mourning, these poles, with their sharply angled roofs, remind viewers either of a peasant cross or a human figure with hands raised in prayer.
Sandarmokh is the most important, and best developed, Russian site of memory. Unfortunately, it is unknown even to neighbors as close as the Scandinavians.
Two better-known memorials in Moscow and St. Petersburg consist of granite stones taken from Solovki.
In St. Petersburg, the stone is complemented with inscriptions, such as "To the victims of Communism."
(This plaque has been vandalized many times, the last with a graffito in red oil paint, "Too few were shot.")
Here we have memory converted to drama.
But Russian memory is also subject to Western-style postmodernist mockery.
A recent fashion in St. Petersburg are restaurants with names such as "Lenin's Mating Call," "USSR," and "Russian Kitsch," which has frescos showing collective farmers socializing with American Indians while Leonid Brezhnev, resembling Frank Sinatra, gives a speech to a stone-age tribe.
Far more than Nazism, Communism belongs to our common European heritage.
The memory of its victims is not only a national, but also a European responsibility.
As generations pass, monuments evolve from a medium of mourning to instruments of education.
The work of memory is hard, expensive, and fragile.
Monuments move back and forth. Capitals may be renamed.
Banknotes expire. Everything may be mocked and change meaning.
Even mummies are mobile.
In 1961, the mummy of Stalin was observed striding out of the Mausoleum in Red Square.
Lenin's corpse remains there, but his departure is expected.
This should be a European event.
Remembering the Importance of Forgetting
SINGAPORE – “Be careful what you post on Facebook,” US President Barack Obama warned American high school students this past September.
“Whatever you do, it will be pulled up again later somewhere in your life.”
In fact, we all are coming to learn that lesson the hard way: digital information almost never goes away, even if we wish that it would.
The result is the permanency of the past in the present.
This fact is one of the biggest challenges that society will face as computers and the Internet become more a part of everyday life.
For millennia, remembering information was costly and time-consuming, and to forget was a natural part of being human.
In the digital age, the opposite is true: cheap computer storage, powerful processors, and ubiquitous Internet access have made remembering the norm.
Consider this: we tend to retain our rough drafts, years of e-mail traffic, and thousands of ghastly digital snapshots on our hard drives, not because we have decided that they are worth remembering, but because keeping them is now the default way of doing things.
By contrast, deciding what to delete is costly.
It actually requires much more time and effort to shed data than to keep it.
So we click “save” just in case.
But it is worth remembering that there is a lot of value in forgetting.
Forgetting permits us to transcend details and generalize, to see the forest and not just the trees.
As some information lapses over time, the world becomes more comprehensible because we become free to focus on what is important.
Forgetting also enables us to forgive others.
Fading memories of past experiences allow new memories to bloom, much as decaying leaves allow for new growth.
Forgetting thus affords us a second chance, individually and as a society, to rise above our past mistakes and misdeeds, to accept that humans change over time.
But, with digital memory, that natural process is halted.
Instead, the past is always present, ready to be called up with a few clicks on a keyboard or mobile phone.
Indeed, we are increasingly confronted with outdated information taken out of context, from anachronistic news stories to emotional e-mails and compromising pictures that we had long ago forgotten.
For example, more and more employers are researching job applicants through Google and social-networking Web sites.
There are already many cases of people being denied jobs or promotions because of what is unearthed.
But these are reflections of a person’s past; they rarely provide accurate information about the present.
Obama’s admonishment reminds us to be more discriminating about what information we share online.
His advice is essentially to practice a form of digital abstinence.
It is an understandable, pragmatic suggestion – but not necessarily a good one.
We have much to gain individually and as a society from sharing information with each other.
Too much self-censoring of what we do online would deny us the benefits of the Internet.
A better approach would be to ensure that digital information, like its offline variants of yesteryear, can disappear over time.
First, we could give digital files “expiration dates,” so that our digital systems would delete the file when the appropriate time comes.
Second, we could opt to expose our information to a form of digital “rusting,” so that it slowly erodes (and we would need to take proactive steps should we ever wish to recover some of it).
Third, we could separate past information, so that it takes a special effort or additional time to retrieve it, thereby reducing the chances that we accidentally stumble upon it.
The more we steam headlong into the future, the more we amalgamate the data and detritus of the past and place it irrevocably into the present.
Yet it is not just how information is stored and retrieved that needs to change, but how we think about information as well.
The onus is on us as much as it is on the computer.
Harnessing the Remittance Boom
ROME – For more than a decade, Asia’s economies have been on the move – and so have its people.
The scale of migration from rural to urban areas and across international borders is historically unprecedented, and twenty-first-century Asia is its focal point.
In Asia’s developing countries, the power and potential of remittances – the money that migrant workers send home to their families (many of whom live in poor and remote areas) – is immense.
Currently, over 60 million migrant workers from the Asia/Pacific region account for more than half of all remittance flows to developing countries, sending home about $260 billion in 2012.
China, India, and the Philippines are the three largest recipients of remittances, while Bangladesh, Indonesia, Pakistan, and Vietnam are also in the top ten.
The money is often a lifeline: it is estimated that 10% of Asian families depend on payments from abroad to obtain their food, clothing, and shelter.
But, while remittances to developing countries are five times higher than official development assistance, the enormous potential returns for society have not been realized – and can be secured only if the flow of money can be channeled into effective rural and agricultural development, particularly in fragile states and post-conflict countries.
Doing so would contribute significantly to creating jobs, enhancing food security, and fostering stability in countries emerging from strife.
In order to establish such channels, we must scale up key initiatives, identify new opportunities, and map out the road ahead.
The fourth Global Forum on Remittances, which runs May 20-23 in Bangkok, will do just that.
Convened by the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) and the World Bank, the forum will bring together policymakers, private-sector players, and civil-society leaders to chart a course for leveraging the development impact of remittances sent home each year in Asia and around the world.
At IFAD, our starting point is always the three billion people who live in the rural areas of developing countries.
We work to create conditions in which poor rural women and men can grow and sell more food, increase their incomes, and determine the direction of their own lives.
We believe that diasporas and the global donor community can leverage the flow of migrant investment if they form partnerships with national governments for long-term development of the rural communities that are so often the beginning of the migration chain.
More than 215 million people around the world live outside of the countries they call home.
But most families that rely on remittances operate outside of the world’s financial system as well.
Despite the global prevalence of electronic money transfers, most migrant workers are excluded from the convenience of modern banking services, dependent on costly cash transfers that often require rural recipients to travel significant distances.
As a result, migrant workers are forced to initiate more than one billion separate transactions worldwide each year.
That means more than one billion trips for rural women and men to collect their money.
Adding up the cost of the transfer, travel, and time, remittances are far too expensive for people living in poverty.
IFAD has been working in more than 40 countries to ensure that rural families can have easy access to remittances, and are better able to use them as savings or investments that go back into their communities.
The amount of money at stake is staggering: It is estimated that over the next five years, more than $2.5 trillion will be sent in remittances to developing countries, with almost 40% – coming in the form of payments of $50, $100, or $500 at a time – destined for rural areas.
While the majority of family remittances will always be used to meet immediate needs, IFAD’s experience shows that rural families would seize opportunities to save and invest, even small amounts, if they had better options.
While remittances should and can be leveraged to bring about impressive results in poverty reduction, let us not forget that there is an underlying issue that needs to be addressed.
Young people, the leaders and farmers of tomorrow, are leaving their rural communities behind in search of better opportunities.
We need to turn rural areas into vibrant and economically stable communities that provide opportunities for young people to earn a living, build their capacities, and start a family.
We should not ignore the enormous development potential of remittances to rural areas.
Let us empower families to use their hard-earned money in ways that will help to make migration a matter of choice, not a necessity for the generations to come.
The Diaspora Goldmine
CAMBRIDGE – Many countries have substantial diasporas, but not many are proud of it.
After all, people tend not to leave a country when it is doing well, so the diaspora is often a reminder of a country’s darker moments.
El Salvador, Nicaragua, and Cuba, to cite three examples, had more than 10% of their native population living abroad in 2010.
And this figure does not take into account their descendants.
The bulk of this migration happened at a time of civil war or revolution.
In other places, massive outmigration occurred in the context of political change, as in Europe when communism collapsed.
The relationship between diasporas and their homelands often encompasses a broad palette of sentiments, including distrust, resentment, envy, and enmity.
Colloquially, people describe a bout of emigration as a period in which a country “lost” a certain proportion of its population.
But people who leave a country have not disappeared.
They are alive and socially active.
As a result, they may become an invaluable asset not only to their country of destination but also, and importantly, to their country of origin.
One important connection is remittances, which add up to some $500 billion a year worldwide.
The largest recipients are India, Mexico, and the Philippines.
For countries such as Armenia, El Salvador, Haiti, Honduras, Jamaica, Kyrgyzstan, Lesotho, Moldova, Nepal, and Tajikistan, expatriates remit the equivalent of more than one-sixth of national income – an amount that often exceeds exports.
And this money can do a lot of good, as the World Bank’s Dilip Ratha has highlighted.
But a diaspora’s potential economic importance goes well beyond remittances.
As the late historian Philip Curtin documented, from the beginning of urban life, millennia ago, trade typically involved networks of co-ethnic merchants living among aliens.
Greeks, Phoenicians, trans-Saharan traders, the Hanseatic League, Jews, Armenians, overseas Chinese, and the Dutch and British East India Companies organized much of world trade through such networks.
Although these alien traders were sometimes politically powerful in the host countries, they were often weak and faced discrimination.
The economist Avner Greif argues that these co-ethnic networks’ durability and resilience throughout history reflects their ability to enforce contracts at long distances when the existing institutional framework could not do so reliably.
They could establish trust between exporters and importers because they could punish opportunistic behaviors.
For a tight-knit community, reputational costs and other forms of social punishment transcend geography: not paying for goods might mean not being able to marry your children well.
Legal institutions have since evolved to facilitate impersonal trade.
Exporters and importers no longer need to know one another, because they can write a contract that a court will enforce.
And yet the impact of co-ethnic networks may well be as important as ever.
As Hillel Rapoport of the Paris School of Economics and his co-authors have shown, controlling for other determinants of trade, countries trade more with, and invest more in, the diasporas’ home countries.
In recent work with Dany Bahar, Rapoport has also shown that countries become good at making the products that their migrants’ home countries are good at making.
I interpret these results as the consequence of tacit knowledge or knowhow.
To do things, you need to know how, and this knowhow is mostly unconscious.
After all, most of us know how to ride a bicycle, but we are not really aware of what our brain does to achieve that feat, or how it develops that ability through practice.
This knowhow moves geographically in the brains of those who possess it and is transferred to others at work.
That is why ethnic cuisines diffuse through diasporas, not cookbooks.
And it may be why economies with more diverse sets of migrants perform better.
Also, return migration is often an important source of new skills for a country.
In ongoing work, Ljubica Nedelkoska of Harvard’s Center for International Development has found that the wages of Albanians who never left tend to increase when migrants return home.
Evidence of the importance of diasporas is everywhere, if you care to look.
Franschhoek (French corner in Afrikaans) is a beautiful valley near Cape Town settled by Huguenots in the late seventeenth century.
That is why, to this day, wines are made there.
Likewise, Joinville is a southern Brazilian city settled in the late nineteenth century by relatively uneducated Germans.
Because of the cultural links they and their descendants have maintained with the mother country for more than 120 years, the city excels at advanced manufacturing of products that had not been invented when the migrants came.
Morocco is full of French-language call centers that get their contracts through a cousin in Paris.
East Asian industrialization exploited the links created by the network of overseas Chinese.
India’s high-tech industries were to a large extent created by returning migrants and are deeply connected to the diaspora.
Israel is an entire country created by its diaspora, and its thriving high-tech sector, too, has benefited from sustained ties.
By contrast, many Latin American countries have substantial diasporas abroad, but few equivalent success stories.
A country’s diaspora, and the diasporas it hosts, can be a huge asset for its development.
Diasporas are not gusanos or worms, as Fidel Castro refers to Cubans abroad.
They are a channel through which not only money, but also much tacit knowledge, can flow, and they are a potential source of opportunities for trade, investment, innovation, and professional networks.
But a diaspora can work its economic magic only if the host country tolerates it and the home country appreciates it.
Governments should have a diaspora strategy that builds on natural feelings of identity and affection to cultivate this social network as a powerful source of economic progress.
Renewing Europe’s Security Dialogue
ATHENS – The year 2009 has been one of great change, taking place amidst even greater uncertainty.
Twenty years after the fall of the Berlin Wall, the resilience of the post-Cold War security system in Europe is being tested.
Longstanding conflicts remain unresolved and complex new challenges are emerging.
Energy security, organized crime, terrorism, absolutism and fundamentalism, climate change, and cybercrime are acute concerns for every country.
The economic crisis has left many people far less prosperous, and perhaps less inclined to be ambitious in our efforts to address Europe’s security challenges.
But we must also keep in mind that crisis brings with it opportunities for change.
This year has also seen a number of positive developments, including a “reset” in relations between two key players in the European security dialogue: Russia and the United States.
The European Union has recently taken important steps towards greater cohesion and unity with the appointment of a President and High Representative for Foreign Affairs.
We should celebrate these achievements even as we recognize that serious problems remain to be resolved.
There are different perspectives on how Europe’s security architecture should be designed, but we all agree on the urgent need to tackle this critical challenge through constructive dialogue.
It is in this spirit of cooperation and bridge-building that 56 foreign ministers – representing the US, Canada, and European countries, including the Russian Federation and the rest of the former Soviet Union – will meet in Athens on December 1-2 on my invitation to discuss the future of European security.
The talks mark the continuation of the “Corfu Process,” anchored in the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, which began with an informal ministerial meeting on Corfu in June.
People living in these areas need peace and stability, not a fragile
Security challenges in neighboring regions also require a joint response.
Afghanistan is a case in point.
And threats like terrorism, trafficking of arms, drugs, and people, and climate change are borderless and complex.
Only a joint response can be effective.
The fall of the Berlin Wall marked the end of an era of mistrust and division, and opened the way for cooperation aimed at a peaceful and stable Europe.
Europe has come a long way from those years of division, but we have not yet fully reaped the benefits promised by the wave of change of 1989.
The OSCE meeting in Athens comes at a critical time, when Europeans must move into the twenty-first century more united than ever before.
We must take this opportunity to restore the full capacity of the OSCE and make a fresh commitment to an indivisible European security system.
Renewing the News
NEW YORK – Last week, rumors from the world of print media were rife: a hundred reporters from The New York Times news desk to be bought out – or to lose their jobs if they refuse; steep cutbacks at British newspapers; staffs slashed at Condé Nast – eight respected editors axed at Glamour magazine.
I think we are witnessing something new being born.
There is a great deal to mourn about the passing of the older news model.
I had the honor of attending the premiere of The Most Dangerous Man in America , the new documentary about Daniel Ellsberg and his daring release of the Pentagon Papers – against the will of the US government – to The New York Times back in 1971.
At that time, newspapers held the public’s focus and could be a powerful gadfly.
If you were President Richard Nixon, there was no ignoring what appeared on the front page of The New York Times .
The blessings of the Internet are many, but one casualty of our segmentation into online subcultures is the loss of a common focal point.
It is easy for a president or prime minister to ignore a thousand Web sites; the multiplicity of outlets and voices online, paradoxically, has weakened the media’s power to force accountability from leaders.
But the passing of the old news model has also had a salutary effect.
People’s relationship to authority figures – doctors, politicians, religious leaders, or, indeed, journalists – is no longer slavishly deferential.
But this means that newspapers, in order to survive, will have to abandon their top-down tone, their “we decide what's important” sense of hierarchy, and create more collaborative kinds of documentation and feedback with citizens.
This does not mean merely permitting comments on an article that is published online; it means creating more opportunities for citizens to document, record, curate, and edit news from their own communities.
A new form could evolve from this changed power relationship between editors and citizens, potentially becoming as powerful as traditional journalism, if not more so.
First, online news outlets will have to link not just to sources, but to live footage, ideally shot by citizens.
I have created op-eds in partnership with a citizens’ video news collective, The Glass Bead collective.
There is a potent immediacy to documents that have hyperlinks to footage of veterans being trodden underfoot by mounted police at a demonstration at the US presidential debates, or students being gassed in their rooms during the recent G-20 summit.
As more citizens become documentarians, online newspapers will have to curate their work to reflect reality on a level of visual urgency that new readers take for granted.
Second, news outlets will have to be interactive: they should regularly teach citizens op-ed writing, for example, so that editors can receive a truly diverse set of submissions – well sourced, well written, and well argued – from people from all walks of life.
Finally, citizens should be able to continue to curate a news story.
On Facebook, of all places, I experienced the amazing potential of posting an item and then inviting my “community” to continue the research as well as the debate.
To be sure, I have been exposed to flimsy sources, and newspapers of the future should help readers learn what a good source is, and what good citizen journalism requires.
But I have also had many eye-opening experiences as people from around the world and from every background deepen my understanding and sourcing about issues as far-ranging as military law, religious practices, and swine flu.
With every shift in medium, there is a period of mourning for the old one.
I don’t pretend to possess journalism’s Holy Grail: a sustainable business plan for the newspaper of the future.
But I do know that that goal is far more likely to be achieved if newspapers take their readers seriously and train them as documentarians of their own communities and of their own moments.
If newspaper publishers continue merely to rearrange the deck chairs, their elegant, elitist – and currently sinking – ship will deserve its fate.
America’s Pacific Rebalance
WASHINGTON, DC – The United States military has entered a period of historic change after more than a decade of war following the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001.
We ended the war in Iraq; we are implementing an effective transition and drawdown in Afghanistan; and we have seriously weakened Al Qaeda’s leadership in the fight against terrorism.
As a result of these efforts and the reality of budget constraints, the US has developed a new defense strategy for the twenty-first century, one that emphasizes agility, technology, and force projection.
We have begun to focus on the challenges and opportunities of the future, and it is clear that many of them lie in Asia.
After all, the global center of gravity is steadily shifting toward the Asia-Pacific, tying America’s future prosperity and security ever more closely to this fast-growing region.
At the same time, increasing military spending, challenges to maritime security, non-traditional threats ranging from piracy to terrorism, and the destruction wrought by natural disasters are making the region’s security environment more complex.
For these reasons, the US Department of Defense is implementing a “rebalance” of America’s strategic focus and posture to the Asia-Pacific.
The vast majority of America’s rebalance comes in non-military areas like trade and development.
This is part of a broad effort directed by President Barack Obama to deepen our diplomatic, development, economic, security, and cultural engagement across the region.
For the Department of Defense, the rebalance is about helping to ensure that the US and all countries in the region continue to benefit from a secure and prosperous Asia-Pacific – as we have for nearly 70 years.
That mission has led me to travel to Asia four times since becoming Secretary of Defense in July 2011.
It has led us to devote more resources and effort to building our partners’ capabilities and improving interoperability between the US military and forces in the region.
We are also working to identify opportunities to deepen our cooperation in information security, intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance, and other high-tech frontiers – from cyberspace to outer space.
For example, we are developing a new bilateral plan for the US-Japanese alliance’s future roles, missions, and capabilities, and reached an agreement to position an additional missile-defense radar to protect against the North Korean threat.
On my recent visit to Australia, we signed an agreement to relocate a space surveillance radar to Western Australia.
And, in South Korea, our Strategic Alliance 2015 agreement charts a course for the future across a range of fronts, including cooperation in space and cyberspace, intelligence and information sharing, and command arrangements.
Moreover, America is focused like never before on working with our allies and partners in South and Southeast Asia.
With India, we have developed an unprecedented bilateral initiative that will streamline our export processes and deepen our defense trade and co-production.
We are also pursuing new areas of cooperation in defense exercises, such as submarine salvage and rescue, reflecting this key partnership’s growing dynamism.
In Southeast Asia, we are expanding our engagement with the Association of Southeast Asia Nations (ASEAN), increasing bilateral engagement with traditional allies and partners like Thailand, the Philippines, and Singapore, and developing our cooperative partnerships with Vietnam, Malaysia, and Indonesia.
One of the most important ways to enhance alliances and partnerships is through joint training and exercises.
During 2012, the US increased both the size and the number of bilateral and multilateral exercises across the Asia-Pacific region.
For example, the Rim of the Pacific (RIMPAC) exercise was the largest ever, including more than 42 ships and 25,000 personnel from 22 countries, while the US and China staged their first-ever maritime counter-piracy exercise near the Horn of Africa.
In 2013, we will engage for the first time in multilateral military exercises led by ASEAN, while China has been invited to send ships to RIMPAC 2014. &#160;
In support of this increased engagement – aimed not at establishing new permanent bases, but rather at building stronger allies and partners through a greater rotational presence – the third pillar of America’s rebalancing is to enhance our presence across the Pacific and Indian Oceans.&#160;
In Northeast Asia, where the US military has traditionally maintained a strong presence, we are modernizing our posture.
This year, we deployed F-22s and MV-22 Ospreys to Japan and reached an important agreement to relocate our forces on Okinawa.
We continue to develop Guam as a strategic hub, and plan to establish fully capable Marine Air-Ground Task Forces in Japan, Guam, and Hawaii.
Meanwhile, we are retaining and upgrading US Army capabilities in Korea.
The US military is also rebalancing within the Asia-Pacific region to place more emphasis on new partnerships in Southeast Asia and the Indian Ocean.
Last spring, 200 US Marines arrived in Darwin, Australia, for the first six-month rotation to serve and train alongside Australian troops and operate with regional partners.
We also increased the number and frequency of US Air Force aircraft rotating through Northern Australia.
Finally, we agreed with Singapore to deploy up to four Littoral Combat Ships there on a rotational basis to join it and other countries in the region for exercises, training, and responses to challenges.
The final pillar of the US rebalance is force projection.
We plan to have 60% of our naval fleet based in the Pacific by 2020, and America’s defense budget has preserved, and even boosted, investment in new and more capable assets needed in the Pacific theater.
Our spending plan prioritizes the development and fielding of the newest, most capable technology, including Virginia-class submarines, fifth-generation F-22 and F-35 fighters, P-8 maritime patrol aircraft, new electronic warfare and communications capabilities, and improved precision weapons and cruise missiles.
These are some of the capabilities that will maintain our forces’ ability to project power should our access and freedom of action be challenged.
These four pillars reflect the Department of Defense’s comprehensive approach to contributing to a peaceful and prosperous Asia-Pacific region in the twenty-first century.
This rebalance is a long-term strategy, and in 2012 we laid a foundation for its long-term success.&#160;
Nevertheless, questions and misperceptions remain.
Some have concluded that the rebalance is directed at China. It is not.
A key component of the rebalance is a healthy, stable, and continuous military-to-military relationship with China, based on sustained and substantive dialogue that enhances our ability to work together and to avoid any kind of miscalculation.
I had a successful visit to China in September, and I am clear-eyed but optimistic about the future of this important military-to-military relationship.
As the US seeks stronger defense ties with China and countries throughout the region, we expect and welcome other countries’ efforts to build ties with China and the US alike.
Some argue that instability and turmoil in the Middle East will prevent us from implementing the rebalance.
Our new defense strategy and budget makes clear that it will not.
The US military is a global force that can walk and chew gum at the same time.
Even as we rebalance toward the Asia-Pacific region, we will retain a significant presence in the Middle East to deter aggression and promote stability.
Finally, some question whether, given America’s fiscal constraints, the US military can make the investments necessary to implement the rebalance.
To be sure, the US is facing a new fiscal reality, and the defense budget must be reduced by $487 billion over the next decade.
But budgets are about priorities, and we have clearly made the Asia-Pacific region a priority.
We have a detailed plan for the rebalance in our budget, and we have made decisions that will make our military more cost-effective, efficient, and productive.
America is and always will be a Pacific nation.
The US has fought and spilled precious blood to give the nations in the Asia-Pacific the opportunity to achieve prosperity and security.
We remain committed to improving the lives of all of those who are part of the Pacific family of nations.
The purpose of the rebalance is to fulfill that commitment to the dream of a better and more secure twenty-first century.
Steady on the Renminbi
NEW HAVEN – Currency wars are raging worldwide, and China is bearing the brunt of them.
The renminbi has appreciated sharply over the past several years, exports are sagging, and the risk of deflation is growing.
Under these circumstances, many suggest that a reversal in Chinese currency policy to weaken the renminbi is the most logical course.
That would be a serious mistake.
In fact, as China pursues structural reforms aimed at ensuring its continued development, forced depreciation is about the last thing it needs.
It would also be highly problematic for the global economy.
On the surface, the situation certainly appears worrisome – especially when viewed through the currency lens, which captures shifts in Chinese prices relative to those in the rest of the world.
According to the Bank for International Settlements (BIS), China's real effective exchange rate – an inflation-adjusted trade-weighted average of the renminbi's value relative to the currencies of a cross-section of China's trading partners – has increased by 26% over the last four years.
China's currency has appreciated more than any of the other 60 countries that the BIS covers (apart from dysfunctional Venezuela, where the figures are distorted by multiple foreign-exchange regimes).
By comparison, the allegedly strong US dollar is up just 12% in real terms over the same period.
Meanwhile, China's emerging-market counterparts have experienced sharp currency depreciations, with the Brazilian real falling by 16%, the Russia ruble by 32%, and the Indian rupee by 12%.
This currency shift is, of course, the functional equivalent of a large hike in the price of Chinese exports.
Add to that continued sluggishness in global demand, and the once-powerful Chinese export machine is suffering, with total exports down by 3% year on year in January.
For an economy in which exports account for about 25% of GDP, that is not a trivial development.
At the same time, a stronger renminbi has made imports less expensive, putting downward pressure on China's price structure.
Unsurprisingly, this has exacerbated the fear of deflation, with the consumer price index (CPI) rising by just 0.8% year on year in January, and the annual decline in producer prices steepening, to 4.3%.
While these trends are undoubtedly being amplified by plummeting world oil prices, China's core CPI inflation rate (which excludes volatile food and energy prices) was near 1% in January.
Against this background, it is easy to see why many anticipate a tactical adjustment in China's currency policy, from appreciation to depreciation.
Such a move would certainly seem appealing as a way to provide temporary relief from downward pressure on growth and prices.
But there are three reasons why such a move could backfire.
First and foremost, a shift in currency policy would undermine – indeed, undo – the progress that China has made on the road to reform and rebalancing.
In fact, a stronger renminbi is consistent with China's key objective of shifting from export-intensive growth to consumer-led development.
The generally steady appreciation of the renminbi – which has risen by 32.6% against the US dollar since mid-2005 – is consistent with this objective and should not be reversed.
It strengthens Chinese consumers' purchasing power and reduces any currency-related subsidy to exports.
During the recent financial crisis, the authorities temporarily suspended China's renminbi-appreciation policy, and the exchange rate was held steady from mid-2008 through early 2010.
Given that current circumstances are far less threatening than those in the depths of the Great Crisis, the need for another tactical adjustment in currency policy is far less acute.
Second, a shift to currency depreciation could inflame anti-China sentiment among the country's major trading partners – especially the United States, where Congress has flirted for years with the prospect of imposing trade sanctions on Chinese exporters.
A bipartisan coalition in the House of Representatives recently introduced the so-called Currency Reform for Fair Trade Act, which would treat currency undervaluation as a subsidy, allowing US companies to seek higher countervailing duties on imports.
Similarly, President Barack Obama's administration has just brought yet another action against China in the World Trade Organization – this time focusing on illegal subsidies that China provided to exporters through so-called “common service platforms" and “demonstration bases."
If China intervenes to push its currency lower, US political support for anti-China trade actions will undoubtedly intensify, pushing the world's two largest economies closer to the slippery slope of protectionism.
Finally, a renminbi-depreciation policy would lead to a sharp escalation in the global currency war.
In an era of unprecedented quantitative easing, competitive currency devaluation has become the norm for the world's major exporters – first the US, then Japan, and now Europe.
If China joined this race to the bottom, others would be tempted to escalate their actions and world financial markets would be subject to yet another source of serious instability.
Just as China resisted the temptation of renminbi depreciation during the Asian financial crisis of 1997-98 – a decision that may have played a pivotal role in arresting regional contagion – it must stay the course today.
That is all the more important in a disorderly climate of QE, where China's role as a currency anchor may take on even greater importance than it did in the late 1990s.
Strategy is China's greatest strength.
Time and again, Chinese officials have successfully coped with unexpected developments, without losing sight of their long-term strategic objectives.
They should work to uphold that record, using the strong renminbi as an incentive to redouble efforts at reform and rebalancing, rather than as an excuse to backtrack.
This is no time for China to flinch.
The Irresistible Rise of the Renminbi
SEOUL – By the end of this year, the International Monetary Fund will decide whether the Chinese renminbi will join the euro, the Japanese yen, the British pound, and the US dollar in the basket of currencies that determines the value of its international reserve asset, the Special Drawing Right (SDR).
China is pushing hard for the renminbi’s inclusion.
Should it be admitted?
The IMF created the SDR in 1969 to supplement existing reserve currencies, thereby providing the global financial system with additional liquidity.
As it stands, the SDR’s role remains largely limited to IMF operations; its share in global financial markets and central banks’ international reserves is negligible.
Nonetheless, adding the renminbi to the SDR basket would be symbolically important, implying recognition of China’s growing global stature.
The renminbi is already a major currency for world trade and investment, and accounts for a growing share of international financial transactions and reserve holdings.
To qualify for inclusion, the Chinese government has eased its capital controls and liberalized its financial markets considerably.
Inclusion in the SDR basket would require continuing this process, which, together with the renminbi’s emergence as a globally investable currency, would benefit the entire world economy.
The IMF’s largest shareholders – the United States, Europe, and Japan – should thus welcome the renminbi’s addition to the SDR basket.
Yet opinions on the matter have been divided, with the US, in particular, reluctant to welcome China into the fold.
This is all the more problematic given that the 2008 financial crisis laid bare the international reserve system’s inadequacy when it comes to ensuring sufficient liquidity for emerging economies.
Although emerging economies have since accumulated larger foreign-exchange reserves and strengthened financial supervision and regulation, they remain vulnerable to external shocks, especially from the US, the eurozone, and Japan.
All three have lately employed expansionary monetary policies; and, as the US Federal Reserve normalizes its policy, emerging economies will be hit again by a sudden withdrawal of global liquidity.
This continued vulnerability reflects a collective failure to reform the global monetary system – an imperative that People’s Bank of China (PBOC) Governor Zhou Xiaochuan highlighted in early 2009.
Per Zhou’s proposal, China has championed a transition to a multi-currency reserve system, in which the SDR and an internationalized renminbi would be used more widely, including in countries’ currency reserves.
But its attempt in 2010 to add its currency to the SDR basket failed, because the renminbi was not “freely usable.”
Since then, China has implemented a series of reforms to increase the renminbi’s usage in foreign trade and direct investment, as well as in cross-border financial investment.
Fourteen renminbi-clearing banks have been established worldwide.
Last year, the Shanghai-Hong Kong Stock Connect was launched to stimulate cross-border investment and capital-market development.
And China has signed bilateral currency-swap agreements with 28 central banks, including the Central Bank of Brazil, the Bank of Canada, the European Central Bank, and the Bank of England.
This year, Chinese policymakers have signaled further financial liberalization by removing the domestic cap on banks’ deposit rates, thereby giving overseas institutional investors easier access to capital markets.
The PBOC is also likely to widen the currency’s trading band and move toward a more flexible exchange-rate regime.
As a result of these efforts, the renminbi has emerged as the second most used currency in trade finance, overtaking the euro, and the fifth most used for international payments.
Moreover, it is increasingly preferred in currency-market transactions and official foreign-exchange reserves.
Of course, China stands to gain much from the renminbi’s emergence as an alternative international reserve currency, sharing in the “exorbitant privilege” that the US currently enjoys by virtue of the dollar’s global status.
Beyond the convenience of conducting international transactions in local currency, China would be able to take advantage of seigniorage – safe in the knowledge that it would not face a balance-of-payments crisis.
But, in order to reach that point, China must confront significant risks.
Capital-account liberalization and renminbi internationalization invite potentially volatile cross-border capital flows, which could, for example, trigger rapid currency appreciation.
Given this, China can be expected to continue to manage capital-account transactions to some extent, using macroprudential measures and, when appropriate, direct capital controls.