But these steps must be taken in tandem, because firms and creditors will try to circumvent capital requirements if they see attractive alternative sources of funds – like rule-exempt repo financing.
There is another solution as well: repo users could be made to pay for their privileges and the costs that they impose on the rest of the economy.
They could be charged a few basis points per annum in government fees in order to align repos’ private price with their social cost.
Doing so could bring more market discipline to this part of the financial market without extensive regulation.
The collapse of Bear Stearns and Lehman Brothers exacerbated the US and global recession.&#160; MF Global’s failure stands as a warning that only three years later, and even after the major Dodd-Frank financial reforms, the US still has not fixed key problems that brought them down.
Reforming Russia’s Military Industrial Complex
Under President Vladimir Putin, Russia has launched a comprehensive program to restructure its defense industry, which has shrunk dramatically since the Soviet era.
This process has achieved some progress, but fundamental structural problems persist that lead Russia to export large quantities of advanced weapons to conflict-prone regions, placing the Kremlin at odds with Europe, the United States, and other countries.
Over the last six years, the Putin administration has encouraged the nationalization and consolidation of private-sector defense firms into large, vertically integrated, state-controlled holdings.
In November 2000, Putin approved the creation of a single government-supervised arms exporting agency, Rosoboronexport, to end the self-destructive competition that had developed between the country’s major weapons-exporting enterprises.
Earlier this year, the agency gained the exclusive right to sell Russian weapons to foreign countries.
At present, the government is promoting the creation of a similar institution in the aviation sector, the new United Aircraft Building Corporation (UABC), which includes major state and private manufacturers of fixed-wing aircraft.
Proponents of the merger believe it will improve the efficiency of the Russian aircraft industry and, by lowering costs, make Russian planes more attractive to foreign buyers.
Under Putin, Russian military spending has also rebounded.
This year, the Russian government will provide the Ministry of Defense almost 5 trillion rubles ($189 billion) under the 2007-2015 State Armaments Program. The percentage of the defense budget allocated to purchasing military equipment will rise from 44% in 2006 to 50% by 2011.
The primary purpose of this increased spending is to push new weapons systems from the research and development stage to actual procurement for Russia’s armed forces.
Over the course of 2007-2015, Russia’s army and navy will replace almost half (45%) of their military equipment.
In the past, poor government and industry practices frustrated similar plans to supply large numbers of advanced conventional weapons to Russia’s armed forces.
The country’s military-industrial sector suffers from limited domestic orders and extensive overcapacity.
Purchases for the Russian army and navy have been increasing, but still only sustain about one-fourth of Russia’s existing military production capacity.
The Russian government now spends more on new Russian-made conventional weapons than do foreign purchasers.
Yet, persistent inefficiencies in the Russian defense procurement system result in foreign buyers receiving more new systems than the Russian military.
As a result, Russia’s leading defense firms remain heavily dependent on foreign sales.
Although Russia’s arms exports have decreased considerably since the Soviet period, its revenue per transaction is now greater because Russian firms have yielded much of the lower-end market to less expensive suppliers like China, India, and other former Soviet bloc allies.
Moreover, where the USSR transferred much weaponry under easy commercial terms or without charge (e.g., under long-term loans not expected to be repaid), Russia now discounts arms only for its closest allies.
On March 27, 2007, the Defense Ministry announced that Russia’s annual arms exports increased by 50%, from $4 billion to $6.5 billion, from 2001 to 2006.
In an effort to both maximize foreign revenue and strengthen Russia’s own military potential, former Russian Defense Minister Sergei Ivanov, who now oversees Russia’s military-industrial complex and is one of the two leading candidates to succeed Putin as president, stressed the need for “the national defense industry to find a balance between a commitment to arm the Russian military and an opportunity to export arms to countries not subject to UN sanctions.”
Besides helping to sustain the health of Russia’s military industrial complex, many Russian officials think that arms sales will promote Russia’s diplomatic interests by strengthening ties with recipient states.
These transactions, however, have complicated Moscow’s relations with foreign governments, particularly the United States.
American officials complain that Russia’s self-imposed restrictions on arms sales are much weaker than those of Western countries, especially with regard to authoritarian governments accused of committing human rights violations or states seeking weapons of mass destruction.
Washington has protested against Russian military sales to Belarus, China, Iran, Syria, Uzbekistan, and Venezuela.
In early January 2007, the US government imposed economic sanctions on three Russian companies, including Rosoboronexport, for selling missiles and other prohibited military technologies to Iran and Syria.
Russian officials insist that their military exports conform to all applicable international laws and involve primarily defensive weaponry that will not disrupt regional power balances.
They add that the US and its allies also transfer large volumes of weapons to areas of conflict, including South Asia and the Middle East.
Given the condition of Russia’s military-industrial complex, considerations of national pride, geopolitical influence, and entrepreneurial profits will likely sustain Russian interest in selling weapons to almost any client no matter how distasteful to Western governments.
Reformasi Bidang Keamanan di Negara-negara Arab
WASHINGTON, DC – Pengalaman negara-negara Arab menunjukkan bahwa bicara mengenai reformasi sektor keamanan, pendekatan-pendekatan teknokratis saja tidak cukup.
Sederhananya, fokus teknokratis pada peningkatan keterampilan dan kemampuan operasional, di tengah lemahnya tata kelola atau tidak berfungsinya badan keamanan, dapat dengan mudah dikalahkan oleh koalisi anti-perubahan yang mengakibatkan pola perilaku regresif yang terus-menerus.
Hal ini ditemukan di kondisi politik dan sosial yang terpolarisasi – contoh paling nyata saat ini terlihat di Mesir, Irak, Libya, dan Yaman, belum lagi Bahrain dan Suriah.
Namun tetap saja, bahkan di negara-negara yang memiliki pluralisme politik dan tidak mengalami pergolakan sipil atau konflik bersenjata dalam negeri – seperti Lebanon dan Tunisia, mungkin juga Otoritas Palestina dan Aljazair – pendekatan bertahap hanya mampu mencapai keberhasilan yang parsial.
Pembentukan badan keamanan yang modern dan akuntabel memerlukan lebih dari sekedar sikap teknokratis.
Terlepas dari kerangka hukum formal, terdapat sejumlah hambatan dalam pemeriksaan efektif yang menghalangi diterapkannya pengawasan aliran dana dari dan untuk kepolisian dan badan keamanan dalam negeri.
Selain itu, lembaga-lembaga tersebut umumnya mampu menyerap pelatihan anti-korupsi secara formal walaupun tetap saja tidak mengubah perilaku mereka.
Agar reformasi sektor keamanan yang efektif dimungkinkan di dunia Arab, tabir kerahasiaan di dalam sektor ini harus diangkat.
Di antara negara-negara Arab, hanya Yaman yang menyusun UU Kebebasan Informasi setelah tahun 2011.
Sebaliknya, beberapa lembaga negara menolak usulan Badan Pemeriksa Nasional Mesir (Central Auditing Agency) mengenai rancangan peraturan yang memberikan hak bagi warga negara untuk mengakses informasi tentang korupsi yang terjadi di semua instansi pemerintah.
Permasalahannya, sesuai pendapat peneliti asal Mesir, Dina El-Khawaga, adalah mustahil “untuk melaksanakan reformasi di sektor yang secara struktural sudah korup.”
Yang diperlukan adalah pengawasan yang efektif dan menyeluruh pada pengadaan publik, transparansi yang luas mengenai penganggaran dan prosedur, dan pengawasan multi-lembaga yang solid di perbatasan negara untuk memberantas jaringan terlarang yang melibatkan sektor keamanan.
Negara-negara Arab seperti Yordania telah menunjukkan bahwa pemberantasan korupsi di sektor keamanan memungkinkan adanya perbaikan yang signifikan, bahkan di tengah kondisi sulit dengan wilayah perbatasan yang luas, buruknya perdagangan gelap akibat perang di negara-negara tetangga, dan tingginya jumlah pengungsi.
Tata kelola sektor keamanan yang efektif membutuhkan kemauan politik yang konsisten di pemerintahan, terutama kesiapan untuk mendorong reformasi di dalam pemerintahan dan sektor ekonomi yang menjadi bagian dari bidang keamanan.
Namun perubahan secara besar-besaran ini sifatnya sangat kontroversial, sehingga arah dan hasilnya tidak bisa diprediksi atau dikendalikan dengan mudah, seberapa pun kuatnya tekad dan kepemimpinan pemerintah.
Disini terlihat adanya suatu paradoks yang suram.
Pergerakan menuju politik yang lebih pluralis di negara-negara Arab telah membuka perpecahan sosial yang mendalam tentang sifat dasar dan tujuan keamanan – suatu pemisahan yang semakin menyulitkan proses reformasi.
Sebagai contoh, beberapa pihak bahkan menuntut badan keamanan untuk menegakkan nilai-nilai agama.
Dinamika khusus dalam hal reformasi sektor keamanan bervariasi antar negara, tergantung pada pola pengamanan dan pengendalian di masa lalu dan kondisi di mana pihak berwenang ditantang dan dipaksa mengubah struktur yang berlaku.
Tapi umumnya, masyarakat akan mengandalkan negara atau badan-badan pemerintah yang resmi untuk menyelesaikan persoalan dan melaksanakan penegakan hukum, atau akan melakukannya sendiri daripada bergantung – atau menyerahkan nasib – pada lembaga non-pemerintahan.
Akibatnya, pemerintah bisa mengklaim adanya legitimasi kuat untuk memulai upaya-upaya pembaruan.
Meskipun terdapat dukungan bagi negara sebagai penguasa dan arbiter tertinggi, meningkatnya polarisasi sosial di banyak negara Arab selama dua dekade terakhir telah menghambat konsensus tentang restrukturisasi dan reformasi keamanan.
Pengucilan terhadap 40% penduduk yang hidup pada atau di bawah garis kemiskinan, telah memunculkan tantangan-tantangan politik yang pada akhirnya menjadikan seluruh segmen sosial tunduk pada penargetan yang dilakukan badan keamanan resmi.
Selain itu, tekad untuk menghilangkan perbedaan pendapat ini mempengaruhi kelas menengah perkotaan yang bisa jadi merupakan pendukung utama reformasi sektor keamanan.
Mesir dan Suriah adalah contohnya.
Sifat sektarian di dalam sektor keamanan Irak dan polarisasi partisan di Otoritas Palestina menyiratkan adanya risiko serupa.
Kehancuran politik dan konstitusional yang parah, serta meluasnya fragmentasi sosial dan kelembagaan, juga menghambat reformasi – atau bahkan menghentikannya seperti yang dialami Libya atau Yaman.
Bahkan Mesir, dengan sistem yang sangat terpusat dan birokratis, telah mendelegasikan beberapa fungsi pengamanan dan pengendalian pada masyarakat marjinal di kota dan desa kepada baltagiyyeh (preman) dan mantan antek-antek pihak penguasa, kepala desa, dan tetua adat atau suku.
Tentunya, pengesahan fungsi kepolisian dan peradilan atas dasar identitas suku, sektarian, atau etnis – seperti yang terjadi dengan milisi revolusioner Libya, milisi Syiah Hashd di Irak, atau milisi partai sektarian di Lebanon – bisa menimbulkan bahaya.
Tetapi penekanan sebelumnya pada sektor keamanan yang dikelola secara terpusat menjadikannya sebagai aset penting dalam persaingan politik, juga memungkinkan mereka terhindar dari pengawasan dan mendapat keuntungan dari impunitas hukum.
Jadi keseimbangan yang lebih baik diperlukan untuk meminimalisasi kekhawatiran berbagai aktor sosial dan politik yang peran sertanya diperlukan untuk memperbarui kerangka konstitusional, memperkuat supremasi hukum, dan menghidupkan kembali identitas nasional dan lembaga-lembaga negara dalam konteks transisi demokratis.
Intinya adalah reformasi sektor keamanan tidak bisa dilakukan secara terpisah dari proses yang lebih luas dalam hal transisi demokratis dan rekonsiliasi nasional.
Negara-negara Arab yang saat ini menjalankan proses transisi mengalami sendiri betapa sulitnya menggantikan praktik-praktik otoriter yang sangat mengakar dengan demokrasi yang berkelanjutan, ini adalah suatu proses yang sangat bergantung pada perubahan sektor keamanan negara.
Penambahan fokus pada pemberantasan terorisme semakin menghambat reformasi ini, walaupun kegagalan sektor keamanan yang tidak direformasi dalam memenuhi perannya secara efektif, seperti di Mesir dan Tunisia, seharusnya menimbulkan efek sebaliknya.
Pihak yang mendukung demokrasi dan reformasi sektor keamanan harus menunjukkan kesatuan tujuan yang konsisten, membangun konsensus sosial dan koalisi politik dalam setiap programnya, dan merumuskan kebijakan yang koheren dan berkesinambungan.
Jika semua hal tadi berhasil dipenuhi, segala hambatan politik, ekonomi, dan sosial yang menghalangi pembentukan badan keamanan yang modern dan akuntabel akan teratasi.
The New Frontiers of Loyalty
LONDON – This is a tricky time to be a state, and an even trickier time to be a citizen.
The nation-state, the classic provider of security and basic wellbeing in exchange for citizens’ loyalty, is under threat – both at home and as the fundamental unit of international affairs.
New types of loyalty and association are challenging the state’s traditional role.
Some are geographic.
In Europe alone, there at least 40 would-be Scotlands seeking separation of some kind from the countries in which they now find themselves.
Other loyalties are based on other kindred identities – not just religious or ethnic, but based on shared commercial, political, or other interests.
Today, many more of us are supporters of NGOs than are members of political parties.
In short, our allegiances, particularly in the West, have rarely seemed more divided than they do now.
Amartya Sen, the Nobel laureate economist, has argued that we can learn to live with these multiple identities and even thrive with the diversity of citizenship and loyalties that they allow us.
But this diversity is not entirely benign.
Many of us work for or hold stock in commercial organizations that seem to pay scant regard to national tax or regulatory authorities.
And, in much of the West, states adhere to models of welfare provision that increasingly disappoint their citizens and are often unaffordable.
A global reordering of economic growth is punishing the developed countries’ high-cost, high-tax, high-benefits governance model.
The Western state’s shortcomings are strikingly apparent when compared with robust survivors and adapters in other parts of the world.
China represents what might be called the Economic Security State: seeking to channel domestic savings into household consumption to sustain GDP growth and popular support, while using its investment power abroad to secure the commodities and energy that underpin its industrialization.
Under Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s leadership, India may prove to be a semi-admiring imitator of China.
Russia, by contrast, is a more classic National Security State, now playing Western anxieties like a fiddle to consolidate its tightening grip on Ukraine and suppress domestic opposition with a tide of official nationalism.
So we live in a world of evolutionary state disorder.
While some in the West may yearn for the return of the strong, unifying state, most of us recognize that it is not coming back.
Indeed, some argue that the inventiveness and internationalism of a world networked by interests and shared causes is likely to be more resilient than one crammed into the artificial – and increasingly constraining – box of the national state.
In that sense, economic success in China or India may be those states’ undoing, as middle-class political aspirations render current arrangements dysfunctional.
Conversely, we may find ourselves in a world whose eastern half is organized into strong authoritarian state structures, with the West embracing post-state models of association.
The question for international governance is how to provide a framework of institutions and rules in a world of competing organizational structures.
The politicians’ answer is depressingly predictable: in the face of a resurgent Russia and China, this is no time to abandon our own states and diplomacy to their fate.
Yet the old systems no longer offer useful answers, as Russia has demonstrated by brushing aside the United Nations Security Council – the high altar of the state-based international system – over Ukraine and stalemating it over Syria.
And, away from the din of their ranting politicians, what Russians, as much as Americans or Chinese, probably want most is a peaceful, predictable international order that allows them to provide for their families and enjoy the benefits of a golden age of global commerce and technology.
A world, in which states’ hard power is contending with the soft power of transnational ideas, invention, and finance, needs rules.
We will all pay dearly – in defense budgets and, more important, in lost global opportunities – if we do not summon the courage to design a global order in which non-state actors have a formal role. Otherwise, we would be inviting states to continue pursuing a might-makes-right approach and to shirk the coordinated action on, say, financial regulation and the environment that the world now requires.
Of course, states do not have a monopoly on bad behavior.
Transnational economic activity has been an opportunity not only for business, but also for organized crime and others to liberate themselves from effective regulation.
At the moment, the United States has stepped into the breach, relying on often-Draconian extraterritorial use of its justice system and control of the international banking system to impose a crude frontier justice.
That is not good enough.
What is needed is a legitimate system of rules, norms, and institutions, devised by private as well as government stakeholders, that reflects the emerging global nature of economic, political, and social activity as the old state loses its dominance and must coexist with a patchwork of non-state structures of association.
Reform or Divorce in Europe
NEW YORK – To say that the eurozone has not been performing well since the 2008 crisis is an understatement.
Its member countries have done more poorly than the European Union countries outside the eurozone, and much more poorly than the United States, which was the epicenter of the crisis.
The worst-performing eurozone countries are mired in depression or deep recession; their condition – think of Greece – is worse in many ways than what economies suffered during the Great Depression of the 1930s.
The best-performing eurozone members, such as Germany, look good, but only in comparison; and their growth model is partly based on beggar-thy-neighbor policies, whereby success comes at the expense of erstwhile “partners.”
Four types of explanation have been advanced to explain this state of affairs.
Germany likes to blame the victim, pointing to Greece’s profligacy and the debt and deficits elsewhere.
But this puts the cart before the horse: Spain and Ireland had surpluses and low debt-to-GDP ratios before the euro crisis.
So the crisis caused the deficits and debts, not the other way around.
Deficit fetishism is, no doubt, part of Europe’s problems.
Finland, too, has been having trouble adjusting to the multiple shocks it has confronted, with GDP in 2015 some 5.5% below its 2008 peak.
Other “blame the victim��� critics cite the welfare state and excessive labor-market protections as the cause of the eurozone’s malaise.
Yet some of Europe’s best-performing countries, such as Sweden and Norway, have the strongest welfare states and labor-market protections.
Many of the countries now performing poorly were doing very well – above the European average – before the euro was introduced.
Their decline did not result from some sudden change in their labor laws, or from an epidemic of laziness in the crisis countries.
What changed was the currency arrangement.
The second type of explanation amounts to a wish that Europe had better leaders, men and women who understood economics better and implemented better policies.
Flawed policies – not just austerity, but also misguided so-called structural reforms, which widened inequality and thus further weakened overall demand and potential growth – have undoubtedly made matters worse.
But the eurozone was a political arrangement, in which it was inevitable that Germany’s voice would be loud.
Anyone who has dealt with German policymakers over the past third of a century should have known in advance the likely result.
Most important, given the available tools, not even the most brilliant economic czar could have made the eurozone prosper.
The third set of reasons for the eurozone’s poor performance is a broader right-wing critique of the EU, centered on eurocrats’ penchant for stifling, innovation-inhibiting regulations.
This critique, too, misses the mark.
The eurocrats, like labor laws or the welfare state, didn’t suddenly change in 1999, with the creation of the fixed exchange-rate system, or in 2008, with the beginning of the crisis.
More fundamentally, what matters is the standard of living, the quality of life.
Anyone who denies how much better off we in the West are with our stiflingly clean air and water should visit Beijing.
That leaves the fourth explanation: the euro is more to blame than the policies and structures of individual countries.
The euro was flawed at birth.
Even the best policymakers the world has ever seen could not have made it work.
The eurozone’s structure imposed the kind of rigidity associated with the gold standard.
The single currency took away its members’ most important mechanism for adjustment – the exchange rate – and the eurozone circumscribed monetary and fiscal policy.
In response to asymmetric shocks and divergences in productivity, there would have to be adjustments in the real (inflation-adjusted) exchange rate, meaning that prices in the eurozone periphery would have to fall relative to Germany and northern Europe.
But, with Germany adamant about inflation – its prices have been stagnant – the adjustment could be accomplished only through wrenching deflation elsewhere.
Typically, this meant painful unemployment and weakening unions; the eurozone’s poorest countries, and especially the workers within them, bore the brunt of the adjustment burden.
So the plan to spur convergence among eurozone countries failed miserably, with disparities between and within countries growing.
This system cannot and will not work in the long run: democratic politics ensures its failure.
Only by changing the eurozone’s rules and institutions can the euro be made to work.
This will require seven changes:
· abandoning the convergence criteria, which require deficits to be less than 3% of GDP;
· replacing austerity with a growth strategy, supported by a solidarity fund for stabilization;
· dismantling a crisis-prone system whereby countries must borrow in a currency not under their control, and relying instead on Eurobonds or some similar mechanism;
· better burden-sharing during adjustment, with countries running current -account surpluses committing to raise wages and increase fiscal spending, thereby ensuring that their prices increase faster than those in the countries with current-account deficits;
· changing the mandate of the European Central Bank, which focuses only on inflation, unlike the US Federal Reserve, which takes into account employment, growth, and stability as well;
· establishing common deposit insurance, which would prevent money from fleeing poorly performing countries, and other elements of a “banking union”;
· and encouraging, rather than forbidding, industrial policies designed to ensure that the eurozone’s laggards can catch up with its leaders.
From an economic perspective, these changes are small; but today’s eurozone leadership may lack the political will to carry them out.
That doesn’t change the basic fact that the current halfway house is untenable.
A system intended to promote prosperity and further integration has been having just the opposite effect. An amicable divorce would be better than the current stalemate.
Of course, every divorce is costly; but muddling through would be even more costly.
As we’ve already seen this summer in the United Kingdom, if European leaders can’t or won’t make the hard decisions, European voters will make the decisions for them – and the leaders may not be happy with the results.
Reform the UN Security Council
Human progress can be measured by the fact that we are living in a century where unilateral military operations based on power alone are intolerable. But the spread of the ideology of peace does not mean that threats to security have disappeared.
At times, preventive action may be necessary.
Many lives would have been saved in Africa, for example, if the international community could have acted decisively and quickly.
The events in Iraq also have demonstrated that the key issue for world security is really the relationship of the big powers to the UN Security Council.
The need for an effective UN Security Council reflects the central strategic certainty of the post-Cold War period: security threats are no longer likely to take the form of war between states, but will instead consist in acts of terror, civil wars, and massacres of civilian populations.
These threats are often related to economic chaos and basic failures in national governance, and international military action will often be needed to meet them head on.
But the legitimacy of any international military action that goes beyond immediate self-defense requires broad international approval - and action without legitimacy is bound to fail.
The international community must therefore accept the need for a fundamental link between such military action and the UN.
Peacekeeping and crisis prevention are accepted functions of the UN.
But broad international support will not be forthcoming if military operations are perceived as some form of Western neo-imperialism.
This last point has been at the heart of the problems in Iraq.
Augmenting US and British troops with other "Western" forces would not, particularly at this late stage, change the fundamental perception of that intervention, both in the Arab world and beyond it.
Only the explicit, up-front approval of a reformed UN Security Council can provide the legitimacy and international support that military action - with the exception of clear self-defense - requires.
This is true for actions contemplated by individual nations, temporary alliances, or more permanent alliances such as NATO.
For the Security Council to be effective in providing global governance in the domain of security, it must be reformed to reflect the realities of the twenty-first century.
A system of
The new system must, of course, reflect not only the size of populations but also the differing economic and military capabilities of nations.
The degree of "internal legitimacy" of governments in terms of human rights and democracy could become another factor determining voting weights or voting rights.
Countries such as India and Japan must gain a strong voice.
Latin America, Africa, and the Arab world also must see an increase in their influence.
There should be permanent global participation in the Security Council through regional constituencies, although the number of seats at any one time should remain in the neighborhood of 15 in order to permit constructive debate and a degree of cohesion.
It is only within this kind of renewed UN that NATO or other military alliances can obtain legitimized effectiveness .
Ideally, NATO should provide troops to UN-sponsored operations together with forces from other regional security organizations that could be established in Latin America, Asia, or Africa.
These organizations would cooperate with explicit UN guidance and endorsement.
The High Level Panel on Security Reform appointed by Secretary General Kofi Annan is looking at the various options.
A far-reaching reform will be difficult, and some may regard it as beyond our reach.
But it is time to think big, to escape from the constraints of the past, and to try to tackle the problems of our age if we truly want to prevent catastrophic events and achieve genuine and long-lasting global peace and security.
Housing versus Habitat
CAMBRIDGE – Peter Drucker, the influential management guru, famously said, “What does not get measured, does not get done.”
He might have added that what gets measured poorly gets done poorly.
Consider low-income housing.
Most developing countries, and many rich ones, define their housing deficit according to the number of families living in units deemed socially unacceptable.
But what is meant by unacceptable varies greatly from country to country.
Piped water, sewerage, and electricity are seen as essential in the Americas, but not in India.
The problem is that people do not demand houses; they demand habitats.
A house is an object; a habitat is a node in a multiplicity of overlapping networks – physical (power, water and sanitation, roads), economic (urban transport, labor markets, distribution and retail, entertainment) and social (education, health, security, family, friends).
The ability to connect to all of these networks makes a habitat valuable.
Cities, for example, can be highly productive spaces, because they allow people to combine their different skills to make things that none of them could make individually.
People can exchange their knowhow, learn from each other, and trade.
Jane Jacobs’s insights on this, published more that 40 years ago, have been confirmed by more recent studies summarized in books by Edward Glaeser and Enrico Moretti.
So, if the deficit being measured is one of houses rather than one of habitats, the solutions often do not solve the real problem.
A housing minister who is told to build a certain number of houses will likely fail to build an equivalent number of well-connected habitat nodes.
After all, much of what makes a house a habitat lies outside of his department’s purview.
Moreover, if the housing deficit is diagnosed as a dearth of adequate housing, then the solution is to build more houses for those who lack it – that is, the poor.
But this is like assuming that new cars should be built for those without them – that is, for people who could buy second-hand cars from those seeking to upgrade.
It confuses the construction industry, which builds new homes, with the much larger housing market, which includes all homes.
It gets worse.
Because the poor cannot buy adequate housing on their own, public resources must be used.
In order to target these subsidies to low-income households, governments typically treat families of different income levels differently: the rich must fend for themselves, middle-class families are provided with assistance to secure mortgage loans, and the poor are offered public housing.
To maximize the number of units built, housing ministries make sure that projects meet minimum specifications below a certain per-unit cost threshold.
As a result, developers look for the cheapest land, which is obviously the least connected to the networks that would make it more valuable.
This approach has ended up exacerbating the segregation of the poor.
It artificially creates – as in France – socially homogenous poor neighborhoods where the unskilled live among themselves, disconnected from others, making it harder for them to benefit from the agglomeration economies that would boost their productivity.
Indeed, because many of these developments are so remote, residents often face a long, uncomfortable, and costly daily commute to reach good jobs.
No wonder so many prefer to stay home and work on their own, which may explain why so many developing countries are becoming more urbanized but not more productive.
Confusing the construction of new homes with the housing market is most absurd when dealing with displaced families.
For example, the Venezuelan and Colombian governments were confronted with the need to relocate tens of thousands of families displaced by floods in 2010.
Although the two governments are far apart politically, both promised the displaced families new houses in new urban developments.
In the meantime, people were left for years waiting in shelters.
And, once again, these new urban developments have few of the networks that would make them a habitat.
The burden of creating integrated communities has been placed on a randomly assembled group comprising some of the least connected members of society.
Instead, displaced families should quickly be given vouchers so that they can obtain an appropriate home without delay.
They are bound to choose older homes in established neighborhoods that have already been connected to the many networks that make them a habitat.
Large new housing developments should naturally attract those who already have ample social connections, making it easier to kick-start more integrated communities.
In order to separate the problem of the overall housing deficit from the problem of families with inadequate housing, policymakers need to address both supply and demand.
On the supply side, urban land – with all its physical and social infrastructure – must expand quickly enough.
On the demand side, subsidies should focus on helping families choose from the entire housing market.
This approach would promote socially diverse and productive neighborhoods, rather than segregation and pockets of economic stagnation.
But this goal cannot be achieved unless the construction industry is prevented from dictating low-income-housing policy.
The Night-Watchman State’s Last Shift
HONG KONG – Too often, debate about the relationship between the state and the market casts them as opposing forces locked in a zero-sum struggle.
But this simplistic approach quickly turns constructive discussion into a casualty of the ideological battle between advocates of state and market capitalism.
A more useful framework would view the state and the market as two sides of the same coin, bound together by the property-rights infrastructure (PRI).
The state interacts with the market –&#160;the realm of private, voluntary exchange of property rights – in three main ways.
First, the state transacts with the private sector through taxation and expenditure.
Second, it establishes and maintains the PRI, which includes all of the institutions needed to delineate, exchange, fine-tune, and protect (through enforcement of law and contracts) property rights.
Among these institutions are the judiciary and arbitration panels, which function not only to adjudicate property-rights disputes, but also to address administrative abuses and disputes between the private and public sectors.
Finally, the state competes with the private sector via state-owned enterprises and utilities.
Given that an effective PRI safeguards market order and stability, the market needs a strong state to manage it.
This means that whether a government is “big” or “small” is less important than how well it manages the PRI – that is, whether the state is able to ensure high-quality market order.
Current policy debates have largely neglected this aspect of the state’s role, because Western thinkers take their countries’ PRI for granted, especially their regulatory and judicial systems, which have benefited from hundreds of years of development.
But these countries’ experience is entirely different from that of developing economies, which are under intense pressure to build a sound PRI quickly.
For a large economy like China – which has overlapping bureaucracies in different state agencies, and many layers of government extending from the central administration to local units – creating a transparent, fair, and effective PRI is particularly complex.
As a state-led economy moves toward a market-based system, policymakers are faced with a difficult choice: pursue policies associated with immediate and rapid GDP growth, or seek the longer-term, less visible benefits of PRI development.
When China began this transition, its central and local governments focused on building physical infrastructure, such as roads and electricity grids, which delivered tangible gains.
But it was the state’s less visible investment in the country’s institutional infrastructure that had the biggest impact on China’s GDP growth.
Over the last three decades, the government has created a transitory but effective PRI to remove barriers to market entry, define new property rights, and mimic international rules, thereby facilitating external trade and enabling foreign multinationals to operate effectively in China.
China’s government-services supply chain plays an important role in orchestrating and supporting the market economy’s development.
But it is not enough.
With private and foreign-owned entities now accounting for more than two-thirds of China’s output, and with China becoming a leading actor in global markets, the need to upgrade its PRI is becoming increasingly urgent.
In order to create value consistently within domestic and international markets, China must ensure that competition is fair, transparent, and subject to the rule of law.
China’s leaders know that private small and medium-size enterprises with fair market access would be a far more reliable source of innovation and jobs than are large state-owned monopolies.
Given this, China’s continued economic success depends on reducing state ownership of productive capital, facilitating market innovation and growth, and investing in human capital, such as through education, health care, and social welfare.
Concretely, this means introducing land reform and privatization, regulating food and drugs, protecting human capital and intellectual property, safeguarding the value of household savings, ensuring market access, and executing fair and transparent taxation.
Such reforms would not weaken the state; they would simply alter the distribution of power in order to create a more stable system.
For example, the primary objective of privatization would not be to reduce the size of the state sector, but to eliminate state-owned enterprises’ unfair and hidden privileges, such as subsidized credit and monopolistic market positions.
This would help to eliminate corruption, by making bureaucratic functions more transparent and preventing officials from rewarding themselves at the public’s expense.
Strengthening the rule of law and creating a level playing field essentially involve building a stable, effective PRI, composed of institutions that can motivate public officials to deliver services as effectively as possible.
Such a PRI would ensure that the state fulfills its responsibility to safeguard justice, enforce the law firmly and transparently, and enable the strongest competitors to reap their just rewards.
The good news is that many of China’s local governments, which are responsible for overseeing the country’s courts, are beginning to compete with each other to deliver better PRI.
They recognize that stable, equitable markets are better than physical infrastructure at creating jobs and driving long-term growth.
The bad news is that those who benefit from the current system are resisting progress.
In order to navigate the complex market-state relationship and achieve a beneficial outcome, Chinese policymakers must have a clear idea of where the state’s limited capacity and political capital are needed most. And that presupposes a discourse on the state-market relationship that is very different from the one to which Westerners are accustomed.
The West’s Second Chance in Syria
NEW YORK – The last-minute agreement between Russia and the United States to put Syria’s chemical weapons under international control gives the West, which had run out of good options, a second chance to reach what always should have been its strategic goal: peace in Syria and an end to its people’s suffering.
Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov took advantage of Western leaders’ failure to formulate a clear central objective.
Did they hope to end Syria’s civil war by forcing a military stalemate, or to bring about the demise of President Bashar al-Assad’s regime?
Did they want to strengthen international law barring the use of chemical weapons, or to send Iran a signal about their determination to enforce “red lines”?
The Russian proposal forced the West to choose prohibition of chemical weapons as its immediate goal.
Given that this is one of the few areas of possible agreement in the United Nations Security Council, it is a good starting point to repair badly damaged relations among the Council’s five permanent members (China, France, Russia, the United Kingdom, and the US).
Of course, the deal may prove to be little more than a diversion, breaking the momentum toward military action but failing to achieve its goal.
Its implementation will be a test of Russia’s good faith.
For their part, Western countries must avoid the traps of the difficult negotiation process that the deal demands, without losing sight of their strategic goal of ending the conflict.
The complex process of securing and destroying Syria’s chemical arsenal promises to be next to impossible in the midst of a civil war.
To succeed, Western leaders must reframe their approach to the Syrian endgame, rejecting the assumptions that have shaped their policies since the beginning of the crisis.
The West’s fundamental mistake has been consistently to underestimate the Assad regime’s resilience.
Despite its brutality, the Assad government retains a substantial base of supporters who are willing to fight to the death to prevent the regime’s collapse.
Indeed, many Syrians believe that they have no future if Assad’s government collapses – a belief that has been reinforced as the civil war’s dividing lines have become increasingly sectarian.
With regime supporters’ physical survival seemingly at stake, the expectation of a quick collapse was illusory.
More problematic, the West’s loud calls for Assad’s exit from power, though now muted, have given false hope to the opposition, while Russia has been hiding behind the rhetoric of a “Syrian-led process” to avoid confronting its international responsibilities.
But a diplomatic solution guided by the Security Council’s permanent members is the only credible path to peace.
The alternative – an attempt at negotiation between Syria’s government and an increasingly fragmented opposition – would serve only to prolong the war and raise the death toll.
Likewise, the West must recognize that reconciliation in Syria will be impossible without reconciliation between the Sunni and Shia regimes in the wider region.
Several of the Sunni-ruled Gulf monarchies view Syria’s crisis and the prospect of Assad’s demise as an opportunity to compensate for Iraq’s rapprochement with Iran following the fall of Saddam Hussein’s Sunni regime and the emergence of a Shia-led government.
A year ago, the US, the UK, and France appeared to side with Saudi Arabia when they rejected former UN Secretary-General Kofi Annan’s request that Iran be invited to the first attempt in Geneva to negotiate a settlement of Syria’s civil war.
They probably feared that Iran’s participation in the talks would enable Iranian leaders to link efforts to end the Syrian crisis to negotiations over Iran’s nuclear program, enhancing their ability to resist international demands that the program be terminated.
But, while Iran’s direct involvement in Syria – where its own Revolutionary Guards, along with its Lebanese proxy, Hezbollah, are fighting in support of Assad – is part of the problem, a long-term solution is virtually impossible without Iranian participation.
Indeed, the Middle East cannot achieve long-term stability while Iran is excluded from negotiations and the Shia-Sunni schism is allowed to deepen.
Although it is too soon to tell what, if anything, will come of the current diplomatic charm offensive by Iran’s more moderate new president, Hassan Rouhani, it might herald an important shift in Iranian policy that could ultimately enable regional reconciliation.
With the entire Middle East undergoing a generational transformation, regional challenges cannot be addressed separately.
Only a unified, comprehensive approach can manage the forces driving momentous change in the Middle East, prevent outside powers’ rivalries from complicating the situation further, and ensure a peaceful outcome.
With emerging regional powers increasingly challenging the capacity of the Security Council’s permanent members to shape events in the Middle East, there is no time to waste.
The West’s lofty and self-serving rhetoric has not helped to end Syria’s conflict; it may even have made the situation more dangerous.
Although the Russian initiative is not without pitfalls, it could be a crucial launchpad for more serious and constructive engagement with Syria – and with the rest of the Middle East.
Emergency Education Now
DAVOS – In an ideal world, whenever children needed help, they would get it.
Hundreds of desperate children become thousands and eventually millions.
Hope gives way to prolonged misery – not for a few months or even a year, but on average for more than a decade.
They are shut out of schools, locked out of opportunity, and condemned to live in unbearable conditions – subject to child labor or forced begging, sold into marriage, trafficked, conscripted into gangs, or recruited by extremists.
What has happened in recent years in South Sudan, northern Nigeria, and Iraq – and in Jordan, and Lebanon, where hundreds of thousands of Syrian refugee children are being denied the chance to return to school – makes an overwhelming case for a new humanitarian fund for education in emergencies.
What has happened during the Ebola crisis in Liberia, Guinea, and Sierra Leone – where schools serving five million children remain closed or have not reopened quickly enough – makes this case, too.
Yemen and Chad are likely to be next.
In all of these countries and situations, children’s future depends on whether we, the international community, act.
The Millennium Development Goals commit the international community to achieve the target of universal primary education by the end of 2015.
But the official out-of-school figure currently stands at 58 million.
And, once out of school for a year or more, children are unlikely to return.
There is a huge gap in our array of solutions.
In 2014, education received just 1% of humanitarian funds – leaving millions of children and young people on the streets or idle in camps.
And there is no mechanism to pay for the education of refugee children or those affected by disaster.
To be sure, there are organizations – the United Nations High Commission for Refugees (UNHCR), UNICEF, and many other groups – that, working together, perform heroically.
And organizations like the Global Partnership for Education, Sheikha Mozah’s Educate a Child foundation, and the Global Business Coalition for Education also contribute in times of emergency.
But that woefully small 1% figure means that the world simply does not have enough to ensure that more than a fraction of affected children get help.
The solution must be based on a simple humane principle: No child should be denied opportunity simply because adults are unable to work together.
That means establishing an emergency education system that enables adequate funding to be released to UN agencies and operational NGOs at the onset of a crisis – not years later.
What has been happening in Lebanon over the past two years is a case in point.
Today, there are 465,000 Syrian child refugees.
The Lebanese government has volunteered to accept refugee children into the country’s schools by introducing a second afternoon session and enlisting teachers and school directors to take on the extra workload.
Complicating the situation, officials have had to persuade a divided country, already worried about the influx of refugees (which has added 20% to the country’s population). But few refugee children have enrolled.
UNICEF and the UNHCR have devised a plan with the Lebanese government to implement this program, but the international community has failed to help.
Only $100 million has been pledged, but $163 million is still needed.
Though the Global Partnership for Education and other organizations want to do more, their mandate does not permit them to provide assistance to middle-income countries like Lebanon.
Something is very wrong with this picture.
Lebanon’s government has a plan that requires no new schools or infrastructure, making it one of the most cost-effective solutions to a refugee crisis imaginable.
But, still, the money is lacking.
The same thing is happening in South Sudan.
And in northern Nigeria, countless attacks by the terrorist group Boko Haram have underscored the need for a full safe-schools program; but the money to deliver it simply is not there.
Similarly, in Pakistan, the Peshawar massacre last month has revealed how much more must be done to protect schools and children’s future.
Given such crises, the world can no longer afford to do without a humanitarian fund for education during emergencies.
In April, at the World Bank’s annual meeting, I will call for action by the assembled government ministers, and I hope to announce the establishment of such a fund at the Oslo Summit on Education for Development on July 6-7.
Education, it is said, cannot wait.
Passing the hat when a crisis erupts is not the solution.
In 2015, we must do more.
A Better Year for Migrants?
DUBLIN – The Mediterranean migration crisis has delivered two critical lessons.
First, Europe and the international community have grossly inadequate systems for protecting vulnerable migrants.
Second, in the absence of such systems, populist leaders will prey on fear to gain political support, undermining the liberal, tolerant societies that have taken 70 years of hard work to build.
That is why vigorous action at the European and global levels is essential this year.
In September, United Nations Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon will convene an extraordinary summit dedicated to building a fair global system for protecting refugees and vulnerable migrants.
One hopes that countries will come prepared to make tangible, enduring commitments.
Such commitments were sorely lacking in 2015.
Indeed, the international community could have blunted last year’s crisis by providing even modest support for the three frontline countries – Turkey, Lebanon, and Jordan – which together host some four million Syrian refugees.
With only around €10 billion ($10.8 billion), these countries could have provided better housing, food, and education for refugees, thereby reducing the incentive to flee to Europe.
That failure could end up costing Germany alone upwards of €21 billion annually for years to come.
But the financial implications of the crisis pale in comparison to the human and political costs.
More than a million people risked their lives crossing the Mediterranean last year, and then endured grueling journeys through the Balkans.
Almost 4,000 people died on the way, and many European countries turned their backs on those who survived, refusing them safe haven.
Cynical political leaders ruthlessly capitalized on popular anxiety by promoting an odious nationalist vision that either ignores or distorts real-life experiences with immigration.
In the United States, for example, not one of the 780,000 refugees resettled since September 11, 2001, has executed a terrorist attack.
Meanwhile, immigrants typically pay more in taxes than they receive in benefits.
Nonetheless, extremist forces are dangerously close to taking political power in some European states, and are gaining traction even in formerly liberal bastions.
Anti-migrant parties already are in power in Hungary and Poland.
Their success is compelling mainstream parties to adopt anti-migrant policies as well.
All of this has seriously undermined European cooperation.
The EU’s program to process the million refugees who arrived on its shores has succeeded in “relocating” a mere 190 of them.
Checks at the borders of six countries within the Schengen Area have been reinstituted, at least temporarily.
To the rest of the world, the EU appears chauvinistic and inept.
Of course, the crisis is not solely for Europe to solve; responsibility is not defined by proximity.
But the EU might now face an existential threat, which it can overcome only with a strong show of solidarity and global leadership.
That is why its member states must take the lead in proposing solutions.
The most urgent priority is to create safe and legal paths for refugees to reach Europe.
This does not imply that every vulnerable migrant must be accepted.
But the EU should be more systematically generous in determining how many to admit, and it should implement organized ways to facilitate their entry.
Such a system would protect migrants and safeguard Europe (by enabling it to vet applicants fully).
Beyond reducing the incentive for asylum-seekers to risk their lives and life savings to cross the Mediterranean, such an approach would show solidarity with the frontline countries, which will continue to host most of the refugees.
Equally important, it would put pressure on the rest of the international community to contribute.
That brings us to the second priority for 2016: building a robust global system to protect refugees and other vulnerable migrants.
This requires, first and foremost, agreement by more countries to accept refugees.
In recent years, the UN Refugee Agency has been able to resettle fewer than 75,000 of more than 20 million refugees annually.
Millions end up in protracted displacement, spending an estimated 25 years, on average, stuck in limbo, unsure when they might return home.
In 2016, developed countries should agree to accept a combined total approaching a million refugees annually, either through resettlement or by issuing humanitarian, student, labor, and other visas.
With Canada alone saying that it will resettle 50,000 Syrian refugees this year, it is clear that this target is achievable.
At the same time, the international community must support the integration of refugees in major host countries like Turkey, Kenya, Lebanon, and Jordan.
As it stands, such countries receive just a fraction of the $3,000-5,000 per refugee required annually to provide adequate housing, food, health care, schooling, and job training during the first few years of displacement.
And that does not account for the costs of building or upgrading infrastructure.
Lebanon’s water-supply system, for example, is faltering under the strain of the massive influx of refugees.
In exchange for funding, host countries should agree to integrate refugees fully into their schools, labor markets, and civic institutions.
But integrating migrants effectively will be impossible unless European and other countries change how they perceive migrants.
If migrants are viewed as a burden or, worse, a security threat, reactionary political forces will continue to gain ground, cutting off opportunities for newcomers and turning such fears into a self-fulfilling prophesy.
If, however, host countries enthusiastically integrate migrants, everyone will benefit – including home countries (for example, through remittances).
Last month in Paris, the international community proved that it could subordinate national self-interest to a greater global goal: confronting climate change.
In 2016, the same thing must happen to forge a better system for protecting migrants.
It is a matter of life and death for 20 million refugees and millions of other vulnerable migrants – and a profound test of the civic health of democratic societies worldwide.
The Case for Surge Funding
MUNICH – Important progress was made at the donors’ conference for Syrian refugees convened in London on February 4. But much more remains to be done.
The international community is still vastly underestimating what is needed to support refugees, both inside and outside the borders of the European Union.
To deal with the refugee crisis, while putting the EU’s largely unused AAA borrowing capacity to better use, requires a paradigm shift.
Rather than scraping together insufficient funds year after year, it is time to engage in “surge funding.”
Spending a large amount of money up front would be far more effective than spending the same amount over several years.
Frontloading the spending would allow us to address the most dangerous consequences of the crisis – including anti-immigrant sentiment in receiving countries and despondency and marginalization among refugees – more effectively.
Making large initial investments would help tip the economic, political, and social dynamics away from xenophobia and disaffection, and toward constructive outcomes that benefit refugees and the recipient countries alike.
Surge funding has been used often to finance immunization campaigns.
The International Finance Facility for Immunization (IFFIm), which borrows against future government contributions to immunization programs, has raised billions of dollars over the past several years to ensure that vaccination campaigns are successful as soon as possible.
In the long run, this is more effective than spending the same amount of money in yearly installments. IFFIm provides a convincing precedent for the current crisis.
A sudden large influx of refugees can cause panic that affects the general population, the authorities, and, most destructively, the refugees themselves.
The panic breeds a false sense that refugees are a burden and a danger, resulting in expensive and counter-productive measures, like erecting fences and walls and concentrating refugees into camps, which in turn breeds frustration and desperation among the refugees.
If the global community could fund large-scale, concentrated programs to address the problem, the general public and the refugees would be reassured.
A surge in spending is needed both in Europe and in frontline states like Jordan, Lebanon and Turkey.
The necessary investments include an overhaul of the EU’s asylum policy and improvement of its border controls.
In frontline states, money is needed to provide refugees with formal employment opportunities, health care, and education.
If life for refugees is made tolerable in frontline countries, and they believe that an orderly process is in place for gaining entry to Europe, they are more likely to wait their turn, rather than rushing to Europe and overwhelming the system.
Similarly, if the refugee crisis can be brought under control, the panic will subside and the European public will be less prone to support anti-migrant policies.
Jordan could provide a test case.
A country of 9.5 million people, it is providing refuge to 2.9 million non-citizens, including 1.265 million Syrians, and facing the influx of additional Syrians uprooted by Russian bombing.
A combination of massive upfront direct financial assistance, enhanced trade preferences, and temporary debt relief is needed.
A successful program for Jordan could demonstrate the international community’s ability to bring the refugee crisis under control, opening the way to similar programs for other frontline states, adjusted on a case-by-case basis, depending on local conditions.
The approach suggested here would cost more than EU member states can afford out of current budgets.
A minimum of €40 billion ($45 billion) needs to be spent annually in the next 3-5 years; but even larger amounts would be justified to bring the migration crisis under control.
In fact, so far, lack of adequate financing is the main obstacle to implementation of successful programs in any of the frontline countries, particularly in Turkey.
While Germany has an unallocated budget surplus of €6 billion ($6.8 billion), other EU countries are running deficits.
German Finance Minister Wolfgang Schäuble has proposed a pan-European fuel tax, but that would demand either unanimous agreement or a coalition of the willing.
This enhances the merits of having recourse to the EU’s largely unused AAA credit.
The migration crisis poses an existential threat to the EU.
Indeed, with the north pitted against the south, and the east confronting the west, the EU is coming apart at the seams.
When should the EU’s AAA credit be mobilized if not at a moment when the EU is in mortal danger?
It is not as if there is no precedent for this approach; throughout history, governments have issued bonds in response to national emergencies.
Tapping the AAA credit of the EU, rather than taxing consumption, has the additional advantage of providing much-needed economic stimulus for Europe.
The amounts involved are large enough to be of macroeconomic significance, especially as they would be spent almost immediately and produce a multiplier effect.
A growing economy would make it much easier to absorb immigrants, whether refugees or economic migrants.
In short, surge funding is a win-win initiative, and it must be undertaken urgently.
Turning Crisis into Success in Germany
BERLIN – According to an early May opinion poll by ARD DeutschlandTREND, the far-right Alternative for Germany (AfD) party’s popular support now stands at 15%, up from around 5% a year ago.
Can this dangerous trend be reversed?
The AfD’s rise since last summer has been the direct result of the surge in the number of refugees – close to one million in 2015 – entering Germany.
After all, the party has made opposition to admitting refugees the centerpiece of its platform, which also includes antagonism toward the European Union and a very conservative social program, to which an openly sectarian religious component was added at a May 3 party convention in Stuttgart.
Yet Germany’s broad political center continues to hold.
The center-right Christian Democrats and their allies still have the support of about 33% of the electorate; the center-left Social Democrats have 20% support; and the Green Party is backed by some 13%.
Even the Free Democrats have clawed their way back from hard times, and now have about 6% support.
In short, moderate political forces still enjoy the support of more than 70% of Germans – in contrast with, say, Austria, where the far right was able to gain 36% in the first round of presidential elections.
Even Germany’s Left Party, which has 8% support and is not traditionally defined as moderate, has a more moderate “eastern” wing and a more radical “western” wing.
The enduring strength of Germany’s political center probably reflects the country’s remarkable economic success, which it has sustained for more than a decade, even as most of the rest of Europe has faced serious challenges.
It owes this outcome partly to the euro, which has benefited German exports and growth far more than most of its citizens realize.
If Germany still had – or had reverted to – the Deutschmark, employment and growth would have been hampered by a much stronger currency, on a trade-weighted basis, in the wake of the global economic crisis.
More fundamentally, Germany has benefited from the extraordinary culture of consensus that it developed in the post-World War II period, with social partners and political parties showing a remarkable ability to compromise.
A fairly wide territorial distribution of economic activity, together with strong local governments and civil-society organizations, has contributed further to a general sense of contentment – a sense that is absent in much of the world nowadays.
Now, however, as the refugee crisis fuels populism and political polarization, the foundations of Germany’s success appear to be under threat.
Indeed, Germany’s future could play out in two ways.
The world has a large stake in which scenario prevails.
The first scenario is bleak: Germany fails to integrate the refugees socially and economically, political discontent surges, and the newcomers become increasingly frustrated with their plight.
Any steps they take to vent that frustration embolden right-wing populists and could lead to violence from both sides.
If, in the worst case, a terrorist attack were to occur – especially one that could, in some way, be linked to refugees – the nationalist-populist reaction would be powerful, potentially weakening the very fabric of German society.
Anti-Muslim elements of that reaction would become fodder for religious extremists in the Middle East, by seeming to confirm their narrative of inevitable religious and civilizational conflict.
The second scenario turns the refugee challenge into another success.
Integration of the refugees proceeds reasonably quickly, and Germany resumes its path of moderate politics, social solidarity, and economic growth.
In the long term, the refugees could actually make a strong contribution to German prosperity.
Despite the AfD’s rise, there is plenty of reason to remain optimistic.
Late last year, thousands of Germans gathered at train stations and on the streets to welcome the first groups of refugees as they arrived.
Throughout much of the country, local communities have mobilized to provide housing, language training, and social guidance for refugees, who have never experienced anything like a wealthy democratic society.
Tens of thousands of teenage students are acting as “facilitating partners” to their refugee classmates who don’t speak German, many of whom arrived in the country without their parents.
Whether this approach will endure, and bring about successful integration, will depend on both the Germans and the refugees.
The refugees will have to accept the rule of German law, even if in some cases it does not make sense to them.
Both the new arrivals and German residents will need to balance respect for diversity in lifestyles with the understanding that, in a secular democracy, the same laws apply to everyone.
Those laws must protect private religious and cultural space for all, without allowing that space to be used as an excuse for infringing on the basic human and democratic rights of every individual.
The large existing community of former immigrants could be helpful in articulating and implementing that delicate balance, imperfect as it may have been at times.
The successful integration of the refugees will also depend on economic growth.
Indeed, this amounts to one more argument for Germany to use its fiscal space to increase investment and implement growth-enhancing policies.
While the demographic inflow could become a large net benefit for Germany in the long run, it remains a burden in the short term.
That is why there is also a need for some burden-sharing by European countries, as well as efforts to achieve a marked slowdown in the refugee flow, while upholding the human rights of those fleeing conflict and death.
If Germany can integrate the refugees, it will send a powerful message to nihilists and extremists everywhere.
It would show that, with a strong economy, active civil society, and the rule of secular law, religious differences, cultural tensions, and labor-market challenges can be overcome.
This is a message that the world needs now more than ever.
Refugees and Reform in Europe
LAGUNA BEACH – There is a simple truth beneath the growing human tragedy of Europe’s refugee crisis, and the European Union cannot address the massive influx of exhausted, desperate people in a manner compatible with its values unless governments and citizens acknowledge it.
Simply put, the historic challenge confronting Europe also offers historic opportunities.
The question is whether Europe’s politicians – who have failed to deliver on far less complicated issues over which they had a lot more control – can seize the moment.
The scale of the challenge is immense, with the flow of refugees extremely difficult to monitor and channel, let alone limit.
Fleeing war and oppression, tens of thousands of people are risking life and limb to find refuge in Europe – a phenomenon that will continue as long as chaos persists in countries of origin, such as Syria, and countries facilitating transit, such as Iraq and Libya.
In the meantime, Europe’s transport networks are under stress, as are shelters, border crossings, and registration centers.
Common asylum policies – including, for example, the basic rule that asylum-seekers should be registered at their point of entry into the EU – are not functioning or are being bypassed.
And the cherished concept of effortless travel within the border-free Schengen Area is under threat.
These problems are aggravated by coordination failures.
Attitudes toward refugees vary widely across countries, with Germany taking a particularly enlightened approach that contrasts sharply with Hungary’s notably heartless one.
Some countries, such as the Czech Republic, have blocked deals to share the burden fairly among European Union members, including through mandatory quotas.
Add to that the preferences of the refugees – who, after risking everything to get to Europe, have strong feelings about where they would like to settle – and the policy challenges are enormous, particularly in the short run.
European politicians have yet to catch up with the reality on the ground, let alone get ahead of it.
And their failure is exacerbating the risks to the EU’s political cohesion that emerged over the Greek crisis.
Politicians have a powerful incentive to get Europe’s response to the refugee crisis right.
Beyond the need to alleviate the human misery that fills television screens and front pages of newspapers lies the imperative not to miss the significant medium-term opportunities that migration provides.
Although there are pockets of high unemployment in Europe today, the ratio of workers to elderly people will decline considerably in the longer term.
And, already, labor-market flexibility has been undermined by structural inertia, including difficulties in retooling and retraining workers, particularly the long-term unemployed.
As the German government and some corporate leaders, including the CEO of Daimler-Benz, have already recognized, an open-minded approach to refugee absorption and integration can help to mitigate some of Europe’s protracted structural problems.
After all, a significant proportion of the incoming refugee population is said to be educated, motivated, and committed to building a better future in their new homes.
Capitalizing on this, European decision-makers can turn a severe short-term challenge into a powerful long-term advantage.
An enlightened policy response to the refugee crisis could help Europe in other ways as well.
Already, it is unlocking additional fiscal outlays in countries like Germany – which, despite having the means, did not previously have the will to spend – thereby helping to alleviate an aggregate-demand imbalance that, together with structural impediments to growth and excessive indebtedness in some countries, has held back the region’s recovery.
The current situation could also provide the catalyst needed to make decisive progress on the EU’s incomplete political, institutional, and financial architecture.
And it could compel Europe to overcome the political obstacles blocking solutions to longstanding problems, such as providing the cover needed for certain European creditors to grant deeper debt relief for Greece, whose already-massive fiscal and employment problems are being exacerbated by the influx of refugees.
It can even drive Europe to modernize its governance framework, which allows a few small countries to derail decisions supported by the vast majority of EU members.
Pessimists would immediately point out that Europe has struggled to come together even on far less complex and more controllable issues, such as the protracted economic and financial crisis in Greece.
Yet history also suggests that shocks of the scale and scope of the current refugee crisis have the potential to spur remarkable policy responses.
Europe has the opportunity to turn today’s refugee crisis into a catalyst for renewal and progress.
Let us hope that its politicians stop bickering and start working together to take advantage of this opening.
If they fail, the momentum behind regional integration – which has brought peace, prosperity, and hope to hundreds of millions of people – will weaken considerably, to the detriment of all.
The Agony and the Exodus
BRUSSELS – The tragic exodus of people from war-torn Syria and surrounding countries challenges the world’s reason and sympathy.
Since 2011, some four million people have fled Syria, with millions more internally displaced.
Syria’s neighbors – Jordan, Lebanon, and Turkey – currently house the vast majority of the externally displaced.
But, as the crisis has progressed, hundreds of thousands of refugees have headed toward Europe, with most taking the extremely dangerous marine route.
The nature and scale of this exodus have rendered all previous legal and political assumptions about migration obsolete.
In the past, the chief motive for migration was economic.
The debate to which economic migration gave rise was between liberals, who upheld the principle of the free movement of labor, and those who wanted restrictions on movement among countries in order to protect jobs, culture, and/or political cohesion.
As the world filled up with nation-states, and empty spaces filled up with people, restriction triumphed over free movement.
Controls on immigration became widespread after World War I. All countries developed population policies.
But there has always been another, much smaller, group of asylum-seekers – those individuals forced to flee their home countries by persecution, often on religious or ethnic grounds.