But Blair, beset by controversy over the unpopular and possibly illegal war in Iraq, thought he could avoid trouble at Westminster by postponing ratification until 2006 (that is, a comfortably long time in the future), and proposing that it be carried out by popular referendum.
Unfortunately, as things stand, this is a referendum that Blair will not win, because all polls show a large and solid majority against the European Constitution.
Blair’s government may hope to be rescued by outside events.
France will hold a referendum on the Constitution for the end of this month, and a French “No,” the British seem to think, might make their problem go away.
For the general expectation is that if France rejects the Constitution, the Constitution would be dead, and no British referendum would be needed.
If this is Blair’s calculation, he is mistaken.
Moreover, it is the kind of mistake that the British have been making in relations with Europe for the past half-century.
Some recent French polls now show a majority in favor of the Constitution.
But even if the French do vote “No,” that will not solve the British problem: on the contrary, it will precipitate a major political crisis, in France and across Europe, concerning the future of the EU – the type of crisis that the British have spent fifty years trying to evade. For if the Constitution is indeed dead, what happens next?
None of the leading members of the Union will be interested in Britain’s views on this question.
When Tony Blair swept to power in 1997, he was widely welcomed throughout Europe as the most pro-European British Prime Minister since Edward Heath a quarter of a century earlier.
He spoke French and seemed at ease with Britain’s neighbors across the Channel; more importantly, he seemed to sympathize with European integration.
Eight years on, Europe knows better.
It is now clear to all that Blair is fundamentally opposed to the idea of a more politically integrated Europe.
Not only has he kept Britain out of the single European currency over the past four years, he made it clear during the election campaign that he does not expect the UK to join the Euro during the next five years either.
Occasionally Blair flirts with the idea of more European cooperation on foreign policy and defense.
But the past three years proved in practice that he prefers subservience to the war policy of President Bush to any sense of community with Europe.
In short, Blair is as opposed to the European project as all his predecessors.
One fundamental difference between France and Britain is that most of the mainstream political elite in France has long been broadly pro-European.
If the French electorate votes “No,” it will be much less a vote against the Constitution than a protest vote against President Jacques Chirac, or an expression of anxiety about the implications of the EU’s enlargement to Central Europe.
By contrast, Blair cannot win a referendum on the Constitution, not only because it is opposed by virtually all the popular press, but also because neither he nor any major political leader in Britain has ever had a good word to say about European integration.
The crisis over the Union’s future direction triggered by a French “No” vote could last for some time.
But if the British imagine that the Constitution will just die, and that that will be the end of the story, they are deceiving themselves.
On the contrary, they will find themselves embroiled, like the rest of Europe, in a fundamental debate about the objectives of the Union.
They will then be forced to make public and explicit choices about the sort of Europe that they want, and this will put them at odds with their neighbors.
In the end, the French and other leading member states are likely to explore alternative ways of working towards a more politically integrated Europe.
The most plausible institutional mechanism for this alternative way forward will be the existing grouping of those member states that have wanted to belong to a more united Europe by joining, or seeking to join, the euro zone.
If the Constitution is rejected, the British, having chosen to stay out of that grouping, may find that they have maneuvered themselves into an even more remote outer circle of Europe.
Blame the Economists, Not Economics
CAMBRIDGE – As the world economy tumbles off the edge of a precipice, critics of the economics profession are raising questions about its complicity in the current crisis.
Rightly so: economists have plenty to answer for.
It was economists who legitimized and popularized the view that unfettered finance was a boon to society. They spoke with near unanimity when it came to the “dangers of government over-regulation.”
Their technical expertise – or what seemed like it at the time –gave them a privileged position as opinion makers, as well as access to the corridors of power.
Very few among them (notable exceptions including Nouriel Roubini and Robert Shiller) raised alarm bells about the crisis to come.
Perhaps worse still, the profession has failed to provide helpful guidance in steering the world economy out of its current mess.
On Keynesian fiscal stimulus, economists’ views range from “absolutely essential” to “ineffective and harmful.”
On re-regulating finance, there are plenty of good ideas, but little convergence. From the near-consensus on the virtues of a finance-centric model of the world, the economics profession has moved to a near-total absence of consensus on what ought to be done.&#160;
So is economics in need of a major shake-up?
Should we burn our existing textbooks and rewrite them from scratch?
Actually, no. Without recourse to the economist’s toolkit, we cannot even begin to make sense of the current crisis.
Why, for example, did China’s decision to accumulate foreign reserves result in a mortgage lender in Ohio taking excessive risks?
If your answer does not use elements from behavioral economics, agency theory, information economics, and international economics, among others, it is likely to remain seriously incomplete.
If anything needs fixing, it is the sociology of the profession.
The textbooks – at least those used in advanced courses – are fine.
Non-economists tend to think of economics as a discipline that idolizes markets and a narrow concept of (allocative) efficiency.
If the only economics course you take is the typical introductory survey, or if you are a journalist asking an economist for a quick opinion on a policy issue, that is indeed what you will encounter.
But take a few more economics courses, or spend some time in advanced seminar rooms, and you will get a different picture.
Labor economists focus not only on how trade unions can distort markets, but also how, under certain conditions, they can enhance productivity.
Trade economists study the implications of globalization on inequality within and across countries.
Finance theorists have written reams on the consequences of the failure of the “efficient markets” hypothesis.
Open-economy macroeconomists examine the instabilities of international finance.
Advanced training in economics requires learning about market failures in detail, and about the myriad ways in which governments can help markets work better.
Macroeconomics may be the only applied field within economics in which more training puts greater distance between the specialist and the real world, owing to its reliance on highly unrealistic models that sacrifice relevance to technical rigor.
Sadly, in view of today’s needs, macroeconomists have made little progress on policy since John Maynard Keynes explained how economies could get stuck in unemployment due to deficient aggregate demand.
Some, like Brad DeLong and Paul Krugman, would say that the field has actually regressed.
Paradoxically, then, the current disarray within the profession is perhaps a better reflection of the profession’s true value added than its previous misleading consensus.&#160; Economics can at best clarify the choices for policy makers; it cannot make those choices for them.
When economists disagree, the world gets exposed to legitimate differences of views on how the economy operates.&#160; It is when they agree too much that the public should beware. &#160;&#160;
Bleed the Foreigner
PRINCETON – Today, the world is threatened with a repeat of the 2008 financial meltdown – but on an even more cataclysmic scale.
This time, the epicenter is in Europe, rather than the United States.
And this time, the financial mechanisms involved are not highly complex structured financial products, but one of the oldest financial instruments in the world: government bonds.
While governments and central banks race frantically to find a solution, there is a profound psychological dynamic at work that stands in the way of an orderly debt workout: our aversion to recognizing obligations to strangers.
The impulse simply to cut the Gordian knot of debt by defaulting on it is much stronger when creditors are remote and unknown.
In 2007-2008, it was homeowners who could not keep up with payments; now it is governments.
But, in both cases, the lender was distant and anonymous.
American mortgages were no longer held at the local bank, but had been repackaged in esoteric financial instruments and sold around the world; likewise, Greek government debt is in large part owed to foreigners.
Because Spain and France defaulted so much in the early modern period, and because Greece, from the moment of its political birth in 1830, was a chronic or serial defaulter, some assume that national temperament somehow imbues countries with a proclivity to default.
But that search for long historical continuity is facile, for it misses one of the key determinants of debt sustainability: the identity of the state’s creditor.
This variable makes an enormous difference in terms of whether debt will be regularly and promptly serviced.
The frequent and spectacular early modern bankruptcies of the French and Spanish monarchies concerned for the most part debt owed to foreigners.
The sixteenth-century Habsburgs borrowed – at very high interest rates – from Florentine, Genovese, and Augsburg merchants.
Ancien régime France developed a similar pattern, borrowing in Amsterdam or Geneva in order to fight wars against Spain in the sixteenth and seventeen centuries, and against Britain in the eighteenth.
The Netherlands and Britain, however followed a different path.
They depended much less on foreign creditors than on domestic lenders.
The Dutch model was exported to Britain in 1688, along with the political revolution that deposed the Catholic James II and put the Dutch Protestant William of Orange on the English throne.
Indeed, the Glorious Revolution enabled a revolution in finance.
In particular, recognition of the rights of parliament – of a representative assembly – ensured that the agents of the creditor classes would have permanent control of the budgetary process.
They could thus guarantee – also on behalf of other creditors – that the state’s finances were solid, and that debts would be repaid.
Constitutional monarchy limited the scope for wasteful spending on luxurious court life (as well as on military adventure) – the hallmark of early modern autocratic monarchy.
In short, the financial revolution of the modern world was built on a political order – which anteceded a full transition to universal democracy – in which the creditors formed the political class.
That model was transferred to many other countries, and became the bedrock on which modern financial stability was built.
In the post-1945 period, government finance in rich industrial countries was also overwhelmingly national at first, and the assumptions of 1688 still held.
Then something happened.
With the liberalization of global financial markets that began in the 1970’s, foreign sources of credit became available.
In the mid-1980’s, the US became a net debtor, relying increasingly on foreigners to finance its debt.
Europeans, too, followed this path.
Part of the promise of the new push to European integration in the 1980’s was that it would make borrowing easier.
In the 1990’s, the main attraction of monetary union for Italian and Spanish politicians was that the new currency would bring down interest rates and make foreign money available for cheap financing of government debt.
Until the late 1990’s and the advent of monetary union, most government debt in the European Union was domestically held: in 1998, foreigners held only one-fifth of sovereign debt.
That share climbed rapidly in the aftermath of the euro’s introduction.
In 2008, on the eve of the financial crisis, three-quarters of Portuguese debt, half of Spanish and Greek debt, and more than 40% of Italian debt was held by foreigners.
When the foreign share of debt grows, so do the political incentives to impose the costs of that debt on foreigners.
In the 1930’s, during and after the Great Depression, a strong feeling that the creditors were illegitimate and unethical bloodsuckers accompanied widespread default.
Even US President Franklin Roosevelt jovially slapped his thigh when Reichsbank President Hjalmar Schacht told him that Nazi Germany would default on its external loans, including those owed to American banks, exclaiming, “Serves the Wall Street bankers right!”
In Europe today, impatient Greeks have doubtless derived some encouragement from excoriations of bankers’ foolishness by German Chancellor Angela Merkel and French President Nicolas Sarkozy.
The economists’ commonplace that a monetary union demands a fiscal union is only part of a much deeper truth about debt and obligation: debt is rarely sustainable if there is not some sense of communal or collective responsibility.
That is the mechanism that reduces the incentives to expropriate the creditor, and makes debt secure and cheap.
At the end of the day, a collective, burden-sharing Europe is the only way out of the current crisis.
But that requires substantially greater centralization of political accountability and control than Europeans seem able to achieve today.
And that is why many of them could be paying much more for credit tomorrow.
Blind in Gaza and Jerusalem
LONDON – I spent the New Year in Sydney, watching the fireworks above the iconic bridge welcome in 2009.
The explosions over Gaza that night were not intended to entertain, but rather to break Hamas and discredit it in the eyes of Palestinians.
It was the latest resort to terrible violence in order to resolve how to share in peace what Christians still like to call the Holy Land.
Mahatma Gandhi criticized the biblical justification of retribution, “an eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth.”
Followed through to its end, he argued, it would mean that all were blind.
And so it has proved in Palestine and Israel.
Blind in Gaza, blind in Jerusalem.
Much of what has happened was predictable, as well over 1,400 men, women, and children have died and more than 4,000 have been injured.
First, the United States justified the Israeli assault and blamed everything on Hamas, just as it used to pin all responsibility for whatever went wrong on Yasir Arafat and Fatah.
Second, despite French President Nicolas Sarkozy’s welcome high-profile diplomacy, Europe has been irrelevant, if not quite invisible.
As Israeli officials point out, Europeans are always there for the photo opportunity.
The Quartet’s peacemaker, Tony Blair, is as unctuously nugatory as ever.
He appears on CNN , but has he actually visited Gaza since his appointment in the summer of 2007?
No.
Third, as usual, Israel has accused of anti-Semitism those who have dared to criticize its disproportionate response to Hamas’s indefensible rocket attacks and its collective punishment of Palestinians.
An Italian cardinal, who admittedly spoke intemperately, was accused of using the language of Holocaust denial.
By that standard, does my unqualified criticism of Hamas’s rocket attacks make me an Islamophobe?
Coincidentally, the deadly attack on Gaza came at the same time that a clutch of America’s most distinguished would-be Middle East peacemakers published books about how the task should properly be tackled.
It all sounded a bit like a series of job applications – the war for President Barack Obama’s ear.
One thing all these experts could agree on is that President George W. Bush was a disaster.
American policy might as well have been made in Likud’s headquarters.
Even at the end, when the United Nations Security Council voted on Gaza, Bush was happy to humiliate Condoleezza Rice at Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Olmert’s bidding.
These “wise men,” advisers one and all to President Bill Clinton and other presidents, all seem to concede that the failure of the proposed Camp David accord in 2000 could not, after all, be laid solely at Arafat’s door.
Former Israeli premier Ehud Barak should carry his share of the blame.
Moreover, they all criticize the Clinton-era practice of routinely clearing America’s policy positions first with Israel, which is hardly likely to win Arab confidence or support.
The American diplomats’ arguments about process did not on the whole carry over into disagreement about the content of a peace deal.
All more or less agree on this.
Two states.
Security guarantees for Israel.
A Palestinian state within the 1967 borders, adjusted by agreement through mutual land swaps.
An end to most West Bank settlements.
No “right of return” for Palestinian refugees, but financial compensation for them.
Some system of joint or international sovereignty over Jerusalem’s holy places and the division of the city so that it can become the capital of two states.
Of course, this is what should happen.
And I suppose that it is conceivable that it could still happen with the help of welcome new mediators like Qatar and Turkey, whose prime minister called Israel’s attack “a serious crime against humanity.”
But I have begun to wonder whether it will really be possible to achieve peace on this basis.
Fatah, and Palestinian moderates like President Mahmoud Abbas, have been totally discredited.
Palestinians on the whole have been further radicalized.
Hamas, whose engagement and support is essential for any settlement, has sworn revenge.
Every day, new Palestinian sorrows strike heaven in the face.
The widows and the mothers of the dead weep and cry out for bloody justice.
Should we be surprised?
Had the British government pursued peace and the destruction of the IRA in Northern Ireland by bombing Catholic Derry, would that have alienated or won over Catholic opinion?
On the Israeli side, which political leaders really want a Palestinian state and are prepared to take the political risks associated with trying to establish one?
Which of them are strong enough to deal with the West Bank settlers?
There will be no peace settlement otherwise.
Which leaders will teach the facts of life to the more extreme members of the Jewish diaspora in America?
Who among Israel’s leaders understands that reconciliation is more important that retribution and revenge?
However tough things looked in the past, I have never felt such a sense of despair about Palestine and Israel.
Reason has been drowned in blood.
It seems as though the politics of hope have given way to the politics of the cemetery.
Poor Palestine. Poor Israel.
Who is there now who can still light a candle in the dark?
The End of Big Banks
WASHINGTON, DC – After nearly a decade of crisis, bailout, and reform in the United States and the European Union, the financial system – both in those countries and globally – is remarkably similar to the one we had in 2006.
Many financial reforms have been attempted since 2010, but the overall effects have been limited.
Some big banks have struggled, but others have risen to take their place.
Both before the 2008 global financial crisis and today, just over a dozen big banks dominate the world’s financial landscape.
And yet the ground is shifting beneath the financial sector, and big banks could soon become a thing of the past.
Few officials privately express satisfaction with the progress of financial reform.
In public, most of them are more polite, but the president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, Neel Kashkari, struck a chord recently when he called for a reevaluation of how much progress has been made on addressing the problem of financial institutions that are “too big to fail” (TBTF).
Kashkari worked for Henry M. Paulson in the US Treasury Department, beginning in 2006.
He not only watched the financial crisis develop; in October 2008 he became the assistant secretary responsible for the Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP), with the goal of stabilizing the financial system.
He is a Republican who has worked at both Goldman Sachs (a big bank) and PIMCO (a large asset-management company).
So people pay attention when he says, “I believe the biggest banks are still too big to fail and continue to pose a significant, ongoing risk to our economy.”
And Kashkari is correct in his assessment of the Dodd-Frank financial reforms of 2010.
This legislation and the ensuing regulations have moved some issues in the right direction.
“But given the enormous costs that would be associated with another financial crisis and the lack of certainty about whether these new tools would be effective in dealing with one,” he argues, “I believe we must seriously consider bolder, transformational options.”
Kashkari is now proposing exactly the right approach: to hold public conferences and extensive discussions to evaluate whether large banks should be broken up, whether they (and other financial institutions) should be forced to fund themselves with more equity and less debt, or whether there should be a debt tax to discourage excessive leverage.
The first conference will be on April 4 (I will be one of the speakers).
Kashkari is just one of 12 presidents of regional Federal Reserve Banks.
And he sits on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC), which sets monetary policy – but not on the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, which oversees bank regulation.
Still, his call for an evaluation of the TBTF problem will have a major impact for three reasons.
First, the views he expresses are entirely sensible and mainstream, based on deep experience (his and others) with this and other financial crises.
Kashkari is presenting from a position of authority a message that many other reasonable people have been trying to convey for nearly a decade.
Second, Kashkari has articulated – in appropriate central-bank language – precisely the same view that the remaining Democratic presidential candidates are putting before the voting public.
Hillary Clinton has a detailed and thoughtful plan for financial reform, with emphasis on taxing leverage and increasing capital requirements.
Bernie Sanders would prefer to break up the banks.
But the goal is the same; and, as Kashkari points out, any of these tools can potentially get us to a better place.
When reasonable Republicans and Democrats begin to converge on policy, we are more likely to get sensible change.
Third, Kashkari’s timing coincides with the arrival of new “blockchain” technology, which makes it possible to organize financial transactions in a more decentralized way.
Various versions of this technology are either already available or currently under development – and there is a very real prospect that this will reduce transaction costs across much of the financial sector.
We do not yet know which version will prevail, and there is active discussion about how to ensure that the new standards and systems enhance stability, rather than (as with some previous financial innovations) producing unpleasant unintended consequences.
Most important, blockchain technology has the potential to reduce substantially, or even eliminate, the value of being a trusted intermediary such as a large bank.
And yet the big banks themselves are pouring money into this technology – presumably hoping to save at least some part of their business by limiting the degree of ultimate decentralization.
Kashkari will lead the way to rethinking – and, one hopes, ending – the TBTF problem in traditional big banks.
In a blockchain world, he and his colleagues are likely to work hard to prevent any variant of TBTF from reappearing.
Block Thinking
“Multiculturalism” has become a suspect term almost everywhere in the world nowadays, and particularly in Europe.
People say things like: “I used to be for openness and toleration of difference, but now I see where it’s leading.”
But where is it leading?
Almost every reason for toleration’s apparent fall into disrepute concerns Islam.
Even simple requests, like that of schoolgirls to wear headscarves in class, are suddenly freighted with immense political significance and treated as issues that must be resolved at the highest level of government.
People – and their elected leaders as well -- often have the feeling that such seemingly innocent proposals are in fact part of an ominous “hidden agenda.”
That agenda is “Islam,” which many imagine to include all the terrible things that we can read about in the press every day: the stoning of adulterous women under Sharia law in northern Nigeria, the amputation of thieves’ hands in Saudi Arabia, honor killings of women who refuse arranged marriages in Pakistan (or even northern English cities like Bradford and Manchester), the willingness to justify suicide bombings.
If you reply that the girls who want to wear headscarves to school aren’t living in Nigeria or Saudi Arabia, and almost certainly don’t share the extreme Wahhabi views found in those countries, you will be met with a look of almost indulgent pity, a look of the type reserved for the terminally naïve.
Or you will be told stories about how Saudi trained imams are twisting the girls’ arms, turning them into unwilling stalking-horses for “Islam.”
Indeed, it is virtually impossible nowadays to talk about headscarves as an issue in its own right.
All the sociological evidence about the girls’ motives, which are in fact very varied, is swept aside as irrelevant.
All that matters is the threat posed by Islam.
This is a classic example of what I call “block thinking,” which seems to have made huge strides in Europe in recent years.
John Bowen’s recent book Why the French Don’t Like Headscarves documents this shift.
Block thinking fuses a varied reality into one indissoluble unity, and in two ways.
First, different manifestations of Islamic piety or culture are seen as alternative ways of expressing the same core meaning.
Second, all Muslims are then seen as endorsing these core meanings.
The possibility that a girl wearing a headscarf might in fact be rebelling against her parents and their kind of Islam, and that others might be deeply pious while being utterly revolted by gender discrimination or violence, is lost from view.
Block thinking is an age-old phenomenon, and we all do it to some degree.
But, while in another age we might have been indulgent about its consequences, today it has explosive potential, because people who think in this manner are prime recruits for seeing the world in terms of Samuel Huntington’s theory of the “clash of civilizations.”
What’s worse, the way such people then act tends to edge us closer to Huntington’s nightmare scenario.
By treating all the varied segments of Islam as nothing more than parts of a unified threat to the West, they make it harder for Muslims to stand out and criticize their own block thinkers – people like Osama bin Laden, who are building their own unified enemy, composed of “Christians and Jews.”
Block thinkers on each side give aid and comfort to block thinkers on the other side, and with each exchange they pull us closer toward an abyss.
So how can we stop this madness?
Block thought persists in part because its critics on each side are unknown to those on the other side.
Indeed, how many times does a critic of European block thought meet this kind of response: “But where are the Muslims who are criticizing extremist Islam?”
Of course, one isn’t likely to meet them in the drawing rooms of Paris journalists or the wider European professional political class.
But explaining that to block thinkers will never have the impact of a real connection to the multi-faceted discourse that is actually taking place on the other side.
The real question, then, is this: Where are the crossover figures who can provide that urgently needed connection?
BMW\u0027s and Chinese Justice
In most places, the name "BMW" implies luxury and exclusivity.
But in China, the brand has unwittingly found itself enmeshed in tales that illustrate the powerlessness of ordinary Chinese against the powerful and corrupt.
The first scandal occurred last year, after a tractor filled with green onions scraped the side of a BMW in Harbin.
The drivers of both the tractor and the metallic-silver luxury car were 45-year-old women, but any similarity between them ended there: the former was a peasant, the latter the wife of a wealthy businessman.
After a confrontation between the two, the wealthy wife drove her BMW into the growing crowd of spectators on the roadside, killing the peasant woman and injuring 12 others.
The case went to the local court, where the judge ruled it an "accidental traffic disturbance" and gave the driver a two-year suspended sentence.
The judge's ruling spurred rumors that he went easy on her because her husband was related to senior provincial officials.
It quickly became a story of "rich versus poor," widely cited as an example of high-level corruption.
Over the next few months, newspapers and television stations ran with the story as it snowballed into a national obsession.
Alarmed by the public reaction, the Harbin magistrate ordered the case reopened, only to have the suspended sentence confirmed when the case was closed this March.
The big BMW story of late 2003 resurfaced quietly, before being buried again forever.
That same month, a lottery scandal threw the BMW brand into the limelight once again.
Lottery officials in Shaanxi province rejected a winning ticket, calling it a fake and denying its bearer, a 17-year-old security guard named Liu Liang, the grand prize of a $58,000 BMW and 120,000 yuan ($14,510) in cash.
Liu became so angry about being accused of fraud and denied the car that he climbed atop a high advertising billboard and threatened to jump as a show of innocence.
But the story didn't end when police officers managed to talk him down.
News broadcasts covered his continued insistence that he did not forge his ticket, along with the lottery center's claims that their rejection of the ticket was legitimate.
The police finally stepped in and, after a careful investigation, announced that they had found the true criminal: Yang Yongming, a private businessman whom the local lottery administration had contracted to organize ticket sales.
Yang had conspired with the government officials directing the lottery, who were arrested for malfeasance, to fraudulently obtain the top prizes.
In June Liu Liang finally got what he deserved - a BMW-325i sedan and a sincere apology from the lottery center.
If the first scandal was a tragedy, the second was more like a farce.
But both offer keys to understanding contemporary Chinese psychology.
The outcry after the first BMW case was not really about the light sentence given to a rich woman, but about the lack of confidence ordinary people have in China's judicial system.
In China, power, money, and connections trump the law.
Even as they are becoming ever more litigious, many Chinese believe that they have no hope of securing justice against the powerful.
The apathetic response of the dead peasant woman's husband to the $10,000 in compensation he received was telling.
"I don't care about the verdict and whether it is justice or not," he said.
The most harmful consequence is the public's loss of trust in the system.
Social trust is not something you can buy with money.
If an entire society believes that you cannot depend on legal rights for protection - that one must instead rely on a web of relationships with those who have power and influence - questions about whether such a society is livable or desirable will remain.
Similarly, in the second BMW case, people didn't blame a corrupt businessman; they ascribed culpability to the lottery center, a government body.
So instead of mistrusting one person, they grew suspicious of an institution - even of government itself.
When a stubborn teenager went up against the mighty lottery authority with its army of auditors and inspectors and initial alibis, this individual, not the system, was the clear winner of the public's admiration.
Liu Liang may have been just a working-class kid, but there was wisdom in his words that there is still a "silent majority" who can affect the workings of China's fragile society.
He refused to settle privately, because he believed that if he let corrupt government officials off the hook, "they'll keep scamming the public."
Thanks to his perseverance and the media's investigation, the fraud was laid bare.
Power corrupts everywhere, but individuals in China such as Liu have come to form a countervailing force.
Even so, such marginal forces do not yet constitute a system for redressing grievances.
While pop music fans in China can listen to whatever they like, including Madonna singing "I'm gonna shake up the system," ordinary Chinese need courage to speak such messages aloud.
As one saying goes, "There is not want of conscience in Chinese, but there is want of courage."
From Bubbles to Bridges
LONDON – As the season in which public companies hold their annual general meetings progresses, one persistent issue is the lack of genuine dialogue between company officials and the general public.
In place of robust debate and discussion among investors, executives, the workforce, and the community at large, the conversation seems to be taking place in different silos, with one group sitting around the boardroom table and another gathered at the kitchen table.
From the outside, a boardroom is all too often viewed as a kind of bubble where big decisions that influence thousands of lives are made by faceless people.
They are perceived as places where big bonuses are awarded to chief executives and where horse-trading and old boy networks are more important than merit or hard work.
With people outside the boardroom increasingly demanding to hold those inside it to account, opening up avenues of communication is now critical to companies’ long-term success.
An important feature of this shift will be the realization by high-profile executives that they can no longer afford to brush off criticism with the you-just-don’t-understand defense.
When Jamie Dimon, CEO of JPMorgan Chase, said that he didn’t think that United States Senator Elizabeth Warren “fully understands the global banking system,” many were infuriated at the arrogant condescension of his pronouncement.
His words tapped into a wider feeling that CEOs are out of touch and unwilling, or unable, to respond to tough questions with sincere answers.
Even the widely respected investor Warren Buffett missed the mark when he said that Warren “would do better if she was less angry and demonized less.”
In the absence of genuine dialogue about issues like wage discrepancy, corporate social responsibility, data privacy, and a bonus culture that does not seem to provide the right incentives for hard work or to adequately penalize failure, worries and mistrust are guaranteed to fester.
Lack of transparency, absence of clarity, and a paucity of answers feeds into the perception that companies are too often engaged in dodgy dealings and can’t be trusted.
Worst of all, the breakdown in communication deprives those around both the boardroom and kitchen tables of the opportunity to realize that they are talking about similar problems and share similar desires to find solutions to them.
Chief executives and board chairs need to think of those with whom they interact as people to talk with rather than at.
Leaders who can talk are fine; but those who can listen are even better.
Business executives need to realize that if they cannot explain their decisions in ways that investors, regulators, workers, and consumers can understand, then they – not the people with whom they are talking – are the problem.
When activist investors want to take a look at a company, the boardroom instinct should not be to circle the wagons and call in consultants to do battle.
Instead, boards and executive teams need to ask themselves why their company has become a target and whether there are legitimate concerns to be addressed.
Annual general meetings provide an ideal opportunity to stand up and ask hard questions – an opportunity that investors and community members should make certain is not wasted.
At Yahoo!’s recent annual meeting, the board was asked a wide range of questions; but, with the exception of a question or two about Alibaba, few of them addressed any of the real issues facing the company today.
CEO Marissa Mayer was asked questions like why the “underline” icon had been removed from the formatting options in Yahoo! Mail and why there was so much spam in Yahoo!
Finance. If companies like Yahoo! are to benefit from occasions like this, individual and institutional investors alike need to up their game and ask real questions about the business in the open forum of the annual general meeting instead of airing their concerns behind closed doors.
For the conversation to be truly effective, however, it must continue between annual meetings.
Smart business leaders must provide frequent opportunities for the exchange of ideas and expressions of concern.
Silos must be knocked down and bubbles must be pierced, with bridges being built in their place.
Tomorrow’s successful executives will be those who take the opportunity to join a real conversation and draw wisdom from the crowd.
The Age of Bobby Fischer
CAMBRIDGE – The brilliant new Hollywood movie “Pawn Sacrifice” portrays the life of tormented chess genius Robert James “Bobby” Fischer from his early days as a prodigy to his historic 1972 match, at age 29, with Russian world champion Boris Spassky.
Actor Toby Maguire portrays Fischer with remarkable authenticity – indeed, pitch-perfect for those of us who met Fischer in his prime.
The film depicts a match that became a signature event in the Cold War between Russia and the United States.
It also makes one wonder whether a creative genius like Fischer, deeply troubled yet supremely functional at the chessboard, would be able to exist in today’s unforgiving online world.
Fischer certainly got attention back then, but information was filtered very differently than it is today.
Journalists used to lead the way, rather than slavishly following the flow of superficial Internet traffic.
The story of an erratic kid from Brooklyn taking on the Soviet empire in its national sport made good copy for journalists, who understood the significance of the event.
The match garnered front-page headlines in major newspapers around the world on a daily basis for two months, with commentators providing live move-by-move analysis for up to five hours each day.
Back then, there were only a few television channels.
There were no DVD players or pay-per-view services.
Still, that was not the only reason people remained glued to their TV sets to watch the match.
The surreal environment, the amazing chess turns, and the Cold War backdrop made Fischer one of the most famous people in the world that summer.
I won’t humor myself that it was the chess analysis that drew attention, although I was a commentator for public television on the pivotal 13th game.
For the American champion, the match was the consummation of two decades of chasing the title, starting from his days as a child prodigy.
After a lifetime of living in relative poverty for a superstar (even though he frequently appeared on the cover of major magazines), Fischer finally found himself playing in a match with a $250,000 purse.
Of course, it was a pittance compared to the $2.5 million that each fighter was guaranteed in the 1971 Ali-Frazier fight.
But Fischer recognized that US culture marginalizes any pursuit that does not produce big money, so he viewed the six-figure cash prize as the ultimate symbol of advancement in his sport.
For Russia, the match was not about money; it was about hearts and minds.
The chess world had long been the perfect battleground on which to prove the superiority of the Communist system.
Although most Westerners today pretend that we always knew that Russian-style Communism would fail, it was not so obvious back then.
The leading introductory economic textbook of the time, by Nobel laurate Paul Samuelson, was still predicting that Russia might overtake the US as the world’s largest economy.
To be fair, Russians valued chess enormously, even if it did not produce a lot of income.
In many ways, chess was Russia’s national sport.
No wonder Fischer’s quixotic pursuit of the championship led American policy mastermind Henry Kissinger to call Fischer and urge him not to back out, as he had threatened to do.
Whatever his status in the US, Fischer was certainly the most beloved American in Russia.
The majesty of his play transcended propaganda in a country where everyday people could appreciate and understand the innate beauty of the game.
In the run-up to the championship, Fischer trounced two very good opponents with unheard of 6-0 scores, an astonishing result when so many grandmaster games end in draws.
Russian fans were so excited by Fischer’s unprecedented achievement that they reportedly jammed Moscow telephone exchanges to get information.
After a while, operators would simply pick up the line and say “6-0” and hang up.
In the end, even Spassky paid the ultimate tribute to Fischer’s genius, clapping along with the audience after Fischer’s inspired sixth-game victory, as portrayed in the movie.
The American might have been the ultimate chess genius, but the Russian was the class act.
Director Edward Zwick does not shirk from showing the demons that plagued Fischer.
He was justly concerned that the Russians would go to great lengths to prevent him from being champion, but ultimately rational concerns tipped into paranoia, and Fischer started to turn on his closest friends and confidants.
He became anti-Semitic, despite being Jewish himself.
One suspects that in today’s online world, Fischer’s paranoia and personal flaws would have tripped him up long before he became champion.
After Fischer became champion and simply stopped playing competitive chess, his mental illness became much worse.
Though no one can condone Fischer’s virulent rants and dark thoughts in his later years (he died in 2008), it is sad to realize that someone of such towering creativity and genius, who inspired so many people through his chess, might have had his career ended at a much earlier stage today.
We live in a different world.
“Pawn Sacrifice” recalls the world in which Fischer’s feats were possible.
The Boehner Shock
WASHINGTON, DC – Ever since the financial crisis erupted in 2008, media outlets and specialists alike have devoted much attention to anticipating negative shocks to the global economy.
Today the focus is on the state of the Chinese economy, the timing of the US Federal Reserve’s normalization of interest rates, and the various policies under discussion in the United States’ presidential election campaign.
But the most damaging shocks often hide in plain sight – and then hit precisely when and where almost everyone thought stability would prevail.
One such risk is that political partisanship will cause another disruption to the US federal government’s finances, weakening the American economy and roiling world financial markets.
This warning may seem strange.
After all, the last big partisan fight (in 2013) over funding the government and raising the debt limit gained little for the Republicans who instigated it – other than significant damage to their reputation for responsibility.
And the current Republican leadership, eager to strengthen their party’s electoral chances in 2016, very much wants to project an image of sober good sense.
Yet a major and destabilizing confrontation over public finance now seems unavoidable, particularly following House Speaker John Boehner’s surprise announcement that he will resign his position and his seat in Congress at the end of October.
To see why, one need look no further than the House Ways and Means Committee, whose current chairman, Paul Ryan, is a leader of the hardline Republican insurgents who had scorned Boehner for being too willing to compromise with President Barack Obama and House Democrats.
Ryan’s committee plays an important role in setting America’s fiscal agenda, reflecting both the constitutional requirement that revenue bills originate in the House of Representatives and political realities (the House is traditionally less fractious than the Senate).
Unlike in 2013, the strategy of Ryan and his allies this time around is unlikely to include a threat to default directly on federal government debt.
And Republicans on the committee claim that social security payments will be made on time.
So what other bills do they plan not to pay as part of a showdown over legislation to keep the government funded?
In fact, it is difficult to say exactly what the threat is – and that is part of the problem.
Uncertainty about government contracts and various kinds of payments can have a broad impact on the economy.
The difficulty of working through the full economic implications is precisely what discourages consumers from making purchases and causes firms to postpone investment.
The US Government Accountability Office (GAO) published a helpful report in July that spelled out some of the consequences of the 2013 confrontation over the debt ceiling – including how it pushed up the government’s borrowing costs and the negative impact this had on the economy.
But the Republican majority in Congress simply ignores this type of sensible analysis.
As a result, a partial government shutdown is entirely possible, with the Republicans imposing a form of prioritization on government payments: some people will be paid what they are owed, and others will not.
This will fuel uncertainty, sap economic confidence, and almost certainly hurt the Republicans at the polls in 2016.
So why is it likely to happen?
One reason is to be found in the decentralized nature of American politics, which leaves elected officials relatively unbeholden to party leaders.
Some Republican supporters and donors have obviously moved to the right in recent decades.
But, as James Kwak and I explained in our book on US fiscal policy, White House Burning, the time when the Republican right favored responsible budgets and financial stability has long since passed.
Now the right – increasingly catering to a Southern, rural, and white constituency – cares much more about shrinking the federal government, and in recent years has viewed shutting it down or threatening nonpayment of debts as a way to “starve the beast.”
Moreover, the Republicans’ uncompromising stance has been reinforced by the extreme position taken by many within its congressional delegation that Planned Parenthood – a health-care provider that primarily serves women – must be defunded as a condition of any budget deal.
Boehner’s resignation, though viewed by some as clearing the way for a short-term deal to fund the government, merely underscores the limited ability of any “responsible” Republican leader to control the party’s increasingly fundamentalist caucus.
In the US, as elsewhere, debates about fiscal policy should be open, with clear statements of alternative goals and balanced assessments of how best to pay for what government does.
Unfortunately, a debate and the compromises that follow are not what the Republicans have in mind.
Boehner’s forced departure makes it likelier than ever that the US – and the world – will soon face the prospect of another self-inflicted economic shock, caused entirely by the Republicans’ scorched-earth budget tactics.
Less than Zero in Japan
TOKYO – In a bold attempt to reflate the Japanese economy, the Bank of Japan has now pushed interest rates on deposits into negative territory.
Though this policy is not new – it is already being pursued by the European Central Bank, the Bank of Sweden, the Swiss National Bank, and others – it is uncharted ground for the BOJ.
And, unfortunately, markets have not responded as expected.
In theory, negative rates, by forcing commercial banks essentially to pay the central bank to be able to park their money, should spur increased lending to companies, which would then spend more, including on hiring more employees.
This should spur a stock-market rebound, boost household consumption, weaken the yen’s exchange rate, and halt deflation.
But theory does not always translate into practice; while the BOJ’s introduction of negative rates almost immediately pushed the interest-rate structure lower, as expected, the policy’s effects on the yen and the stock market have been an unpleasant surprise.
One reason for this is widespread pessimism about Japan’s economy, reinforced by volatility in China, monetary tightening in the United States, and the collapse in world oil prices.
But, as BOJ Governor Haruhiko Kuroda recently reported to the House of Councillors, Japan’s economic fundamentals are generally sound, and pessimistic predictions are greatly exaggerated.
In fact, Prime Minister Shinzo Abe’s economy strategy – so-called “Abenomics” – has enabled Japan to stay on a reasonably positive path in highly uncertain times, with the economy showing signs of steady recovery from its decades of stagnation.
Since Abe took office in 2012, 1.5 million jobs have been created, and the unemployment rate has fallen from 4.6% to 3.3%.
Moreover, tourism has surged, and both company and government revenues have been rising rapidly.
Even Japan’s external challenges may not be such bad news.
For starters, Japan, like emerging economies with flexible exchange-rate regimes, may actually benefit from America’s monetary tightening, as an appreciating dollar makes Japanese exports more competitive.
Similarly, because Japan can meet at most 6% of its own energy needs, cheap oil is a true blessing – one that may well endure for some time to come.
As for the economic situation in China, there is certainly reason for concern.
The problem is that, while the “hardware” of the Chinese economy has advanced substantially since Deng Xiaoping initiated his “reform and opening up” policy almost four decades ago, the “software” of economic policymaking is constrained by excessive state management.
As a result, the country is struggling to shift to a more sustainable growth model, underpinned by a thriving services sector and strong domestic consumption.
Until China reckons with the ruling Communist Party’s stranglehold on key levers of the economy, it will be a source of market uncertainty that reverberates throughout the global economy.
But even here Japan’s situation is not as dire as many seem to think, owing to its limited exposure to China; for example, exports to China amount to only 3% of Japan’s GDP.
Given this, there is no reason why the Tokyo stock market should gyrate whenever the Shanghai market shakes.
The conventional hedge-fund strategy should be going short on Shanghai stocks and long on Tokyo stocks.
And yet, even though Japan’s economic situation is far from dire, introducing negative interest rates has not been treated as what it is: a maneuver to loosen monetary policy.
Instead, the Japanese stock market regarded negative rates as a harbinger of greater financial risk, and speculators have remained bullish on the yen.
The statistician and economist Yoichi Takahashi tells me that the yen’s 8% appreciation over just ten days in February is abnormal, and probably fueled by speculative attacks.
In his opinion, some interventions in the exchange market by the Ministry of Finance may need to be pursued to contain the extraordinary fluctuations.
From 2003 to 2004, the Japanese treasury purchased a large amount of dollars, thereby easing monetary conditions at a time when the BOJ was reluctant to pursue open market operations.
In recent years, however, the yen’s exchange rate has been determined through monetary policy, not manipulated by intervention.
In general, I welcome this new approach, and thus do not recommend major interventions to change the direction of the yen exchange rate.
I do, however, believe that sporadic interventions may be needed to punish speculators who are taking advantage of temporary market psychology to keep the yen far above its market value.
Nigeria’s Poverty-Powered Insurgency
LAGOS – Nigerian security forces recently razed a northeastern fishing village, leaving almost 200 people dead and destroying some 2,000 homes, in order to root out just a few members of the radical Islamist sect Boko Haram.
The assault reflected the military’s growing frustration with the extremists who have staged scores of attacks in the last four years.
While Nigerian President Goodluck Jonathan and United Nations Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon have condemned the army’s heavy-handed approach, this is not the first time that clashes with extremists have caused significant collateral damage – and it almost certainly will not be the last.
Boko Haram, whose primary objective is to compel Nigeria to adopt Sharia law, has proved surprisingly resilient since declaring war on the government in 2009, in response to the military’s execution of its leader, Mohammed Yusuf.
Using hit-and-run guerilla tactics and suicide bombers, Boko Haram has attacked police stations, government buildings, and churches, killing thousands.
Despite violent clashes with a special military task force in Borno and Yobe, the northern states where the sect is most active, Boko Haram remains robust.
Political sensitivities in the predominantly Muslim north have forced Jonathan, a Christian southerner, to tread lightly in his efforts to contain Boko Haram.
Many northerners resent that the presidency was returned to a southerner after only one term with a northerner in office (an informal agreement mandates that the presidency should alternate between north and south every two terms).
Northern politicians and emirs (traditional Muslim leaders) have used the ongoing insurgency to damage Jonathan’s credibility, thereby strengthening their campaign to return the presidency to the north.
First, they ordered that Jonathan disband the military task force, claiming that it was occupying the north and harassing civilians.
They then called on Jonathan to extend amnesty to Boko Haram’s members and to initiate a dialogue.
Jonathan initially refused their requests, stating last month that he could not negotiate with “ghosts.”
But, with the clamor for amnesty reaching a deafening crescendo, Jonathan relented.
Last week, he inaugurated the Presidential Committee on Dialogue and Peaceful Resolution of Security Challenges in the North, a 26-member committee composed mainly of northern leaders tasked with opening a dialogue with Boko Haram and working out the terms of amnesty and compensation for victims of the insurgency.
But, before the government had even announced its decision, Boko Haram’s leader, Abubakar Shekau, rejected the offer.
In an audio recording that he sent to journalists earlier this month, he stated that the organization had done nothing to warrant an amnesty.
According to Shekau, the Nigerian government is the iniquitous party, and Boko Haram will not give up the fight.
This defiance reflects Boko Haram’s strong position.
As a recent US State Department report points out, Nigerian citizens’ “grievances regarding poverty, government and security-force corruption, and police impunity and brutality [have] created a fertile ground for recruiting Boko Haram members.”
In recent years, competition from Asia has weakened the north’s once-prosperous textile industry, leaving thousands unemployed; drought has devastated the region’s agriculture; and the service sector has remained underdeveloped.
Millions of impoverished, unemployed young people now seek an alternative, which Boko Haram, with its incendiary rhetoric blaming the country’s leaders for the population’s troubles, can provide.
With people flocking to its recruiting centers by the thousands, Boko Haram faces no shortage of willing soldiers to continue its war of attrition against the Nigerian government.
Recognizing that the most effective approach to thinning Boko Haram’s ranks is to address the north’s deepening economic and social problems, Jonathan has backed an initiative to build new schools in the north that will equip young people with valuable skills.
Studies of how to revive the region’s economy have been commissioned.
But such efforts will take time to yield results.
Moreover, the north’s troubles are only part of a wider national story of surging unemployment, restless young people, endemic corruption, and a growing sense of hopelessness.
Jonathan appears to be incapable of tackling the official corruption that, as the US report emphasized, pervades all sectors, from the police to the courts.
In its 14 years in power, the People’s Democratic Party has failed to articulate programs and policies that offer Nigerians a new sense of purpose.
Most Nigerians expect the general election in 2015 to bring in a new set of self-serving politicians with little interest in improving the situation.
If they are right, Boko Haram will continue to thrive.
Smart Taxation
ROME – An effective tax policy that ensures adequate domestic revenue is a crucial determinant of a country’s ability to pursue development policies.
But tax revenues in most developing countries are low, impeding progress toward more balanced, inclusive, and sustainable economic development that can improve public health and raise standards of living.
Although non-tax revenue may contribute significantly to some countries’ total GDP, the average tax/GDP ratios in low-income and lower-middle-income countries are roughly 15% and 19%, respectively – significantly lower than the OECD average of more than 35%.
To finance development projects, poor and lower-middle-income countries must devise and implement tax strategies to increase domestic revenue.
This entails abandoning the prevailing dogma that taxes should only be increased when absolutely necessary.
This stance assumes that lower tax rates raise the tax/GDP ratio by ensuring better compliance with tax laws, and favors indirect taxation (such as value-added taxes) in order to broaden the tax base to include those with modest incomes.
Meanwhile, direct taxation of corporations and individuals has tended to decline – despite the moot claim that lower direct taxation ensures investment and growth.
As a result, the tax/GDP ratio in most countries in Sub-Saharan Africa and Latin America has stagnated or even fallen.
In many developing countries, total tax revenue is derived from three main sources: domestic taxes on goods and services (sales and excise taxes), direct taxes (primarily on corporations), and, most important, taxes on foreign trade (import duties).
But, as trade liberalization has lowered tariffs and duties, the share of trade taxes has declined, while other sources have not compensated for falling trade revenue.
By contrast, in high-income countries, income taxes (primarily on individuals) comprise the largest proportion of tax revenue (roughly 36%), while domestic taxes on goods and services and social-security contributions each account for slightly more than one-quarter.
Moreover, the share of trade taxes is typically low.
Of course, developing countries should not simply mimic developed economies’ tax systems.
After all, no one-size-fits-all approach exists, even among developing countries.
And tax policy must evolve with changing economic circumstances.
Instead, developing-country leaders must draw on the experiences of both developed countries and their peers to design tax policies that meet the basic requirements of operability, buoyancy, and stability.
This can include broadening the tax base, reducing tax avoidance and evasion, improving tax collection, and developing new, cooperative international taxation strategies.
In many countries, tax reform has already significantly increased the share of direct taxes in overall revenue.
Raising tax rates for the wealthiest citizens in developing a more progressive income tax framework would bolster this progress.
Governments should also work to improve tax compliance and reduce evasion, which requires limiting tax officials’ discretionary authority.
Computerizing tax administration, for example, could help to limit corruption by making it more difficult to tamper with records.
In order to increase personal-income taxes’ share of total revenue, developing countries are already improving their tax administrations in innovative ways, particularly to reach hard-to-tax citizens.
More can be done: Every individual who owns a house or a vehicle, is a member of a club, holds a credit card, passport, driver’s license, or other identity card, or subscribes to a telephone service can be required to file a tax return.
Moreover, excise taxes are a convenient source of revenue in developing countries, as they are primarily levied on products such as alcohol, tobacco, gas, vehicles, and spare parts, which involve few producers, large sales volumes, relatively inelastic demand, and easy observability.
Excise taxes may be levied when goods leave a factory or arrive at a port, simplifying measurement, collection, and monitoring, while ensuring coverage and limiting evasion.
But, despite their robust base and low administrative costs, excise taxes currently amount to less than 2% of low-income countries’ GDP, compared to roughly 3% in high-income countries.
Developing countries must also aim to offset the consequences of globalization.
For example, capital mobility increases opportunities for tax evasion, given that tax authorities’ capacity to monitor their citizens’ overseas incomes is limited, and some governments and financial institutions systematically conceal relevant information.
If dividends, interest, royalties, and management fees are not taxed in the country in which they are paid, they more easily escape notice in the country of residence.
Indeed, some countries – including the United States – impose no taxes on interest from large bank deposits by non-resident aliens.
Globalization may also facilitate legal tax avoidance.
For example, multinational corporations use methods like transfer pricing (book-keeping of goods, services, and resources transferred between a single company’s branches or subsidiaries) to minimize tax liability on their profits from international operations.
Corporate taxpayers take advantage of discrepancies in rules and rates, choosing to do business in countries with more favorable – or lax – tax regimes.
Finally, international competition for inward foreign direct investment may lead governments to reduce tax rates and increase concessions for foreign investors.
With evidence of sudden capital outflows in response to certain tax-policy changes, governments are reluctant to raise income-tax rates – which have fallen sharply since the late 1970’s – or to tax dividend and interest income, for fear of capital flight.
But, as direct-tax concessions have little or no effect in diverting international investment, let alone in attracting such flows, they constitute an unnecessary loss of revenue.
Beggar-thy-neighbor policies will lead to revenue losses for all developing countries, while undermining the possibility of balanced, inclusive, and sustainable development.
Developing-country finance ministries and tax authorities must cooperate with one another and with their OECD counterparts to close existing loopholes and establish effective tax policies that support their shared interests.
With rising public debt worldwide placing fiscal constraints (real and imagined) on global economic recovery, such cooperation is more urgent than ever.
Bombs Away
LONDON – One of the most dispiriting features of today’s international debates is that the threat to humanity posed by the world’s 23,000 nuclear weapons – and by those who would build more of them, or be only too willing to use them – has been consigned to the margin of politics.
US President Barack Obama did capture global attention with his Prague speech in 2009, which made a compelling case for a nuclear weapon-free world.
And he did deliver on a major new arms-reduction treaty with Russia, and hosted a summit aimed at reducing the vulnerability of nuclear weapons and materials to theft or diversion.
But nuclear issues still struggle for public resonance and political traction.
It would take a brave gambler to bet on ratification of the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty by the US Senate any time soon.
The film An Inconvenient Truth won an Academy Award, led to a Nobel Prize for Al Gore, and attracted huge international attention to the disastrous impact of climate change.
But Countdown to Zero, an equally compelling documentary, made by the same production team and making shockingly clear how close and how often the world has come to nuclear catastrophe, has come and gone almost without trace.
Complacency trumps anxiety almost everywhere.
Japan’s Fukushima disaster has generated a massive debate about the safety of nuclear power, but not about nuclear weapons.
Fear of a nuclear holocaust seems to have ended with the Cold War.
Indeed, Hiroshima and Nagasaki seem an eternity ago; new nuclear-weapons states have emerged without the world ending; no terrorist nuclear device has threatened a major city; and possession of nuclear weapons, for the states that have them, seems to be a source of comfort and pride rather than concern or embarrassment.
With only a handful of exceptions, the current generation of political leaders shows little interest in disarmament, and not much more in non-proliferation.
And their publics are not pressuring them to behave otherwise.
Few have worked harder to shake the world out of its complacency than four of the hardest-nosed realists ever to hold public office: former US Secretaries of State Henry Kissinger and George Shultz, former US Secretary of Defense William Perry, and former US Senator Sam Nunn.
In a series of opinion articles over the last five years, they have repeatedly sounded the alarm that the risks of nuclear weapons outweigh any possible usefulness in today’s security environment.
Moreover, they have called for a complete rethinking of deterrence strategy, in order to minimize, and ultimately eliminate, reliance on the most indiscriminately destructive weapons ever invented.
Last week in London, the “gang of four” convened a private meeting with leading think-tank researchers and a worldwide cast of some 30 former foreign and defense ministers, generals, and ambassadors who share their concern and commitment.
But our average age was over 65, and the limits of our effectiveness were neatly described by former British Defence Minister Des Browne: “People who used to be something really want to tackle this issue.
The trouble is that those who are something don’t.”
No quick fix will turn all this around.
Getting the kind of messages that emerged from the London meeting embedded in public and political consciousness is going to be slow boring through hard boards.
But the messages demand attention, and we simply have to keep drilling.
The first message is that the threat of a nuclear weapons catastrophe remains alarmingly real.
Existing global stockpiles have a destructive capacity equal to 150,000 Hiroshima bombs, and in handling them there is an omnipresent potential for human error, system error, or misjudgment under stress.
Pakistan versus India is a devastating conflict-in-waiting, and North Korea and Iran remain volatile sources of concern.
We know that terrorist groups have the capacity to engineer nuclear devices and would explode them anywhere they could; we simply cannot be confident that we can forever deny them access to the fissile material they need to fuel them.
The second message is that Cold War nuclear-deterrence doctrine is irrelevant to today’s world.
So long as nuclear weapons remain, states can justify maintaining a minimum nuclear-deterrent capability.
But that can be done without weapons on high alert, and with drastically reduced arsenals in the case of the US and Russia, and, at worst, at current levels for the other nuclear-armed states.
The third message is that if the existing nuclear powers sincerely want to prevent others from joining their club, they cannot keep justifying the possession of nuclear weapons as a means of protection for themselves or their allies against other weapons of mass destruction, especially biological weapons, or conventional weapons.
Indeed, the single most difficult issue inhibiting serious movement toward disarmament – certainly in the case of Pakistan versus India, and Russia and China versus the US – are conventional arms imbalances, and ways of addressing them must rise to the top of the policy agenda.
The final message is that neither piecemeal change nor sloganeering will do the job.
Nuclear disarmament, non-proliferation, counter-terrorism, and civil nuclear-energy risk reduction are inextricably connected, and they call for sustained commitment around a comprehensive agenda, and detailed argument.
Sound bites and tweets are an unlikely route to nuclear salvation.
Kissinger is no idealist icon.
But he’s always worth listening to, and never more so than with respect to the question that he has been asking for years: When the next nuclear-weapons catastrophe happens, as it surely will, the world will have to respond dramatically.
Why can’t we start right now?
Bombs, Books, and Bucks
The $82 billion “emergency supplemental” bill to finance American military operations in Iraq and Afghanistan leaves the United States spending more money on military power than is needed on a yearly basis to permit every child in the world to receive, within one decade, both primary and secondary education.
Clearly, the question is not whether universal education is affordable, but whether America and the world can afford to neglect the political, economic, social, and health benefits of educating the roughly 380 million children around the globe who currently do not attend school.
Education, no less than military might, is a security imperative, for it helps the world – both individuals and societies – to escape the consequences of widespread poverty, rapid population growth, environmental problems, and social injustices.
Education strengthens social and cultural capital, which contributes to strong and stable polities.
It improves human health, increases life expectancy, and lowers fertility rates.