This principle was carried forward by groups like Médicins sans Frontières, whose doctors have risked their lives for the last four decades to deliver medical care to the world’s most dangerous places.
Now Lebanon is the site of a pilot program to advance the idea that providing education for refugee children is equally feasible – and no less important.
Across 1,500 communities in this troubled, divided country, where Syrian refugee children now make up 20% of the school-age population, the aim is to establish children’s right to education as a humanitarian priority.
The typical refugee child spends more than ten years away from home.
And every month that a child is out of school makes it less likely that they will ever return.
Three years ago, most Syrian children were at school, and the country had near universal primary education.
Today, millions of children are being denied any chance to realize their talents.
The scars will last for decades.
So, in Syria and the surrounding region, there is already a lost generation in the making: children who are now eight and nine and who have never been to school, children condemned to work as child laborers, and hundreds of girls forced into early marriages.
There are gruesome tales of young people who have been forced to sell their kidneys and other organs simply to survive.
Of course, we must provide food, shelter, and vaccinations.
But, in conflicts like these, the one thing that children need, beyond the material basics, is hope.
And it is education that provides children with hope that there is light at the end of the tunnel – hope that they can plan for the future and prepare for jobs and adulthood.
The pilot project in Lebanon, designed by Kevin Watkins of the United Kingdom’s Overseas Development Institute and led by the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) and the UN High Commission for Refugees (UNHCR), creates the opportunity to establish a right to education irrespective of borders.
Indeed, it is designed to cater to all 435,000 Syrian child refugees now in the country.
Thanks to a historic agreement with the Lebanese government, places for hundreds of thousands of children can be created within weeks by putting 1,500 of Lebanon’s schools on a double-shift system.
The scheme is already being piloted in a small village called Akroum in the north of the country.
Lebanese children are taught during the first shift, and Syrian children in the second.
Using the same school for both sets of pupils means that education can be delivered at a cost of only £400 ($670) per child per year.
To secure places for all refugee children, we are seeking $195 million dollars a year for UNICEF and UNHCR, with the plan to be implemented on the ground by NGOs and the Lebanese authorities.
The aim is to secure all funding during March, as the world marks the third anniversary of this tragic exodus from Syria.
We have already assembled a coalition of ten donor countries to take the lead, but we need ten more donors to fund the project fully.
We are appealing to donors not just to create thousands of school places for desperately needy children, but also to establish a precedent for the 20 million other children driven by violent conflict into displaced-persons camps and shantytowns.
There cannot be universal educational opportunity for the worlds’ children without an agreement that we will cater to children in conflict zones.
One million Afghan children are in camps along the border with Pakistan.
Thousands of children in South Sudan still await their first chance to go to school, and schools have yet to be provided for a million more children in the war-torn Central African Republic.
These children’s chances now depend on showing that we can make progress in Lebanon.
The UN Millennium Development Goals, adopted in 2000, expire in December 2015, which means that time is running to meet the deadline for achieving the target of universal primary education.
That goal will remain unattainable unless and until we establish the long-overdue principle that a child’s right to education knows no boundaries.
One Hundred Days of Servitude
LONDON – Demonstrations around the world were held this week to mark the 100th day of captivity for more than 200 Nigerian schoolgirls by the Islamist extremist group Boko Haram.
Since their abduction in April, global outrage has not waned; on the contrary, it has spurred a worldwide movement to uphold all girls’ basic rights.
Campaigners from groups fighting child marriage, child trafficking, and child labor, and from groups demanding children’s right to attend school, free of intimidation, have united in the past few days to show the strength of global opinion in favor of universal education and a world free of child slavery.
But what is of greater long-term significance is that girls themselves are demanding that their rights be taken seriously.
Girls have mobilized in Bangladesh, where the movement to establish child-marriage-free zones is growing; in India, where the Global March Against Child Labor started; and in Africa, where child protection clubs are being formed in almost every country.
The first demand is that the Nigerian girls be returned safely to their homes and that schools in Nigeria are made safer and more secure from threats by Boko Haram (whose name means “Western education is a sin”).
France, the United Kingdom, the United States, China, and Israel have stepped up military and technical support, including the recent provision of helicopters and night-vision equipment for jungle warfare to fight the group, whose campaign of terror has cost 5,000 deaths in the past five years.
In Nigeria alone, six million girls do not attend school; around the world, ten million girls each year become child brides, and seven million school-age girls are full-time workers.
We can no longer assume steady, if rocky, progress toward vindication of girls’ rights.
Iraqi legislators are considering reducing the age for child marriage to nine.
Pakistan’s Council of Islamic Ideology is calling for all age limits on marriage to be abolished.
And India has passed up another chance to outlaw child labor.
The rising tide of adolescent rage at child marriage and child labor has yet to trend on Twitter and Facebook.
And Bangladesh’s child-marriage-free zone in the Nilphamari region, Indonesia’s child-empowerment groups in the districts of Dompu and Grobogan, Uganda’s child-rights clubs, and India’s Bachpan Bachao Andolan, which combats child slavery, may not be household names.
But the yawning gap between what girls are demanding and the opportunities on offer to them is fueling a liberation struggle led by girls themselves.
Last month, on the “Day of the African Child,” thousands of young people marched on the streets of Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, and took over 20 African and Asian parliaments to demand universal education for girls.
On July 23, girls took to the streets in Pakistan, led by Baela Raza Jamil of Idara-e-Taleem-o-Aagahi, which is campaigning for what the Nigerian schoolgirls have lost: the right to an education.
In India, vigils making common cause with the Chibok girls were led by Bachpan Bachao Andolan, which every day rescues children from trafficking and slave labor.
Girls Not Brides mobilized in 45 countries, reminding its 145 sister organizations around the world that many of the Chibok girls will meet the same fate as the girls they seek to protect.
Increasingly, young people around the world see the connection between the abductions in Nigeria, the rape and murder of young girls in India, so-called “honor killings” of Pakistani girls who marry against their families’ wishes, genital mutilation of girls across Africa, and child-trafficking for full-time work, often in slave-labor conditions.
Seven decades after the adoption by the United Nations of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, girls’ rights are still not taken seriously; so girls are taking action to make themselves heard.
And, slowly but surely, local embryonic civil-rights movements are linking up with global leaders – Girls Not Brides, Walk Free, and A World at School – as part of an emergency coalition to eliminate child labor, child marriage, and educational discrimination against girls.
The timetable for doing so will be set out at the UN General Assembly in September in the presence of Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon.
Girls should be able to study in a classroom, free of fear and without the need to demonstrate on the streets.
This is a basic right; ensuring that it is respected cannot come soon enough.
Putting Education First
LONDON – For far too long, the cause of universal education has taken a back seat to other great international movements for change.
Now, for two new reasons that lie at the heart of UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon’s launch of the “Education First” initiative, education has returned to its rightful place atop the global policy agenda.
First and foremost, young people have themselves become the biggest advocates of universal education for girls and boys.
Refusing to remain silent while denied opportunity, young people – particularly girls – have launched one of the great civil-rights struggles of our time.
Few could remain unmoved by the brave fight of the young Pakistani girl Malala Yousafzai after the Taliban shot her in the head because she insisted on the right of young girls to an education.
Few have failed to notice the massive public outpouring of support in Pakistan and elsewhere for the cause that she is championing.
Likewise, we have also seen in recent months the creation by schoolgirls in Bangladesh of child-marriage-free zones, aimed at defending the right of girls to stay in school instead of being married off as teenage brides against their will.
In India, the Global March Against Child Labor, led by the children’s rights advocate Kailash Satyarthi, has rescued thousands of young boys and girls from a life of slavery in factories, workshops, and domestic service, and has ensured that they return to school.
These demonstrations by girls and boys demanding their right to education have made the fight for basic schooling impossible to ignore.
Consequently, every government now feels under even greater pressure to deliver the second of the global Millennium Development Goals (“achieve universal primary education”) by the end of 2015.
But a second worldwide force also has propelled education to the center of the policy agenda in most countries: the increased recognition of the importance of education by those who examine why countries succeed or fail.
For years, academics have debated whether culture, institutions, ideology, or resources cause some countries to lag behind.
Today, a growing number of writers, researchers, and policymakers see the crucial link between education and national economic success.
The deployment of human capital has become an important factor in explaining why some countries remain stuck in a “middle-income trap” and why others cannot break out of low-income status.
And research assessing a country’s human capital now focuses on the quantity and quality of basic skills, qualified graduate manpower, and expertise in research and development.
Putting education first is urgent in view of the scale of wasted talent and potential worldwide.
Some 57 million children still do not go to school, 500 million girls will never finish the secondary education to which they are entitled, and 750 million adults remain illiterate.
The link between education and economic success makes the delivery of quality schooling and training a hugely important issue for business as well.
By 2020, according to the McKinsey Global Institute, we will face the twin problems of a shortfall of up to 40 million high-skill workers and a surplus of up to 95 million low-skill workers.
By 2030, the global workforce of 3.5 billion will include an estimated one billion workers who lack a secondary education, significantly hindering their countries’ economic prospects.
As a result, without urgent action, businesses are likely to face a huge skills shortage, especially in emerging markets and developing countries, where most economic activity will be concentrated.
Indeed, the adult illiteracy rate in Somalia is 63%, and 39% in Nigeria; in South Sudan, more girls die during childbirth than complete primary school.
Unless we act, by mid-century the global economy will be characterized by massive waste of talent and unequal opportunities.
According to new figures from the Wittgenstein Center’s forthcoming book World Population and Human Capital in the 21st Century, only 3% of young adults in Mali and Mozambique are projected to have a tertiary education in 2050; the expected proportion is just 4% in Niger, Liberia, Rwanda, and Chad, and only 5% in Malawi and Madagascar.
While the projection for North America as a whole is 60%, the forecast for Sub-Saharan Africa is 16%.
Such figures reveal a world divided between those who have and those who lack educational opportunity, with huge potential repercussions not only in terms of skill shortages and economic waste, but also in terms of social stability.
The late US Supreme Court Chief Justice Earl Warren’s words in Brown v. Board of Education,which struck down the legal basis for racial segregation in America’s public schools, remain no less relevant today: “It is doubtful that any child may reasonably be expected to succeed in life if he is denied the opportunity of an education.”
As Warren put it, “Such an opportunity…is a right which must be made available to all on equal terms.”
We have little more than two years to turn basic education from a privilege for some into a right for all.
Secretary-General Ban and I are determined that every day until that deadline in December 2015, we will work as hard as possible to ensure every child is in school.
Gordon Gekko Reborn
NEW YORK – In the 1987 film Wall Street, the character Gordon Gekko famously declared, “Greed is good.”
His creed became the ethos of a decade of corporate and financial-sector excesses that ended in the late 1980’s collapse of the junk-bond market and the Savings &amp; Loan crisis.
Gekko himself was packed off to prison.
A generation later, the sequel to Wall Street – to be released next month – sees Gekko released from jail and returned to the financial world.
His reappearance comes just as the credit bubble fueled by the sub-prime mortgage boom is about to burst, triggering the worst financial and economic crisis since the Great Depression.
The “Greed is good” mentality is a regular feature of financial crises.
But were the traders and bankers of the sub-prime saga more greedy, arrogant, and immoral than the Gekkos of the 1980’s?
Not really, because greed and amorality in financial markets have been common throughout the ages.
Teaching morality and values in business schools will not tame such behavior, but changing the incentives that reward short-term profits and lead bankers and traders to take excessive risks will.
The bankers and traders of the latest crisis responded rationally to compensation and bonus schemes that allowed them to assume a lot of leverage and ensured large bonuses, but that were almost guaranteed to bankrupt a large number of financial institutions in the end.
To avoid such excesses, it is not enough to rely on better regulation and supervision, for three reasons:
·        Smart and greedy bankers and traders will always find ways to circumvent new rules;
·        CEOs and boards of directors of financial firms – let alone regulators and supervisors – cannot effectively monitor the risks and behaviors of thousands of separate profit and loss centers in a firm, as each trader and banker is a separate P&amp;L with its own capital at risk;
·        CEOs and boards are themselves subject to major conflicts of interest, because they don’t represent the true interest of their firms’ ultimate shareholders.
As a result, any reform of regulation and supervision will fail to control bubbles and excesses unless several other fundamental aspects of the financial system are changed.
First, compensation schemes must be radically altered through regulation, as banks will not do it themselves for fear of losing talented people to competitors.
In particular, bonuses based on medium-term results of risky trades and investments must supplant bonuses based on short-term outcomes.
Second, repeal of the Glass-Steagall Act, which separated commercial and investment banking, was a mistake.
The old model of private partnerships – in which partners had an incentive to monitor each other to avoid reckless investments – gave way to one of public companies aggressively competing with each other and with commercial banks to achieve ever-rising profitability, which was achievable only with reckless levels of leverage.
Similarly, the move from a lending model of “originate and hold” to one of “originate and distribute” based on securitization led to a massive transfer of risk.
No player but the last in the securitization chain was exposed to the ultimate credit risk; the rest simply raked in high fees and commissions.
Third, financial markets and financial firms have become a nexus of conflicts of interest that must be unwound.
These conflicts are inbuilt, because firms that engage in commercial banking, investment banking, proprietary trading, market making and dealing, insurance, asset management, private equity, hedge-fund activities, and other services are on every side of every deal (the recent case of Goldman Sachs was just the tip of the iceberg).
There are also massive agency problems in the financial system, because principals (such as shareholders) cannot properly monitor the actions of agents (CEOs, managers, traders, bankers) that pursue their own interest.
Moreover, the problem is not just that long-term shareholders are shafted by greedy short-term agents; even the shareholders have agency problems.
If financial institutions do not have enough capital, and shareholders don’t have enough of their own skin in the game, they will push CEOs and bankers to take on too much leverage and risks, because their own net worth is not at stake.
At the same time, there is a double agency problem, as the ultimate shareholders – individual shareholders – don’t directly control boards and CEOs.
These shareholders are represented by institutional investors (pension funds, etc.) whose interests, agendas, and cozy relationships often align them more closely with firms’ CEOs and managers.
Thus, repeated financial crises are also the result of a failed system of corporate governance.
Fourth, greed cannot be controlled by any appeal to morality and values.
Greed has to be controlled by fear of loss, which derives from knowledge that the reckless institutions and agents will not be bailed out.
The systematic bailouts of the latest crisis – however necessary to avoid a global meltdown – worsened this moral-hazard problem.
Not only were “too big to fail” financial institutions bailed out, but the distortion has become worse as these institutions have become – via financial-sector consolidation – even bigger.
If an institution is too big to fail, it is too big and should be broken up.
Unless we make these radical reforms, new Gordon Gekkos – and Charles Ponzis – will emerge.
For each chastised and born-again Gekko – as the Gekko in the new Wall Street is – hundreds of meaner and greedier ones will be born.
Partnership or Putsch?
EUGENE – In 2010, I sat across the table from Assistant US Trade Representative Barbara Weisel, who was responsible for negotiating the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP), the mega-regional free-trade treaty among Vietnam, Malaysia, and ten other Pacific Rim countries that President Barack Obama’s administration wants to conclude in the coming weeks.
At the time, I was Senior Policy Adviser for the US House of Representatives’ Committee on Education and Labor – a position that made me the top congressional staff member responsible for upholding labor standards in international trade treaties.
The purpose of the meeting was for Congress to understand what steps the Obama administration was taking to protect American workers from being forced into unfair competition with workers from low-wage trading partners.
I asked Weisel what I thought was a simple question: “What is the White House’s position on democracy?”
Weisel claimed not to understand, so I explained: A majority of congressional Democrats supported the principle that the United States should sign trade agreements only with countries that are democracies.
Other democracies feel the same way.
For example, trade agreements negotiated by members of the Commonwealth of Nations (formerly the British Commonwealth) contain just such a provision.
The logic is obvious: If we in developed democracies had lacked the right to protest, speak out, organize unions, and vote for representatives of our choosing, we would never have ended child labor or established the eight-hour workday.
Having used these rights to raise our own living standards, we should not now put developed countries’ workers in direct competition with workers who lack the basic freedoms needed to improve their own conditions.
But my explanation did not help.
Weisel stated simply that “we have no position” on democracy.
I pressed her on how the White House planned to deal with, for example, Vietnam – a country where children as young as 14 are forced to work 12-hour days, and where there is no right to free speech, no right to protest, no right to strike, and no freedom of association.
“Oh, you can have labor rights without democracy,” Weisel insisted.
She demurred when asked to name an example.
In reality, the one thing that non-democratic regimes can never tolerate is independent workers’ organizations.
That is why trade unionists were the first through the gates of Dachau, and why Poland’s Solidarity movement posed an existential threat to Communist power throughout the former Soviet bloc.
Indeed, part of international investors’ attraction to countries like Vietnam and China is not simply that wages are low, but that the absence of democratic rights promises to lock in cheap labor for years to come.
For example, when China revised its labor law in 2008, Apple, Hewlett-Packard, and other members of the US-China Business Council lobbied successfully to limit the expansion of Chinese workers’ rights.
While China is not a party to the current negotiations, the TPP is designed to allow additional countries to sign on in the future – and the Chinese, we can assume, will be courted assiduously.
Former US Trade Representative Ron Kirk, for one, noted that he “would love nothing more” than to see China join the treaty.
But the TPP is not really a “trade” treaty at all.
Rather, it is a vehicle for corporate lobbyists to achieve what they have been unable to persuade legislators to support through normal means.
For example, pharmaceutical companies have insisted that the TPP force all countries to grant 12-year patents on prescription drugs – increasing their profits while delaying competition from cheaper generic versions.
Likewise, tobacco companies are seeking to use the TPP to prohibit developing countries – which represent the largest cigarette markets – from adopting new controls on their products.
The TPP’s most controversial provision, if adopted, would allow private corporations to sue foreign governments for adopting policies that adversely affect their expected profits.
For example, if Vietnam were to mandate six weeks of paid maternity leave for all employees, a foreign factory owner might sue the government, insisting that it either repeal the law or reimburse the company for the cost of providing this benefit.
A private tribunal would hear cases and issue binding rulings, with no possibility of appeal to any court or other democratically accountable authority.
This, then, is the future that the TPP holds out: a kind of Potemkin democracy, in which citizens are free to choose their flags and holidays but cannot afford to enact any laws that might reduce international investors’ profits.
Workers’ wages in the US, Canada, Japan, Australia, New Zealand, and other developed countries would be inexorably competed down toward those of lower-wage trading partners, while developing-country workers would find it increasingly difficult – even in nominal democracies – to improve their standard of living.
The TPP is being crafted in utmost secrecy, with even legislators unable to see the full text that is being negotiated, though corporate lobbyists have been treated as partners in the drafting process.
This is not surprising: In the US, where almost five million manufacturing jobs have disappeared since the adoption of the North American Free Trade Agreement, and where real wages have stagnated, a majority of voters across the political spectrum are opposed to more such treaties.
At least for the Obama administration, the rush to conclude the TPP negotiations is doubtless driven by the desire to close the deal well ahead of America’s midterm election in November.
And that, too, is bad for democracy.
Indeed, though the US Constitution stipulates that the power to “regulate Commerce with foreign Nations” lies solely in the hands of Congress, the Obama administration is pressing legislators to approve so-called fast-track authority, under which they would have no say over either the TPP’s terms or the parties to it – or even the power to amend the treaty text in any way.
As a political scientist, I am sometimes asked how it is possible for democracies to enact laws that run counter to the interests of the vast majority of voters.
They do so, in part, by shunning any commitment to democracy itself.
There is no clearer example of this than the TPP, which almost certainly constitutes the single biggest threat to the preservation – or creation – of any signatory country’s middle class.
Restoring Yesterday\u0027s Hope for Tomorrow\u0027s World
WASHINGTON, DC – The year 2015 was difficult, punctuated by declining growth forecasts, horrific terror attacks, massive refugee flows, and serious political challenges, with populism on the rise in many countries.
In the Middle East, in particular, chaos and violence has continued to proliferate, with devastating consequences.
This represents a disappointing turn from the undoubtedly flawed, but far more hopeful world of just a few decades ago.
In his autobiography The World of Yesterday, Stefan Zweig described a similarly drastic change.
Born in 1881 in Vienna, Zweig spent his youth in an optimistic, civil, and tolerant environment.
Then, starting in 1914, he witnessed Europe’s collapse into World War I, followed by revolutionary convulsions, the Great Depression, the rise of Stalinism, and finally the barbarism of Nazism and the outbreak of World War II.
Devastated, Zweig committed suicide while in exile in 1942.
One imagines that Zweig would have been comforted by the post-WWII creation of the United Nations and the Bretton-Woods system, not to mention the subsequent decades of reconstruction and reconciliation.
He could have witnessed the cooperation and progress that marked the post-war era.
Perhaps, then, he would have looked at the period from 1914 to 1945 as a terrible but limited detour in the world’s march toward peace and prosperity.
Of course, the second half of the twentieth century was far from perfect.
Until 1990, peace was secured largely by the threat of mutual nuclear destruction.
Local conflicts, such as in Korea, Vietnam, parts of Africa, and the Middle East, took their toll.
And while about 100 developing countries gained independence, the process was not always peaceful.
At the same time, however, the world economy grew more rapidly than ever.
A strong middle class emerged in the advanced countries, and then began to appear elsewhere.
The Western democracies and Japan built economies in which productivity growth led to shared prosperity; governments engaged in regulation and redistribution, while private companies fueled growth by implementing technologically advanced production methods.
On both the regional and global levels, decisive progress was made in reaping the benefits from trade and economies of scale.
The European integration project seemed to herald a new kind of cooperation, which could extend to other regions and even influence global cooperation.
The generation that came of age in the 1960s felt much like Zweig had felt in his youth.
We believed that, though progress may not be linear, we could count on it.
We expected an increasingly peaceful and tolerant world, in which technological advances, together with well-governed markets, would generate ever-expanding prosperity.
In 1989, when the Soviet Union was poised to collapse and China was shifting to a market-based economy, Francis Fukuyama announced the “end of history.”
Over the last two decades, however, our hopes – political, social, and economic – have been repeatedly dashed.
There was a time when US policymakers were wondering whether Russia should join NATO.
That possibility is difficult even to consider today, after Russia’s intervention in Ukraine and annexation of Crimea (apparently carried out in response to fears that Ukraine would deepen its ties with the European Union and NATO).
Many emerging economies achieved rapid growth for years – even decades – enabling billions of people to escape extreme poverty and reducing the wealth gap between developed and developing countries.
But that growth has lately slowed substantially, leading many to question whether economists spoke too soon when we labeled them the new engines of global economic growth.
Likewise, the Arab Spring in 2011 was supposed to herald a new, more democratic future for the Middle East and North Africa.
While Tunisia has averted disaster, most of the other affected countries have ended up mired in chaos, with Syria’s brutal civil war facilitating the rise of the Islamic State.
The euro, meanwhile, suffered its own crisis.
The common currency, once portrayed as the start of a quasi-federal Europe, instead created serious tension between “creditor” and “debtor” countries when many debtors faced a protracted economic downturn.
Just as Europe seemed finally to be escaping the euro crisis, refugees, especially from Syria, began flooding in.
That has jeopardized the Schengen Area of borderless travel, and some are asking whether the EU can withstand the pressure.
In the United States, the Syrian refugee crisis has led Congress to rush to restrict visa-free entrance for tourists from 38 countries.
This comes at a time when income and wealth inequality is skyrocketing in the US – the median wage for men has not increased in decades – leaving many to wonder whether their children will be able to maintain the living standard they enjoyed.
On top of all this, for the first time in decades, the growth of international trade no longer comfortably exceeds the growth of global output.
A fundamental driver of many of these problems may well be the unprecedented speed of change – driven by globalization and technological innovation – which has produced disruptions too quickly and on too large a scale for us to manage.
For example, while communication technology has done wonders, say, to expand access to finance in Africa, it has also enabled terrorist networks to encrypt their communications effectively.
And as the global financial crisis starkly demonstrated, regulators have struggled to keep pace with financial innovation.
The potential for human progress still seems immense, because the world wants for neither resources nor technological innovation.
Indeed, technology offers the hope of lifesaving medical treatments, higher economic productivity, and sustainable energy systems.
But people are fearful, as shown by the return of identity politics and a lack of economic and political inclusiveness.
As a result, productivity growth is slowing, and, though capital seems cheap and profits plentiful, investment remains sluggish.
The key to managing the disruptions and assuaging people’s fears is governance.
Zweig saw the world fall apart a century ago not because human knowledge stopped advancing, but because of widespread governance and policy failures.
As we enter 2016, we must focus on adapting governance, in all of its economic and political dimensions, to the twenty-first century, so that our resources and knowledge produce inclusive progress, not violent conflict.
The Good-Governance Trap
ROME – Development and improved governance have tended to go hand in hand.
But, contrary to popular belief, there is little evidence that success in implementing governance reforms leads to more rapid and inclusive economic and social development.
In fact, it may be the other way around.
The focus on good governance stems from the struggle to restore sustained growth during the developing-country debt crises of the 1980s.
Instead of reassessing the prevailing economic-policy approach, international development institutions took aim at the easy targets: developing-country governments.
Advising those governments on how to do their jobs became a new vocation for these institutions, which quickly developed new “technical” approaches to governance reform.
The World Bank, using well over 100 indicators, introduced a composite index of good governance, based on perceptions of voice and accountability, political stability and the absence of violence, government effectiveness, regulatory quality, the rule of law, and levels of corruption.
By claiming that it had found a strong correlation between its governance indicators and economic performance, the Bank fueled hope that the key to economic progress had been found.
The case was flawed from the beginning.
The indicators used were ahistorical and failed to account for country-specific challenges and conditions, with cross-country statistical analyses suffering from selection bias and ignoring the interlinkages among a wide array of variables.
As a result, the World Bank badly overestimated the impact of governance reform on economic growth.
To be sure, governance that is effective, legitimate, and responsive provides untold benefits, especially when compared to the alternative: inefficient governance, cronyism, and corruption.
But the focus on governance reform has not proved nearly as effective as promised in fostering development.
In fact, this governance-focused approach may have actually undermined development efforts.
For starters, it has allowed international institutions to avoid acknowledging the shortcomings of the new development orthodoxy of the last two decades of the twentieth century, when Latin America lost over a decade, and Sub-Saharan Africa a quarter-century, of economic and social progress.
It has also complicated the work of governments unnecessarily.
With good-governance reforms now a condition for international aid, developing-country governments often end up mimicking donor expectations, instead of addressing the issues that are most pressing for their own citizens.
Indeed, such reforms can even undermine traditional rights and customary obligations worked out among communities over many generations.
Moreover, the required reforms are so wide-ranging that they are beyond the means of most developing countries to implement.
As a result, good-governance solutions tend to distract from more effective development efforts.
Another problem with governance reforms is that, although they are formally neutral, they often favor particular vested interests, with grossly unfair consequences.
Reforms aimed at decentralization and devolution have, in some cases, enabled the rise of powerful local political patrons.
The conclusion is clear: the development agenda should not be overloaded with governance reform.
As Harvard’s Merilee Grindle has put it, we should be aiming for “good enough” governance, selecting a few imperatives from a long list of possibilities.
But selecting the most important measures will not be easy.
Indeed, advocates of governance reform have rarely been right about the most effective approach.
Consider the unrelenting promotion of efforts to strengthen property rights.
Absent alienable individual ownership of productive resources, it is asserted, there will be insufficient means and incentives to pursue development initiatives, and shared resources (the “commons”) will be over-exploited and used inefficiently.
In reality, the so-called “tragedy of the commons” is neither ubiquitous nor inevitable, and individual property rights are not always the best – and never the only – institutional solution for dealing with social dilemmas.
The late Elinor Ostrom, a Nobel laureate in economics, showed that human societies have built myriad creative and lasting solutions to resolve a wide range of dilemmas involving the use of common resources.
The theme of good governance has special appeal to large bureaucratic organizations like multilateral development banks and UN agencies, which favor apolitical solutions to what are essentially political problems.
In other words, good governance is an ostensibly technocratic answer to what donors and other well-meaning international groups consider bad policies and, especially, bad politics.
Herein lies the real problem with the good-governance agenda: it supposes that the solution to most policy and political dilemmas lies in compliance with a set of formal process-oriented indicators.
But experience over two decades shows that such directives provide little practical guidance for solving the technically, socially, and politically complex real-world problems of economic development.
Recognizing that governance improves with development, the international community would be better served by pursuing reforms that directly advance development, instead of a broad agenda that may have, at best, a small indirect impact.
Such a pragmatic approach to improving governance would be neither dogmatic nor pretend to universality.
Instead, the major constraints would be identified, analyzed, and addressed, perhaps sequentially.
Many of the good-governance agenda’s key goals – empowerment, inclusion, participation, integrity, transparency, and accountability – can be built into workable solutions, not because outsiders demand them, but because effective solutions require them.
Such solutions should draw from relevant experiences, with the understanding that they do not amount to “best practices.”
The blind pursuit of good governance has guided development efforts for too long.
It is time to acknowledge what works – and disregard what does not.
Reengineering Government
PARIS – Since the financial crisis erupted in 2008, governments in advanced countries have been under significant pressure.
In many countries, tax receipts abruptly collapsed when the economy contracted, income dwindled, and real-estate transactions came to a halt.
The fall in tax revenues was in most cases sudden, deep, and lasting.
Governments had no choice but to raise taxes or to adjust to leaner times.
In some countries, the magnitude of the shock was such that a large tax increase could not fill the gap.
In Spain, despite tax hikes worth more than 4% of GDP since 2010, the tax-to-GDP ratio was only 38% in 2014, compared to 41% in 2007.
In Greece, tax increases amounted to 13% of GDP during the same period, but the tax ratio increased by only six percentage points.
Elsewhere, political limits to tax increases were reached before the gap could be filled.
Willingly or not, priority is being given to spending cuts.
Disillusion about future growth adds to the pressure.
The productivity record has generally been weak over the last few years, and this suggests that growth in the years ahead could be slower than previously expected.
Revenue growth thus looks insufficient to match the surge in age-related public spending on health and pensions.
This is a very different crisis from those experienced in the 1980s and the 1990s.
Back then, the main issue was political: the legitimacy and efficiency of public spending was under attack.
In the words of US President Ronald Reagan, government was the problem, not the solution.
The state, it was loudly proclaimed, had to be rolled back.
By contrast, today’s concerns are economic.
Partisan disagreement about the proper scope of government remains, but there is no overall rejection of state intervention.
Often, it is not interests or ideologies that make public spending cuts unavoidable – just facts.
How can governments rise to the challenge?
The risk they face is clear enough: absent a profound reengineering, inertial spending – owing to entitlements and civil-service wages – is bound to crowd out spending on new priorities and new policies.
Already, the countries that have been forced to cut the most have generally sacrificed public infrastructure investment.
Research is another area at risk.
Social investment in programs that pay off over the long term, such as pre-school child care, is suffering from financial constraints.
National security is not given the priority it deserves, despite growing threats.
Last but not least, makeshift solutions such as protracted wage freezes may eventually erode the quality of public services.
Fortunately, there are a few things governments can do to mitigate the effects of inertial spending.
For starters, they can simply systematize evaluations of the efficiency of public money.
In most countries, such assessments are still rare and haphazard: Parliaments often enact policies without knowing whether they are worth the money, and it may take a very long time before ineffective or inefficient policies are terminated.
That is why enabling legislation for spending programs should contain sunset clauses, with extensions subject to independent evaluation.
Second, spending reviews, too, should be systematized.
Setting priorities – whether to spend more on education and less on pensions, for example, or whether to invest in infrastructure or in research – entails hard choices that should be made explicit.
In an ideal world, these choices would be the focus of electoral debates and parliamentary work.
But behind every budget line is a constituency tempting policymakers to eschew hard decisions.
That is why structured spending reviews are useful: they force officials to bridge the gap between ends and means and encourage informed democratic decision-making.
Third, governments should equip themselves with a reengineering budget.
As private companies know, transformations – deep changes in the way things are done – often cost money before they bring savings.
This may be because the changes require investment in new technology, retraining of employees, or simply buying stakeholders’ consent.
Money earmarked in the budget for such reengineering of government programs would be a good investment.
Fourth, governments should promote public-sector innovation.
Contrary to popular prejudice, local governments and public agencies do innovate; what is missing is a mechanism to select and disseminate innovations in the same way the market selects new products or cost-saving processes.
A better way to deliver a public service may remain unknown for years.
That might well change if governments took simple steps like allocating more funding on a project basis and organizing contests.
For example, schools in disadvantaged neighborhoods should be allowed to tender for funds for educational innovation.
Last but not least, people should be empowered.
Citizens want a more nimble state that tailors its operations to local needs.
In the digital age, they want it to meet new standards of speed, reliability, and personalization.
They increasingly challenge the traditional view that efficiency and equality imply less individual choice.
And they want the government to be open, to guarantee access to data, and to make its efficiency and effectiveness directly observable.
These are powerful forces for change, and embattled governments should harness them to the goal of achieving the reengineering they so urgently need.
The alternative is to accept the deterioration of the quality of public services, which would lead only to a loss of government legitimacy and, with it, a diminishing willingness to pay taxes.
Beyond the Revolving Door
LONDON – “Honestly,” said Bill Gates during the COP21 meeting in Paris earlier this month, “I’ve been a bit surprised that the climate talks historically haven’t had R&D on the agenda in any way, shape, or form.”
So am I, and the question Gates raises goes to the heart of the relationship between business and government in solving our societies’ toughest problems, from ensuring the planet’s continued habitability to fostering stable and inclusive economic growth.
To be sure, in some areas, government authorities simply don’t consider making business a part of the solution early on.
The most striking recent example is the ongoing refugee crisis: Governments in Europe and around the world still don’t fully include business in early-stage thinking about how to manage the flow of asylum-seekers.
Granted, in many cases business leaders have chosen to remain on the sideline; but both they and governments need to adjust their thinking.
But in other areas, companies are more than eager to step up, be seen and heard, and exercise influence.
When it comes to technology, R&D, trade talks, and the like, the benefit for companies’ bottom line is direct and clear, and here Gates’ surprise is understandable, because corporate leaders typically lobby to participate and change the way governments think and act.
And yet dangers arise when business gets too close to government.
Sometimes the risk entails the proverbial “revolving door” between government and business, through which personnel glide from senior private-sector jobs to top official posts and back again.
It is a cycle that often resembles the fox guarding the henhouse, with those who regulate too close to those whom they regulate.
The most obvious example of this is finance and banking, where former employees of a single firm, Goldman Sachs, hold some of the most senior regulatory and monetary positions – and not just in the United States.
Mario Draghi, the president of the European Central Bank was Vice Chairman and Managing Director of Goldman Sachs International, and Mark Carney, the governor of the Bank of England, worked for Goldman Sachs for 13 years.
But simply closing the revolving door in finance is not a solution.
Research by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York has shown that regulation and legislation in this area must strike a balance, lest it undermine “the ability of regulatory agencies to seek and retain talent.”
In areas like defense, the revolving door moves swiftly.
According to the Boston Globe, from 2004 through 2008, some four-fifths of retiring three- and four-star US generals went to work as consultants or defense executives.
Likewise, the US-based group Citizens for Responsibility and Ethics has shown the extent to which careers lead from the US Department of Defense to the defense industry.
Corporate scandals often reveal where business and government are too close for comfort, as when senior members of Toshiba’s executive team and board, for example, sit on Japanese government panels and commissions.
Likewise, Volkswagen’s close relationship with the German government has led to accusations that regulators went easy on the company, setting the stage for the emissions-testing scandal in which the carmaker is now embroiled.
But close ties between business and government are also necessary.
Strong economies need strong businesses and strong trade, and that requires good relationships with policymakers.
When government officials travel abroad to encourage economic cooperation, CEOs of some of the country’s biggest companies should go along.
The question is whether such companies are so important to the country’s economy and reputation that the government cannot regulate them properly.
They are given excessive leeway because they, like many financial firms, are too important to fail.
This complex dance between business and government is never-ending and always evolving.
It is the stuff of gatherings like the World Economic Forum, where business leaders and governments talk tough on panels and make nice in back rooms.
And the need to do both has become more obvious than ever in an era of slow economic growth and privatization of services once provided by the public sector.
The working relationship is important and should not be condemned, but it must be recognized openly.
This brings us back to Gates, who announced in Paris an initiative to spend a total of $20 billion on climate-related R&D over the next five years.
Gates’ plan highlights a frequently noted component of the relationship between government and business: governments’ vital role in funding early experimental research, which business then often turns into commercially viable solutions.
All of this is necessary to build stronger economies.
But, though Gates was right to ask why climate-change negotiations have not included R&D, let’s not pretend that any of this is simple.
The need for revolving doors, whether of personnel or ideas, between government and business cannot be a reason to allow companies to gain undue influence on public policy or for regulators to be kept weak.
Nor can it be a reason to give failing businesses a safety net for their own bad behavior or poor decisions.
This is especially true at a time when public trust is at a low ebb.
Rather than pretending that this symbiotic relationship doesn’t exist or, worse, that it isn’t necessary, both business and government must err on the side of transparency.
As Gates’ question made clear, in our fear of allowing the relationship to go too far, we risk not allowing it to go far enough.
Innovate or Stagnate
DUBAI – Companies, like people, grow old.
They start life small and eager to survive, fueled by youthful energy and fresh ideas.
They compete, expand, mature, and eventually, with few exceptions, fade into obscurity.
The same is true of governments: they, too, can lose the hunger and ambition of youth and allow themselves to become complacent.
Consider this: only 11% of the Fortune 500 companies from 1955 still exist today, while the average time that companies stay in the top 500 has fallen from 75 years to 15 years.
In this age of rapid change, those who lag behind become irrelevant– in a heartbeat.
Countries whose governments grow old face the same fate as outdated companies.
Their choice is simple: innovate or become irrelevant.
The race for national competitiveness is every bit as fierce as the competition among companies in the marketplace.
Countries compete for investment, talent, growth, and opportunity in a globalized world, and those that are pushed out of the running surrender the greatest prize of all: human development, prosperity, and happiness for their people.
To avoid this fate, governments must focus on what really matters: how to be like the 11% of companies that have remained, through the decades, in the top 500.
The lifecycle of companies should teach governments that the secret of eternal youth is constant innovation – seizing opportunities and behaving like the dynamic, entrepreneurial companies that are defining today’s world and shaping its future.
The key to corporations’ rejuvenation, civilizations’ evolution, and human development in general is simple: innovation.
I am always amazed when governments think they are an exception to this rule.
Innovation in government is not an intellectual luxury, a topic confined to seminars and panel discussions, or a matter only of administrative reforms.
It is the recipe for human survival and development, the fuel for constant progress, and the blueprint for a country’s rise.
The first key to business-like innovation in government is a focus on skills.
Top-tier companies continuously invest in their employees to provide them with the right skills for the marketplace.
Governments must do the same, by constantly upgrading skills and nurturing innovation – among their own employees, across key sectors of the economy, and at the foundations of the education system.
Governments that fail to equip new generations with the skills needed to become leaders for their time are condemning them to be led by other, more innovative societies.
A United States Department of Labor study found that 65% of children currently in primary school will grow up to work in jobs that do not exist today.
Another study at Oxford University found that 47% of job categories are at high risk of ceasing to exist because they can be automated through technology.
So, how do we prepare our children and future generations for such times?
How do we equip our countries to compete, not only today, but in the coming decades as well?
The answer lies in honing our children’s creativity, and providing them with the analytical and communication skills needed to channel it toward productive ends.
The second key to transforming governments into engines of innovation is to shift the balance of investment toward intangibles, as in the private sector.
Whereas more than 80% of the value of the Standard &amp; Poor’s 500 consisted of tangible assets 40 years ago, today that ratio is reversed: more than 80% of the largest companies’ value is intangible – the knowledge and skills of their employees and the intellectual property embedded in their products.
Governments, too, should think strategically about shifting their spending away from tangible infrastructure like roads and buildings, and toward intangibles like education and research and development.
It is no secret that the US and Europe, combined, spend more than $250 billion of public funds annually on R&amp;D to maintain their leading positions.
Likewise, a key driver of rapid development in countries like Singapore, Malaysia, and South Korea has been their strategic decision to shift public expenditure away from hard infrastructure and toward the “soft” infrastructure needed to build and sustain a knowledge economy.
Likewise, the British government spends markedly more of its budget on such intangibles than on tangible assets.
Most of today’s transformative companies are well known for having an innovative corporate culture and working environment that inspires and empowers employees.
Governments that set an example for innovation have the power to implant a nationwide culture of creativity.
When such a culture takes root, people feel inspired to run further with their ideas, to aim higher with their ambitions, and to pursue bigger dreams.
That is how countries that encourage innovation take the lead – and stay there.
To sustain innovation, businesses must attract and retain the most creative and productive minds.
In this age of global mobility, countries, too, go head to head in the battle for talent.
Global cities compete to provide an ideal life and work environment for innovators, and to harness their creativity to become stronger and more competitive still.
Innovative governments do the same thing on a national scale.
They attract talent, perform efficiently, and continually upgrade their systems and services.
They empower citizens to cultivate their collective energy and develop their potential, and thus become drivers of their countries’ growth and advancement in the world arena.
Above all, they value human minds and help people become better guardians and builders of our planet.
For governments, innovation is an existential question.
Only those that sustain innovation can drive change in the world, because they are the governments that never grow old.
The Scarecrow of National Debt
CAMBRIDGE – Most people are more worried by government debt than about taxation.
“But it’s trillions” a friend of mine recently expostulated about the United Kingdom’s national debt.
He exaggerated a bit: it is £1.7 trillion ($2.2 trillion).
But one website features a clock showing the debt growing at a rate of £5,170 per second.
Although the tax take is far less, the UK government still collected a hefty £750 billion in taxes in the last fiscal year.
The tax base grows by the second, too, but no clock shows that.
Many people think that, however depressing heavy taxes are, it is more honest for governments to raise them to pay for their spending than it is to incur debt.
Borrowing strikes them as a way of taxing by stealth.
“How are they going to pay it back?” my friend asked.
“Think of the burden on our children and grandchildren.”
I should say that my friend is extremely old.
Horror of debt is particularly marked in the elderly, perhaps out of an ancient feeling that one should not meet one’s maker with a negative balance sheet.
I should also add that my friend is extremely well educated, and had, in fact, played a prominent role in public life.
But public finance is a mystery to him: he just had the gut feeling that a national debt in the trillions and growing by £5,170 a second was a very bad thing.
One should not attribute this gut feeling to financial illiteracy. It has been receiving strong support from those supposedly well-versed in public finance, particularly since the economic collapse of 2008.
Britain’s national debt currently stands at 84% of GDP.
This is dangerously near the threshold of 90% identified by Harvard economist Kenneth Rogoff (together with Carmen Reinhart and Vincent Reinhart), beyond which economic growth stalls.
In the face of criticism of the data underlying this threshold Rogoff has held firm, and he now gives a reason for his alarm.
With US government debt running at 82% of GDP, the danger is of a “fast upward shift in interest rates.” The “potentially massive” fiscal costs of this could well require “significant tax and spending adjustments” (economist’s code for increasing taxes and reducing public spending), which would increase unemployment.
This is the financial leg of the familiar “crowding out” argument.
The higher the national debt, according to this view, the greater the risk of government default – and therefore the higher the cost of fresh government borrowing.
This in turn will raise the cost of new private-sector borrowing.
(That is why Rogoff wants the US government to “lock in” currently low rates by issuing much longer-term debt to fund public infrastructure).
Maintaining low interest rates for private bank loans has been one of the main arguments for reducing budget deficits.
But this argument – or set of arguments (there are different strands) – for fiscal austerity is invalid.
A government that can issue debt in its own currency can easily keep interest rates low.
The rates are bounded by concerns about inflation, over-expansion of the state sector, and the central bank’s independence; but, with our relatively low levels of debt (Japan’s debt amounts to over 230% of its GDP) and depressed output and inflation, these limits are quite distant in the UK and the US.
And as the record bears out, continuous increases in both countries’ national debt since the crash have been accompanied by a fall in the cost of government borrowing to near zero.
The other leg of the argument for reducing the national debt has to do with the “burden on future generations.”
US President Dwight Eisenhower expressed this thought succinctly in his State of the Union message in 1960: generating a surplus to pay back debt was a necessary “reduction on our children’s inherited mortgage.”
This is crystal clear if the government simply raises the money it needs for its spending through taxes rather than borrowing it.
Furthermore, the idea that additional government spending, whether financed by taxation or borrowing, is bound to reduce private consumption by the same amount assumes that no flow of additional income results from the extra government spending – in other words, that the economy is already at full capacity.
This has not been true of most countries since 2008.
But in the face of such weighty, if fallacious, testimony to the contrary, who am I to persuade my elderly friend to ignore his gut when it comes to thinking about the national debt?
Fraud, Fools, and Financial Markets
NEW HAVEN – Adam Smith famously wrote of the “invisible hand,” by which individuals’ pursuit of self-interest in free, competitive markets advances the interest of society as a whole.
And Smith was right: Free markets have generated unprecedented prosperity for individuals and societies alike. But, because we can be manipulated or deceived or even just passively tempted, free markets also persuade us to buy things that are good neither for us nor for society.
This observation represents an important codicil to Smith’s vision. And it is one that George Akerlof and I explore in our new book, Phishing for Phools: The Economics of Manipulation and Deception.
Most of us have suffered “phishing”: unwanted emails and phone calls designed to defraud us.
A “phool” is anyone who does not fully comprehend the ubiquity of phishing.
A phool sees isolated examples of phishing, but does not appreciate the extent of professionalism devoted to it, nor how deeply this professionalism affects lives.
Sadly, a lot of us have been phools – including Akerlof and me, which is why we wrote this book.
But the losers in the downturns are not just those who have been duped.
A chain of additional losses occurs when the inflated assets have been purchased with borrowed money.
In that case, bankruptcies and fear of bankruptcy spawn an epidemic of further bankruptcies, reinforcing fear.
Then credit dries up and the economy collapses. This vicious downward spiral for business confidence typically features phishes – for example, the victims of Bernard Madoff’s Ponzi scheme – discovered only after the period of irrational exuberance has ended.
Epidemics, in economics as much as in medicine, call for an immediate and drastic response.
The response by the authorities to the Great Crash of 1929 was small and slow, and the world economy entered a “Dark Age” that lasted through the Great Depression of the 1930s and the Second World War.
The 2007-2009 financial crisis portended a similar outcome, but this time the world’s governments and central banks intervened promptly, in a coordinated fashion, and with an appropriately high volume of stimulus.
The recovery has been weak; but we are nowhere near a new Dark Age.
For that we should be grateful.
Yet some now argue that the fiscal and monetary authorities should not have responded so quickly or strongly when the 2007-2009 crisis erupted.
They believe that the primary cause of the crisis was what economists call moral hazard: because risk-takers expected that the authorities would intervene to protect them when their bets went awry, they took even greater risks.
By contrast, our view (supported by plenty of data) is that rapidly rising prices usually reflect irrational exuberance, aided and abetted by phishes.
The irrationally exuberant were not thinking of the returns they would garner if the authorities intervened to maintain the economy and the flow of credit (or, in extreme cases, moved to bail out their bank or enterprise).
Such possibilities were a marginal consideration in the euphoria preceding the 2007-2009 crisis: those selling at inflated prices were making profits; and buyers “knew” they were doing the right thing – even when they weren’t.
The reluctance to acknowledge the need for immediate intervention in a financial crisis is based on a school of economics that fails to account for the irrational exuberance that I have explored elsewhere, and that ignores the aggressive marketing and other realities of digital-age markets examined in Phishing for Phools.
But adhering to an approach that overlooks these factors is akin to doing away with fire departments, on the grounds that without them people would be more careful – and so there would then be no fires.
We found out many years ago, to the world’s great regret, what happens when a financial epidemic is allowed to run its course.
Our analysis indicates that not only are there endemic and natural forces that make the financial system highly volatile; but also that swift, effective intervention is needed in the face of financial collapse.
We need to give free rein to fiscal and monetary authorities to take aggressive steps when financial turmoil turns into financial crisis.
One Dark Age is one too many.
The Creative State
LONDON – The conventional view in mainstream economics today is that governments have little capacity to spark innovation.
The state should play as limited a role in the economy as possible, the thinking goes, intervening only in cases of “market failure.”
This is far from the truth.
In fact, governments can and do play a critical role in spurring innovation – actively creating new markets, instead of just fixing them.
To be sure, advocates of a limited economic role for government believe that market failure justifies some funding of infrastructure and basic science.
But such limited intervention can hardly explain the billions of public-sector dollars that have flowed toward downstream applied research, even providing early-stage financing for companies.
Indeed, in some of the world’s most famous innovation hubs, the state has played a key “entrepreneurial” role, envisioning and financing the creation of entire new fields, from information technology to biotech, nanotech, and green tech.
In Silicon Valley, for example, the government has acted as a strategic investor through a decentralized network of public institutions: The Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency, NASA, the Small Business Innovation Research program (SBIR), and the National Science Foundation.
The sums involved can be staggering, and not just in IT; large amounts of funding have also been channeled to energy and life sciences.
In 2011, for instance, the US National Institutes of Health (NIH) invested $31 billion in biomedical research.
Marcia Angell, a professor at Harvard Medical School, has shown that this financing played a crucial role in the development of some of the most revolutionary new drugs in recent decades.
Similarly, for some of the most innovative American companies, financing from the SBIR has proved to be more important than private venture capital.
Examples outside the US include Israel, where the public venture-capital fund Yozma has provided early-stage funding to some of the country’s most dynamic companies, and Finland, where Sitra, the public innovation fund, supplied early financing for Nokia.
In China, the state-owned development bank is offering billions of dollars in loans to some of the country’s most innovative companies, including Huawei and Yingli Solar.
These types of public investments are critical in creating and shaping new markets.
Indeed, government investment played a central role in developing nearly all of the technologies that make the iPhone a smart phone: the Internet, GPS, touchscreens, and the advances in voice recognition underlying Siri.
Similarly, in many countries, it is the public sector that is leading the way in making green technology possible.
Recognizing the importance of government investment in promoting innovation and growth implies the need to rethink the conventional wisdom about state intervention.
Instead of focusing on picking individual technologies or firms, public organizations should act like investors, betting on a diversified “portfolio” of choices.
Like any other investor, the state will not always succeed.
In fact, failure is more likely, because government agencies often invest in the areas of highest uncertainty, where private capital is reluctant to enter.
This means that public organizations must be capable of taking chances and learning from trial and error.
If failure is an unavoidable part of the innovation game, and if government is crucial for innovation, society must be more tolerant of “government failure.”
But the reality is that when government fails, there is public outcry – and silence when it succeeds.
For example, the bankruptcy of the US solar energy firm Solyndra, which received a $500 million government-guaranteed loan, triggered partisan protests.
Yet few have paused to consider that the government provided nearly the same amount to Tesla to help it develop the Tesla S car, a product that is considered an archetype of Silicon Valley innovation.
What, then, might make the public more accepting of government failure?
Private venture capitalists cover their losses from failed investments with their profits from those that succeed; but government programs are rarely set up to generate significant returns.
While some argue that the government’s return comes through taxes, the current tax system is not working, owing not only to loopholes, but also to rate reductions.
When NASA was founded, the top marginal tax rate was over 90%.
And capital gains tax has fallen by more than 50% since the 1980s.
In order to build support for public investment in higher-risk innovation, perhaps taxpayers should receive a more direct return, by channeling profits into a public innovation fund to finance the next wave of technologies.
When investments are in upstream basic research, the spillover effect across industries and sectors is sometimes enough of a social reward.
But other cases might require creating alternative incentives.
For example, some of the profits from the government’s investment in Tesla could have been recovered through shares (or royalties), and used to cover the losses from its investment in Solyndra.
Repayment of public loans to business could be made contingent on income, as student loans often are.
And the prices of drugs that are developed largely with NIH funding could be capped, so that the taxpayer does not pay twice.
One thing is clear: the current approach suffers from serious shortcomings, largely because it socializes the risks and privatizes the rewards.
This is hurting not only future innovation opportunities, but also the government’s ability to communicate its role to the public.
Acknowledging the role that the state has played – and should continue to play – in shaping innovation enables us to begin debating the most important question: What are the new visionary public investments needed to drive future economic growth?
The Productivity of Trust
CAMBRIDGE – The Nobel laureate economist Paul Krugman once quipped that “Canada is essentially closer to the United States than it is to itself.”
After all, most of its citizens live in a narrow band along the more than 3,000-mile-long border.
Most Canadians live closer to more Americans than they do to other Canadians.
The same can be said of corporations and governments.
Most firms are closer to the government than they are to other firms: they interact with government rules and agencies more than they do with the rest of the business community.
The quality of that interaction and its evolution over time is probably the most fundamental determinant of a country’s potential for growth and prosperity.
But this is not the Weltanschauung – the worldview – that permeates private-sector discourse, especially the views expressed by most chambers of trade and industry and business associations around the world.
Business organizations often hew to Ronald Reagan’s dictum: “Government is not the solution to our problems; government is the problem.”
It is a great sound bite: short, recursive, and somewhat poetic.