Coercive military action was allowed to take two forms: “all necessary measures” to enforce a no-fly zone, and “all necessary measures… to protect civilians and civilian populated areas under threat of attack.”
Boots on the ground – “a foreign occupation force” – were expressly excluded.
The language of these resolutions could hardly be clearer in prescribing the scope and limits of what should be done.
In the case of enforcing the no-fly zone, Resolution 1973 allows the destruction, by aircraft or missile, of any loyalist jet or helicopter that takes off, any pro-Qaddafi forces’ anti-aircraft batteries or missile-launch sites, and the disabling of any airstrip.
And, as for the wider mandate to protect civilians, the resolution allows airborne attacks to knock out tanks or troop columns advancing on Benghazi or other rebel-held towns, and – should they exist – concentrations of forces within those areas that pose a direct and immediate threat to Qaddafi’s opponents.
In both cases, some questions do arise at the margin.
Is it within the scope of the no-fly zone to take out command and control centers that might direct aircraft?
Can it possibly be legitimate to kill regime forces actually fleeing from a protected area, or in some other way posing no obvious or imminent threat to civilians?
Should a line be drawn against any otherwise legitimate action against Qaddafi’s forces that would be likely to put innocent civilians at risk?
Beyond these questions, there is nothing to debate.
Military action expressly designed to kill Qaddafi or force him into exile, to ensure a rebel victory in a civil war, or to achieve a more open and responsive system of government in Libya is not permissible under the explicit terms of Resolution 1973.
Nor is it permissible under the moral first principles of the “responsibility to protect” doctrine unanimously endorsed by the UN General Assembly in 2005 in an effort to end mass atrocities once and for all.
True, one or more of these results might, conceivably, be the effect of permissible military action, but they cannot be its objective.
It also follows from these legal and moral first principles that once there are reasonable grounds for confidence that the threat to civilian populations has been removed or neutralized (as seems now to be largely the case, at least in the east), military action should cease.
Of course, a close watch should be maintained, so that enforcement action under Resolution 1973 can be very quickly reinstated.
But offshore-based airborne action, with a sharply defined and limited objective, is much less susceptible to the kind of mission-creep and quagmire problems that often beset intervening ground forces, especially those with an inherently confused mandate, as in Afghanistan.
As the situation in Libya and the wider Middle East unfolds, policymakers are bound to face further acute dilemmas, not least in responding to continuing repression in Tripoli, or the similarly ugly and fragile situations in Bahrain and Yemen.
Mustering the cross-cultural political will to give the responsibility to protect real – and consistent – teeth will always be difficult.
But, at least in the case of Libya, a vital precedent has been set.
The Security Council has written the right script; we must now make sure that we follow it.
Stimulating Equality
NEW YORK – With unemployment climbing in the United States and other OECD countries, job creation is a key objective for policymakers.
In the US, President Barack Obama recently proposed to increase public spending by about $600 billion over the next two years to create an additional four million jobs.
But Obama is also concerned with reversing a sharp rise in income inequality (which is now at an 80-year high).
Is it possible for leaders to do both at the same time?
The answer is unequivocally yes, but only if they focus on government spending rather than reforming their tax systems.
That lesson is even more powerful for other advanced countries like Germany and France, which spend a far higher percentage of GDP on public programs (35% and 43%, respectively, in 2005) than the US (only 25%).
America’s tax system has surprisingly little redistributional punch.
Using a measure of “comprehensive income” – money income, total capital gains on wealth, imputed rent on owner-occupied housing, non-cash government benefits, and public consumption – income taxes are generally progressive.
Federal income taxes as a proportion of income increase steadily from 2% at the 10th percentile (that is, a family ranked tenth from the bottom out of 100) to 14% at the 90th percentile, but then falls off slightly to 13% at the very top, reflecting the favorable treatment of capital gains and investment income under the Bush administration’s income-tax laws.
On the other hand, social security taxes – the biggest tax for more than two-thirds of families – are mildly regressive.
Social security taxes as a proportion of income rise gradually from 5% at the 10th percentile to 9% at the 80th percentile, stay there at the 90th percentile, but then fall off sharply to 5% at the top.
This decline reflects the wage cap on social security taxes (currently at $102,000).
The total tax burden on families also includes sales taxes, which are steeply regressive, and property taxes, which are progressive.
Total personal taxes are mildly progressive, increasing steadily as a share of income from 14% at the 10th percentile to 28% at the 90th percentile, but then falling off sharply to 22% at the top, owing to the favorable treatment of capital gains and investment income, the wage cap on social security taxes, and the sharp regressivity of sales taxes.
On the other hand, total transfers have a much bigger equalizing effect on incomes.
Cash transfers, like social security and unemployment insurance, are highly equalizing.
When the value of non-cash government benefits, like Medicaid, Medicare, and Food Stamps, are also included, total transfers become extremely progressive.
As a proportion of income, they fall almost continuously, from 50% at the 10th percentile to 2.5% at the very top.
But government spending on goods and services, like education, highways, police, and sanitation, has distributional consequences, too, and can be allocated to actual beneficiaries in much the same way as government transfers.
Educational expenditures are allocated on the basis of the number of schoolchildren in the family.
Highway spending is allocated in proportion to the number of cars owned by the family and estimated miles driven.
Collective goods like fire and police protection are allocated on a per capita basis.
Public consumption is just as progressive as transfer payments.
As a proportion of income, it declines almost continuously, from 34% at the 10th percentile to 3% at the very top.
The main beneficiaries of public spending are the poor and the middle class.
When you add together government transfers and public consumption and subtract taxes paid, you get a figure for net government expenditures. This is extremely progressive.
As a share of income, it declines sharply from 70% at the 10th percentile to -16% at the top (in other words, the top bracket pays more in taxes than it receives in government benefits).
In fact, the crossover point between positive and negative net government expenditures is at the 66th percentile.
The extremely progressive nature of net government expenditures comes about equally from government transfers and public spending; very little is contributed by taxes.
It is not just the poor who benefit from net governmental expenditures.
The middle class is also a big beneficiary.
Between 1959 and 2005, about half of the growth of the middle class’s income came from increased net government expenditures.
Indeed, from 2000 to 2004, the increase in net government expenditures accounted for 150% of income growth, as other sources of income shriveled up.
Net government spending also helped to reduce overall inequality over those years.
As Obama and other leaders around the world implement stimulus packages in the months ahead, they should recognize that the question of who benefits goes beyond the number of jobs created.
Government spending, no less than government transfers, has actual beneficiaries.
If these packages target education (very redistributive) or sanitation, fire, police, and highways (mildly redistributive), they can create jobs and reduce inequality.
Are Equities Overvalued?
MILAN – Since the global economic crisis, sharp divergences in economic performance have contributed to considerable stock-market volatility.
Now, equity prices are reaching relatively high levels by conventional measures – and investors are starting to get nervous.
The question is whether stock valuations are excessive relative to future earnings potential.
The answer depends on two key variables: the discount rate and future earnings growth.
And, in February, the forward 12-month earnings P/E ratio, which uses managers’ future earnings guidance, reached an 11-year high of 17.1, with the five- and ten-year averages standing at about 14 and the 15-year average at 16.
The stock market’s recent performance often is attributed to the unconventional monetary policies that many central banks have been pursuing.
These policies, by design, lowered the return on sovereign bonds, forcing investors to seek yield in markets for higher-risk assets like equities, lower-rated bonds, and foreign securities.
According to the standard formulation, stock prices tend to revert toward the present value of estimated future earnings (including growth in those earnings), discounted at the so-called “risk-free rate,” augmented by an equity risk premium.
More precisely, the forward earnings yield – that is, the inverse of the P/E ratio – is equal to the risk-free rate plus the equity premium, minus the growth rate of earnings.
(Of course, markets take detours along the way, driven by, say, irrational exuberance, temporary declines in the impact of value investors, or mistimed contrarian trades.)
Monetary policy may have bolstered stock prices in two ways, either lowering the discount rate by compressing the equity risk premium, or simply reducing risk-free rates for long enough to raise the present value of stocks.
In either case, equity prices should level off at some point, allowing earnings to catch up, or even correct downward.
But the monetary-policy story, while plausible, is not ironclad.
Indeed, other factors may explain – or at least contribute to – current stock-market trends.
A key factor is earnings growth.
In the long run, it is reasonable to expect that revenue growth would be broadly consistent with economic growth – and, as it stands, there is little acceleration on this front.
Earnings can grow faster than revenues for a prolonged (though not indefinite) period, if companies cut costs or reduce investment – a trend that would, over time, lower depreciation charges.
In theory, corporate-tax cuts could have the same effect.
Furthermore, the economy’s equilibrium conditions could change, so that aggregate earnings would capture a larger share of national income.
There is some evidence that this is now occurring in advanced economies, with the proliferation of labor-saving digital technologies and the globalization of supply chains suppressing income growth.
That said, some trends may be having the opposite effect on expectations for earnings growth.
More than two-fifths of the S&amp;P 500’s earnings come from external markets, some of which, like Europe and Japan, are barely growing, while others, like China, are slowing.
The appreciation of the dollar exacerbates the situation for US markets, because it creates headwinds for exporters and causes companies’ foreign earnings, reported in dollars, to decline.
And a slowdown in productivity growth, together with excessive leverage and persistent public-sector underinvestment, may be undermining medium-term potential economic growth.
While expectations of faster earnings growth may well be contributing to elevated P/E levels, the current situation is complicated, to say the least.
What is certain is that expectations of high earnings growth would have a more durable positive effect on P/E levels than the suppression of the equity risk premium.
The other important factor affecting P/E is the risk-free rate.
As monetary policy normalizes – a process that has already begun in the United States – the risk-free rate is expected to rise to a level that is consistent with stable 2% inflation, which, in turn, corresponds with a level of unemployment.
What precisely that rate is, however, remains uncertain – and extremely difficult to determine, given that it is affected by virtually every aspect of the unfolding growth patterns.
Nonetheless, several features of current growth patterns stand out: excess productive capacity, persistent high leverage, declining labor content in goods-and-services production, and an increasingly unequal distribution of income both between labor and capital, and across labor-income segments, with their differential savings rates.
Together, these patterns could lead to an extended period in which aggregate demand limits growth.
With growth not constrained on the supply side, there would be little inflationary pressure, and the neutral interest rate that is consistent with non-inflationary full employment could simply be lower than it used to be for an extended period.
Where does this leave us?
In my view, it is difficult to make a strong case for a significant sustained increase in earnings growth in this environment, meaning that growth alone would not justify current equity valuations.
But the lower-discount-rate argument is more persuasive, and is consistent with underlying economic conditions and central banks’ mandates.
That said, in such a complex environment, investors can be expected to reach widely disparate conclusions, which will sustain – if not increase – market volatility.
Stock Market Fantasies
Historically, the stock market has performed well.
In his celebrated 2002 book Stocks for the Long Run , Jeremy Siegel shows that the American stock market returned 6.9% per year in real terms between 1802 and 2001.
Though the return varied by decade, even turning negative in some decades, overall it performed fairly consistently.
This 6.9% annual average return has since been referred to as “Siegel’s constant,” as if Siegel had discovered a new law of nature.
The idea that stocks will perform well in the future has many promoters today, especially among those trying to sell investments in stocks.
In the United States, President George W. Bush’s Commission to Strengthen Social Security cited Siegel for its claim that the government should encourage people to invest in stocks.
Bush has been traveling the country promoting a plan to introduce personal retirement accounts invested in stocks and bonds.
The plan assumes a 6.5% real return for stocks – only slightly below Siegel’s constant –in future decades.
But most people don’t believe that the stock market will perform so well in the future.
Siegel himself recently projected only a 6% average real return for US stocks over the next four decades.
Others have lower expectations.
At that rate, a 20-year-old who in 1960 invested $4,000 a year in a tax-free account in the US stock market would have one million dollars by age 65 today.
Should we expect to be able to do that in the future?
Obviously, most people didn’t invest this way in 1960.
But could most people have?
If so, how would the economy, with the labor and material resources at its disposal, provide the large houses, luxury cars, and high-end services that millionaires expect?
It is natural to suppose that it could not.
In fact, statistics on past stock market performance mislead because of what statisticians call “selection bias,” which occurs when the sample from which a statistic is derived is not representative of all the data.
Several kinds of selection bias must be considered when we look at Siegel’s constant.
The most fundamental problem is that, in examining stock market investments, we are selecting an economic activity because it was a consistent success in the past.
We are trying to extrapolate the past experience of a small fraction of the world population that we have chosen to examine because they made a lot of money.
Of course, if one looks at many different investment strategies and many different countries, one can find something that performed spectacularly in the past, even if there is no strategy that can be expected to do so well in the future.
The US had one of the world’s most successful stock markets in the twentieth century.
A study by Philippe Jorion and William Goetzmann found 39 countries with reliable stock price data – though not dividend data – for a good part of the twentieth century.
Their sample included countries in Latin America and Asian countries beyond Japan.
They found that the median real stock price appreciation from 1920 to 1996 for all these countries was only 0.8%, compared to 4.3% for the US.
The US was actually ranked first among the 39 countries.
Of course, even looking at these countries entails selection bias, for it excludes countries without price data for much of the twentieth century, notably China and Russia, where communist revolutions terminated the stock markets, resulting in -100% returns for investors.
The particular problems that prevented us from observing the returns on these stock markets will never be repeated, but it is wrong to assume that problems of that scale will not recur.
There is also the selection bias that we infer from looking at the twentieth century, the most successful in terms of economic growth in human history.
The twenty-first century will be different in ways that we cannot fathom today.
Of course, investing in stocks is not a bad thing.
Indeed, the stock market is an important component of any modern economy.
But we should not make plans that rely on high returns, as many (including some governments) appear to be doing.
Stock Markets’ Fear of Falling
NEW HAVEN &#45;&#45; The sharp drop in the world’s stock markets on August 9, after BNP Paribas announced that it would freeze three of its funds, is just one more example of the markets’ recent downward instability or asymmetry.
That is, the markets have been more vulnerable to sudden large drops than they have been to sudden large increases.
Daily stock price changes for the 100-business-day period ending August 3 were unusually negatively skewed in Argentina, Australia, Brazil, Canada, China, France, Germany, India, Japan, Korea, Mexico, the United States and the United Kingdom.
In the US, for example, the Standard and Poor’s 500 index in July recorded six days of declines and only three days of increases amounting to more than 1%.
In June, the index dropped more than 1% on four days, and gained more than 1% on two days.
Going back further, there was a gigantic one-day drop on February 27, 2007, of 3.5%, and no sharp rebound.
The February 27 decline began with an 8.8% one-day drop in the Shanghai Composite, following news that the Chinese government might tax capital gains more aggressively.
This news should have been relevant only to China, but the drop there fueled declines worldwide.
For example, the Bovespa in Brazil fell 6.6% on February 27, and the BSE 30 in India fell 4% the next day.
The markets have broken all-time records, come close to doing so, or at least done very well since 2003 ( the case in Japan) by making up for the big drops incrementally, in a succession of smaller increases.
Nor is the negative skew inconsistent with the fact that world stock markets have been relatively quiet for most of this year.
With the conspicuous exception of China and the less conspicuous exception of Australia, all have had low standard deviations of daily returns for the 100-business-day period ending August 3 when compared with the norm for the country.
The February 27 drop in US stock prices was only the 31st biggest one-day drop since 1950.
But all of the other 30 drops occurred at times when stock prices were much more volatile.
Thus, the February 27th drop really stands out, as do other recent one-day drops.
Indeed, one of the big puzzles of the US stock market recently has been low price volatility since around 2004, amid the most volatile earnings growth ever seen.
Five-year real earnings growth on the S&amp;P 500 set an all-time record in the period ending in the first quarter of 2007, at 192%.
Before that, between the third quarter of 2000 and the first quarter of 2002, real S&amp;P 500 earnings fell 55% – the biggest-ever decline since the index was created in 1957.
One would think that market prices should be volatile as investors try to absorb what this earnings volatility means.
But we have learned time and again that stock markets are driven more by psychology than by reasoning about fundamentals.
Is psychology somehow behind the pervasive negative skew in recent months?
Maybe we should ask why the skew is so negative.
Should we regard it as just chance, or, when combined with record-high prices, as a symptom of some instability?
The adage in the bull market of the 1920’s was “one step down, two steps up, again and again.”
The updated adage for the recent bull market is “one big step down, then three little steps up, again and again,” so far at least.
No one is looking for a sudden surge, and volatility is reduced by the absence of sharp up-movements.
But big negative returns have an unfortunate psychological impact on markets.
People still talk about October 28, 1929, or October 19, 1987.
Big drops get their attention, and this primes some people to be attentive for them in the future, and to be ready to sell if another one comes.
In fact, willingness to support the market after a sudden drop may be declining.
The “buy-on-dips stock market confidence index” that we compile at the Yale School of Management has been falling gradually since 2001, and has fallen especially far lately.
The index is the share of people who answered “increase” to the question, “If the Dow dropped 3% tomorrow, I would guess that the day after tomorrow the Dow would: Increase?
Decrease?
Stay the Same?”
In 2001, 72% of institutional investors and 74% of individual investors chose “increase.”
By May 2007, only 48% of institutional investors and 59% of individual investors chose “increase.”
Perhaps the buy-on-dips confidence index has slipped lately because of negative news concerning credit markets, notably the US sub-prime mortgage market, which has increased anxiety about the fundamental soundness of the economy.
But something more may be at work.
Everyone knows that markets have been booming, and everyone knows that other people know that a correction is always a possibility.
So there may be an underlying sensitivity to price drops, which could fuel a succession of downward price changes, amplifying public concerns about problems in the economy and heralding a profound change in investor sentiment.
Stocks and the Long Run
BERKELEY – After the second 40% decline in America’s Standard &amp; Poor’s composite index of common stocks in a decade, global investors are shell-shocked.
Funds invested, and reinvested, in the S&amp;P composite from 1998-2008 have yielded a real return of zero: the dividends earned on the portfolio have been just enough to offset inflation.
Not since 1982 has a decade passed at the end of which investors would have been better off had they placed their money in corporate or United States Treasury bonds rather than in a diversified portfolio of stocks.
So investors are wondering: will future decades be like the past decade?
If so, shouldn't investments in equities be shunned?
The answer is almost surely no.
At a time horizon of a decade or two, the past performance of stocks and bonds is neither a reliable guarantee nor a good guide to future results.
Periods like 1998-2008, in which stocks do relatively badly, are preceded by periods – like 1978-1988 and 1988-1998 – in which they do relatively well, and are in all likelihood followed by similar periods.
Do the math.
Some will be used to buy back stock – thus concentrating the equity and raising the value of the stock that is not bought back.
Some will be reinvested and used to boost the company’s capital stock.
You can argue that the corporate executives have expertise and knowledge that allows them to commit the funds they control to higher-return projects than are available in the stock market.
Or you can argue that they are corrupt empire-builders who dissipate a portion of the shareholders’ money that they control.
The sensible guess is that these two factors cancel each other out.
Thus, the expected fundamental real return on diversified US stock portfolios right now is in the range of 6% to 7%.
The expected market return is that amount plus or minus expected changes in valuation ratios: will stocks return more as price-earnings ratios rise, or return less as price-earnings ratios fall?
Once again, the sensible guess is that these two factors more or less cancel each other out.
Compare the 6% to 7% real return on stocks to a 1.25% real return on bonds.
But aren’t stocks risky?
Couldn’t earnings collapse?
Couldn’t the market undergo another 40% decline in the near future?
Aren’t bonds safer?
The answers to these questions are yes, yes, yes, and yes.
Remember: we already had another 40% decline in 2000-2003, and are in another one right now.
We also had the long slide from 1977-1982 that followed a 40% collapse from 1973-1975.
Before that, we had declines in 1946-1949, 1937-1942, and the biggest of them all in 1929-1933.
But stock market declines that are not accompanied by steep and persistent collapses in earnings are by their nature temporary: they are provoked by steep rises in perceived risk, and if those risks turn out to be overblown, stocks rebound when the perception of risk falls.
And how about stock market declines that are accompanied by a steep and persistent collapse in earnings – by depressions?
In the pre-World War II era, when governments held fast to the gold standard, depressions were times of deflation.
But in the post-World War II era, in which social democratic governments maintain welfare spending and Keynesian economic advisers seek to use fiscal policy to boost output, an earnings depression is much more likely to be accompanied by inflation.
True, a steep and persistent collapse in earnings will erode wealth invested in stocks.
But the inflation that accompanies it will produce a steeper and larger erosion of real wealth invested in nominal bonds.
As Edgar L. Smith wrote in The Atlantic Monthly back in 1924, when the principal risks are macroeconomic, bonds are no safer than diversified portfolios of stocks – in fact, they are riskier.
All these arguments apply only to long-term investors who can afford to wait out another 40% decline in values and keep their money invested until perceived risk drops.
(And if perceived risk never drops than you have worse things to worry about than the performance of your portfolio.)
For retirees and other people who need to spend soon, the year-to-year variability of the stock market commands caution.
But for those who do not need to spend soon, the recent decline in equity values is more an opportunity than a catastrophe.
We liked the stocks in our portfolio a year ago for their long-term prospects.
Today’s short-term crisis does not materially alter their long-term prospects.
And now we have an opportunity to buy more, and cheaply.
Stop Coddling Belarus
Lenin once said that capitalists were so cynical that they would sell the Soviets the rope with which they would hang them.
Lenin and communism have passed away, but that cynical indifference to suffering when profits are involved remains.
Belarus provides a glaring example.
The European Parliament has consistently denounced Belarus as Europe’s last dictatorship, yet EU member governments continue business as usual with Aleksander Lukashenka, the country’s wayward and near lunatic despot.
This is especially true when there is a chance to save or make money.
For example, for more than a decade, Germany’s police forces, customs service, and even the Bundeswehr have been ordering uniforms from a state-owned factory in the city of Dzherzinsky, named after the father of the Red Terror and founder of the Soviet KGB, Feliks Dzherzinsky.
Similar examples of such indifferent cynicism abound.
By treating Lukashenka as a favored business partner at the same time that the EU is trying to isolate him as an international pariah, European hypocrisy stands naked.
Instead of indirectly propping up Lukashenka’s regime through such cozy deals, Europe’s governments must begin to act in accordance with what Europe’s parliament has long understood: underwriting Lukashenka economically only prolongs his misrule.
So it is now more important than ever that European parliamentarians unite and make their position clear.
The European Parliament has, indeed, taken the lead.
Since last year it has been enlisting people with historic knowledge and understanding of totalitarian regimes to help guide its response to events in Belarus.
This advice helped shape the parliament’s strong stance against maintaining unnecessary economic engagement with Lukashenka and his henchmen.
But there are two radically different attitudes regarding Belarus’s participation in European activities.
On one hand, the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe has denied Belarusian politicians even informal access to meetings in Strasbourg.
The Assembly condemned Lukashenka’s usurpation of power when he twisted the constitution to grant himself a virtual lifetime presidency, and it has denounced the disappearance of those Belarussians who have dared to think differently from the regime.
The Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) has also taken a strong stand against the Belarusian dictator.
As the Final Report of its 2004 mission to observe the Belarusian parliamentary elections clearly stated, the vote “fell significantly short of OSCE commitments.”
Similarly, the 2004 referendum to eliminate term limits on the presidency “took place with unrestrained Government bias in favor of the referendum,” and without “the conditions, particularly freedom of expression and freedom of the media, to ensure that the will of the people serves as the basis of government authority.”
But at the same time the OSCE is condemning these anti-democratic practices, its own Parliamentary Assembly maintains full-fledged cooperation with the Belarusian parliament.
Indeed, the OSCE treats the Lukashenka-controlled parliament in the same way it does any EU parliament. So real parliaments and sham parliaments are treated as equals.
The idea would be laughable if it were not so tragic.
This absurd situation must change.
It is the duty of all members of EU national parliaments to reject this affront to their democratic dignity.
Only democratic parliaments should sit as equals in Europe’s democratic forums.
The goal is not to ensure Europe’s democratic purity, but to change the nature of Belarus’s government.
For that to happen, Europe’s democratic voice must be heard within Belarus.
That won’t be easy.
Of the 1,500 different media outlets in Belarus today, only a dozen or so retain any form of independence.
Even that small number is likely to diminish, as Lukashenka keeps up political, financial, and legal pressure on them.
Indeed, Belarus’s last independent daily newspaper recently went out of business.
The European Commission has allocated two million euros to establish an independent radio station for Belarus, which must operate outside of the country because of Lukashenka.
Working with the Belarusian association of journalists, this independent media outlet will broadcast from Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, and perhaps Ukraine.
This meager effort, however, is an insufficient response by Europe’s democracies to the full panoply of Lukashenka’s dictatorship: his docile courts, brutal jails, and corrupt police.
Are a few hours of radio broadcasting really all Europe and the democratic west can muster?
If so, Lukashenka must be laughing aloud.
Parliamentarians across Europe and the West must join their voice together in a well-defined, united and ringing declaration that forces Western leaders to apply real pressure to Europe’s last dictator.
Such pressure brought results a year ago, with the success of the Orange Revolution in Ukraine.
Nothing less than a united position against the despot of Belarus is necessary if Lukashenka – and his Russian backers – are to be forced to change their ways.
Stopping America’s Federal Debt Explosion
CAMBRIDGE – The US Congressional Budget Office (CBO) has just delivered the bad news that the national debt is now rising faster than GDP and heading toward ratios that we usually associate with Italy or Spain.
That confirms my view that the fiscal deficit is the most serious long-term economic problem facing US policymakers.
A decade ago, the federal debt was just 35% of GDP.
It is now more than double that and projected to reach 86% in 2026.
But that’s just the beginning.
The annual budget deficit projected for 2026 is 5% of GDP.
If it stays at that level, the debt ratio would eventually rise to 125%.
Even that projection assumes that interest rates on the national debt will rise slowly, averaging less than 3.5% in 2026.
But if the US debt ratio really is on the fast track to triple-digit levels, investors in the US and abroad may rightly fear that the government has lost control of the budget process.
With debt exploding, foreign bondholders could begin to worry that the US will find a way to reduce its real value by stoking inflation or imposing a withholding tax on all government bond interest.
In that case, investors will insist on a risk premium: higher interest rates on Treasury debt.
Higher interest rates, in turn, would increase the deficit – and thus the future level of the debt ratio – even more.
The high and rising level of the national debt hurts the US economy in many ways.
Paying the interest requires higher federal taxes or a larger budget deficit.
In 2016, the interest on the national debt is equal to nearly 16% of the revenue from personal income tax.
By 2026, the projected interest on the national debt will equal more than 31% of this revenue, even if interest rates rise as slowly as the CBO projects.
Foreign investors now own more than half of net government debt, and that proportion is likely to keep growing.
Even if they are now willing to accept newly issued bonds when interest and principal on outstanding ones are due, the time will come when the US will have to pay the interest by exporting more goods and services than it imports.
And boosting net exports will require a weaker dollar to make US products more attractive to foreign buyers and foreign goods more expensive to US buyers, implying a loss in Americans’ standard of living.
Increased borrowing by the federal government also means crowding out the private sector.
Lower borrowing and capital investment by firms reduces future productivity growth and growth in real incomes.
So it is important to find ways to reduce the budget deficit and minimize the future debt ratio.
The good news is that a relatively small reduction in the deficit can put the debt ratio on a path to a much lower level.
Cutting the deficit to 2% of GDP, for example, would cause the debt ratio eventually to reach 50%.
Deficit reduction requires cutting government spending, increasing revenue, or both.
Neither is politically easy; but neither should be impossible.
Cutting spending is made more difficult by the reductions in relative outlays that have already occurred.
The share of GDP devoted to defense has fallen from 7.5% of GDP in 1966 to 3.2% of GDP this year, and the CBO projects it to fall to 2.6% during the next decade.
That would be the lowest GDP share since World War II, representing a level of spending that military experts believe is dangerously low.
Other spending is split between the annually appropriated amounts (known as non-defense discretionary spending) and the programs in which spending follows from established rules that are not subject to annual review (known as the “mandatory” spending programs, primarily Social Security retirement benefits and health-care spending).
The non-defense discretionary spending is also heading toward 2.6% of GDP – also the smallest share of GDP since WWII.
It is the mandatory programs that have grown rapidly, driving up the deficit.
The mandatory programs’ share of GDP, only 4.5% in 1966, is now 13.3% and projected to reach 15% in 2026.
These programs are largely benefits for middle-class seniors and not welfare programs targeted at the relatively poor.
That’s why most experts agree that slowing the rise in these so-called “entitlement” programs has to be part of reducing future deficits.
Federal taxes now take 18.3% of GDP and are projected to remain at that level for the next decade, unless tax rules or rates are changed.
The rate structure for personal taxation has changed over the past 30 years, with the top tax rate rising from 28% in 1986 to more than 40% now.
The corporate rate of 35% is already the highest in the industrial world.
Higher marginal tax rates would weaken incentives and distort economic decisions.
That’s why I and others who think about shrinking the deficit focus on changing tax rules to limit the special features known as “tax expenditures,” which represent government spending built into the tax code.
These items range from small ones, like the $7,500 tax credit that goes to a buyer of an electric car, to large (for example, the deduction for mortgage interest and the exclusion from taxable income of employer payments for employee health insurance).
The mortgage deduction alone will reduce tax revenue in 2016 by $84 billion, or more than 5% of the personal income tax collected.
The exclusion of health insurance premiums from employees’ taxable income will reduce revenue by more than $200 billion, or about 15% of receipts from the personal income tax.
Nothing to start shrinking the deficit will happen before this year’s presidential election.
But tackling the spending and revenue components of deficit reduction should be high on the agenda when the new president takes office next year.
Stop the Band-Aid Treatment
The Middle East is a tinderbox, with some key players on all sides waiting for every opportunity to destroy their enemies with bullets, bombs and missiles.
One of the special vulnerabilities of Israel, and a repetitive cause of violence, is the holding of prisoners.
Militant Palestinians and Lebanese know that a captured Israeli soldier or civilian is either a cause of conflict or a valuable bargaining chip for prisoner exchange.
This assumption is based on a number of such trades, including 1,150 Arabs, mostly Palestinians, for three Israelis in 1985; 123 Lebanese for the remains of two Israeli soldiers in 1996; and 433 Palestinians and others for an Israeli businessman and the bodies of three soldiers in 2004.
This stratagem precipitated the renewed violence that erupted in June when Palestinians dug a tunnel under the barrier that surrounds Gaza and assaulted some Israeli soldiers, killing two and capturing one.
They offered to exchange the soldier for the release of 95 women and 313 children who are among almost 10,000 Arabs in Israeli prisons, but this time Israel rejected a swap and attacked Gaza in an attempt to free the soldier and stop rocket fire into Israel.
The resulting destruction brought reconciliation between warring Palestinian factions and support for them throughout the Arab world.
Hezbollah militants in south Lebanon then killed three Israeli soldiers and captured two others, and insisted on Israel’s withdrawal from disputed territory and an exchange for some of the several thousand incarcerated Lebanese.
With American backing, Israeli bombs and missiles rained down on Lebanon.
Soon, Hezbollah rockets supplied by Syria and Iran were striking northern Israel.
It is inarguable that Israel has a right to defend itself against attacks on its citizens, but it is inhumane and counterproductive to punish civilian populations in the illogical hope that somehow they will blame Hamas and Hezbollah for provoking the devastating response.
The result instead has been that broad Arab and worldwide support has been rallied for these groups, while condemnation of both Israel and the United States has intensified.
Israel belatedly announced, but did not carry out, a two-day cessation in bombing Lebanon, responding to the global condemnation of an air attack on the Lebanese village of Qana, where 57 civilians were killed and where 106 died from the same cause 10 years ago.
As before there were expressions of “deep regret,” a promise of “immediate investigation” and the explanation that dropped leaflets had warned families in the region to leave their homes.
The urgent need in Lebanon is that Israeli attacks stop, that Lebanon’s regular military forces control the southern region of the country, that Hezbollah cease as a separate fighting force, and future attacks against Israel be prevented.
Israel should withdraw from all Lebanese territory, including Shebaa Farms, and release the Lebanese prisoners.
Yet Prime Minister Ehud Olmert has rejected such a cease-fire.
These are ambitious hopes, but even if the UN Security Council adopts and implements a resolution that would lead to such an eventual solution, it will provide just another band-aid and temporary relief.
Tragically, the current conflict is part of the inevitably repetitive cycle of violence that results from the absence of a comprehensive settlement in the Middle East, exacerbated by the almost unprecedented six-year absence of any real effort to achieve such a goal.
Leaders on both sides ignore strong majorities that crave peace, allowing extremist-led violence to preempt all opportunities for building a political consensus.
Traumatized Israelis cling to the false hope that their lives will be made safer by incremental unilateral withdrawals from occupied areas, while Palestinians see their remnant territories reduced to little more than human dumping grounds surrounded by a provocative “security barrier” that embarrasses Israel’s friends and fails to bring safety or stability.
The general parameters of a long-term, two-state agreement are well known.
There will be no substantive and permanent peace for any peoples in this troubled region as long as Israel is violating key UN resolutions, official American policy and the international “road map” for peace by occupying Arab lands and oppressing the Palestinians.
Except for mutually agreeable negotiated modifications, Israel’s official pre-1967 borders must be honored.
As were all previous administrations since the founding of Israel, US government leaders must be in the forefront of achieving this long-delayed goal.
A major impediment to progress is the US administration’s strange policy that dialogue on controversial issues will be extended only as a reward for subservient behavior and will be withheld from those who reject US assertions.
Direct engagement with the Palestine Liberation Organization or the Palestinian Authority and the government in Damascus will be necessary if secure negotiated settlements are to be achieved.
Failure to address the issues and leaders involved risks the creation of an arc of even greater instability running from Jerusalem through Beirut, Damascus, Baghdad and Tehran.
The people of the Middle East deserve peace and justice, and we in the international community owe them our strong leadership and support.
Menghentikan Perang terhadap Anak-anak
Machel salah.
Bukan apa-apa, satu generasi setelahnya, kemanusiaan merosot semakin dalam dan moralitas semakin hampa.
Anak-anak yang hidup di zona konflik menjadi target kekerasan yang merajalela dan ketentuan-ketentuan HAM yang ditetapkan PBB yang seharusnya melindungi mereka justru dilukai oleh impunitas.
Pada peringatan dua puluh tahun laporan Machel, komunitas internasional harus mengatakan cukup! dan menghentikan perang terhadap anak-anak.
Perang berlangsung dalam berbagai bentuk.
Umumnya, anak-anak menjadi target utama.
Pemerkosaan, perkawinan paksa, perbudakan, dan penculikan merupakan taktik-taktik standar yang dipergunakan kelompok-kelompok seperti ISIS di Irak dan Suriah, Boko Haram di Nigeria bagian utara, dan organisasi sejenis di Afghanistan, Pakistan, and Somalia.
Pembunuhan terhadap anak-anak bersekolah mereka anggap sebuah strategi militer yang sah.
Seringkali, anak-anak diserang oleh aktor negara dan bukan negara (non-state).
Di Sudan Selatan, sejak meletusnya konflik pada tahun 2013, pemerintah dan kelompok pemberontak membunuh, memperkosa, dan merekrut anak-anak untuk ikut mengangkat senjata.
Begitu brutalnya, namun sangat sistematis dan menyebarluas serangan-serangan yang dilancarkan sehingga terkesan bahwa itu semua dilakukan berdasarkan restu dan wewenang politik tertinggi di negara.
Sesungguhnya, menurut laporan Dewan Keamanan PBB yang diterbitkan awal tahun ini, armada pemerintah Sudan Selatan terlibat dalam aksi-aksi tersebut, dengan demikian jelas sekali mengapa tidak ada seorang pun yang dimintai pertanggungjawaban atas pembunuhan 130 anak-anak pada Mei 2015 yang terjadi di negara bagian Unity State.
Anak-anak juga menjadi korban tak terduga (collateral damage) akibat tergerusnya hukum dan norma-norma yang dirancang untuk melindungi warga di zona konflik.
Di Suriah, anak-anak yang hidup di Aleppo, Homs, dan kota-kota lain terus dibombardir gas dan bom drum rakitan yang diluncurkan tentara yang menunjukkan penolakan atas hukum internasional.
Larangan serangan terhadap sekolah dan pusat-pusat kesehatan hanya ucapan belaka: lebih dari 25% sekolah di Suriah kini hancur atau terpaksa ditutup.
Pemimpin politik di Arab Saudi jelas-jelas memperlakukan Konvensi Jenewa, fondasi hukum bagi perlindungan warga sipil, sebagai aturan yang usang .
Bulan Agustus lalu, serangan udara Arab Saudi di pinggiran kota Saada, Yaman, menghancurkan sebuah sekolah dan membunuh sepuluh siswa.
Ini hanya satu dari sekian banyak kejadian dari serangan serupa yang menimpa sekolah, pusat kesehatan, dan pasar.
Dalam satu tahun, koalisi yang dipimpin Arab Saudi di Yaman telah merusak empat fasilitas kesehatan yang dibantu LSM Doctors Without Borders.
Kekerasan terhadap anak-anak yang tengah mengancam masih jauh dari ramalan Machel dua dekade lalu.
Setelah mendengar usulan Machel, Majelis Umum PBB membentuk Special Representative for Children and Armed Conflict (Perwakilan Khusus untuk Urusan Anak-anak dan Konflik Bersenjata) pada tahun 1977, untuk mengidentifikasi dan melaporkan kepada Sekjen PBB dan Dewan Keamanan mengenai pihak-pihak dalam konflik yang bertanggung jawab atas pelanggaran keji dan tiada hentinya.
Perwakilan khusus tersebut mengawasi enam jenis pelanggaran terhadap hak-hak anak: pembunuhan dan mutilasi, kekerasan seksual, rektrutmen militer, serangan terhadap sekolah dan fasilitas kesehatan, penculikan, dan perampasan akses pada bantuan kemanusiaan.
Enam jenis pelanggaran di atas dilarang menurut hukum internasional, termasuk Konvensi Jenewa tahun 1949, yang mewajibkan pihak-pihak dalam konflik untuk melindungi warga sipil dan menjamin akses pada bantuan kemanusiaan tidak terputus, dan Konvensi tentang Hak-hak Anak, perjanjian HAM dengan jumlah ratifikasi terbanyak, yang memuat daftar hak-hak anak secara lengkap.
Kekerasan terhadap anak terjadi bukan karena keterbatasan hak, tapi akibat sebuah krisis kepatuhan (crisis of compliance) menurut istilah Eva Svoboda dari Overseas Development Institute.  Komunitas internasional gagal menjunjung tinggi hukum, norma, dan ketentuan yang mengatur standar-standar yang beradab.
Singkat kata, pembunuhan, mutilasi, dan teror terhadap anak-anak menjadi praktik lazim.
Krisis kepatuhan ini bermula dari atas di sistem PBB dan diturunkan melalui Dewan Keamanan, ke Majelis Umum, dan akhirnya negara-negara anggota.
Contohnya gerakan yang diusung Arab Saudi di Yaman.
Awal tahun ini, Arab Saudi masuk ke dalam “list of shame” yang dikeluarkan sekjen PBB  karena tindakannya mengebom fasilitas warga sipil dan membunuh anak-anak.
Namun pada bulan Juni, Arab Saudi dihapuskan dari daftar tersebut setelah pemerintahnya melakukan serangkaian lobi secara intensif, ditambah dengan lobi yang dilakukan sekutunya di Amerika dan Eropa.
Terlepas dari niat negara-negara sekutu, pesan yang dikirimkan jelas: perlindungan terhadap jual-beli senjata yang menguntungkan harus diutamakan daripada perlindungan hak-hak anak.
Siklus pelaporan tentang perampasan hak-hak anak tiada habisnya kini berisiko diperlakukan sebagai lelucon semata.
Meskipun kantor perwakilan khusus sudah melakukan kinerja luar biasa dalam mengungkapkan peristiwa-peristiwa serangan terhadap anak-anak – bahkan beberapa kali terlibat perundingan untuk pembebasan tentara anak di bawah umur – hukuman yang dikenakan tidak sebanding dengan kejahatan yang dilakukan.
Ketika para pemimpin dunia bertemu di New York bulan ini untuk menghadiri Pertemuan Majelis Umum PBB ke-71, ini waktunya menegaskan kembali nilai-nilai yang menjadi sendi-sendi dalam rumusan deklarasi HAM.
Satu-satunya cara menghentikan impunitas atas kejahatan berat dan keji terhadap anak-anak ialah menegakkan akuntabilitas murni – dan mengadili pelakunya.
Setidaknya, badan-badan seperti Mahkamah Internasional di Den Haag (International Criminal Court) dan Pengadilan khusus HAM Afrika (African Court on Human and Peoples’ Rights) harus bekerja lebih erat dengan perwakilan khusus PBB.
Namun, mengingat skala permasalahan yang begitu besar dan sedemikian mengakarnya budaya impunitas, prakarsa yang lebih kuat tentu diperlukan.
Selain itu, mempertimbangkan kegagalan lembaga-lembaga yang ada, barangkali sudah saatnya mendirikan badan baru – International Criminal Court for Children, berwenang menyidik dan menuntut aktor negara dan bukan negara (non-state) atas kejahatan perang terhadap anak-anak.
Bersama kita membiarkan hukum HAM kehilangan gigi dan terlupakan.
Tapi yakinlah, jika ada satu dalil yang bisa menyatukan dunia yang terpecah-belah, dapat dipastikan itu karena perlindungan anak-anak di zona perang.
Story Time for the World Economy
NEW HAVEN - Since hitting bottom in early March, the world’s major stock markets have all risen dramatically.
Some, notably in China and Brazil, reached lows last fall and again in March, before rebounding sharply, with Brazil’s Bovespa up 75% in May compared to late October 2008, and the Shanghai Composite up 54% in roughly the same period.
But the stock market news just about everywhere has been very good since March.
Does this suggest that the world economic crisis is coming to an end?
Could it be that everyone becomes optimistic again at the same time, bringing a quick end to all our problems?
Speculative booms are driven by psychological feedback.
Rising stock prices generate stories of smart investors getting rich.
People become envious of others’ successes, and begin to wonder if rising prices don’t portend further increases.
A temptation arises to get into the market, even among people who are fundamentally doubtful that the boom will continue.
So rising prices feed back into more rising prices, and the cycle repeats again and again – for a while.
During a boom, people considering getting into asset markets weigh the fear of regret if they don’t against the pain of possible loss if they do.
There is no authoritative answer about what the “right” decision is, and no consensus among experts about the proper level of exposure to these markets.
Should it be 30% in stocks and 70% in housing?
Or the reverse?
Who knows?
So the ultimate human decision must be based on the relative salience of these discordant emotional factors.
In a boom environment, the emotional factors are biased toward getting into the market.
But one must ask what would sustain such a movement now. There seems to be no dramatic fundamental news since March other than the price increases themselves.
The human tendency to react to price increases is always there waiting to generate booms and bubbles.
The feedback is only an amplification mechanism for other factors that predispose people to want to get into the markets.
The whole world can’t recover all of the enthusiasm of a few years ago from feedback alone, for there is a giant coordination problem: we are not all attentive to price increases at the same time, so we make decisions to buy at very different times.
As a result, things happen slowly, and, meanwhile, more bad news may be revealed.
The only way world confidence can return dramatically is if our thinking coordinates around some inspiring story beyond that of the price increases themselves.
In my 2009 book with George Akerlof, Animal Spirits , we describe the ups and downs of a macroeconomy as being substantially driven by stories .
Such narratives, especially those fueled by accessible human-interest stories, are the thought viruses whose contagion drives the economy.
The contagion rate of stories depends on their relation to feedback, but plausible stories have to be there in the first place.
The narratives have substantial persistence in that they affect our views.
The story that drove the worldwide stock-market bubble that peaked in 2000 was complex, but, put crudely, it was that bright, aggressive people were leading the way to a new era of capitalist glory in a rapidly globalizing economy.
Such people became new entrepreneurs and world travelers on the way to prosperity.
This narrative seemed plausible to casual observers, because it was tied to millions of little human-interest stories about the obvious successes of those – friends, neighbors, and family members – who had the vision to participate enthusiastically in the new environment.
But it is hard today to re-create such a narrative, given so many stories of trouble.
The stock markets’ rebound since March seems not to be built around any inspirational story, but rather the mere absence of more really bad news and the knowledge that all previous recessions have come to an end.
At a time when the newspapers are filled with pictures of foreclosure sales – and even of surplus homes being demolished – it is hard to see any cause for the markets’ rebound other than this “all recessions come to an end sooner or later” story.
Indeed, the “capitalists triumphant” story is tarnished, as is our faith in international trade.
So, here is the problem: there isn’t a plausible driver of a dramatic recovery.
Starting an economic recovery is like launching a new movie: nobody knows how people will react to it until people actually get to see it and talk about it among themselves.
The new movie Star Trek , based on yet another remake of a television show from more than 40 years ago, surprised everyone by raking in $76.5 million on its first weekend.
That old story just got some excitement back with this new movie.
Similarly, we have to hope that some of the same old stories that propelled us in the past – the rise of capitalism and its internationalization throughout the world economy – can somehow be dusted off and revived yet again to invigorate the animal spirits that drive economic recovery.
Our efforts to stimulate the economy should be focused on improving the script for those stories, making these stories believable again.
This means making capitalism work better, and making it clear that there is no threat of protectionism.
But the rationale must be to get the world economy out of its current risky situation, not to propel us into yet another speculative bubble.
Asia’s Game Without Frontiers
NEW DELHI – Nowadays, many people seem to be more relaxed than ever about nationality, with the Internet enabling them to forge close connections with distant cultures and people.
But states remain extremely sensitive about their borders’ inviolability.
After all, territory – including land, oceans, air space, rivers, and seabeds – is central to a country’s identity, and shapes its security and foreign policy.
States can respond to territorial disputes either by surrendering some aspects of sovereignty, thus weakening their power and influence, or by adopting a more robust national-defense strategy aimed at fending off current challenges and precluding future threats.
Today, many Asian countries are choosing the latter option.
Consider the territorial disputes roiling the Indian Ocean and other East Asian regions, sparked by China’s repeated – and increasingly assertive – efforts to claim sovereignty over vast maritime areas.
As China’s incursions reignite long-smoldering disagreements and threaten to destabilize the regional status quo, countries throughout Asia are reconsidering their strategic positions.
For example, the Philippines is revamping its security strategy by enhancing cooperation with the United States – China’s counterweight in the region – only two decades after it closed two major American military installations, the naval base at Subic Bay and Clark Air Base.
Vietnam, too, has strengthened its ties with the US.
And, after decades of absence, America has resumed training programs for Indonesia’s military.
More significant, Japan’s leaders are now openly debating ways to transform the country’s post-World War II pacifism into a much more assertive nationalism.
In fact, in August, the Japan Maritime Self-Defense Force unveiled the helicopter destroyer Izumo, whose structure and capabilities resemble those of an aircraft carrier, with possible offensive applications.
This emerging strategic shift will likely have far-reaching consequences, raising the stakes of Sino-Japanese sparring over islands in the East China Sea.
But, while Japan’s tense relationship with China dominates headlines worldwide, the strategic rivalry between China and India is more likely to shape Asian power dynamics in the coming decades.
And recent events suggest that China knows it.
In April, a platoon of Chinese People’s Liberation Army (PLA) border-security personnel crossed the so-called “line of actual control” into India’s Depsang Valley in Ladakh to erect an encampment, where they remained for almost three weeks.
China’s leaders have yet to explain what prompted the incursion – but there is no shortage of speculation.
Some claim that the local PLA commander initiated the “stand-off,” while others contend that China’s new president, Xi Jinping, was using the transgression to assert his authority over the PLA.
The incursion has even been linked to the scandal surrounding Chongqing’s disgraced former Communist Party chief, Bo Xilai, who had close ties with high-ranking PLA and security-services officers.
But the most likely explanation is the simplest one: China was deliberately asserting its authority over the disputed border.
As it stands, India and China are openly competing for influence in Sri Lanka, Myanmar, Nepal, and Bangladesh.
So far, they have largely relied on economic and commercial mechanisms – especially rival port and pipeline projects – to secure their positions.
China is not allowing its economic slowdown to derail its efforts to enlarge and modernize its navy and expand its commercial interests around Eurasia’s southern rim.
It has been investing or demonstrating interest in deep-water port projects in Kenya, Tanzania, and Bangladesh, and it has been directly involved in financing and constructing Indian Ocean ports in Myanmar, Sri Lanka, and Pakistan.
Just as China is helping to develop Pakistan’s port of Gwadar, India is helping to develop Iran’s Chabahar port 70 kilometers (43.5 miles) away.
Chabahar is not useful only to counter China; it will serve as a vital link for India to transport goods to Afghanistan, Central Asia, and beyond.
India could even develop a major communication hub with the port as its nexus.
Moreover, India is working to safeguard its naval superiority over China.
In August, the reactor aboard India’s first indigenously built nuclear submarine, INS Arihant, was activated, bringing the country one step closer to realizing its long-sought goal of a “nuclear triad” – the capability to launch nuclear weapons from land, air, and sea.
Just three days later, India launched the aircraft carrier INS Vikrant.
But, as The Economist observed, “rarely does nemesis follow hubris so quickly.”
Indeed, just two days after the Vikrant’s launch, explosions at the naval dockyard in Mumbai sank INS Sindhurakshak – one of the ten Kilo-class submarines that form the backbone of India’s aging conventional-submarine fleet – killing 18 crew members.
Perhaps China’s apparent economic, strategic, and military advantages will prove less significant than many believe – especially given continuing uncertainty over the terms of America’s strategic “pivot” toward Asia.
Indeed, with the US on their side, either Japan or India could conceivably tip the scales in its own favor.
But one thing is clear: a great game is beginning among Asia’s great powers, and there are scant rules in place to manage how it will be played.
Euro Lessons for East Asia
SEOUL – East Asia could learn two valuable lessons from the eurozone crisis.
First, do not rush the process of financial and monetary integration; and, second, develop adequate institutional frameworks before proceeding.
In fact, East Asian countries are unlikely to move toward a regional fixed exchange-rate system or a monetary union with a single currency in the immediate future, owing to the region’s great diversity in terms of economic and political conditions.
Perhaps, in a few decades, the region’s countries will develop institutions to promote financial integration, such as a single bank supervisory agency of the type that the European Union is now creating.
Nevertheless, Asian policymakers should improve cooperation mechanisms designed to prevent and manage crises.
Most promising is the Chiang Mai Initiative Multilateralization (CMIM) of the ASEAN+3 – the 10 members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations plus China, Japan, and South Korea.
This $120 billion regional reserve pool was launched in 2010 to provide short-term liquidity to members in an emergency.
The ASEAN+3 is now strengthening the CMIM by doubling the total fund size to $240 billion.
The group also agreed to enhance the CMIM’s flexibility by reducing the minimum portion of crisis lending to be tied to the International Monetary Fund’s lending program from 80% to 70%.
The CMIM has yet to be tested in a crisis.
In its infancy, it might not be able to provide adequate emergency support in a timely and flexible manner.
The $240 billion fund is small, amounting to only about 1.5% of the region’s GDP.
European experience suggests that large-scale systemic shocks call for greater financial support.
Unlike the IMF or the European Stability Mechanism, CMIM contributions are self-managed by the respective country’s authorities.
And countries may choose not to contribute to a swap request.
This suggests that the CMIM could be especially constrained amid a systemic shock or political disputes among member countries.
Moreover, an “IMF stigma” remains among those countries in the region that were discontented with the Fund’s role during the 1997-1998 Asian financial crisis.
IMF conditionality for the activation of the majority of their borrowing could make countries reluctant to turn to the CMIM for support.
Another challenge is the CMIM’s limited capacity for economic surveillance and monitoring.
Last year, ASEAN+3 established a regional surveillance unit, the ASEAN+3 Macroeconomic Research Office (AMRO), to monitor regional economies, detect emerging vulnerabilities, and support effective decision-making by the CMIM.
But it is unclear whether AMRO has sufficient capacity and expertise to monitor 13 countries effectively.
Indeed, East Asian countries may find it difficult to conduct candid surveillance of one another’s policies and enforce firm policy conditionality.
The example of Greece before and during the eurozone crisis shows that it is often hard for countries to be tough on their neighbors.
The ASEAN+3 must continue to increase its resources, enhance its independence and improve its operational procedures.
A fully capable regional financial safety net could contain the contagion of financial shocks emanating from individual economies and prevent disruptions to the region’s key growth drivers – intra-regional trade and investment.
The CMIM could help East Asian countries to reduce their reliance on accumulating, as a form of self-insurance, costly reserves that fuel global imbalances.
With greater resources and an improved governance structure, AMRO could play a more effective role in regional economic surveillance and monitoring, without which moral-hazard risks associated with financial safety nets would rise.
Enhanced regional control would contribute to better information-sharing and decision-making as well, implying that the IMF-linked portion of CMIM crisis lending could be reduced in step with the strengthening of AMRO’s capacity and performance.
The ASEAN+3 should aim to develop the CMIM into a full-capacity regional financial safety net supported by AMRO as a capable and credible secretariat – a de facto Asian Monetary Fund, possibly with broader membership.
But, until the CMIM and AMRO are fully developed, their close cooperation with the IMF is desirable.
Indeed, at the Cannes G-20 Summit in November 2011, leaders agreed on principles for cooperation between the IMF and regional financing arrangements, including open information-sharing and joint missions.
In particular, the IMF and ASEAN+3 financing arrangement should establish a regular channel of dialogue to facilitate information exchange and prepare concrete guidelines for cooperation and an appropriate division of tasks.
Establishing constructive and effective guidelines could help to prevent the sort of conflicts and confusion over lending conditions during crises that we have seen among the IMF, EU, and the European Central Bank in the eurozone.
Given the “IMF stigma” in Asia, a co-financing facility that provides precautionary credit lines without policy conditionality to qualified member countries would be useful.
Asian countries have learned from their region’s own crisis in the 1990’s, as well as from the eurozone’s ongoing crisis, that effective management of cross-border capital flows requires well-constructed national, regional, and global responses.
To respond effectively to crises, East Asian countries must continue to improve the regional financial safety net and surveillance mechanism, while strengthening their cooperation with the IMF.
Strengthening IMF Surveillance
In today’s globalized economy, one country’s economic and financial policies can reverberate far beyond its borders.
Be it the spread of inflation or the impact of currency devaluation half a world away, global economic forces can have a direct impact on every person’s livelihood.
Under such circumstances, international cooperation is essential to ensure stability and growth and prevent disruptive crises.
But for such cooperation to be effective, the international community needs the right tools.
The International Monetary Fund provides one of the most important tools.
For many years, the IMF has engaged its member countries in a process known as “surveillance,” in which it monitors, analyzes, and consults on each country’s economic policies – both exchange rate policies and relevant domestic policies.
These regular checkups help to identify potential vulnerabilities and maintain economic stability.
However, the increasingly complex policy challenges of the globalized economy demand a fresh look at this process.
This June, the IMF’s Executive Board did just that, reaching a broad consensus on updating surveillance to make it more focused and effective.
This is one of the most important reforms to the Fund’s work in the 30 years since the surveillance process was designed.
Indeed, it is part of a much broader reform effort aimed at strengthening the IMF and will have implications extending well beyond the Fund’s boardroom.
The new reform brings three critical changes.
First, it affirms that surveillance should focus on what matters for stability, and gives detailed guidance in this area.
IMF advice should not be spread too thin.
Second, there is now clear advice to the Fund’s member countries on how they should run their exchange rate policies, and on what is acceptable to the international community.