Nor should we forget the Scots and the Northern Irish, who voted overwhelmingly against Brexit and are now prepared to go to great lengths to preserve their membership in the European club.
Indeed, even some of the most enthusiastic Leave campaigners have shown signs of buyer’s remorse, now that the price of Brexit is becoming increasingly clear.
Most notorious among them is Boris Johnson, the former London mayor who, just four days after the referendum, wrote a commentary in the Daily Telegraph titled: “I Cannot Stress Too Much That Britain Is Part of Europe – And Always Will Be.”
So, how can Britain uphold the democratic will of its voters and yet remain “part of Europe,” as the City and others would like?
The answer is simple: It should muddle through.
This shouldn’t be too hard in the end.
This, after all, is the country that had, as the historian John Robert Seeley once wrote, “conquered and peopled half the world in a fit of absence of mind.”
Fortunately, the EU itself also has a proud tradition of muddling through the challenges it faces, long relying on messy arrangements to accommodate its various members’ needs and demands.
The EU most likely would have collapsed early on had it not been for what The Economist has described as its “spirit of grubby compromise.”
Where divergent interests cannot be easily reconciled, the EU has mastered the techniques of obfuscation and ambiguity to keep the beast lumbering forward.
Can such an arrangement now keep Britain in Europe?
If I were a betting man, I would say yes.
Policymakers know that despite the definitive wording of the Brexit referendum, the choice was never a simple “in” or “out.”
Between those two poles is a host of possible compromises that would leave Britain an informal partner of the EU, even if no longer a formal member.
The most likely possibility that comes to mind is known as the “Norway option.”
Norway is a member of the European Economic Area, but it has access to the EU’s single market.
In return for that privilege, Norway contributes annually to the EU budget, agrees to play by all the bloc’s rules – even if it has no part in their formulation – and allows for the free movement of EU citizens.
There is little reason to doubt that Britain could negotiate something along similar lines.
The easiest part to negotiate would be the annual contribution, which need not be very different from what the UK transfers to the EU now.
Nor should it be difficult to find some way to give Britain an opt-out on any new EU rules, similar to what it already enjoys outside the eurozone under the banner of “vital national interests.”
The biggest stumbling block is immigration, which motivated so many Leave voters.
But even here it isn’t impossible to imagine that diplomats might be able to fudge things enough to reach an agreement that even the Leave camp can stomach.
In short, there is a good chance that in two or three years, after the smoke has cleared, little will have changed between the UK and the EU in practical terms.
As a strictly legal matter, Britain will no longer be an EU member.
But, otherwise, life will go on much as it did before.
The EU’s spirit of “grubby compromise” will have won out again.
Should Britain Leave the EU?
STANFORD – In this, the 400th year since William Shakespeare’s death, the United Kingdom faces an existential question: To be or not to be “European.”
When Britons vote in June on whether to remain in the European Union, making the right choice will require them to cut through the hyperbole on both sides of the debate and consider carefully what so-called “Brexit” would really mean for their country.
The main issues that will shape voters’ decision relate to trade relations, regulation, and the budget; foreign policy and security; and domestic policies, such as welfare and immigration.
Then there are questions about the substantive and emotional benefits and baggage that attend EU membership, with all of its rules, regulations, and bureaucrats.
The choice is stark, but the questions at issue are not all black and white.
The UK is deeply connected by trade to the rest of the EU, which accounts for the largest share of Britain’s total global exports and imports, each amounting to about 30% of British GDP.
Brexit would therefore have significant consequences for trade flows not just between the UK and the EU, but also in the rest of the world.
What those consequences would be depends upon the terms and timing of new trade agreements.
When the EU’s predecessor, the European Economic Community, was created in 1957, it linked just six countries (Belgium, France, Germany, Italy, Luxembourg, and the Netherlands).
Given high tariffs at the time, the EEC brought substantial gains.
Today, the EU has 28 members and is the world’s largest market, but tariffs generally are much lower.
The truth is that it is impossible at this point to know how post-Brexit UK-EU trade relations would shake out.
After all, there is no real precedent – Greenland’s departure from the EEC can hardly be considered a comparable situation – and negotiating the details of the withdrawal alone could take up to two years.
During that time, the pound would be more volatile, trade flows may be diverted or delayed, and some investment in British trade-related industries would be put on hold.
Britain might emerge from such a process in a situation resembling that of Norway: a member of the European Economic Area that pays most of the regular costs of EU membership to retain most of the same trade privileges.
Or it might be like Switzerland, relying on bilateral trade agreements, as it pays to be part of the single market in goods but not services.
Another possibility would be to go it alone in the World Trade Organization.
Or Britain could create an entirely new model for itself.
In any case, new trade agreements with non-EU countries would be inevitable.
The UK would also pay special attention to maintaining the City of London’s role as a global financial center – a status that a Switzerland-type arrangement could undermine, as UK trade in financial services with the single market would plummet.
And paying to retain trade preferences could expose Britain to future changes in EU policy.
For example, if the EU used future financial subsidies to support highly indebted periphery countries, the UK budget could also be affected.
In short, in the event of Brexit, the UK may face some very difficult decisions on trade.
But trade is just the beginning.
The Brexit referendum will also have political repercussions, particularly if the Conservative Party splits over the issue – a distinct possibility, regardless of the outcome.
What would that mean for future UK economic policy?
How would it affect the strength of the UK economy or Britain’s defense budget?
On security and foreign policy, the British have not been much impeded by the ponderous EU.
While the EU imposed sanctions on Syria, the UK’s parliament voted against any military involvement there.
The UK intelligence service is, by all accounts, far ahead of most of its EU counterparts and works closely with the United States.
In a Brexit scenario, the UK’s intelligence ties with the US would probably become even stronger, regardless of any new limitations on its access to intelligence from some EU member countries.
The one area where the situation is not quite so tangled, at least from the British perspective, is the euro, which the UK never joined.
(I advised former Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher not to join the eurozone’s predecessor, the Economic and Monetary Union.)
This was the right call, as it enabled the UK to retain full monetary-policy authority, and thus the ability to use the exchange rate to absorb shocks when domestic booms and busts do not synchronize with those in the rest of Europe.
From the EU’s perspective, losing the UK could be a serious blow, forcing the Union to provide less for its members at a higher cost.
By making it easier for other countries to insist on their own special exceptions – for example, to the deficit and debt “requirements” established in the Maastricht Treaty – Brexit could pose serious problems for the EU’s future evolution.
Already, EU members – especially the eurozone countries – have been avoiding concrete action to resolve their interdependent economic, social, banking, debt, and currency crises.
While both proponents and opponents of Brexit exaggerate their case, a review of the facts suggests that saying no to Brexit would be the better option for the UK as well.
If it does not like how the EU – and the European Commission – evolves, it can attempt to renegotiate its membership terms, as Prime Minister David Cameron did in February, or it can exit.
But if the UK exits now, its options become severely limited.
In particular, future changes to its relationship with the EU, especially a future re-entry, if desirable, would be difficult to negotiate (perhaps especially given European leaders’ desire to deter other member states from following the UK’s example).
Indeed, it could entail worse terms than Cameron has secured for his country should it remain in the EU.
Hanya Eropa Bersatu yang Bisa Mengalahkan Gerakan Nasionalis Eropa
BRUSSELS – Keputusan pemilih Inggris untuk keluar dari Uni Eropa sungguh disayangkan, namun tidak mengejutkan.
Selama beberapa dekade, politisi-politisi asal Inggris enggan memberikan dukungan atas keanggotaan di UE atau bahkan menjelaskan kepada rakyat Inggris mengenai cara kerja UE dan kenapa Kesatuan tersebut diperlukan.
Selama masa jabatannya, David Cameron telah gagal menunjukkan kepemimpinan atau kemauan untuk terlibat secara nyata di dalam UE.
Sejak awal ia sudah setengah hati dan itu terlihat ketika ia terus-menerus memprotes para birokrat di Brussels.
Sayangnya, upaya terakhir beliau untuk menyelamatkan keanggotaan Inggris di UE pada masa kampanye Brexit (British Exit) tidak cukup untuk mengembalikan efeknya terhadap opini rakyat Inggris yang sudah terpapar kebohongan selama berpuluh-puluh tahun.
Inggris sudah menentukan jalannya yaitu isolasi di Eropa dan menyangkal nasihat dari negara sahabat dan sekutunya.
Kini, ketika kesatuan tersebut berakhir, pelajaran terpenting yang dipetik dari referendum “Brexit” yang memberikan vonis adalah kita tidak bisa menggulingkan nasionalisme dengan mengakomodasi kelompok nasionalis.
Jika UE ingin melawan tekanan akibat gerakan nasionalisme yang melemahkan fundamental pendiriannya, UE harus menyimak kekhawatiran penduduknya dan menawarkan visi baru yang radikal demi tata kelola yang efektif.
Jika tidak, ancaman nasionalis akan menyebar.
Sebagai pendahuluan, negara-negara UE lainnya kini harus menjunjung tinggi hukum Eropa dan mengupayakan perpisahan dengan cepat dan sepenuhnya.
Rakyat Inggris memilih untuk hengkang dan para pemimpin politiknya bersikeras untuk menghormati hasil referendum, maka tidak salah untuk mendesak Inggris agar segera keluar.
Jika kelambanan Inggris menyebabkan Eropa terus merugi keuangannya akibat ketidakpastian politik, perceraian secara menyeluruh hendaklah dilakukan sepihak.
Secara politik, UE tampaknya segera menjadi musuh, alih-alih mitra terpercaya UE.
Sebelum terhindari hujatan, Theresa May – menteri dalam negeri, sekarang menjadi kandidat terkuat untuk menggantikan David Cameron sebagai Perdana Menteri – secara tersirat mengancam masa depan penduduk UE yang tinggal di Inggris dengan menjanjikan bahwa mereka menjadi “bagian dalam negosiasi” untuk rencana hengkangnya Inggris.
Theresa May sebenarnya menolak Brexit.
Namun sikap bermusuhan anti-Eropa yang dimilikinya berbeda, tidak sama dengan rasa benci yang ditunjukkan politisi-politisi yang pro-Brexit, seperti Daniel Hannan, anggota Parlemen Eropa asal Partai Konservatif, dan Nigel Farage, pemimpin Partai Independen Inggris, yang bersukacita atas kemungkinan referendum lanjutan untuk meninggalkan UE di kalangan negara-negara Eropa.
Untungnya, penularan pasca Brexit sejauh ini gagal dimanifestasikan, terutama karena Inggris menjadi bahan olok-olokan publik sejak tanggal 23 Juni akibat prospek perekonomiannya yang melemah, sektor keuangannya – sumber kekuatan global – yang mempertimbangkan lokasi-lokasi baru, dan para pemimpinnya yang saling menusuk dari belakang.
Faktanya adalah referendum tersebut mungkin merangsang negara-negara Eropa – termasuk negara dengan partai-partai yang skeptis terhadap UE (Euroskeptic), seperti Denmark dan Swedia – untuk bersatu mendukung keanggotaan di UE.
Sebuah survei pasca referendum yang dilakukan di Swedia menemukan bahwa 66% responden masih mendukung keanggotaan di UE.
Di Denmark, survei serupa setelah referendum Brexit menunjukkan kenaikan dukungan sebanyak 9% untuk tetap berada di UE.
Pemimpin UE tidak bisa tinggal diam.
Krisis Brexit harus diperlakukan sebagai peluang bagi UE, mengingat maraknya kekhawatiran atas globalisasi, terorisme, imigrasi, dan ketidaksetaraan.
Eropa yang terpecah telah gagal mengatasi tantangan-tantangan tersebut; dan meskipun Inggris akan dirindukan, kini perpecahan di UE akan berkurang.
Akan tetapi, UE sekarang tidak mampu mengambil tindakan tegas dan berskala tegas.
Guna memberi daya tarik emosional tentang nasionalisme populis, UE harus lebih responsif terhadap kebutuhan rakyatnya.
Ini memerlukan reformasi struktural yang radikal terhadap Eurozone dan lembaga-lembaga politik utama di UE.
Para ekonom umumnya sepakat bahwa pemberlakuan mata uang tunggal tanpa kesatuan fiskal atau common treasury tidak akan berkelanjutan.
Jika Eropa tidak merampungkan tugasnya saat pertama kali memperkenalkan euro, mereka akan terus-menerus mengalami penderitaan ekonomi akibat perpecahan struktural.
Integrasi menyeluruh akan mengarah pada kesejahteraan dan tata kelola lebih baik.
Pengaturan keamanan Eropa mengalami kesulitan yang sama.
Aneh memang betapa Eropa memiliki Badan Antariksa Eropa (European Space Agency) yang dihormati komunitas global namun tidak ada organisasi kredibel yang berfungsi untuk mengumpulkan dan bertukar intelijen di tengah perang melawan terorisme.
Serangan di Paris bulan November lalu seharusnya memperjelas bahwa ancaman terorisme tidak mengenal batas negara sehingga menuntut adanya intelijen gabungan, namun negara-negara anggota UE masih mengutamakan kedaulatan masing-masing daripada keamanan bersama.
Kerja sama antar pemerintah saja tidak cukup.
Eropa memerlukan organisasi intelijen terpusat yang bergigi.
Melalui reformasi yang besar-besaran ini Eropa bisa mulai membendung kebangkitan populisme yang mengarah pada keberhasilan kampanye “Brexit”.
Ada yang berpendapat bahwa lebih banyak kewenangan berdaulat harus dikembalikan kepada negara-negara anggota UE.
Saya sangat sepakat. Hal ini hanya melemahkan proyek integrasi yang selama ini mempertahankan perdamaian dan kesejahteraan di Eropa.
Populisme dan sikap anti-Euro (Eurosketicism) adalah rival proyek tersebut. Satu-satunya cara mengalahkannya ialah dengan membangun Eropa yang bekerja untuk rakyatnya.
Jika tidak, ini akan menguntungkan demagog yang siap mengikuti jejak Inggris hanya untuk dikecam di kemudian hari.
Фунт бізге не айтпақшы?
ЛОНДОН - Менің қаржы саласында өткізген 32 жылда түсінгенім, шетел валюта нарығының оғаш әлемі кейде ақылға қонбайды және стерлингтің бастапқы, тепе-теңдік мәнін есептеуге тырысу мәнсіз жаттығу болуы мүмкін.
Шынында да, Brexit референдум сауалнамалары 23 маусымда жабылғаннан кейінгі қызу сағатта, Британдық фунт бастапқыда £ 1,5 / $ 1 мөлшерден жоғары биржада сатылды.
Бұл айырбас бағамы «қалу керек» жағы жеңді деген қазір күлкілі болып саналатын тұжырымды көрсетеді.
Фунт содан бері бұл бастапқы шыңынан 20% -ке азайып, ол еуроға да салыстырмалы түрде ұқсас азайды.
Осы сәйкессіздіктерге қарамастан, бізде ақылға қонымды-ақ, фунттың Brexit-тен кейінгі өнімділігін өлшеу жолдары бар.
Біріншіден, біз оның бүгінгі құнын референдум науқаны ішіндегі, ақпаннан бастап маусымға дейінгі аралықтағы, оның орташа құнымен салыстыра аламыз. Осы тұрғыдан қарасақ, сайлаушылар Ұлыбритания Еуропалық одақтан шығуы керек деп шешкен кезден бері фунт айтарлықтай 13% -ға азайған.
Тағы бір, толықтыра түсетін түсіндірме бойынша, фунттың әлсіздігі, оның әлеуетті циклдік пайдасынан да басқа, оның ЕО-дан қиындау шығу жолы және басқа да саяси белгісіздік салдарынан болған Ұлыбританияның тәуекел үшін сыйлықақысы болып табылады.
Біз «қалыпты» циклдік экономикалық дамуды есептеу үшін RER тепе-теңдік үлгілерін реттеу арқылы осындай тәуекел үшін алған сыйлығын бағалай аламыз.
Жоғары пайыздық мөлшерлемелер және төмен, тұрақты инфляция, елдің валютасына өзге валюталардан артықшылық бере алады, сондықтан егер біз нақты пайыздық дифференциалды ескерсек, біз валютаның саудаға түсе алатын шартты бағасын анықтай аламыз. Біз доллар және еуроға қатысты фунт үшін осылай есептесек, фунттың шартты айырбас бағамы әлі де ағымдағы спот бағамынан әлсіздеу екенін көреміз, бұл нарықтың шын мәнінде айтарлықтай тәуекел үшін сыйлықақы ескергені тәрізді.
Бұл есептеулердің қоғамдық-саяси салдары бар.
Біріншіден, британдық саясаткерлер төмендеп жатқан фунттың пайдасы бар болғанымен, оның Ұлыбританияның сыртқы позициясын жақсарту және оның экономикасын теңгеруге жеткілікті емес екенін мойындағандары жөн.
Екіншіден, фунттың күнделікті және апталық өзгерістері, «қатаң» Brexit, мысалы Ұлыбританияның иммиграцияны шектеу мақсатында бірыңғай жалпы еуропалық нарықпен қатынауынан айрылуы, өнімділігінің өсуіне теріс ықпал етеді деген нарықтың болжамын көрсетеді. Егер нарық  болжамы дұрыс болса, онда Ұлыбританияның келешек дамуы саясаткерлердің Brexit-тен кейінгі сауда арттыру қабілетіне тіпті одан да қатты байланысты болады.
Сонымен қатар, саясаткерлердің,  жалпы халықтың қозғалысын шектей отырып, жоғары білікті жұмысшыларды тартуды жүзеге асыратын күрделі көші-қон стратегиясын әзірлеуі қажет болады.
Соңында, шетел валюталық нарықтары Ұлыбританияға тәуекел үшін сыйлықақы ескеріп салса да (және солай болғаны рас сияқты), саясаткерлер Ұлыбританияның экономикалық саясат шеңберінде кез келген басқа да өзгерістер ұсынбауға өте абай болулары керек.
Англия банкінің тәуелсіздігіне жасалған кез келген жаңа қатерлер нарықтың есесін алу әрекетін қоздыруы мүмкін.
Post-EU Depression
The government of Poland collapsed first, followed by the Czech government.
Then the Hungarian prime minister resigned. The government of Slovakia lost its majority and is unstable.
Within months, if not weeks, of realizing the long-sought goal of European Union membership, a wave of political instability surged through Central Europe.
Why should this historic event cause such political upheaval?
Some argue that these countries are inherently unstable. Their political cultures are underdeveloped.
They were admitted to the EU only fifteen years after the fall of communism, and not all of them had previous experience with democracy.
Unlike EU members admitted during earlier rounds of enlargement, the Central Europeans suffer from widespread corruption, political nepotism, fragile political parties with unclear identities, and weak civil societies.
All of these problems were to some extent hidden due to the external pressure of EU accession, and have now erupted into full view.
But there are more obvious causes for Central Europe's current problems.
Above all, every government that successfully led its country into the EU had to adopt-often under pressure and hastily-a range of unpopular steps.
Although most citizens in these countries supported EU membership, many thought that their governments paid too high a price.
This was partly because the EU was not as generous toward its newest members as it had been toward new members in the past.
Moreover, only fifteen years ago, eight of the ten new members had state-controlled economies, which meant that a period of painful transition toward a market economy was followed by, or overlapped with, sometimes painful reforms necessary for EU membership.
Even before attaining EU membership, all candidate countries' governments had to start adopting measures aimed at meeting the Maastricht criteria within several years, because the new members had committed themselves in their accession treaties to adopting the euro.
The most important measures required cutting budget deficits, often at the cost of lowering public expenditures.
In the Czech Republic, Hungary, and Poland, the task of completing such difficult reforms just before crossing the "finish line" fell to socialist parties, forcing them to betray their socialist identity in the eyes of leftist voters.
As a result, their historic mission doomed them.
In Poland, the Democratic Left Alliance fell apart shortly before accession, while the Czech Social Democrats came close to a similar split.
Ruling coalitions were at the same time in disadvantageous positions vis-à-vis opposition parties, which attacked the incumbents for failing to negotiate good membership terms, without themselves having to pass the test of negotiating better conditions.
Government parties were also hurt by the nationalistic rhetoric of center-right parties, which repeatedly warned against a betrayal of national interests.
The overlap between the end of the accession process and heated discussions about the new European Constitution played into the hands of the opposition.
The political right in Hungary, Poland, and the Czech Republic warned against a possible loss of sovereignty should the Constitution be adopted.
Such rhetoric resonates powerfully in former Soviet satellites that have only recently regained their sovereignty.
Despite all this pressure, the ruling coalitions in the Poland, the Czech Republic, and Hungary held together, as the historical mission of attaining EU membership worked like a lid on a pressure cooker.
Addressing conflicts among government coalition parties, as well as within individual government parties, was postponed until after official EU entry.
Not surprisingly, accession untied politicians' hands, and conflicts came to the fore.
Polish Prime Minister Lezsek Miller resigned one day after his country's official admission to the EU.
Czech Prime Minister Vladimir Spidla was forced to resign by his own party several weeks later.
Hungarian Prime Minister Peter Medgyessy was pushed out in late August.
Even the center-right Slovak government was not spared.
It took it upon itself not only to meet EU membership criteria, but also push forward with other painful reforms.
The comfortable role of criticizing the government fell into the hands of leftist populists, for a change.
The Slovak government is still in power, but it has lost its majority and could fall soon.
In Poland, Hungary, and the Czech Republic, we will now witness a period of unabashed populism.
The ruling coalitions were reconstructed, with new faces at the helm. The main objective of the new prime ministers and cabinet members is to regain popularity for their parties.
The ruling coalitions can finally afford, at least temporarily, "the luxury" of populism that opposition parties used as their main weapon in the last few years.
Those who hope for further progress on economic reforms in Central Europe will have to wait.
Post-National Football?
NEW YORK – Some of the more hysterical German newspapers blamed Germany’s defeat against Italy in the semi-finals of the European championship on the fact that few players bothered to sing the national anthem.
Contrast that with the Italian players, all of whom belted out the words of Il Canto degli Italiani (The Song of the Italians).
Indeed, the captain, Gigi Buffon, sang with his eyes closed, as though in prayer.
But the Italians had no chance in the final against Spain, the best team in the world, none of whose players opened their mouths during the Spanish anthem, Marcha Real – which stands to reason, given that the “Royal March”&nbsp;has no lyrics.
And, besides, the Catalonian players feel uncomfortable with the national anthem, which was much promoted under the late dictator Francisco Franco, who hated Catalan nationalism.
We know that in football, the most successful teams are not always those with the greatest stars.
Champions operate as teams – cohesive, untroubled by the egotism of prima donnas, each player prepared to work for the others.
Is patriotism really the key to this kind of spirit for national teams, as the German critics of their team believe?
Football has often been called a substitute for war – a symbolic, more or less peaceful, way to fight out international rivalries.
The fans of national sides are actors in a kind of patriotic carnival, dressed in the costumes of their national stereotypes: English fans as medieval knights, the Dutch in clogs, the Spanish as bullfighters.
Germans, understandably, have a problem with national symbolism, but I spotted a few fans in quasi-Bavarian dress.
The prize for the most humorous masquerade must go to the Italians dressed as popes and cardinals.
In the past, English fans – but they were not the only ones – took the war metaphor too far and acted more like invading armies on the continent of Europe, terrorizing towns unlucky enough to stage an England game.
But players, too, sometimes have failed to conceal national animosities: when Holland beat Germany in a memorable European semi-final in 1988, one of the Dutch players ostentatiously wiped his bottom with a German shirt.
Given the strength of national feeling in these contests, it is not surprising that people like to project national characteristics onto the style of play.
On the rare occasion that England wins a big match these days, victory is attributed to a “typically” English fighting spirit, coupled with “fair play.”
The Germans play with “discipline,” the Italians with the defensive strength of Roman warriors, the Dutch with free-spirited individualism, the Spanish with the elegance of toreadors, and so on.
When the French won the World Cup in 1998, they ascribed it to their team’s multi-ethnicity – the embodiment of France’s commitment to liberté, égalité, fraternité.
But, when teams lose, these stereotypical virtues are damned with equal conviction as characteristic defects: German lack of imagination, Italian fear of attack, Dutch selfishness, the absence of national feeling among ethnic minorities in France, and so on.
In fact, the reality of football styles is rather more complicated.
The provenance of the great Spanish game of today is not the bullring, but the Barcelona team built by Johan Cruyff in the 1970’s and 1980’s.
The origin of his “total football” philosophy of keeping possession of the ball with quick, short passes and lightning switches from defense to offense was Ajax, Amsterdam, in the late 1960’s.
As often happens with innovative models, others adopt them, and, as in the Spanish case, improve and refine them.
Now everyone tries to play “total football” – except the English, who “typically” remain aloof from foreign ideas.
Italians have abandoned their defensive tactics.
Even the Germans play the passing game with flair and imagination.
The difference between Spain and the others is that the Spaniards do it better.
Daniel Cohn-Bendit, the Franco-German former student leader of 1968 and Green member of the European parliament, argued in a recent article that modern football stars don’t really play for their countries.
As hardened professionals, they primarily play for themselves.
They are, to use his phrase, “mercenaries.”
That is perhaps a little too cynical.
The tears streaming down the cheeks of Andrea Pirlo and Mario Balotelli after Italy’s defeat were not those of hardened pros.
They wanted to win, not just for the money or for the sake of their careers, but for the glory.
It still must feel good to be a national hero, hailed in the streets of Rome, Madrid, London, or Berlin as a returning warrior from a successful campaign.
And yet Cohn-Bendit is not entirely wrong.
What was striking during this European championship was the intimate collegiality between opposing players.
They consoled and congratulated each other, embracing like the old friends and colleagues that they often are.
Most of the top players play for the same clubs in Spain, Germany, England, or Italy.
Many speak several European languages with the fluency of the international businessmen that they also are.
The best European clubs are all multinational now.
Players follow the money.
And the top clubs also happen to be the richest: Real Madrid, Chelsea, Barcelona, Manchester City, Bayern Munich, etc.
Some of the most difficult and demanding prima donnas often cause less friction in these multinational outfits than they do on their national teams.
If there is a moral to this story, it is this: a common flag, language, or national history can certainly help to induce people to work together in harmony for a shared cause.
But so can enlightened self-interest.
At the highest levels of human achievement – whether in art, science, or football – it might actually be the more important factor.
Post-Uribe Colombia
BUENOS AIRES – Colombia’s presidential election at the end of May will be unique in many ways.
Álvaro Uribe’s plans for a third term were dashed in March by the Constitutional Court, which, despite massive pressure, upheld the constitutional prohibition on serving more than two consecutive terms.
Uribe’s absence has opened the election in unforeseen ways.
Although Uribe is now technically a “lame duck” president, he does retain considerable influence, and is trying hard to keep the issue of internal security – the central focus of his presidency – at the heart of the electoral battle.
He has also sought to benefit from ratcheting up tensions with neighboring Venezuela, and counts on his dauphin, former Defense Minister Juan Manuel Santos, to unite the country’s right-wing forces in order to ensure continuity with his policies.
But Colombia does not seem to want continuity at any price; instead it now appears to favor moderate revision of what Uribe has built over the past decade.
This renovation comes in a form that is unusual in contemporary Colombian history.
The alliance between presidential candidate Antanas Mockus and vice-presidential candidate Sergio Fajardo offers the possibility of a real break, because neither man comes from the currently weakened traditional liberal-conservative political milieu.
Instead, each comes from the world of academia (both hold doctorates in mathematics).
Their principal – and successful – experience is in local politics.
Mockus was mayor of Bogota and Fajardo mayor of Medellin, and both want to shift the government’s main priority from internal security to strengthening the rule of law, education, science and technology, productivity, and SOUND public finances.
Neither is backed by urban political machines or shady armed organizations in rural areas, but by independent groups, non-ideologically inclined citizens, and new voters keen to cast their ballots for unconventional candidates.
Both have ingeniously mobilized young people and made innovative use of online social networks.
The Mockus-Fajardo ticket proudly portrays the two men as political outsiders, with all the attendant risks and benefits.
Their electoral platform – which also promotes a sense of generational change – is centered on their rejection of illegality and corruption, two issues that galvanize broad popular support.
Indeed, this yearning for change is why Mockus, the son of Lithuanian immigrants, may reach the presidency in a country that experienced only a scant influx of foreigners in the twentieth century.
The Mockus phenomenon is in many ways the Colombian analog of the rise of “alternative” presidents across Latin America in recent years: Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva in Brazil, Michelle Bachelet in Chile, Evo Morales in Bolivia, Mauricio Funes in El Salvador, Daniel Ortega in Nicaragua, José Mujica in Uruguay, Rafael Correa in Ecuador, Fernando Lugo in Paraguay, and Hugo Chávez in Venezuela.
But Mockus is different.
In contrast to men like Funes, Ortega, Mujica, and Chávez, whose careers began in guerrilla movements or failed coups, Mockus’s past is irreproachable.
He has never been co-opted by private interests, be they political, economic, or criminal.
He trusts his instincts and likes imaginative public policies, though this worries those who fear another messianic leader at the head of the government.
Moreover, Mockus’s sensitivity towards human-rights concerns distinguishes him from Uribe, who leaves behind a deplorable legacy in this regard.
Obviously the FARC guerrillas – much diminished by Uribe, but still violently opposed to Colombian democracy – remain a source of concern for many Colombians.
But, because the Mockus-Fajardo ticket is truly centrist, the risk of serious missteps in this area seems minimal.
Moreover, the shadow over the election campaign does not come from the FARC, but from the right – the Uribist candidate Santos and the conservative Noemí Sanin.
The Liberal Party, a coalition comprising a cross-section of the center-left, and the leftist Polo Democrático have no chance of victory, although their support for a Mockus government would be important in forging a stable parliamentary majority.
Conversely, legislative elections in March gave the Mockus-Fajardo ticket only minimal representation in the two chambers of Congress, implying that any government that they form would need all the legislative allies that it can find in order to enact its agenda.
If, as appears increasingly likely, Mockus becomes president, his agenda promises to be prudent – neither a leap into the void nor immobilized by the need for profound changes.
Three issues will hold his attention initially: the potent mafia subculture that has arisen over the last decade, the need to redirect a development model marked by extensive inequality, and avoidance of isolation and overreaction in the country’s foreign relations.
Colombia may be on the cusp of achieving a long-cherished but oft-postponed dream: domestic peace and diminishing tension with its neighbors.
Antanas Mockus looks like the figure best suited to realizing these possibilities.
Unnecessary Instability
PARIS – In normal life, technicalities are better left to technicians.
A car owner does not need – or usually want – to bother to find out what exactly goes on under the hood.
But when the car breaks down, he or she often has no choice.
What is true of cars applies to the economy: arcane issues are for specialists.
Yet in recent years, topics about which most people had never heard or cared – for example, securitization, credit default swaps, and the European payment system known as Target 2 – have imposed themselves on public debate, forcing ordinary people to grapple with their intricacies.
The same has started to happen with the notion of “potential output growth.”
Originally a concept created by economists for economists, its use for determining when, and by how much, a public deficit must be corrected is becoming a matter for wider discussion.
Indeed, its unreliability is seriously weakening the EU’s fiscal pact – which makes it necessary to open the hood and look inside.
The aim of the concept of potential – as opposed to actual – GDP is to take into account that, like an engine, an economy often operates below or above potential.
In a demand-driven recession, actual output falls below potential, which results in a rise in unemployment.
Similarly, a credit-fueled construction boom drives output above potential, resulting in inflation.
The gap between actual and potential GDP is thus a gauge of an economy’s spare capacity.
The distinction is also useful for policy purposes: weak potential growth cannot be addressed by demand-side initiatives; supply-side measures are needed.
But potential GDP can be only estimated, not observed.
Estimates are based on the amount of labor and capital available for production and an assessment of their joint productivity.
And, because estimates differ, depending on the data and methods used, the concept is clear whereas its value is imprecise.
Moreover, the global financial crisis has created new puzzles.
GDP in nearly all advanced economies is currently far below pre-crisis projections, yet few expect the gap ever to be bridged.
Policymakers struggle to get their assessment right.
Some wonder what is left of the notion of potential output.
The European Union has an additional problem: in response to the sovereign crisis, most of its members agreed in 2011 to a “fiscal compact” requiring them to keep their structural budget deficit – the one they would record were output equal to potential – below 0.5% of GDP.
Failure to converge on this target may open the door to financial penalties.
The virtue of such a framework is to take into account the impact of temporarily weaker output on fiscal outcomes.
Thus, a deficit is acceptable when it results from abnormally low tax revenues, but not when revenues are at their normal level.
Indeed, a major flaw in the initial European Stability and Growth Pact was that it did not include such corrections (I was among those advocating its reform in a 2003 report to the president of the European Commission).
The 2011 treaty actually built on a series of previous reforms that put increasing emphasis on potential-output-based assessments of the fiscal situation.
The problem is that an unobservable and imprecise variable – whose estimates are too inexact and volatile to provide more than a rough roadmap for a country’s journey toward fiscal rectitude – has become part of an international treaty and the national rules (sometimes of constitutional status) through which it is implemented.
Estimates of short-term or current potential output are also constantly reworked, implying continuous change in the assessment of the underlying fiscal situation.
For France, the estimate fell from 1.2% to 0.9%, and for Italy it went from -0.1% to -0.4%.
The estimate of Spain’s potential growth rate fell from -1.2% to -1.4%, but the Commission later changed its mind and now says it was -0.7%.
These are not exceptions.
For actual GDP, such frequent and large forecast revisions are inevitable.
Potential GDP, however, is supposed to be more stable, as it does not depend on demand-side developments.
True, there are reasons to reassess a country’s potential growth in line with new information on labor-market conditions, investment, and productivity.
But relentless attempts at accuracy easily result in noise.
Furthermore, instability confuses the policymaking process.
Even a downward revision by 0.2% of GDP is meaningful: it implies a deterioration of the structural deficit by about 0.1% of GDP – not a trivial number in a fiscally constrained environment.
Members of parliament – who are not technicians – are understandably disturbed when they are asked to pass a revised budget in response to an updated estimate.
Not knowing the whys and wherefores, they end up perceiving such revisions as a source of artificial instability.
The purpose of the European fiscal framework is to lengthen the time horizon of policy and to make decision-makers more aware of the debt-sustainability challenges that they face.
This requires consistency.
Yet volatility in the assessment of potential growth prevents politicians from “owning” the already abstruse structural deficit and causes volatility in the policies based on this assessment, paradoxically resulting in a shortening of decision-makers’ time horizon.
The focus of policy discussions should not be the latest potential GDP revision, but whether a country is on track to ensure public finance sustainability.
Too often, the European fiscal pact is perceived by national policymakers as an external constraint, not as a framework conducive to better decisions.
A greater degree of stability in the assessment of an economy’s potential would strengthen decision-makers’ awareness and appreciation of longer-term challenges, thereby putting policymaking on a sounder footing.
A World of Vulnerability
ROME – In 2010, global leaders achieved the Millennium Development Goal (MDG) of reducing the share of the world’s poor to half of its 1990 level – five years ahead of schedule.
But rising unemployment and falling incomes underscore the enduring threat of poverty worldwide.
After all, poverty is not an unchanging attribute of a fixed group; it is a condition that threatens billions of vulnerable people.
Despite their shortcomings, income measures are useful in gaining a better understanding of the extent of poverty and vulnerability worldwide.
But the World Bank’s poverty line of $1.25 per day (in purchasing-power-parity terms), which is used in measuring progress toward the MDGs’ poverty-reduction target, is not the only relevant threshold.
When the poverty line is raised to per capita daily spending of $2, the global poverty rate rises from 18% to roughly 40%, suggesting that many people are living just above the established poverty line, vulnerable to external shocks or changes in personal circumstances, such as price increases or income losses.
Three-quarters of the world’s poor live in rural areas, where agricultural workers suffer the highest incidence of poverty, largely owing to low productivity, seasonal unemployment, and the low wages paid by most rural employers.
In recent decades, vulnerability and economic insecurity have increased with the rise of transient, casual, and precarious employment, including self-employment, and part-time, fixed-term, temporary, and on-call jobs.
At-home positions, frequently filled by women, are also on the rise.
Labor-market liberalization, globalization, and unions’ declining influence have exacerbated these employment trends.
At the same time, macroeconomic policies have focused on achieving and maintaining low-single-digit inflation, rather than full employment, while limited social protection has heightened economic insecurity and vulnerability.
During the East Asian crisis of 1997-1998, poverty rose sharply.
For example, Indonesia’s poverty rate soared from roughly 11% to 37% during the crisis, mainly owing to the massive depreciation of the rupiah.
Likewise, following the 2008 global economic crisis, food-price spikes and recession caused the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization to revise its hunger estimates upward, to more than one billion people.
Considering the FAO’s conservative definition of chronic severe hunger, this is a serious indictment of global poverty-reduction efforts.
New estimates by the International Labor Organization (ILO), based on a different methodology from that used by the World Bank, demonstrate that, while the number of those classified as working poor worldwide declined by 158 million from 2000 to 2011 (from 25.4% of workers to 14.8%), progress has slowed markedly since 2008.
Indeed, only 15% of workers, or 24 million people, managed to rise above the poverty line in 2007-2011.
The other 134 million workers who escaped poverty did so earlier, in 2000-2007.
As a result, there were 50 million more working poor in 2011 than projected by pre-crisis trends for 2002-2007.
The lack of basic social protection in most countries exacerbates vulnerability.
The ILO World Social Security Report found high or very high vulnerability, in terms of poverty and labor-market informality, in 58 countries, mainly in Africa and Asia. Most such countries do not provide unemployment insurance, while more than 80% of their populations lack social-security coverage and access to basic health services.
Indeed, few countries currently provide comprehensive social protection, as defined by ILO Convention 102 (the instrument establishing internationally-agreed minimum social-security standards).
According to the ILO, only one-third of countries worldwide – accounting for roughly 28% of the global population – provide all nine types of protection, meaning that only about 20% of the world’s working-age population (and their families) enjoys comprehensive coverage.
Although all countries offer some kind of social protection or security, in most countries, coverage is severely limited and targeted at specific groups.
As a result, only a small minority of the global population has full, legally guaranteed access to existing social-protection schemes – leaving roughly 5.6 billion people worldwide vulnerable to various degrees.
Vulnerability exists at levels far above the World Bank’s $1.25/day poverty threshold, especially given rising job insecurity and inadequate social protection worldwide.
To address global poverty effectively, global leaders must take a more comprehensive approach that focuses on reducing citizens’ vulnerability.
Pragmatism or Perdition
BERKELEY – It is almost impossible to assess the progress of the United States economy over the past four decades without feeling disappointed.
From the perspective of the typical American, nearly one-third of the country’s productive potential has been thrown away on spending that adds nothing to real wealth or destroyed by the 2008 financial crisis.
Since the mid-1970s, the US has ramped up spending on health-care administration by about 4% of GDP and increased expenditure on overtreatment by about 2% of GDP.
Countries like Canada, the United Kingdom, and France have not followed suit, and yet they do just as well – if not better – at ensuring that their citizens stay healthy.
Meanwhile, over the same period, the US has redirected spending away from education, public infrastructure, and manufacturing toward providing incentives for the rich – mostly in the form of tax cuts.
The US spends 10% more than it used to on making it easier for the rich to accumulate wealth, but it has cut public investment in physical and human capital by roughly 4% of GDP, compared to what would have been expected if spending patterns had followed historic trends.
Forty years ago, for example, the US spent roughly 4% of its GDP on finance.
Today, it spends twice that.
And the results have been catastrophic.
Despite the plutocracy’s claims that the heads of financial companies and other CEOs deserve their increasingly outsized compensation packages, there is no evidence that they are doing a better job than they used to at running their companies or allocating capital more efficiently.
On the contrary, the lion’s share of the responsibility for the economy’s continuing struggles can be comfortably laid at the feet of America’s hypertrophied, dysfunctional financial sector.
This reallocation of investment is usually attributed to efforts to boost growth.
And yet, regardless of how much one tortures the baselines or massages the benchmarks, it is clear that it has failed.
Indeed, it is difficult to see the decisions of the past 40 years as anything other than a profound failure on the part of the public institutions responsible for shaping the country’s economic progress.
This is a surprising development.
Until around 1980, these institutions were clearly world-class.
For more than 200 years, the US government was highly successful at expanding opportunity and nurturing economic growth.
From Alexander Hamilton’s insistence on promoting industry and finance, to the construction of continent-spanning infrastructure and the introduction of public education, the government’s investments paid off handsomely.
Indeed, the government repeatedly pushed the economy into what were thought to be the industries of the future, resulting in economic expansion and a larger, wealthier middle class.
It is only relatively recently that the bets have started being misplaced.
The past 40 years of policies have failed to produce a richer society; they have produced only a richer elite.
Not surprisingly, ideologues of the left and the right disagree over what went wrong.
The left, quite credibly, blames the idea that the free market is always right and needs to be unchained, and that those it rewards are always deserving.
Those on the right, less credibly, attribute the decline to the survival and expansion of America’s (comparatively meager) social-welfare system.
Programs such as Medicare, Medicaid, Social Security, the Earned Income Tax Credit, unemployment insurance, and disability insurance, they argue, have turned the US into a country of takers, not makers.
In a new book, Concrete Economics: The Hamilton Approach to Economic Growth and Policy, my co-author Steve Cohen and I show that the problem is even more fundamental.
Poor US economic performance is not the result of any particular ideology, but of allowing ideologues to guide public policy.
The real-world purpose of an ideology is not to provide understanding, but to offer its adherents a sense of certainty as they navigate a complex world.
An ideology becomes successful not by suggesting policies that work, but by helping people feel comfortable, happy, and sure of what they are doing.
Cohen and I argue that there is a better alternative to the ideological approach: pragmatism.
Rather than searching for overarching rules or a grand theory, look instead for what is likely to work – and make policy accordingly.
We have named this approach after the US founder who was most adept at adjusting his policy prescriptions to reality.
But it is a method of decision-making that has had numerous champions throughout the country’s history; US Presidents Dwight Eisenhower, Teddy Roosevelt, Franklin Roosevelt, and Abraham Lincoln all placed pragmatism ahead of ideology.
As a contribution to popular culture, Concrete Economics is sure to prove less popular than the hip-hop musical Hamilton.
But for policymakers seeking to turn around the American economy, we hope it will offer some much-needed guidance when approaching the challenges facing the country.
Precautionary Absurdity
PRINCETON – Many people who advocate draconian measures to counteract climate change base their argument on the so-called “precautionary principle,” which holds that when a possible future disaster would be unacceptably severe, action to prevent it is imperative.
Cost-benefit analysis – balancing the cost of remedial action against the benefit of avoiding disaster – is no longer permissible.
Action to counter the disaster must be taken, regardless of the cost.
This principle leads people to advocate enormously costly actions to prevent disasters that are even more enormous but whose likelihood highly uncertain.
If a disaster is unacceptable, then, no matter how uncertain the likelihood of its occurrence, it must be prevented.
As a result of widespread reliance on the precautionary principle, doomsday scenarios have come to dominate discussion of climate change.
It is easy to imagine disasters so severe that drastic action to prevent them would be reasonable, and advocates of drastic action can easily scare the public with imagined disasters.
Nobody knows enough about the causes of climate change to prove that an imagined disaster is impossible.
What is wrong with the precautionary principle?
It appears to be a statement of the obvious: unacceptable disasters require extraordinary counter-measures.
The precautionary principle prescribes action, regardless of cost, to prevent all of them.
But this is impossible. There is no future free of risk.
No matter what we do or fail to do, the risk of unacceptable disasters will persist.
Our resources are limited, and so are the costs we can pay for remedial actions.
There is no escape from balancing costs and benefits. There is no way we can avoid making difficult choices.
Some disasters are less likely than others, and some remedies are more costly than others.
These are the facts of life that the precautionary principle tells us to ignore.
It sometimes happens that a drastic action designed to prevent an unacceptable disaster may make the disaster worse.
Catastrophic disasters associated with climate change are easy to invent, but the effects of remedial actions may be difficult to predict.
For example, one of the most immediate and severe consequences of climate change could be a rapid rise in sea level.
It is generally believed that the appropriate preventive measure is to stop burning fossil fuels and reduce the abundance of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere.
But the preventive measure is extremely costly, and it might have an effect opposite to our intention.
We know that the sea level rose by roughly 100 meters during the last 12,000 years.
This rise was clearly connected with the melting of the continental ice sheets at the end of the last ice age – that is, it had nothing to do with human activities.
During the last 200 years, a period when we have had accurate measurements from tide gauges, the sea level has continued to rise slowly.
We do not know how much of the recent rise is caused by human activities.
Some of the recent rise, associated with the shrinking of glaciers, is not caused by human activities, since the glaciers have been shrinking for hundreds of years while human activities became significant only in the last century.
The air surrounding Greenland and Antarctica has recently become warmer and more humid. Warm and humid air will increase melting of ice in low regions at the edges of the ice sheets while boosting snowfall over cold high regions in the interior.
The melting causes the sea level to rise, whereas the snow causes it to fall.
We do not know which of the two effects predominates. 
If the Arctic Ocean becomes ice-free in summer, the melting and the snowfall will probably increase sharply.
At that point, the precautionary principle might suggest that we take drastic action to stop burning fossil fuels.
But we had better know for sure which way the response will go before we apply the remedy.
It would be unfortunate if China and India were to impoverish themselves by ceasing to burn coal, only to have the resulting decrease of snowfall over Greenland and Antarctica cause sea levels to rise faster.
The precautionary principle is not a useful substitute for scientific understanding.
Predatory Competition Policy
The recent decision by the European Court of First Instance to uphold the fine and sanctions the European Commission imposed upon Microsoft in 2004 appears to have justified the Commission’s interventionist approach to competition policy.
A five-year investigation of Intel may also end with severe penalties.
But the EU should not rejoice at this seeming triumph over American “big business.”
Instead, it should ponder if its policies actually make Europe hospitable for innovating enterprises.
Italy’s Minister for Trade and Europe, Emma Bonino, commenting upon the Microsoft ruling, observed that the very name Microsoft evokes “what the US is capable of doing.”
To Bonino, if a company of comparable significance isn’t being born in Europe, it is because “we haven’t been able to set up a favorable climate for it to flourish.” 
The European Commission’s approach to competition policy won’t move Europe toward that better climate.
Indeed, high-tech companies like Microsoft and Intel are particularly unsuitable targets for antitrust policing, because regulators cannot possibly move at the speed of ‘Internet time.’ 
Consider computer operating systems, business accounting software, databases, Internet search engines, silicone chips, broadband services, cable, and cellular telephony. All are examples of fast-moving industries in which competition is fierce and great wealth is created.
Industries and firms, like people, have their own life cycles, and the pace of change in high-tech industries is unprecedented.
Remember IBM?
Only a few years ago, antitrust authorities in the US were convinced that IBM was locking up the computer industry for generations to come.
Since then firms like Microsoft and Intel exploited software and hardware revolutions that IBM and others had missed, and left IBM in the dust.
And just as competition authorities on both sides of the Atlantic have been losing sleep over the Windows monopoly, Microsoft’s desktop model is threatened today by handheld devices and Google’s dispersed online computing model.
Intel is subject to parallel threats from a myriad of chip and hardware makers.
Regulators contribute no value to this high speed evolutionary process.
Rather than preventing monopolization and restraint of trade, as the theory goes, antitrust regulation in the “new economy” is a new face of the old “industrial policy,” allowing bureaucrats to manipulate economic outcomes and favor companies dearer to them than the consumers’ choice.
The only beneficiaries of government officials’ telling Microsoft how to make computer software are Microsoft’s competitors -- and not competition. 
Yet regulators persist in trying to inject themselves into these fields, with antitrust authorities claiming that they are ripe with anti-competitive practices and exercises of “undue market power" by the most successful market participants. 
European competition law in particular allows policymakers to intervene at will, increasing uncertainty, damaging wealth creation and consumer well-being.
Efficient companies are punished for their success by being held to a special standard that expects them to cuddle their competitors, instead of continuing to out-price and outsell them, to the benefit of consumers.
What is presented as a defense of competition results in advancing politically connected special interests and imposing unnecessary costs on innovation.
Even if Microsoft on occasion may have engaged in some sharp competitive practices, the EU’s competition authorities have not been content with slapping its wrists, but got involved in deeply intrusive remedies, including the unbundling of a media player from Microsoft’s operating system and mandating disclosure of industrial secrets embodied in Microsoft’s server software.
Not surprisingly, Microsoft’s competitors cheered the Commission throughout the entire investigation and appeal.
The Commission is thus establishing itself as a friendly venue for businesses that cannot overcome competitors in the market, and seek a second chance in court.
The new European Commission’s action against the chipmaker Intel is a good example.
Intel is charged with “abusing” its dominant market position by so called “predatory pricing” (selling below cost) and offering substantial rebates to retain market share and undermine its arch-rival Advanced Micro Devices. 
“Predatory pricing” is an old scarecrow of antitrust enforcement.
The idea that it is rational for a company to incur enormous losses by selling below cost in order to achieve or maintain a monopoly position has been roundly criticized by economists who argue that situations in which such losses can be recouped by subsequent monopoly profits are extremely rare.
Indeed, empirical research has shown that, throughout history, as far back as the Standard Oil case in the early 20th century, most instances of alleged “predatory pricing” have in fact been cases of superior efficiency.
In the last couple of decades, US courts have made proving price predation next to impossible.
Yet the EU’s competition authorities persist in accusing Intel of exactly this form of irrational behavior.
The problem with “predatory pricing” is that the courts are very unlikely to be able to distinguish “unfair” prices from effective competition that is a boon to consumers.
It is the less efficient competitors, and not consumers, that are the most likely to benefit from punishing Intel for lowering its prices.
Reforms are needed if Europe really wants to become a competitive, knowledge-based economy, and not merely the most regulated one.
Imposing billions of dollars of fines on the most conspicuous wealth creators is not the way to go.
Europe needs to make the likes of Microsoft and Intel feel at home in Brussels, Paris, or Berlin, not to become a political market leader in supplying sympathetic verdicts to market losers.
Sizing Up the US Election’s Opening Round
WASHINGTON, DC – If you find America’s presidential election campaign puzzling, you probably have a better grasp of it than those who are willing to predict an outcome.
At this point, with both major parties set to choose their nominees in state-level primary elections or caucuses, there can be no predictions, only informed (or uninformed) guesses.
The first major contest, in Iowa on February 1, is usually tricky to forecast, because the outcome relies more on organizational prowess than on popularity.
The main question, in both the Republican and Democratic races, is whether the candidates can get enough of their supporters to the caucuses – relatively small gatherings held in the evening in wintry conditions.
On the Republican side, Ted Cruz and Donald Trump are within the margin of polling error of each other in both Iowa and New Hampshire, which votes eight days later.
Although Trump leads by an enormous margin in national polls, the strength of his Iowa organization is unknown, and what matters are the state-level results as the nominating process moves ahead.
His challenge is that many of his supporters have never actually participated in an election.
Trump’s success so far reflects his shrewdness at reading the times and pleasing a crowd.
(His reality television show, The Apprentice, gave him plenty of practice.)
The electorate is angrier and more fearful than in recent presidential contests, and both he and Cruz are capitalizing on it.
That sentiment – a product of slow economic recovery, ever-widening wealth and income inequality, and a racially infused sense of insecurity (particularly among white men) – makes for volatile politics.
Trump, in particular, is channeling the same populist anger on the right that fueled the rise in 2010 of the Tea Party, which opposed both the government’s bailout of the banks that had caused the 2008 financial crisis and President Barack Obama’s health-care program.
But the Tea Party candidates who swept into Congress in 2010 failed to deliver on their promises to repeal “Obamacare” and substantially cut federal spending, further inflaming much of the Republican base.
So the preference of the possible Republican voters has been for someone who hasn’t been “tainted” by “Washington.”
Trump – roughly half of whose supporters have only a high school education or less – is especially deft at pandering to racial prejudices and hostility toward immigration.
And his supposed success in business (his record is actually mixed) convinces his followers that he knows how to get things done, while his enormous personal wealth is seen as making him incorruptible.
An important consideration to bear in mind, though, is that Trump has been benefiting from the fact that the field is so large.
When other candidates drop out, the picture could be quite different.
Whether an “establishment” figure – one backed by the party leadership, such as former Florida Governor Jeb Bush or New Jersey Governor Chris Christie – can catch on with voters will become clearer only after Iowa and New Hampshire have voted.
Conservative fundamentalist Christians – traditionally a powerful force in the Iowa Republican caucus – had been largely backing another anti-establishment candidate, the noted neurosurgeon Ben Carson.
But, as Carson’s campaign has collapsed under the weight of his obliviousness to policy, Cruz has emerged as the greatest threat to Trump in the early contests.
A first-term senator from Texas, Cruz is smart, serious, and nasty.
In the current political climate, he wears the scorn of his Senate colleagues – he’s detested by almost all of them – as a badge of honor.
That approach, along with his record as Obamacare’s greatest congressional foe and his displays of religiosity, is clearly working for him.
Those who assumed – as many did – that Bush would walk away with the Republican nomination were misreading the political barometer.
The Bush name is no longer magic, and Jeb had been out of politics for eight years when he entered the race.
Moreover, the pressures facing a national candidate are quite different – both more magnified and more diffuse – from those facing a governor.
Yet some believe that it’s too soon to write Bush off.
Senator Marco Rubio of Florida – a supposedly “establishment” candidate who has been moving up in the polls – is arguably the exception to the pattern so far.
But, based on his record in the Senate, the “establishment” label is debatable.
Rubio, the epitome of a young man in a hurry, has taken positions – for example, on the Iran nuclear deal – that have incensed the Senate Republican leadership.
Rubio’s slick speaking style and Hispanic heritage make Democrats nervous.
But he is now being tested as never before, and he’s made some mistakes (including something as silly as turning up in boots with “Cuban” heels that made him look faintly ridiculous).
On the Democratic side, the huge crowds turning up for the self-described Democratic Socialist Bernie Sanders are also motivated largely by perceived economic injustice (creating a possible overlap – which Sanders has noted – with Trump supporters).
It should be no surprise that Sanders – substantive, authentic, and uninhibited by the need to placate the party’s various interest groups – is posing such a strong challenge to Hillary Clinton, the long-presumed Democratic nominee.
He leads most polls in New Hampshire, which neighbors his home state of Vermont, but also some in Iowa.
Nonetheless, given Clinton’s organizational advantages (particularly the overwhelming support of other Democratic officeholders), only some dramatic and unforeseeable development could block her path to the party’s nomination.
Her greatest challenge, in the primaries if not in the general election, is likely to be an enthusiasm gap: Support for her candidacy, while broad, is not deep.
Indeed, because she lacks the intense connection with voters needed to encourage them to turn out in a close race, her frontrunner status could, paradoxically, become her greatest weakness.
Preempting Home-Grown Terrorists
BERLIN – Islamist terrorism has in recent years become central to security policy in Germany and many other Western countries.
The terrorists’ intention is to sow mistrust and stoke fears; their aim is to weaken the democratic rule of law and to shatter citizens’ confidence in public institutions.
Governments are determined to prevent this, but the reality is that frequent terror alerts tend to increase rather than reduce insecurity among our people.
The debates across Europe on new security laws to fight terrorism have sometimes created the false image that states threaten rather than protect their citizens’ freedom.
In fact, the often-assumed conflict between freedom and public security does not exist.
Freedom and public security are not irreconcilable opposites.
They complement and even depend on each other.
Public security is a pre-requisite for freedom, and protecting freedom is at the core of a democratic state’s responsibility for public security.
A state’s monopoly on the use of force is justified if citizens can rely on it to ensure their security.
The prevention of threats, along with law enforcement that involves prosecuting offenders, are crucial responsibilities, but they do not require, as a matter of principle, ever-newer security laws.
Of course, security authorities need suitable tools to fight terrorism.
As terrorists take advantage of new technologies, the legal and technical means used by security authorities must adapt accordingly.
But terrorism cannot be fought by the security authorities alone.
Prevention is better than repression.
We should do everything in our power to avoid radicalization, to interrupt radicalization processes early, and to guide radicalized individuals back into our society and to acceptance of our values.
Yet, in facing a worsening problem of home-grown terrorism, Western countries are often unaware of this radicalization process.
To intervene effectively, we need to find answers to three questions: Where and how do people radicalize?
Why are they attracted to radical ideas?
What can we do to counteract it?
In Germany, radicalization takes place largely through radical mosque communities or private prayer rooms, as well as through the Internet.
State surveillance is used as a counter-measure, but it is just as important to work closely with the Muslim population.
Parents, friends, and imams can spot signs of radicalization earlier than security officials can, and they act responsibly by contacting the relevant state agencies in such cases.
Security authorities are responsible for monitoring the more visible signs of radicalization, and other state agencies can help potential terrorism recruits to leave extremist environments and become reintegrated into society.
Nothing, though, can replace support and help within these young peoples’ immediate environment.
The second question – why are some people attracted to radical ideas? – has been explored by researchers and security practitioners, who generally agree that people are more inclined to accept radical ideologies if they feel alienated.
This is especially true of young people who have experienced real or even imagined discrimination.
Lacking attractive social or professional prospects, such young people often seek a new and more welcoming home within a radical group.
Society’s task is to give them a feeling of belonging.
That means a new sense of commitment by civil society as a whole.
Our societies need to engender greater respect and acknowledgement of others, and to acquire more knowledge about different cultures and religions.
We need to create tightly knit networks of personal relations between the members of different social and religious groups.
It is equally important that citizens should consider it their duty to commit themselves to the principles of liberal democracy.
It is everyone’s task to counter extremism actively and speak out about radical statements, in public and in private.