They are places like Tianjin, a city southeast of Beijing with a GDP that is practically on par with Stockholm’s today – and could equal all of Sweden’s by 2025.
The second great disruption is the acceleration of technological change.
While technology has always been transformative, its impact is now ubiquitous, with digital and mobile technologies being adopted at an unprecedented rate.
It took more than 50 years after the telephone was invented for half of American homes to have one, but only 20 years for cellphones to spread from less than 3% of the world’s population to more than two-thirds.
Facebook had six million users in 2006; today, it has 1.4 billion.
The mobile Internet offers the promise of economic progress for billions of emerging-economy citizens at a speed that would otherwise be unimaginable.
And it gives entrepreneurial upstarts a greater chance of competing with established firms.
But technological change also carries risks, especially for workers who lose their jobs to automation or lack the skills to work in higher-tech fields.
The third disruption is demographic.
For the first time in centuries, our population could plateau in most of the world.
Indeed, population aging, which has been evident in the developed world for some time, is now spreading to China and soon will reach Latin America.
Thirty years ago, only a few countries, home to a small share of the global population, had fertility rates substantially below the replacement rate of 2.1 children per woman.
In 2013, about 60% of the world’s population lived in countries with sub-replacement fertility rates.
As the elderly increasingly outnumber working-age people, pressure is building on the labor force, and tax revenues, needed to service government debt and fund public services and pension systems, are diminishing.
The final disruption is the world’s increasing interconnectedness, with goods, capital, people, and information flowing ever more easily across borders.
Not long ago, international links existed primarily among major trading hubs in Europe and North America; now, the web is intricate and sprawling.
Capital flows among emerging economies have doubled in just ten years, and more than one billion people crossed borders in 2009, over five times the figure in 1980.
The resulting challenges – a host of new and unexpected competitors, volatility stemming from faraway places, and the disappearance of local jobs – are already overwhelming workers and companies.
Of course, this interconnectedness also offers important opportunities; but an implicit bias toward the familiar is impeding the ability of workers, firms, and even governments to take full advantage of them.
This is especially true for companies.
According to McKinsey research, from 1990 to 2005, US companies almost always allocated resources on the basis of past, rather than future, opportunities.
Firms that succumb to such inertia will probably sink, rather than swim, in the new global economy.
Some firms, however, will adapt, taking advantage of unprecedented opportunities to remain agile.
Instead of, say, building a new headquarters, renting a storefront, or purchasing a restaurant – traditional requirements that demanded large amounts of up-front capital – they can open a satellite sales office, create an online store, or launch a food truck.
Flexibility and responsiveness will enable such firms to thrive.
The pace and scale of the current economic transformation is undoubtedly daunting.
But there is plenty of reason for optimism.
Inequality may be on the rise within countries, but it has dropped dramatically among them.
Nearly a billion people were lifted out of extreme poverty from 1990 to 2010; another three billion will join the global middle class in the next two decades.
In 1930, at the height of the Great Depression, John Maynard Keynes declared that the standard of living in “progressive economies” would increase 4-8 times over the subsequent 100 years.
His prediction, which was regarded as hopelessly Pollyannaish at the time, has turned out to be correct, with the improvement likely to be at the top of his projected range.
Keynes, unlike many of his contemporaries, recognized the forces at work in the economy, adjusted his thinking, and, crucially, was not afraid to be optimistic.
We must do the same.
Divest in a Better Future
SEATTLE – Sometimes the best measure of a movement’s momentum is the reaction of its critics.
When, in early October, the Australian National University (ANU) announced that it would sell its shares in seven fossil-fuel and mining companies, it triggered a chorus of criticism from the country’s conservative politicians.
These nominal champions of the free market were quick to tell the university what it should do with its money.
The Treasurer of Australia, Joe Hockey, disparaged the ANU’s decision as being “removed from reality.”
Others chimed in, calling it “a disgrace,” “very strange,” and “narrow-minded and irresponsible.”
Never mind that the sums involved were relatively small – making up less than 2% of the university’s estimated $1 billion portfolio.
As the drive to divest from fossil fuels picks up speed, such panicky responses are becoming increasingly common.
The outrage of Australia’s conservatives reminds me of the reaction I received when I testified before the US Congress in 2013 that we should “keep our coal in the ground where it belongs.”
David McKinley, a Republican congressman from West Virginia, in the heart of America’s coal country, replied that my words “sent a shiver up [his] spine,” then changed the subject to the crime rate in Seattle, where I was Mayor.
Even ExxonMobil appears shaken.
The company recently published a long, defensive blog post responding to what it described as a “full-throated endorsement” of fossil-fuel divestment by Mary Robinson, United Nations Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon’s special envoy for climate change.
The fossil-fuel industry clearly sees the divestment movement as the political threat that it is.
When enough people say no to investing in fossil-fuel production, the next step has to be keeping coal, oil, and gas in the ground.
That is a necessary step if we are to head off the most dangerous consequences of climate change.
To prevent world temperatures from rising above the 2º Celsius threshold that climate scientists believe represents a tipping point beyond which the worst effects could no longer be mitigated, we will need to leave approximately 80% of known fossil-fuel reserves untapped.
Oil and coal companies and their political allies warn us of fiscal catastrophe if we do that – as if heat waves, droughts, storms, and rising seas did not bring their own fiscal and social catastrophes.
As Mayor of Seattle, I supported the creation of energy-efficient buildings, the development of solar, wind, and hydroelectric power, and a shift toward walking, biking, and public transit as alternatives to driving – strategies that can help to build a more resilient economy and provide viable alternatives to fossil fuels.
But they cannot prevent the worst of global warming, particularly if they result in coal and oil simply being sold elsewhere.
As imperfect as our governance systems are, at some point the public and its leaders may demand that we confront the truth about global warming.
At that point, they will put in place the regulatory or legal controls needed to reduce fossil-fuel use dramatically.
If you are a prudent and cautious investor, contemplate that possibility for a moment.
Stock values in the fossil-fuel industry – which are based on the assumption that companies will be able to extract and burn all known reserves – will plummet.
Investing in these companies, it turns out, is extraordinarily risky.
As anyone who receives investment statements knows, “past performance is no guarantee of future performance.”
That reality implies another compelling case for divestment.
To be sure, some will claim that the world will never change and that we will continue to depend on fossil fuels forever.
But one has only to look to Seattle, where gay couples marry in City Hall and marijuana is sold in licensed retail outlets, to see the human capacity to reexamine deeply held assumptions.
The prudent investor, and the wise business leader, will look where the economy is headed, not where it has been.
The ANU’s decision looks like a sage one to anyone not in thrall to oil and gas companies, and it will only look wiser with the passing of time.
Good on them.
When I put Seattle on the path to divestment in 2013, my decision was well received by the young people who will have to live with the consequences of global warming, as well as the general public.
As the political pressure mounts, the university’s administrators need only listen to the students.
We need more courage like that shown by the ANU.
Its leaders bucked the power of coal and oil interests, which wield enormous power in Australia.
If they can do it to popular acclaim, others can, too.
Divided We Fall
LONDON – Politics trumped sensible economics in the United States this summer, when Congress and President Barack Obama could not agree on taxes, entitlements, deficits, or an investment stimulus.
Europe’s leaders were also paralyzed – ruling out defaults and devaluations, as well as deficits and stimulus.
And, having run negative real interest rates, printed money, plowed in liquidity, and subsidized commercial banks, central bankers everywhere – most recently US Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke – appear to have concluded that they, too, have reached the limit of what they can do.
As a result, few people today doubt that the world is drifting, rudderless and leaderless, towards a second downturn.
The pre-summer debate about whether we faced a “new normal” of slower growth has been resolved: nothing now looks normal.
Muddling through has failed.
Unable to conclude a global trade deal, climate-change agreement, growth pact, or changes in the financial regime, the world is likely to descend into a new protectionism of competitive devaluation, currency wars, trade restrictions, and capital controls.
But this is not a time for defeatism.
Countries claiming to have reached the limit of what they can do really mean that they have reached the limit of what they can do on their own.
The way forward to sustained growth and employment is not through a flurry of one-off national initiatives, but rather through global policy coordination.
That was the goal back in April 2009, when the G-20 set itself three critical tasks.
The first, preventing a global depression, was achieved.
The other two – a growth pact, underpinned by a reformed global financial system – should now be the main items on the G-20’s agenda when it meets.
In 2010, the International Monetary Fund estimated that a coordinated approach to macroeconomic, trade, and structural policies could achieve 5.5% higher global GDP, create 25-50 million additional jobs, and lift 90 million people out of poverty.
But a global growth pact looks even more indispensable today, given the world economy’s structural problems and huge imbalances between production and consumption.
It may seem strange to describe the greatest financial crisis since the 1930’s as a symptom of a bigger problem.
But, when historians look back on the wave of globalization after 1990 – which has brought two billion new producers into the world economy – they will find a turning point around 2010. For the first time in 150 years, the West (America and the European Union) was out-manufactured, out-produced, out-exported, out-traded, and out-invested by the rest of the world.
Indeed, by the early to mid-2020’s, the Asian consumer market will be twice the size of the US market.
Today, however, the West and Asia remain mutually dependent.
Two-thirds of Asia’s exports still end up in the West, and south-south trade accounts for just 20% of global turnover.
Put another way, ten years ago the US engine could drive the world economy, and ten years from now the emerging-market countries stand to take over that role, particularly given the rising purchasing power of their middle classes.
But, for now, America and Europe cannot expand their consumer spending without increasing exports, while China and the emerging markets cannot easily expand their production or consumption without the guarantee of strong Western markets.
So, first, we must restore the broad vision of global cooperation contained in the G-20 growth pact (which has since been downgraded to what the IMF now calls “an in-depth analysis of…those countries identified as having large imbalances”).
But a broader and deeper agenda is needed: China should agree to raise household spending and consumer imports; India should open its markets so that its poor can benefit from low-cost imports; and Europe and America must boost competitiveness in order to increase their exports.
The G-20 was also adamant in 2009 that future stability required a new global financial regime.
David Miles of the Bank of England predicts three more financial crises in the coming two decades.
And, if the BoE’s Andrew Haldane is right that rising pressures in Asia threaten future turmoil, the West will regret its failure to entrench global capital-adequacy and liquidity standards and a more transparent early-warning system.
The problem is already evident.
Europe’s banking-sector liabilities are nearly five times higher than in the US, at 345% of GDP.
Germany’s banks are leveraged at 32 times their assets.
So, not only is bank recapitalization essential for financial stability, but so is a reformed euro, built on fiscal and monetary coordination and an enhanced role for the European Central Bank in supporting individual governments (not individual banks) as lender of last resort.
The G-20 will not achieve growth and stability without a renewed focus on long-term debt reduction.
But there is also a short-term imperative to avoid a cycle of decline.
So we should draw on Robert Skidelsky’s national investment bank proposals to equip our infrastructure – not least our environment – for future challenges and to stimulate growth and job creation.
One model is the European Investment Bank, which, with €50 billion of capital, has been able to invest €400 billion.
But there is perhaps a deal to be done with the Chinese on investing their reserves and with Western multinationals on the tax treatment of repatriated profits.
Finally, as the Nobel laureate economist Michael Spence has shown, growth is now a necessary but insufficient condition for job creation.
Today’s epidemic of youth unemployment, in particular, requires new approaches – a development bank, for example, to help employ the bulging youth population in the Middle East and North Africa, and training and apprenticeship programs elsewhere.
The G-20’s growth compact must be a jobs compact, too.
The G-20, which represents 80% of world output, came into its own in 2009 as the only multilateral body able to coordinate global economic policy.
Unfortunately, its member states soon abandoned that goal and defaulted to national solutions.
Predictably, going it alone has proven futile in ensuring economic recovery. The G-20’s time has come again.
The sooner French President Nicolas Sarkozy calls the G-20 together to act, the better.
Déjà-vu in the Middle East
BERLIN &#45;&#45; Does history repeat itself, after all?
Recent developments in the Middle East suggest that the answer is “yes,” because the situation at the end of President George W. Bush’s tenure increasingly resembles that of Bill Clinton’s final year in the presidency.
Both presidents, at the end of their respective terms, sought to resolve one of the world’s most dangerous conflicts, while facing the threat that time was running out on them.
One could despair: the Bush administration has obviously wasted almost seven years during which it could have pursued a solution.
We are now back to the starting point: the Camp David and Taba talks – flippantly abandoned in January 2001 – are to be taken up again.
Still, as the wise saying goes, better late than never!
The Middle East conference to be held in Annapolis, Maryland should be a forum for final status negotiations between the parties, dealing above all with the establishment of a Palestinian state and its borders (those of June 1967, with some negotiated exchanges of territory), its capital (Jerusalem), Israeli settlements, and the right of return for Palestinian refugees.
It should also address questions of security, the termination of the decades-long state of war, and recognition of Israel by the Arab states.
Indeed, it is high time for progress on a two-state solution, because the Palestinians are increasingly losing hope of ever having a state of their own.
Without it, the Middle East conflict will remain at a stalemate and violence will only intensify.
Acceptable compromises on all of these questions have been negotiated repeatedly by the parties and stowed away for many years.
The only missing ingredient is the political will and strength to enter into a peace agreement.
But this very political strength is precisely what both the Israeli and Palestinian governments lack.
Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Olmert and Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas are very weak domestically, and, given the compromises needed on both sides, they will be risking a lot.
The same is true of President Bush.
Indeed, the US government does not even stand whole-heartedly behind its own initiative.
Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice wants the conference to happen and has done much to push it ahead.
But how much risk is Bush – without whom a real breakthrough will be impossible – prepared to accept?
Fortunately, existing taboos about what is acceptable in the final status talks have fallen – on both sides.
The parallel weakness of Olmert and Abbas has produced a parallel interest in a peace settlement.
Indeed, both men hope for political survival through a peace agreement: Olmert by means of new elections and Abbas by a referendum through which he can regain ascendancy over Hamas.
So will a failed “Peace of the Strong“ be followed by a successful “Peace of the Weak”?
As the domestic situations in Israel and Palestine have changed, so, too, has the regional political environment changed in a positive direction, because most Arab states today are more afraid of Iran’s regional domination than they are of Israel.
This development offers an unprecedented opportunity.
There are obvious pitfalls, to be sure.
Olmert’s room for maneuver within his party, and particularly within his coalition, is very small.
Can he make sufficient concessions on borders and Jerusalem?
Similar doubts apply to Abbas.
Can he deliver the security guarantees that Olmert needs, especially given the Palestinians’ fear that, in the end, they will give too much, without getting back concessions on what they see as their fundamental demands?
Moreover, the critical hurdle will not be the negotiations, but rather implementation of whatever agreement may emerge – and its political cost will be very high.
The Palestinians are already in the midst of a civil war.
The compromises necessary for peace are likely to lead to a stark political confrontation in Israel as well.
Obviously, Olmert is thinking of fusing an agreement on the final status with the Road Map mechanism.
Such an agreement should be implemented gradually, and progress should depend on the parties’ fulfillment of their obligations each step of the way.
Yet a mechanism of this kind can only work if a third party (the US, the “US plus,” or the Middle East Quartet) is available to monitor the agreement.
Otherwise, disputes about fulfillment of this or that provision will lead the entire process back into the familiar quicksand of Middle East futility.
So, from a realistic point of view, a positive outcome for the Annapolis talks seems almost impossible.
Why should this conflict, which has proven to be unsolvable in the past, be suddenly solved (or brought closer to a solution) by three actors – Bush, Olmert, and Abbas – who are all in a state of profound domestic weakness?
Karl Marx wrote that history always repeats itself, first as tragedy, then as farce.
One might fear that Camp David proves to be the tragedy and Annapolis the farce.
But, then, this is the Middle East, where earlier breakthroughs grew out of defeat, not victory.
So one should never give up hope, even when hope seems impossible to sustain.
Do Antioxidant Supplements Work?
NIS, Serbia – The influence of diet on health has been known since the Ancient Greeks.
Our bodies simply cannot synthesize many essential compounds, so our health partly depends on what we eat and drink.
Antioxidants, which are believed to help protect us against both cancer and heart disease, are one such element that must import into our bodies.
Studies have shown that there is a significant positive association between a higher intake of fruits and vegetables and reduced risk of chronic disease.
Fruits and vegetables are sources of numerous micronutrients, and some, including b-carotene (a precursor of vitamin A), vitamin C, vitamin E, and selenium, have potential as antioxidants.
But what specifically makes fruits and vegetables so beneficial is not clear.
The main role of antioxidants is to prevent oxidative damage to cellular components, so it has been proposed that dietary antioxidants decrease such damage and with it the risk of disease.
This has stimulated interest in the possible preventive potential of antioxidant supplements.
Indeed, consumption of antioxidant supplements in developed countries has become widespread.
More than one-third of adults in developed countries now ingest antioxidant pills, which is much easier than eating fruits and vegetables.
But will the benefits be the same?
As with any therapeutic intervention, the most convincing and direct proof of the preventive efficacy of antioxidant supplements requires randomized, controlled clinical trials.
Such trials eliminate the problems of participants’ dietary record and controls the effects of both known and unknown confounding factors.
So far, many studies have been conducted to verify the supposed beneficial effects of antioxidant supplements.
But, while the results of epidemiological studies have been almost uniformly positive, the results of clinical trials have remained largely inconclusive.
Some clinical trials were terminated prematurely because harmful effects of antioxidant supplements were observed.
Indeed, the overwhelming evidence currently calls into question the preventive effect of antioxidant pills.
On the contrary, they may be harmful, leading to an increased risk of mortality in people consuming them.
There are several possible explanations for the negative effect of antioxidant supplements.
First, the “free radicals” that anti-oxidants act against perform a dual biological function.
Free radicals are produced continuously in all cells as part of their normal functioning.
In moderate concentrations, they are essential mediators of reactions by which our bodies eliminate unwanted cells.
By eliminating free radicals from our body, we interfere with important defensive mechanisms for eliminating damaged cells, including cancerous cells.
So antioxidant substances can also harm people.
Whereas our diets typically contain safe levels, highly concentrated antioxidant supplements can be hazardous.
In fact, the amounts of antioxidants that lend protection are not known and probably differ among individuals.
People exposed to increased oxidative stress may have elevated antioxidant requirements.
Moreover, antioxidant supplements in pills are synthetic and biochemically unbalanced compared to their naturally occurring counterparts.
Nor are they subjected to the same rigorous toxicity studies as other pharmaceutical agents.
Indeed, we still lack substantial information on how our bodies metabolize them and how they interact with one another.
As a result, it is still unclear whether dosage, duration of use, or parallel intake of other agents determine differences in their effect.
It also is unclear whether oxidative stress is a primary cause or a secondary phenomenon of chronic diseases, as well as of the aging process.
In most human disease, oxidative stress is merely a symptom.
So the link between oxidative stress and disease should not be overemphasized.
There are still many gaps in our knowledge of the mechanisms of action of antioxidant supplements.
Basic issues concerning the efficacy and safety of consuming relatively high doses of antioxidant supplements need to be resolved.
Results of ongoing clinical trials and further studies are required to improve our knowledge.
In the meantime, we know that antioxidants can cause unwanted health consequences.
So the optimal source for antioxidants is diet, not supplements.
In short, we should stop taking pills and eat more fruits and vegetables.
Could Hensarling’s Dodd-Frank “Off-Ramp” Work?
Let’s go back to basics for a moment. The government guarantees bank deposits because a banking failure could hurt the entire economy.
This creates moral hazard, as banks, looking for big shareholder gains, become lax in managing what effectively becomes the public’s money.
They feel comfortable taking big risks, because if they lose, they just turn the bank over to the government to pay off depositors and other creditors.
And if they win, they and their shareholders keep the bonanza.
Regulators use two key measures to mitigate such risk-taking: they require banks to hold more capital and to keep investments, loans, and operations safer (and potentially less profitable) than the banks want them to be.
Because these two central regulatory methods achieve the same end, they can theoretically be substituted for one another – regulators can set banks’ capital requirement very high, or they can set the riskiness of banks’ activities very low.
In practice, because regulators cannot do either perfectly, they do some of each.
Hensarling’s off-ramp proposal builds on that tradeoff, giving banks more leeway to decide whether they want less risk or more capital.
Baseline regulation would be the typical mixture of the two, but individual banks could opt for substantially higher capital requirements in exchange for permission to engage in riskier investments and operations.
In other words, they could reduce the constraints of one regulatory measure in exchange for tightening those of the other.
This is conceptually sound.
But there are problems with Hensarling’s proposal as he has articulated it. And they are not small.
First, the ratio of capital that Hensarling would require of banks that take an off-ramp is far too low, at 10% of total assets.
That is higher than current levels, but not high enough to ensure bank safety.
The Financial Stability Board and the International Monetary Fund each found that many banks threatened during the financial crisis of 2007 and 2008 would have needed double today’s levels of capital to survive intact.
Were the Hensarling proposal to be implemented, those levels would have to be even higher, owing to the reduction in risk regulation.
Only if capital were increased substantially – to “shock and awe” levels – would the banks and their executives conclude, without regulatory instruction, that it is not in their or their stockholders’ interest to take on much risk.
A second problem with Hensarling’s proposal is that banks are likely to reject it as long as corporate tax policy remains unchanged.
As I have argued in previous commentaries, and in a recent academic paper written with Michael Troege, requiring banks to have more capital raises their tax bill, because it reduces the level of tax-deductible debt and increases that of taxable equity.
If the tax code is not reformed, few banks will find the tradeoff attractive, because a higher tax bill will cancel out returns from taking Hensarling’s offer.
The third problem is one of logistics: Hensarling’s plan would hardwire into legislation the parameters for banks to take a regulatory off-ramp, thus tying regulators’ hands.
Once a bank had the 10% capital, it could neither be stopped from key mergers nor be determined to be systemically important and risky.
Because financial circumstances change quickly, regulators, who can adapt to new conditions faster than Congress can, should have discretion to set capital-requirement and loan-risk tradeoff benchmarks.
Under Hensarling’s plan, they would not.
More insidious, by repealing much of the Dodd-Frank risk regulation, the Hensarling proposal would virtually eliminate banks’ incentive to choose the off-ramp.
There wouldn’t be enough regulation for them to feel the need to escape.
Banks could thus have their cake and eat it.
Despite all of this, regulators should thank Hensarling for pushing forward the concept of a flexible tradeoff framework.
While the details of his particular proposal are problematic, to say the least, the concept has real potential.
The result could be a more dynamic financial system – and also a safer one.
Do Economic Sanctions Work?
CAMBRIDGE – With Western economic sanctions against Russia, Iran, and Cuba in the news, it is a good time to take stock of the debate on just how well such measures work.
The short answer is that economic sanctions usually have only modest effects, even if they can be an essential means of demonstrating moral resolve.
If economic sanctions are to play an increasingly important role in twenty-first-century statecraft, it might be worth reflecting on how they have worked in the past.
As Gary Hufbauer and Jeffrey Schott note in their classic book on the topic, the history of economic sanctions goes back at least to 432 BC, when the Greek statesman and general Pericles issued the so-called “Megarian decree” in response to the abduction of three Aspasian&nbsp;women.
In modern times, the United States has employed economic sanctions in pursuit of diverse goals, from the Carter administration’s efforts in the 1970s to promote human rights, to attempts to impede nuclear proliferation in the 1980s.
During the Cold War, the US also employed economic sanctions to destabilize unfriendly governments, especially in Latin America, though they do not appear to have played more than a minor role, even where regime change eventually occurred.
Economic sanctions on Serbia in the early 1990s did not deter the invasion of Bosnia.
Certainly, the US government’s symbolic punishment of chess legend Bobby Fischer (for playing a match in Belgrade that violated sanctions) provided no relief for the besieged city of Sarajevo.
The old Soviet Union played the sanctions game as well – for example, against China, Albania, and Yugoslavia.
It, too, did not have much success, except perhaps in the case of Finland, which ultimately bent its policies to gain relief from sanctions imposed in 1958.
Most modern cases of sanctions pit a large country against a small country, though there are a few cases involving countries of equal size, such as the long quarrel, from the 1950s to the 1980s, between the United Kingdom and Spain over Gibraltar.
As Hufbauer and Schott, among others, have illustrated, the effects of sanctions are often fairly disappointing – so much so that many scholars have concluded that such measures often are imposed so that governments can appear to domestic audiences to be “doing something.”
Certainly, severe US sanctions on Cuba failed to bring the Castro regime to heel; indeed, President Barack Obama’s move to reestablish full diplomatic relations may have more effect.
But sometimes sanctions do work.
The strong international consensus to impose sanctions on South Africa in the 1980s eventually helped bring an end to apartheid.
Likewise, sanctions have helped bring Iran to the bargaining table, though it is not clear how long its government will be willing to defer its nuclear ambitions.
And the Russian economy today is in big trouble, though this might be described as a lucky punch, with the real damage being done by an epic collapse in global oil prices.
Some in Russia, where the price collapse has hit government revenues hard, claim that the US and Saudi Arabia are conspiring to bring Russia to its knees.
But that gives US strategists far too much credit.
A more likely culprit for the steep price decline is a combination of the shale-energy revolution in the US and the sharp slowdown in Chinese growth.
China’s slowdown has helped precipitate a broad-based fall in commodity prices that is having a devastating effect on countries like Argentina and Brazil, with which the US authorities presumably have little quarrel.
One of the major reasons economic sanctions have fallen short in the past is that not all countries have complied.
Indeed, significant differences of domestic opinion in the imposing country often undermine sanctions as well.
Moreover, countries imposing sanctions must be prepared to address their own vulnerabilities.
North Korea is perhaps the most noxious regime in the world today, and one can only hope that its cruel government collapses sometime soon.
The Kim regime has clung to power despite being subject to severe economic sanctions, perhaps because China, fearing a united Korea on its border, has not yet been willing to withdraw its support.
Yet it is easy to forget that there are different viewpoints in international relations, even in the most extreme situations.
Though North Korea’s alleged attack on Sony Pictures’ computers has been rightly condemned, it must be admitted that from the perspective of the North Korean elite, their country simply applied economic retaliation much like anyone else does.
Sony Pictures had produced a satire poking fun at North Korea’s leader, the “Young General” Kim Jong-un.
This was an intolerable affront, to which the elite responded with economic sabotage rather than military action.
Let us also not forget that Russia, too, has deployed cyber attacks in the service of foreign-policy goals.
Indeed, Russia has far more formidable hackers than North Korea (though much of the top talent currently is employed in mafia rings, rather than in strategic operations).
In a world where nuclear proliferation has rendered global conventional war unthinkable, economic sanctions and sabotage are likely to play a large role in twenty-first-century geopolitics.
Rather than preventing conflict, Pericles’s sanctions in ancient Greece ultimately helped to trigger the Peloponnesian War.
One can only hope that in this century, wiser heads will prevail, and that economic sanctions lead to bargaining, not violence.
Does Austerity Promote Economic Growth?
NEW HAVEN – In his classic Fable of the Bees: or, Private Vices, Publick Benefits(1724), Bernard Mandeville, the Dutch-born British philosopher and satirist, described – in verse – a prosperous society (of bees) that suddenly chose to make a virtue of austerity, dropping all excess expenditure and extravagant consumption. What then happened?
The Price of Land and Houses falls;
Mirac’lous Palaces, whose Walls,
Like those of Thebes, were rais’d by Play
Are to be let; . . . .
The building Trade is quite destroy’d
Artificers are not employ’d; . . .
Those, that remain’d, grown temp’rate strive
Not how to spend, but how to live . . .
That sounds a lot like what many advanced countries have been going through, after financial-crisis-induced austerity plans were launched, doesn’t it? Is Mandeville a genuine prophet for our times?
Fable of the Bees developed a wide following, and generated substantial controversy, which continues to this day.
The austerity plans being adopted by governments in much of Europe and elsewhere around the world, and the curtailment of consumption expenditure by individuals as well, threaten to produce a global recession.
But how do we know if Mandeville is right about austerity?
His research method – a long poem about his theory – is hardly convincing to modern ears.
Harvard economist Alberto Alesina recently summarized evidence concerning whether government deficit reduction – that is, expenditure cuts and/or tax increases – always induces such negative effects: “The answer to this question is a loud no.”
Sometimes, even often, economies prosper nicely after the government’s deficit is sharply reduced.
Sometimes, just maybe, the austerity program boosts confidence in such a way as to ignite a recovery.
We have to examine the issue with some care, understanding that the issue that Mandeville raised is really a statistical one: the outcome of government deficit reduction is never entirely predictable, so we can ask only how likely such a plan is to succeed in restoring economic prosperity.
And the biggest problem here is accounting for possible reverse causality.
For example, if evidence of future economic strength makes a government worry about economic overheating and inflation, it might try to cool domestic demand by raising taxes and lowering government spending.
If the government is only partly successful in preventing economic overheating, it might nonetheless appear to casual observers that austerity actually strengthened the economy.
Likewise, the government’s deficit might fall not because of austerity, but because the stock market’s anticipation of economic growth fuels higher revenues from capital-gains tax.
Once again, we would see what might appear, from looking at the government deficit, to be an austerity-to-prosperity scenario.
Jaime Guajardo, Daniel Leigh, and Andrea Pescatori of the International Monetary Fund recently studied austerity plans implemented by governments in 17 countries in the last 30 years. But their approach differed from that of previous researchers.
They focused on the government’s intent, and looked at what officials actually said, not just at the pattern of public debt.
They read budget speeches, reviewed stability programs, and even watched news interviews with government figures.
They identified as austerity plans only those cases in which governments imposed tax hikes or spending cuts because they viewed it as a prudent policy with potential long-term benefits, not because they were responding to the short-term economic outlook and sought to reduce the risk of overheating.
Their analysis found a clear tendency for austerity programs to reduce consumption expenditure and weaken the economy.
That conclusion, if valid, stands as a stern warning to policymakers today.
But critics, such as Valerie Ramey of the University of California at San Diego, think that Guajardo, Leigh, and Pescatori have not completely proven their case.
It is possible, Ramey argues, that their results could reflect a different sort of reverse causality if governments are more likely to respond to high public-debt levels with austerity programs when they have reason to believe that economic conditions could make the debt burden especially worrisome.
That may seem unlikely – one would think that a bad economic outlook would incline governments to postpone, rather than accelerate, austerity measures.
And, in response to her comments, the authors did try to account for the severity of the government’s debt problem as perceived by the markets at the time that the plans were implemented, finding very similar results.
But Ramey could be right.
One would then find that government spending cuts or tax hikes tend to be followed by bad economic times, even if the causality runs the other way.
Ultimately, the problem of judging austerity programs is that economists cannot run fully controlled experiments.
When researchers tested Prozac on depressed patients, they divided their subjects randomly into control and experimental groups, and conducted many trials.
We cannot do that with national debt.
So do we have to conclude that historical analysis teaches us no useful lessons?
Do we have to return to the abstract reasoning of Mandeville and some of his successors, including John Maynard Keynes, who thought that there were reasons to expect that austerity would produce depressions?
There is no abstract theory that can predict how people will react to an austerity program.
We have no alternative but to look at the historical evidence.
And the evidence of Guajardo and his co-authors does show that deliberate government decisions to adopt austerity programs have tended to be followed by hard times.
Policymakers cannot afford to wait decades for economists to figure out a definitive answer, which may never be found at all.
But, judging by the evidence that we have, austerity programs in Europe and elsewhere appear likely to yield disappointing results.
Does Capitalism Cause Poverty?
CAMBRIDGE – Capitalism gets blamed for many things nowadays: poverty, inequality, unemployment, even global warming.
As Pope Francis said in a recent speech in Bolivia: “This system is by now intolerable: farm workers find it intolerable, laborers find it intolerable, communities find it intolerable, peoples find it intolerable.
The earth itself – our sister, Mother Earth, as Saint Francis would say – also finds it intolerable.”
But are the problems that upset Francis the consequence of what he called “unbridled capitalism”?
Or are they instead caused by capitalism’s surprising failure to do what was expected of it?
Should an agenda to advance social justice be based on bridling capitalism or on eliminating the barriers that thwart its expansion?
The answer in Latin America, Africa, the Middle East, and Asia is obviously the latter.
To see this, it is useful to recall how Karl Marx imagined the future.
For Marx, the historic role of capitalism was to reorganize production.
Gone would be the family farms, artisan yards, and the “nation of shopkeepers,” as Napoleon is alleged to have scornfully referred to Britain.
All these petty bourgeois activities would be plowed over by the equivalent of today’s Zara, Toyota, Airbus, or Walmart.
As a result, the means of production would no longer be owned by those doing the work, as on the family farm or in the craftsman’s workshop, but by “capital.”
Workers would possess only their own labor, which they would be forced to exchange for a miserable wage.
Nonetheless, they would be more fortunate than the “reserve army of the unemployed” – a pool of idle labor large enough to make others fear losing their job, but small enough not to waste the surplus value that could be extracted by making them work.
With all previous social classes transformed into the working class, and all means of production in the hands of an ever-dwindling group of owners of “capital,” a proletarian revolution would lead humanity to a world of perfect justice: “From each according to his ability, to each according to his needs,” as Marx famously put it.
Clearly, the poet and philosopher Paul Valéry was right: “The future, like everything else, is no longer what it used to be.”
But we should not make fun of Marx’s well-known prediction error.
After all, as the physicist Niels Bohr wryly noted, “Prediction is difficult, especially about the future.”
We now know that as the ink was drying on the Communist Manifesto, wages in Europe and the United States were beginning a 160-year-long rise, making workers part of the middle class, with cars, mortgages, pensions, and petty bourgeois concerns.
Politicians today promise to create jobs – or more opportunities to be exploited by capital – not to take over the means of production.
Capitalism could achieve this transformation because the reorganization of production allowed for an unprecedented increase in productivity.
The division of labor within and across firms, which Adam Smith had already envisioned in 1776 as the engine of growth, allowed for a division of knowhow among individuals that permitted the whole to know more than the parts and form ever-growing networks of exchange and collaboration.
A modern corporation has experts in production, design, marketing, sales, finance, accounting, human resource management, logistics, taxes, contracts, and so on.
Modern production is not just an accumulation of buildings and equipment owned by Das Kapital and operated mechanically by fungible workers.
Instead, it is a coordinated network of people that possess different types of Das Human-Kapital.
In the developed world, capitalism did transform almost everyone into a wage laborer, but it also lifted them out of poverty and made them more prosperous than Marx could have imagined.
That was not the only thing Marx got wrong.
More surprisingly, the capitalist reorganization of production petered out in the developing world, leaving the vast majority of the labor force outside its control.
The numbers are astounding.
While only one in nine people in the United States are self-employed, the proportion in India is 19 out of 20.
Fewer than one-fifth of workers in Peru are employed by the kind of private businesses that Marx had in mind.
In Mexico, about one in three are.
Even within countries, measures of wellbeing are strongly related to the proportion of the labor force employed in capitalist production.
In Mexico’s state of Nuevo León, two-thirds of workers are employed by private incorporated businesses, while in Chiapas only one in seven is.
No wonder, then, that per capita income is more than nine times higher in Nuevo León than in Chiapas.
In Colombia, per capita income in Bogota is four times higher than in Maicao.
Unsurprisingly, the share of capitalist employment is six times higher in Bogota.
In poverty-stricken Bolivia, Francis criticized “the mentality of profit at any price, with no concern for social exclusion or the destruction of nature,” along with “a crude and naive trust in the goodness of those wielding economic power and in the sacralized workings of the prevailing economic system.”
But this explanation of capitalism’s failure is wide of the mark.
The world’s most profitable companies are not exploiting Bolivia.
They are simply not there, because they find the place unprofitable.
The developing world’s fundamental problem is that capitalism has not reorganized production and employment in the poorest countries and regions, leaving the bulk of the labor force outside its scope of operation.
As Rafael Di Tella and Robert MacCulloch have shown, the world’s poorest countries are not characterized by naive trust in capitalism, but by utter distrust, which leads to heavy government intervention and regulation of business.
Under such conditions, capitalism does not thrive and economies remain poor.
Francis is right to focus attention on the plight of the world’s poorest.
Their misery, however, is not the consequence of unbridled capitalism, but of a capitalism that has been bridled in just the wrong way.
Does “Curing” Cancer Kill Patients?
TAMPA – Patients and politicians increasingly demand a “cure” for cancer.
But controlling the disease may prove to be a better strategy than striving to cure it. 
A century ago, the German Nobel laureate Paul Ehrlich introduced the concept of “magic bullets” – compounds engineered to target and kill tumor cells or disease-causing organisms without affecting normal cells.
The success of antibiotics 50 years later seemed to validate Ehrlich’s idea.
So influential have medicine’s triumphs over bacteria been that the “war on cancer” continues to be driven by the assumption that magic bullets will one day be found for tumor cells if the search is sufficiently clever and diligent.
Yet lessons learned in dealing with exotic species, combined with recent mathematical models of the evolutionary dynamics of tumors, indicate that eradicating most cancers may be impossible.
Trying to do so, moreover, could worsen the problem.  
In 1854, the year Ehrlich was born, the diamondback moth was first observed in Illinois.
Within five decades, the moth had spread throughout North America.
It now infests the Americas, Europe, Asia, and Australia.
Attempts to eradicate it using chemicals worked only fleetingly.
In the late 1980’s, biologists found strains that were resistant to all known insecticides.
So farmers abandoned their efforts to eliminate the moth.
Instead, most now apply insecticides only when infestation exceeds some threshold level, with the goal of producing a sustainable and satisfactory crop.
Under the banner of “integrated pest management,” hundreds of invasive species are now successfully controlled by strategies that restrict the population growth of pests but do not attempt to eradicate them
The ability of tumor cells to adapt to a wide range of environmental conditions, including toxic chemicals, is similar to the evolutionary capacities demonstrated by crop pests and other invasive species.
As in the case of the Diamondback moth, successful eradication of disseminated cancer cells is rare.
But despite the paucity of success, the typical goal in cancer therapy remains similar to that of antimicrobial treatments – killing as many tumor cells as possible under the assumption that this will, at best, cure the disease and, at worst, keep the patient alive for as long as possible.
Some types of cancer – for example, Hodgkin’s lymphoma, testicular cancer, and acute myeloid leukemia – can be consistently cured using aggressive chemotherapy.
But these malignant cells seem to be particularly responsive to “treatment.”
Just as invasive species adapt to pesticides, most cancer cells adapt to therapies.
Indeed, the parallels between cancerous cells and invasive species suggest that the principles for successful cancer therapy might be found not in the magic bullets of microbiology but in the evolutionary dynamics of applied ecology.
Recent research suggests that efforts to eliminate cancers may actually hasten the emergence of resistance and tumor recurrence, thus reducing a patient’s chances of survival.
The reason arises from a component of tumor biology not ordinarily investigated: the cost of resistance to treatment.
Cancer cells pay a price when they evolve resistance to chemotherapy.
For example, to cope with toxic drugs, a cancer cell may increase its rate of DNA repair, or actively pump the drug out across the cell membrane.
In targeted therapies, in which drugs interfere with the molecular signaling needed for proliferation and survival, a cell might adapt by activating or following alternative pathways.
All these strategies use up energy that would otherwise be available for invasion into non-cancerous tissues or proliferation, and so reduce a cell’s fitness.
The more complex and costly the mechanisms used, the less fit the resistant population will be.
That cancer cells pay a price for resistance is supported by several observations.
Cells in   laboratory cultures that are resistant to chemotherapies typically lose their resistance when the chemicals are removed.
Lung cancer cells that are resistant to the chemotherapy gemcitabine are less proliferative, invasive, and motile than their drug-sensitive counterparts.  
Although resistant forms are commonly found in tumors that haven’t yet been exposed to treatment, they generally occur in small numbers.
This suggests that resistant cells are not so unfit that drug-sensitive cells completely out-competed them, but that they struggle to proliferate when both types are present.
Our models show that in the absence of therapy, cancer cells that haven’t evolved resistance will proliferate at the expense of the less-fit resistant cells.
When a large number of sensitive cells are killed, say, by aggressive therapies, resistant types can proliferate unconstrained.
This means that high doses of chemotherapy might actually increase the likelihood of a tumor becoming unresponsive to further therapy.
So, just as judicious use of pesticides can control invasive species, a therapeutic strategy designed to maintain a stable, tolerable tumor volume could improve a patient’s prospects for survival by allowing sensitive cells to suppress the growth of resistant ones.
To test this idea, we treated a human ovarian cancer, grown in mice, with conventional high-dose chemotherapy.
The cancer rapidly regressed but then recurred and killed the mice.
Yet when we treated the mice with a drug dose continuously adjusted to maintain a stable tumor volume, the animals, though not cured, survived for a prolonged period of time.
Designing therapies to sustain a stable tumor mass rather than eradicate all cancer cells will   require a strategy that looks beyond the immediate cytotoxic effects of any one treatment.
Researchers will need to establish the mechanisms by which cancer cells achieve resistance and what it costs them.
They will need to understand the evolutionary dynamics of resistant populations, and design strategies to suppress or exploit the adapted characteristics.
Of course, cancer researchers should not abandon their search for ever-more-effective cancer therapies, even for cures.
But it may be time to temper our quest for magic bullets and recognize the cold reality of Darwin’s evolutionary dynamics.  Medicine’s goal of a glorious victory over cancer may need to yield to our recognizing that an uneasy stalemate may be the best that can be achieved.
Does Debt Matter?
LONDON – Europe is now haunted by the specter of debt.
All European leaders quail before it.
To exorcise the demon, they are putting their economies through the wringer.
It doesn’t seem to be helping.
Their economies are still tumbling, and the debt continues to grow.
The credit ratings agency Standard &amp; Poor’s has just downgraded the sovereign-debt ratings of nine eurozone countries, including France.
The United Kingdom is likely to follow.
To anyone not blinded by folly, the explanation for this mass downgrade is obvious.
If you deliberately aim to shrink your GDP, your debt-to-GDP ratio is bound to grow.
The only way to cut your debt (other than by default) is to get your economy to grow.
Fear of debt is rooted in human nature; so the extinction of it as a policy aim seems right to the average citizen.
Everyone knows what financial debt means: money owed, often borrowed.
To be in debt can produce anxiety if one is uncertain whether, when the time comes, one will be able to repay what one owes.
This anxiety is readily transferred to national debt – the debt owed by a government to its creditors.
How, people ask, will governments repay all of the hundreds of billions of dollars that they owe?
As British Prime Minister David Cameron put it: “Government debt is the same as credit-card debt; it’s got to be paid back.”
The next step readily follows: in order to repay, or at least reduce, the national debt, the government must eliminate its budget deficit, because the excess of spending over revenue continually adds to the national debt.
Indeed, if the government fails to act, the national debt will become, in today’s jargon, “unsustainable.”
Again, an analogy with household debt readily suggests itself.
My death does not extinguish my debt, reasons the sensible citizen.
My creditors will have the first claim on my estate – everything that I wanted to leave to my children.
Similarly, a debt left unpaid too long by a government is a burden on future generations: I may enjoy the benefits of government extravagance, but my children will have to foot the bill.
That is why deficit reduction is at the center of most governments’ fiscal policy today.
A government with a “credible” plan for “fiscal consolidation” supposedly is less likely to default on its debt, or leave it for the future to pay.
This will, it is thought, enable the government to borrow money more cheaply than it would otherwise be able to do, in turn lowering interest rates for private borrowers, which should boost economic activity.
So fiscal consolidation is the royal road to economic recovery.
This, the official doctrine of most developed countries today, contains at least five major fallacies, which pass largely unnoticed, because the narrative is so plausible.
First, governments, unlike private individuals, do not have to “repay” their debts.
A government of a country with its own central bank and its own currency can simply continue to borrow by printing the money which is lent to it.
This is not true of countries in the eurozone.
But their governments do not have to repay their debts, either.
If their (foreign) creditors put too much pressure on them, they simply default.
Default is bad.
But life after default goes on much as before.
Second, deliberately cutting the deficit is not the best way for a government to balance its books.
Deficit reduction in a depressed economy is the road not to recovery, but to contraction, because it means cutting the national income on which the government’s revenues depend.
This will make it harder, not easier, for it to cut the deficit.
The British government already must borrow £112 billion ($172 billion) more than it had planned when it announced its deficit-reduction plan in June 2010.
Third, the national debt is not a net burden on future generations.
Even if it gives rise to future tax liabilities (and some of it will), these will be transfers from taxpayers to bond holders.
This may have disagreeable distributional consequences.
But trying to reduce it now will be a net burden on future generations: income will be lowered immediately, profits will fall, pension funds will be diminished, investment projects will be canceled or postponed, and houses, hospitals, and schools will not be built.
Future generations will be worse off, having been deprived of assets that they might otherwise have had.
Fourth, there is no connection between the size of national debt and the price that a government must pay to finance it.
The interest rates that Japan, the United States, the UK, and Germany pay on their national debt are equally low, despite vast differences in their debt levels and fiscal policies.
Finally, low borrowing costs for governments do not automatically reduce the cost of capital for the private sector.
After all, corporate borrowers do not borrow at the “risk-free” yield of, say, US Treasury bonds, and evidence shows that monetary expansion can push down the interest rate on government debt, but have hardly any effect on new bank lending to firms or households.
In fact, the causality is the reverse: the reason why government interest rates in the UK and elsewhere are so low is that interest rates for private-sector loans are so high.
As with “the specter of Communism” that haunted Europe in Karl Marx’s famous manifesto, so today “[a]ll the powers of old Europe have entered into a holy alliance to exorcise” the specter of national debt.
But statesmen who aim to liquidate the debt should recall another famous specter – the specter of revolution.
Does Europe Have a Death Wish?
BERLIN – From the start of the Greek debt crisis in 2010, the major European players should have understood the risks and consequences that it posed for the European Union.
They certainly don’t give that impression to onlookers.
The crisis was always about much more than Greece: a disorderly insolvency there would threaten to pull other economies on the EU’s southern periphery, including some very big ones, into the fiscal abyss, along with major European banks and insurers.
That could plunge the global economy into another financial crisis, delivering a shock equivalent to the autumn of 2008.
It would also mean a eurozone failure that would not leave the Common Market unharmed.
For the first time in its history, the very continuance of the European project is at stake.
And yet the behavior of the EU and its most important member states has been irresolute and dithering, owing to national egotism and a breathtaking absence of leadership.
States can go bust just like companies, but, unlike companies, they don’t disappear when that happens.
That is why states should not be punished, and why their ongoing interests should not be underestimated.
Insolvent states need help with restructuring, both in the financial sector and well beyond it, so that they can work their way out of crisis.
This is certainly true of Greece, whose structural problems are much more sweeping than even its financial difficulties.
Thus far, the EU and the Greek government have failed to address Greece’s structural problems.
But they need to develop (and fund) an appropriate strategy for economic reconstruction, in order to make clear to the Greeks – and to skittish financial markets – that there is light at the end of the tunnel.
Everyone knows that Greece will be unable to work its way out of crisis without massive debt relief.
The only question is whether the country’s debt restructuring will be orderly and controlled or chaotic and contagious.
Either way, Germany’s internal debate about whether to pay for the Greek debt is risible.
Refusing to pay is not a viable option, because Germany and all other eurozone members are in the same boat.
A Greek default would threaten to sink them, too, for it would raise immediate concerns about the solvency of Europe’s systemically important banks and insurance companies.
So what are the eurozone’s heads of government waiting for?
Are they reluctant to come clean with their people out of fear for their own political futures?
The European financial crisis is really a political crisis, because EU leaders are unable to decide on the necessary measures.
Instead, time is lost on secondary issues largely rooted in domestic policy concerns.
It is certainly right, in principle, to argue that the banks should participate in financing the resolution of the debt crisis.
But it makes little sense to insist on it as long as losses by banks that remain “too big to fail” could trigger a renewed financial crisis.
Any chance to make this work would have required overhauling the financial system early in 2009, but that opportunity was largely wasted.
As long as the EU’s life-threatening political crisis continues, its financial crisis will continue to destabilize it.
At the heart of resolving the crisis lies the certainty that the euro – and with it the EU as a whole – will not survive without greater European political unification.
If Europeans want to keep the euro, we must forge ahead with political union now; otherwise, like it or not, the euro and European integration will be undone.
Europe would then lose nearly everything it has gained over a half-century from transcending nationalism.
In the light of the emerging new world order, this would be a tragedy for Europeans.
Unfortunately, when the outgoing president of the European Central Bank, Jean-Claude Trichet, proposed a step in this direction by suggesting that a “European Secretary of the Treasury” be created, heads of state and government dismissed the idea out of hand.
Hardly anyone on the European Council seems willing even to acknowledge the depth of the EU crisis.
Resolving this crisis requires more Europe and more integration, not less.
And yes: the rich economies – first and foremost Germany – will have to pay for the way out.
Germany and France, the two crucial players in this crisis, will have to devise a joint strategy, because only they, working together, can push through a solution.
The problem is that the French referendum on the EU constitution in 2005 vetoed further political integration, while further economic integration may now fail because of Germany.
What is required, therefore, is an open bilateral French-German dialogue about a comprehensive realignment of the monetary union.
Treaty changes are impossible; therefore, different methods will need to be found, which makes the Franco-German partnership all the more important.
Regardless of the EU’s political crisis and paralysis, Europeans should not forget how important its existence is and will continue to be.
One has only to look back to the first half of the twentieth century to understand why.
Does Europe Have a Korean Option?
WASHINGTON, DC – On the surface, at least, the situation in the eurozone today and South Korea in the fall of 1997 look very different.
Both are cases of severe economic crisis, to be sure. But the eurozone’s problems stem from high levels of government debt, while South Korea faced massive capital flight and a collapsing currency – and almost all of the debt was in the corporate sector.
Nevertheless, the eurozone could learn from the experience of South Korea, which came through its crisis more quickly than anyone expected, combining sensible reforms with a rapid recovery.