In one particularly notorious case, 40 maliks (tribal leaders) holding a jirga (tribal assembly) were burned in an indiscriminate attack.
Alongside many luminaries around the world, former US President Jimmy Carter has condemned Obama’s barbaric drone policy.
But the complicity of Pakistan’s government is equally reprehensible.
According to WikiLeaks, former Prime Minister Yousaf Raza Gilani approved the US drone strikes, saying: “I don’t care if they do it as long as they get the right people.
We’ll protest in the National Assembly and then ignore it.”
President Asif Ali Zardari went even further, saying that he did not care about the “collateral damage.”
So Pakistan’s government has failed in its principal responsibility, enshrined in its constitution, to safeguard the lives and property of its citizens, as well as the country’s security and sovereignty.
More than 40,000 citizens have been killed since the beginning of the US war in Afghanistan, because Pakistan’s government criminally collaborates with forces that facilitated its rise to power.
And, in the face of ongoing military operations, most schools in Waziristan have remain closed for the past 7 years, depriving a generation of children of education and opportunity.
The road to peace in South Asia runs through restive Waziristan.
Despite countless sacrifices in the face of the drone strikes’ arbitrary cruelty, the resolve of the tribal areas’ people remains undented.
While they continue to seek peace, they are not willing to compromise their honor and self-respect, however daunting the challenges they confront.
The true face of their cultural patrimony and proud traditions must be brought to the world’s attention, so that their dream of peace with honor can be realized.
But this can happen only when the US and Pakistani governments disengage from their “war on terror.”
Indeed, only when Pakistan is no longer perceived as fighting a US war will local militants stop thinking of the conflict as a jihad against foreign intervention.
Peace will come when the tribal people, in their hundreds and thousands, no longer see a reason to fight.
In short, the drone strikes constitute a flawed policy that has only strengthened anti-US sentiment and the forces of extremism in Pakistan.
America’s killing machines have failed to subjugate the area’s proud people – a failure that underlies the US decision to withdraw from Afghanistan by 2014.
I believe that the withdrawal should come even sooner, so that the US can avoid leaving behind a legacy of animosity that may continue to haunt it for generations.
Only a rapid change of course by the Obama administration in 2013 can begin to counteract the enmity toward the US that has been generated by more than a decade of its forces’ lethal presence in the region.
America’s drone war, with its wanton destruction of families and communities, is deepening that antipathy.
To get peace in Afghanistan, indeed all of South Asia, the US needs to give peace a chance!
Waging Peace in Colombia
BOGOTÁ – Colombians are close to bringing to an end the oldest and only remaining armed conflict in the Western Hemisphere.
After more than five years of negotiations with the FARC (Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia), we can say that we have reached an irreversible phase that will put an end to more than 50 years of a cruel and costly war.
All of my predecessors over the past five decades attempted to make peace with the FARC, the largest and oldest guerrilla army to have emerged in Latin America.
They all failed.
So why has this peace process proved successful?
Above all, this has been a well-planned and carefully executed process that began when we achieved certain conditions.
First, we had to change the correlation of military forces in favor of the Colombian state.
Second, we had to convince the FARC’s leaders that it was in their own personal interest to enter serious negotiations and that they would never achieve their objectives through violence and guerrilla warfare.
Last but not least, we implemented a radical change in our foreign policy, which led to an improvement in our relations with our neighbors and the rest of the region.
This facilitated their support of our initiative and thus the beginning of the peace process.
We started secret negotiations almost four years ago to establish a limited and focused agenda and clear rules of procedure (the absence of which was a major stumbling block in previous negotiations) that would allow us – assuming we reach an agreement – to end the conflict.
This was the first time that the FARC had agreed to such a process.
The outcome of this phase was a five-point agenda: Rural development, political participation, drug trafficking, victims and transitional justice, and lastly the end of the conflict, which includes disarmament, demobilization, and reintegration – commonly known as DDR.
Following the signing of a framework agreement in Oslo in October 2012, we began the public phase of negotiations in Cuba.
The host country and Norway acted as guarantors, while Venezuela and Chile have accompanied the process.
Later on, the United States and the European Union appointed special envoys to the talks.
From the start, a basic rule of the negotiations has been that nothing is agreed until everything is agreed.
To date, we have settled all items except DDR.
To avoid past mistakes, we studied why previous peace negotiations in Colombia had failed, as well as lessons from peace negotiations elsewhere.
We also selected a group of international advisers with hands-on experience in peacemaking to help us navigate through the difficult waters of this process.
I can now say that making peace is much, much more difficult than waging war, and I have done both extensively as Colombia’s Minister of Defense and now as President.
This peace process is groundbreaking in several ways.
We have placed victims (more than 7.5 million in our case) and a comprehensive system to guarantee their rights at the center of the solution to the conflict.
We have also agreed to create a special jurisdiction and tribunal to guarantee that those responsible for international war crimes are investigated, judged, and condemned as stipulated in the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court.
This is the first time that a guerrilla movement has agreed to disarm and be subject to transitional justice.
Peace in Colombia will bring real benefits to a world rife with armed conflicts and longing for a success story.
Despite being the country that has paid the highest cost in the war on drugs – a war that has proven impossible to win – we are still the world’s leading exporter of cocaine.
This unpalatable fact is due mainly to the guerrillas, who have continued to protect their main source of income.
Peace will change this, because the FARC has agreed to help in the substitution of legal crops for coca production.
Without the threat of attack by the guerrillas, our brave soldiers, policemen, and civilian eradicators can do their job without the threat of snipers or landmines.
In terms of the environment, the amount of oil spilled into our rivers and oceans by terrorist attacks on our pipelines is calculated to be more than four million barrels over the last two decades.
That is equivalent to 14 times the volume spilled by the Exxon Valdez.
Furthermore, in a country that has the richest biodiversity in the world per square kilometer, close to 4.4 million hectares of rainforest have been destroyed because of the conflict.
All this can be stopped – and, I hope, reversed – with the end of the conflict.
That is why we Colombians have been fortunate to count on the support of the region and the world.
Today, there is not a single country that does not back our peace process.
Proof of this was the resolution submitted to the United Nations Security Council, which unanimously approved an international mission to verify and monitor DDR.
Despite traditional spoilers, mostly of an internal nature, many of whom oppose the process for political reasons, I am confident that we will put this conflict where it belongs – in the history books.
Reshaping the reality around us is our duty to future generations.
When we reach an agreement, when we stop killing one another after a half-century of war, we will remove a heavy burden that has stalled our progress and finally enjoy the opportunity to write a new chapter of prosperity and modernity for our country.
Stop Paying the Polluters
BRUSSELS – “When the winds of change blow,” says an old Chinese proverb, “some build walls, and others build wind mills.”
These same words closed the meeting in March of the Climate Parliament, a forum in Brussels that brought together legislators from around the world who are committed to the fight against climate change.
Parliamentarians, United Nations representatives, and the International Energy Agency (IEA) alike agreed that ending dependency on fossil fuels is one of the most urgent steps needed to combat it effectively.
The voices from the Climate Parliament join a growing crescendo of influential actors who are speaking out about the need to clean up our energy habits.
During January’s World Economic Forum in Davos, Lord Nicholas Stern, author of a well-known report outlining the measures that the world should take to avoid runaway climate change, admitted that the planet is on track to warm by four degrees Celsius this century.
Looking back, Stern said, his report could have been more insistent about the need to take determined action to avoid the catastrophic risks that this level of warming implies.
Stern’s sentiment was echoed by Christine Lagarde, Managing Director of the International Monetary Fund, who pleaded in favor of stronger climate action to prevent future generations being “roasted, toasted, fried, and grilled.”
And World Bank President Jim Yong Kim announced that his institution would prioritize the fight against climate change and focus on promoting, among other measures, the elimination of subsidies doled out to the fossil-fuel industry.
With this pledge, the World Bank joined an expanding list of international bodies, including the UN, the IMF, and the OECD, that are calling for an end to such subsidies.
Globally, we are on track to reach an international climate deal.
But this will still take time, while the need for action will not wait.
Harnessing the existing broad consensus against fossil-fuel subsidies is possible even in the absence of a legal agreement, and could quickly have a significant positive impact.
According to the IEA, fossil-fuel subsidies rose by almost 30%, to $523 billion, in 2011.
Meanwhile,the UN Environment Program reports that global investment in renewable energy totaled only $257 billion in 2011.
In other words, we are doing exactly the opposite of what we should be doing.
Support for energy efficiency and renewable energy sources is lagging, while governments around the world spend hundreds of billions of dollars subsidizing an incipient catastrophe.
This must change.
As European Commissioner for Climate Action, I am particularly keen to see three international financial institutions – the European Investment Bank, the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, and the World Bank – join with their EU and OECD partners to take a lead role in eliminating public support for fossil fuels.
Together, these three institutions lend more than €130 billion ($168 billion) annually for projects in Europe and beyond, and maintain a strong advisory role in beneficiary countries.
This year provides an especially important opportunity to use this potential for action.
All three institutions have announced reviews of their lending policies for the energy sector.
The outcome will underpin their lending over the next 4-6 years, and send a strong political and financial signal about worldwide commitment to addressing climate change.
Four to six years is also the interval over which climate scientists predict that greenhouse-gas emissions must peak and start to be reduced if the world is to have any hope for a decent future.
Multilateral lenders can lead by example by restricting conditions for public financing of coal, the most damaging fossil fuel, and by pressing for greater transparency in reporting on emissions.
Encouraging investments in renewable energy and increased energy efficiency will have the added benefit of boosting long-term self-reliance and resilience against the volatility of fossil fuel prices.
More broadly, international financial institutions should guide public and private investments alike away from a short-term logic.
Supported by a stable, long-term climate-policy framework, public financing can drive the decarbonization of our energy system and our economies.
Instead of offering unsustainable and environmentally damaging subsidies for fossil fuels, public finance should encourage the development of new industries and businesses that are emerging in the course of the low-carbon transition.
The industries of the future, which will create jobs that last, are those that will use scarce resources efficiently, and that can pay the real environmental and health costs of the resources that they use.
Mengakhiri Praktik Penangkapan Ikan yang Nakal
LONDON – Boga bahari atau hidangan laut adalah komoditas yang paling banyak diperdagangkan secara global, menghidupi miliaran orang di seluruh dunia.
Namun sayangnya, industri ini terkendala oleh praktik penangkapan ikan yang tidak sah, tidak dilaporkan, dan tidak sesuai aturan (illegal, unreported, and unregulated fishing), yang melemahkan upaya konservasi dan melumpuhkan nelayan dan perusahaan jujur yang mematuhi aturan.
Kini adalah momentum yang tepat untuk mengatasi masalah tersebut.
Penangkapan ikan yang nakal mencapai seperlima dari keseluruhan tangkapan ikan laut secara global.
Meskipun sudah ada tanda-tanda positif akan dilakukannya reformasi pada perikanan berskala industri di beberapa negara, permasalahannya tetap saja meluas, menjadikan orang-orang enggan menerapkan tindakan yang sama dan menghambat reformasi perikanan skala kecil yang memberikan pangan dan penghidupan bagi jutaan keluarga.
Aturan memang ada, tetapi harus diperjelas dan dibuat lebih spesifik, penegakannya harus secara efektif dan diberlakukan di seluruh wilayah negara.
Jika tidak, oknum operator akan terus mengambil keuntungan dari lemahnya peraturan dan pengawasan, yang berdampak besar bagi penduduk yang bergantung pada perikanan pesisir demi nafkah dan penghidupannya.
Sebuah studi terbaru menemukan bahwa kemungkinan besar 20-32% dari makanan laut yang diimpor ke Amerika Serikat berasal dari sumber-sumber tidak sah, tidak dilaporkan, dan tidak sesuai aturan.
Angka ini saja mencapai 4-16% dari nilai total tangkapan ikan ilegal di seluruh dunia, dengan nilai perkiraan sekitar $15-23 miliar per tahun.
Kerja sama antara AS, Uni Eropa, dan Jepang berpotensi mendukung langkah besar dalam penyelesaian masalah.
AS mengimpor lebih dari 90% makanan lautnya.
Jepang adalah importir  makanan laut terbesar kedua setelah AS.
Sementara Uni Eropa adalah pasar tunggal terbesar di dunia untuk produk makanan laut, yang mengimpor sekitar 60% dari ikan yang dikonsumsinya.
Potensi kekuatan yang dihasilkan oleh upaya bersama ketiga pasar ini sangat besar.
Pada akhir 2011, Uni Eropa dan Amerika Serikat sepakat untuk bekerja sama demi memberantas penangkapan ikan ilegal.
Kurang dari satu tahun kemudian, Uni Eropa dan Jepang sepakat untuk mencegah impor makanan laut yang ditangkap secara ilegal, berbagi informasi, dan bekerja sama dalam organisasi pengelolaan perikanan regional.
Mereka semua sepakat akan mendorong negara-negara lain untuk meratifikasi dan melaksanakan Port State Measures Agreement (PSMA) supaya operasi penangkapan ikan yang melanggar hukum akan sulit dilakukan.
Operasi penangkapan ikan ilegal memanfaatkan berbagai taktik dan celah dalam hukum internasional untuk memasukkan produknya ke pasar.
Beberapa pelabuhan yang terkenal lemah penegakannya atau memiliki kapasitas pemeriksaan yang terbatas menjadi jalur utama yang digunakan nelayan dan perusahaan yang tidak jujur untuk memindahkan hasil tangkapan dari kapal ke tempat penyimpanan.
Diadopsi pada tahun 2009 oleh Organisasi Pangan dan Pertanian PBB (FAO), PSMA mengharuskan negara-negara peserta untuk menerapkan pengendalian yang lebih ketat terhadap kapal-kapal penangkap ikan berbendera asing.
Sampai saat ini, 13 negara telah meratifikasi perjanjian tersebut; masih diperlukan ratifikasi dari 12 negara lainnya supaya perjanjian ini secara sah berlaku dan efektif secara global.
Untungnya penangkapan ikan yang nakal di beberapa negara tidak lagi dipandang sebagai persoalan kebijakan yang terpisah.
Pada bulan Maret, Satuan Tugas Presiden Amerika Serikat untuk Pemberantasan Penangkapan Ikan yang Tidak Sah, Tidak Dilaporkan, dan Tidak Sesuai Aturan dan Penipuan Makanan Laut mengeluarkan rencana aksi “semua instansi pemerintah”.
Fakta bahwa isu ini berhasil sampai ke meja presiden AS menekankan kewajiban bagi pemerintah untuk mengerahkan sumber daya mereka dan bekerja sama secara internasional.
Kita harus menyerukan berbagai pendekatan.
Beberapa peraturan Uni Eropa bisa jadi merupakan serangkaian tindakan yang paling kuat untuk menghentikan hasil tangkapan ikan yang tidak sah memasuki pasar.
Implementasi awal ini menunjukkan potensi besar.
Regulator di Eropa telah memperkenalkan program pengawasan dan pemantauan yang canggih, menutup akses pasar bagi negara-negara dengan riwayat penangkapan ikan ilegal, memberi sanksi pada operator-operator nakal asal Eropa, dan memberi dukungan pada negara-negara “kartu kuning atau merah” untuk melakukan reformasi terhadap undang-undang perikanan mereka.
Uni Eropa, Jepang, dan Amerika Serikat akan lebih efektif jika mereka menyelaraskan kebijakan untuk mencegah pelaku kejahatan memasuki pasar dan memudahkan operator yang sah memanfaatkan tingkat akses yang lebih luas.
Kerja sama memungkinkan penggunaan teknologi canggih dan terjangkau untuk penelusuran asal-usul makanan laut – pengumpulan data dan intelijen yang membantu mengarahkan kita ke sumber makanan laut, serta kapan dan bagaimana penangkapan dilakukan.
Upaya-upaya ini – misalnya, skema dokumentasi elektronik hasil tangkapan ikan tuna sirip biru Atlantik – merupakan salah satu alat yang paling efektif untuk memberantas penangkapan ikan ilegal.
Pemberantasan penangkapan ikan yang nakal akan membantu memperbarui kehidupan laut dan mengamankan pangan dan penghidupan bagi miliaran orang.
Keinginan ini harus dilengkapi dengan peningkatan upaya, dari Kutub Utara ke Kutub Selatan, untuk melindungi spesies-spesies utama yang terkena dampak buruk dari praktik ini dan membangun cagar alam laut atau “zona regenerasi” untuk membantu mengisi kembali dan memulihkan habitat.
Negara juga harus memberlakukan dan menerapkan undang-undang yang akan menghapuskan penangkapan ikan yang berlebihan di perairan nasional dan internasional.
Penangkapan ikan yang tidak sah, tidak dilaporkan, dan tidak sesuai aturan adalah masalah yang dapat diselesaikan melalui kepemimpinan, tindakan, dan kerja sama internasional.
Kami sangat senang melihat Chile – tuan rumah Our Ocean Conference tahun ini – telah menunjukkan kepemimpinan dan komitmen untuk bertindak dengan meratifikasi PSMA dan melawan operasi penangkapan ikan ilegal.
Kami tetap optimis bahwa negara-negara juga akan mengambil langkah-langkah yang diperlukan untuk mengakhiri bencana akibat penangkapan ikan yang nakal dan bekerja sama untuk menghidupkan kembali kehidupan laut secara global.
Ending Religious Violence in the Middle East
FEZ – The escalation of radicalism, violence, and civil wars in the Middle East since the so-called Arab Spring revolts began in 2010 has exacted a massive toll in human lives and welfare.
The need to build effective states that support peace, provide greater opportunity and prosperity, and protect human rights could not be more urgent.
Already, the violence that has surged in the last few years has left more than 180,000 Iraqis and 470,000 Syrians dead.
Moreover, 6.5 million Syrians have been internally displaced, and another 4.8 million driven from the country altogether.
They have often been tortured in prisons and humiliated in refugee camps.
An estimated 70-80% of the victims are civilians, most of them women and children.
In fact, according to the Syrian Center for Policy Research, half of the refugees and internally displaced people are under the age of 18.
This has a major impact on their future prospects.
UNICEF reports that 2.1 million children in Syria and 700,000 Syrian refugee children are out of school.
A total of 80,000 child refugees in Jordan lack access to an education.
But all of these human costs are symptoms of a deeper problem – and, contrary to popular belief, that problem is not Islam.
The fact that radical Islamists or jihadists are Muslim does not mean that their religion, not to mention their ethnicity or culture, is inherently violent.
Watching Western news, it is easy to see why so many blame Islam.
From the brutality of the Islamic State (ISIS) in Syria and Iraq to the terrorist attacks carried out by al-Qaeda to the stoning of adulterous women under Sharia law in Afghanistan, Middle East violence is almost always attributed to the religion.
As a result, Islam is often viewed primarily as a threat.
But, as the Canadian philosopher Charles Taylor explains, the real threat is not Islam itself, but “block thinking.”
Islamic extremists comprise less than 0.5% of the global Muslim population, yet their worldview dominates media coverage not just of Islam, but also of political developments in the Middle East.
By erasing the huge differences among Muslims, such coverage reinforces a single, simplistic perception of Islam.
That is block thinking.
And, as Michael Griffin documents in his book Islamic State: Rewriting History, such thinking is gaining ground in the United States and Europe.
As a result, many have embraced Samuel Huntington’s theory of a “clash of civilizations,” which assumes that Islam is at odds with modernity.
But that assumption ignores the ideas and impact of Islam’s early reformers – figures like Muhammad Abduh and Jamaleddin al-Afghani – who continue to influence Muslims everywhere.
The most lasting impact of the first reformist wave was the establishment of a salafi (conservative traditionalist) movement, which came to regard the modern state as a means to improve the lot of Muslims.
Today, Muslim thinkers – such as Iran’s Abdolkarim Soroush, Tunisia’s Tahar Haddad, Pakistan’s Fazlur Rahman, Morocco’s Fatema Mernissi, Egypt’s Qasim Amin, and Sudan’s Mahmud Muhammad Taha – continue to explore the connections between Islamic thought and modern values.
While radical Islamists strongly oppose their work, these thinkers have had a huge influence on generations of Muslim intellectuals worldwide.
None of this is to say that religion does not play a role in Middle East violence.
On the contrary, such violence – including sexual assault and arbitrary deprivation of individual and public freedoms – is widespread and multifaceted, owing to the combination of religious beliefs, cultural tradition, race and ethnicity, war, and politics that influences it.
Even the recruitment of jihadist fighters can be viewed as a form of religion-based violence, much like child marriage and honor killings.
But none of that means that Islam is inherently violent.
Resorting to fuzzy – and often bigoted – cultural, religious, or ethnic explanations is a recipe for ill-advised action, or no action at all.
What the Middle East needs are effective social and economic strategies and policies that tackle the complex non-religious reasons behind the violence – and its decidedly non-religious effects.
While cultural, ethnic, and religious factors may need to be considered, they are not the main causes of unemployment and marginalization.
Middle Eastern governments must commit to pursuing bold and creative policies that address the inadequate education, high unemployment, and pervasive corruption that are helping to fuel violence and unrest in the region.
Such efforts should aim to advance democratization, economic development, and the emergence of a strong civil society and progressive media.
The key is not to “Islamize” every issue, but rather to develop real policy solutions that meet people’s needs.
Education is of course critical to success: school curricula must become more inclusive, to broaden students’ knowledge of religions and cultures.
More broadly, schools should also embody the separation of church and state – and well-protected religious freedom – that will be needed to end religion-based violence in the Middle East.
Large-scale violence like that occurring in the Middle East causes devastating harm to individuals, erodes the capital base, hampers productivity, and undermines economic growth.
Its impact on political, social, and economic structures needs to be addressed, and the capacity of the state to do so should not be underestimated or overlooked.
But so long as the state frames or seeks to legitimize its policies in religious terms, the violence will not stop.
Ending Nuclear Evil
CAPE TOWN – Eliminating nuclear weapons is the democratic wish of the world’s people.
Yet no nuclear-armed country currently appears to be preparing for a future without these terrifying devices.
In fact, all are squandering billions of dollars on modernization of their nuclear forces, making a mockery of United Nations disarmament pledges.
If we allow this madness to continue, the eventual use of these instruments of terror seems all but inevitable.
The nuclear power crisis at Japan’s Fukushima power plant has served as a dreadful reminder that events thought unlikely can and do happen.
It has taken a tragedy of great proportions to prompt some leaders to act to avoid similar calamities at nuclear reactors elsewhere in the world.
But it must not take another Hiroshima or Nagasaki – or an even greater disaster – before they finally wake up and recognize the urgent necessity of nuclear disarmament.
This week, the foreign ministers of five nuclear-armed countries – the United States, Russia, Britain, France, and China – will meet in Paris to discuss progress in implementing the nuclear-disarmament commitments that they made at last year’s Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) review conference.
It will be a test of their resolve to transform the vision of a future free of nuclear arms into reality.
If they are serious about preventing the spread of these monstrous weapons – and averting their use – they will work energetically and expeditiously to eliminate them completely.
One standard must apply to all countries: zero.
Nuclear arms are wicked, regardless of who possesses them.
The unspeakable human suffering that they inflict is the same whatever flag they may bear.
So long as these weapons exist, the threat of their use – either by accident or through an act of sheer madness – will remain.
We must not tolerate a system of nuclear apartheid, in which it is considered legitimate for some states to possess nuclear arms but patently unacceptable for others to seek to acquire them.
Such a double standard is no basis for peace and security in the world.
The NPT is not a license for the five original nuclear powers to cling to these weapons indefinitely.
The International Court of Justice has affirmed that they are legally obliged to negotiate in good faith for the complete elimination of their nuclear forces.
The New START agreement between the US and Russia, while a step in the right direction, will only skim the surface off the former Cold War foes’ bloated nuclear arsenals – which account for 95% of the global total.
Furthermore, these and other countries’ modernization activities cannot be reconciled with their professed support for a world free of nuclear weapons.
It is deeply troubling that the US has allocated $185 billion to augment its nuclear stockpile over the next decade, on top of the ordinary annual nuclear-weapons budget of more than $50 billion.
Just as unsettling is the Pentagon’s push for the development of nuclear-armed drones – H-bombs deliverable by remote control.
Russia, too, has unveiled a massive nuclear-weapons modernization plan, which includes the deployment of various new delivery systems.
British politicians, meanwhile, are seeking to renew their navy’s aging fleet of Trident submarines – at an estimated cost of £76 billion ($121 billion).
In doing so, they are passing up an historic opportunity to take the lead on nuclear disarmament.
Every dollar invested in bolstering a country’s nuclear arsenal is a diversion of resources from its schools, hospitals, and other social services, and a theft from the millions around the globe who go hungry or are denied access to basic medicines.
Instead of investing in weapons of mass annihilation, governments must allocate resources towards meeting human needs.
The only obstacle we face in abolishing nuclear weapons is a lack of political will, which can – and must – be overcome.
Two-thirds of UN member states have called for a nuclear-weapons convention similar to existing treaties banning other categories of particularly inhumane and indiscriminate weapons, from biological and chemical arms to anti-personnel land mines and cluster munitions.
Such a treaty is feasible and must be urgently pursued.
It is true that nuclear weapons cannot be uninvented, but that does not mean that nuclear disarmament is an impossible dream.
My own country, South Africa, gave up its nuclear arsenal in the 1990’s, realizing it was better off without these weapons.
Around the same time, the newly independent states of Belarus, Kazakhstan, and Ukraine voluntarily relinquished their nuclear arms, and then joined the NPT.
Other countries have abandoned nuclear-weapons programs, recognizing that nothing good could possibly come from them.
Global stockpiles have dropped from 68,000 warheads at the height of the Cold War to 20,000 today.
In time, every government will come to accept the basic inhumanity of threatening to obliterate entire cities with nuclear weapons.
They will work to achieve a world in which such weapons are no more – where the rule of law, not the rule of force, reigns supreme, and cooperation is seen as the best guarantor of international peace.
But such a world will be possible only if people everywhere rise up and challenge the nuclear madness.
Ending the Syrian War
NEW YORK – Syria is currently the world’s greatest humanitarian catastrophe and most dangerous geopolitical hotspot.
The Syrian people are caught in a bloodbath, with more than 400,000 dead and ten million displaced.
Violent jihadist groups backed by outside patrons mercilessly ravage the country and prey on the population.
All parties to the conflict – President Bashar al-Assad’s regime, the anti-Assad forces supported by the United States and its allies, and the Islamic State – have committed, and continue to commit, serious war crimes.
It is time for a solution.
But such a solution must be based on a transparent and realistic account of what caused the war in the first place.
The chronology is as follows.
In February 2011, peaceful protests were staged in Syria’s major cities, amid the region-wide phenomenon dubbed the “Arab Spring.”
The Assad regime reacted with a shifting mix of violent repression (shooting at demonstrators) and offers of reform.
Soon, the violence escalated.
Assad’s opponents accused the regime of using force against civilians without restraint, while the government pointed to the deaths of soldiers and policeman as evidence of violent jihadists among the protestors.
It seems likely that as early as March or April 2011, Sunni anti-regime fighters and arms started to enter Syria from neighboring countries.
Many eyewitness accounts tell of foreign jihadists engaging in violent attacks on policemen.
(Such accounts are, however, hard to confirm, especially after almost five years.)
The US and its regional allies tried to nudge Assad from power in the spring of 2011, thinking that he would fall quickly like Egypt’s Hosni Mubarak and Tunisia’s Zine El Abidine Ben Ali.
Many observers assert that Qatar funded an increase in anti-regime activity within Syria and used the Doha-based broadcaster Al Jazeera to boost anti-Assad sentiment worldwide, though such claims are hard to pin down definitively.
The US imposed a tightening noose of trade and financial sanctions on the regime.
The Brookings Institution, a bellwether of US official policy, called for Assad’s ouster, and anti-Assad propaganda in the US media soared.
(Until then, Assad was considered in the US media to be a relatively benign, albeit authoritarian, ruler, and then-Secretary of State Hillary Clinton noted as late as March 2011 that many in the US Congress regarded Assad as a reformer.)
The launch of the war can be dated to August 18, 2011, when President Barack Obama and Clinton declared that “Assad must go.”
Up to that point, the violence was still containable.
Total deaths, including both civilians and combatants, ran perhaps to around 2,900 (according to one tally by regime opponents).
After August, the death rate soared.
It is sometimes claimed that the US did not act vigorously at this point.
Obama’s political foes generally attack him for having taken too little action, not too much.
But the US did in fact act to topple Assad, albeit mostly covertly and through allies, especially Saudi Arabia and Turkey (though neither country needed much prodding to intervene).
The CIA and Saudi Arabia covertly coordinated their actions.
Of course, the chronology of the war does not explain it.
For that, we need to examine the motivations of the key actors.
First and foremost, the war in Syria is a proxy war, involving mainly the United States, Russia, Saudi Arabia, Turkey, and Iran.
The US and its allies, Saudi Arabia and Turkey, started the war in 2011 in order to overthrow Assad’s regime.
The US alliance was met with escalating counterforce by Russia and Iran, whose Lebanese proxy army Hezbollah is fighting alongside Assad’s government.
The US interest in overthrowing Assad’s regime was precisely its reliance on Iranian and Russian backing.
Removing Assad, US security officials believed, would weaken Iran, undermine Hezbollah, and roll back Russia’s geopolitical reach.
America’s allies, including Turkey, Saudi Arabia, and Qatar, were interested in replacing Assad’s Alawite regime in Syria with a Sunni-led regime (Alawites are a branch of Shia Islam).
This, they believed, would also weaken their regional competitor, Iran, and curtail Shia influence in the Middle East more generally.
In believing that Assad would be easily overthrown, the US – not for the first time – was relying on its own propaganda.
The regime faced deep opposition, but also had considerable internal support.
More important, the regime had powerful allies, notably Iran and Russia.
It was naive to believe that neither would respond.
The public should appreciate the dirty nature of the CIA-led fight.
The US and its allies flooded Syria with Sunni jihadists, just as the US had flooded Afghanistan in the 1980s with Sunni jihadists (the Mujahideen) that later became Al Qaeda.
Saudi Arabia, Turkey, Qatar, and the US have regularly backed some of the most violent jihadist groups in a cynical miscalculation that these proxies would do their dirty work and then somehow be pushed aside.
According to the US and European mainstream media, Russia’s military intervention in Syria is treacherous and expansionist.
The truth is different.
The US is not allowed under the UN Charter to organize an alliance, fund mercenaries, and smuggle heavy weapons to overthrow another country’s government.
Russia in this case is reacting, not acting.
It is responding to US provocations against its ally.
Ending the war requires adherence to six principles.
First, the US should cease both overt and covert operations to overthrow Syria’s government.
Second, the UN Security Council should implement the ceasefire now under negotiation, calling on all countries, including the US, Russia, Saudi Arabia, Turkey, Qatar, and Iran, to stop arming and funding military forces within Syria.
Third, all paramilitary activities should cease, including those of so-called “moderates” backed by the US.
Fourth, the US and Russia – and, indeed, the UN Security Council – should hold Syria’s government strictly responsible to desist from punitive actions against regime opponents.
Fifth, the political transition should take place gradually and with confidence building on all sides, rather than through an arbitrary, destabilizing rush to “free elections.”
Finally, the Gulf States, Turkey, and Iran should be pressed to negotiate face to face on a regional framework that can ensure lasting peace.
Arabs, Turks, and Iranians have all lived with each other for millennia.
They, not the outside powers, should lead the way to a stable order in the region.
Ending the Financial Arms Race
CAMBRIDGE – People often ask if regulators and legislators have fixed the flaws in the financial system that took the world to the brink of a second Great Depression.
The short answer is no.
Yes, the chances of an immediate repeat of the acute financial meltdown of 2008 are much reduced by the fact that most investors, regulators, consumers, and even politicians will remember their financial near-death experience for quite some time.
As a result, it could take a while for recklessness to hit full throttle again.
But, otherwise, little has fundamentally changed.
Legislation and regulation produced in the wake of the crisis have mostly served as a patch to preserve the status quo.
Politicians and regulators have neither the political courage nor the intellectual conviction needed to return to a much clearer and more straightforward system.
In his recent speech to the annual, elite central-banking conference in Jackson Hole, Wyoming, the Bank of England’s Andy Haldane made a forceful plea for a return to simplicity in banking regulation.
Haldane rightly complained that banking regulation has evolved from a small number of very specific guidelines to mind-numbingly complicated statistical algorithms for measuring risk and capital adequacy.
Legislative complexity is growing exponentially in parallel.
In the United States, the Glass-Steagall Act of 1933 was just 37 pages and helped to produce financial stability for the greater part of seven decades.
The recent Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act is 848 pages, and requires regulatory agencies to produce several hundred additional documents giving even more detailed rules.
Combined, the legislation appears on track to run 30,000 pages.
As Haldane notes, even the celebrated “Volcker rule,” intended to build a better wall between more mundane commercial banking and riskier proprietary bank trading, has been hugely watered down as it grinds through the legislative process.
The former Federal Reserve chairman’s simple idea has been co-opted and diluted through hundreds of pages of legalese.
The problem, at least, is simple: As finance has become more complicated, regulators have tried to keep up by adopting ever more complicated rules.
It is an arms race that underfunded government agencies have no chance to win.
Even back in the 1990’s, regulators would privately complain of the difficulty of retaining any staff capable of understanding the rapidly evolving derivatives market.
Research assistants with one year of experience working on derivatives issues would get bid away by the private sector at salaries five times what the government could pay.
Around the same time, in the mid-1990’s, academics began to publish papers suggesting that the only effective way to regulate modern banks was a form of self-regulation.
Let banks design their own risk management systems, audit them to the limited extent possible, and then severely punish them if they produce a loss outside agreed parameters.
Many economists argued that these clever models were flawed, because the punishment threat was not credible, particularly in the case of a systemic meltdown affecting a large part of the financial system.
But the papers were published anyway, and the ideas were implemented.
It is not necessary to recount the consequences.
The clearest and most effective way to simplify regulation has been advanced in a series of important papers by Anat Admati of Stanford (with co-authors including Peter DeMarzo, Martin Hellwig, and Paul Pfleiderer).
Their basic point is that financial firms should be forced to fund themselves in a more balanced fashion, and not to rely so heavily on debt finance.
Admati and her colleagues recommend requirements that force financial firms to generate equity funding either through retained earnings or, in the case of publicly traded firms, through stock issuance.
The status quo allows banks instead to leverage taxpayer assistance by holding razor-thin equity margins, relying on debt to a far greater extent than typical large non-financial firms do.
Some large firms, such as Apple, hold virtually no debt at all.
Greater reliance on equity would give banks a much larger cushion to absorb losses.
The financial industry complains that efforts to force greater equity funding would curtail lending, but this is just nonsense in a general equilibrium setting.
Nevertheless, governments have been very timid in advancing on this front, with the new Basel III rules taking only a baby step toward real change.
Of course, it is not easy to legislate financial reform in a stagnant global economy, for fear of impeding credit and turning a sluggish recovery into a full-blown recession.
And, surely, academics are also to blame for the inertia, with many of them still defending elegant but deeply flawed models of perfect markets that create an illusion of safety for a system that is in fact highly risk-prone.
The fashionable idea of allowing banks to issue “contingent capital” (debt that becomes equity in a systemic crisis) is no more credible than the idea of committing to punish banks severely in the event of a crisis.
A simpler and more transparent system would ultimately lead to more lending and greater stability, not less.
It is high time to restore sanity to financial-market regulation.
Ending the Nation-State Myth
NEW YORK – This fall, thousands of college students will be taught a myth presented as fact.
It is a myth that has helped fuel wars and may hinder finding solutions to the world’s biggest problems.
Though the origin of this myth is cloudy, science has proven its falsity, and a globalized world has rendered it anachronistic.
I am talking about the nation-state.
The nation-state myth conflates two ideas, one that is concrete, the state, and one that is fuzzy, the nation.
The utility of the state is clear. It is a necessary organizing principle that allows people to pool their resources for the common good and mobilize against common threats, whether they are floods or invading armies.
The state is also the final arbiter of law.
State power is even on the rise, partly as a backlash to globalization and as a result of growing wealth from energy markets.
But the nation-state as a basis for statecraft obscures the nature of humanity’s greatest threats.
Pollution, terrorism, pandemics, and climate change are global phenomena.
They do not respect national sovereignty, and, therefore, they necessitate global cooperation.
The origin of the nation-state idea is unclear.
Most agree that it offered a way to consolidate and legitimize a state’s rule over a group of people, whether defined by a common language, culture, or ethnicity.
The problem is that the contours of a cultural community rarely coincide with a political entity.
Nor does the ideal of national unity account for internal diversity and conflict.
Identities within nations are fluid, even from minute to minute.
About 15 years ago, I spent a summer in France’s Loire Valley.
As many travelers to France will attest, people in the French countryside believe that they, not Parisians, constitute the “true” France.
This division of core and periphery is common in many countries.
But I also noticed that a person’s identity would change during the course of a conversation.
“We French” would give way to “We Gauls,” “We Latins,” “We Bretons,” “We Franks,” or “We Europeans” depending on the topic.
This ever-changing identity was startling, but, on second thought, it made sense: after all, Charles de Gaulle famously said that it is difficult to govern a country with 246 types of cheese.
China is often thought to be governed by the Han majority.
But this group is linguistically, culturally, and even genetically diverse.
As the author Ian Buruma recently mused, it is not clear what people mean by “China.”
Taiwan is an independent state but is officially part of China.
Chinese culture and language has spread all over the world.
“China” is much more than just a nation-state, Buruma concludes.
Taiwanese scholar Lee Hsiao-feng has recently argued that the concept “Chinese” is a meaningless word that was fabricated to justify rule over minorities.
It is difficult to imagine a nation that is confined to one state or a state that contains one nation.
Some argue that Japan is an example of a nation-state.
In countless heated discussions, I have reminded many Japanese that the Japanese people actually comprise Ainu, Koreans, Chinese, Filipinos, and Ryuku.
Their response is always: “Yes, but we want to believe that there is a Japanese people.”  They even have a field of study devoted to examining what it means to be Japanese.
Like religion, the nation-state myth requires a leap of faith.
Japanese scholar Yoshihisa Hagiwara argues that since it is not grounded in fact, the nation-state myth is bound to dissolve, giving way to an understanding that we are merely individuals who are part of a global community.
He laments that the Japanese are especially fond of the idea of “Japaneseness,” making it possible that Japan may become the “last hero” of a dying ethos.
Expressions of this notion appear frequently in popular culture.
A recent credit card commercial depicts a father and son traveling to Norway to trace their family’s origins.
After bonding over local beer, food, sweaters, and swimming, they discover their family is actually from Sweden.
If I were to take that trip, I might have gone to Ireland to discover that my Irish ancestors were originally from Scotland.
But where were the Scots from?
Just across another sea, perhaps. The origin myth continues
If policymakers are to address today’s problems, they must think more broadly.
One place to start may be to reexamine the concept of the nation-state, which students around the world are taught is the basic unit of international relations.
Beyond the core Realist theories of balance of power, an introduction to ethics in international affairs – moral philosophy, human rights, and the role of non-state actors – should be mainstreamed in international relations curricula. 
As the philosopher Peter Singer showed in his book One World , a united front against the biggest problems facing the world will require a fundamental shift in attitude – away from parochialism and toward a redefinition of self-interest.
Enlightened self-interest can be state-based, but interests would be re-defined to encompass universal principles such as the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
If these interests are to gain universal recognition, we will need to shed the nation-state myth once and for all.
Ending the Never-Ending War on Drugs
SAO PAULO – The war on drugs is a lost war, and 2011 is the time to move away from a punitive approach in order to pursue a new set of policies based on public health, human rights, and common sense.
These were the core findings of the Latin American Commission on Drugs and Democracy that I convened, together with former presidents Ernesto Zedillo of Mexico and César Gaviria of Colombia.
We became involved with this issue for a compelling reason: the violence and corruption associated with drug trafficking represents a major threat to democracy in our region.
This sense of urgency led us to evaluate current policies and look for viable alternatives. The evidence is overwhelming.
The prohibitionist approach, based on repression of production and criminalization of consumption, has clearly failed.
After 30 years of massive effort, all prohibitionism has achieved is to shift areas of cultivation and drug cartels from one country to another (the so-called balloon effect).
Latin America remains the world’s largest exporter of cocaine and marijuana.
Thousands of young people continue to lose their lives in gang wars.
Drug lords rule by fear over entire communities.
We ended our report with a call for a paradigm shift.
The illicit drug trade will continue as long as there is demand for drugs. Instead of sticking to failed policies that do not reduce the profitability of the drug trade – and thus its power – we must redirect our efforts to the harm caused by drugs to people and societies, and to reducing consumption.
Some kind of drug consumption has existed throughout history in the most diverse cultures.
Today, drug use occurs throughout society.
All kinds of people use drugs for all kinds of reasons: to relieve pain or experience pleasure, to escape reality or enhance their perception of it.
But the approach recommended in the Commission’s statement does not imply complacency.
Drugs are harmful to health. They undermine users’ decision-making capacity.
Needle-sharing spreads HIV/AIDS and other diseases.
Addiction can lead to financial ruin and domestic abuse, especially of children.
Cutting consumption as much as possible must, therefore, be the main goal.
But this requires treating drug users not as criminals to be incarcerated, but as patients to be cared for.
Several countries are pursuing policies that emphasize prevention and treatment rather than repression – and refocusing their repressive measures on fighting the real enemy: organized crime.
The crack in the global consensus around the prohibitionist approach is widening.
A growing number of countries in Europe and Latin America are moving away from a purely repressive model.
Portugal and Switzerland are compelling examples of the positive impact of policies centered on prevention, treatment, and harm reduction.
Both countries have decriminalized drug possession for personal use.
Instead of leading to an explosion of drug consumption, as many feared, the number of people seeking treatment increased and overall drug use fell.
When the policy approach shifts from criminal repression to public health, drug users are more open to seeking treatment.
Decriminalization of consumption also reduces dealers’ power to influence and control consumers’ behavior.
In our report, we recommend evaluating from a public-health standpoint – and on the basis of the most advanced medical science – the merits of decriminalizing possession of cannabis for personal use.
Marijuana is by far the most widely used drug. There is a growing body of evidence suggesting that the harm it causes is at worst similar to the harm caused by alcohol or tobacco.
Moreover, most of the damage associated with marijuana use – from the indiscriminate incarceration of consumers to the violence and corruption associated with the drug trade – is the result of current prohibitionist policies.
Decriminalization of cannabis would thus be an important step forward in approaching drug use as a health problem and not as a matter for the criminal justice system.
To be credible and effective, decriminalization must be combined with robust prevention campaigns.
The steep and sustained drop in tobacco consumption in recent decades shows that public information and prevention campaigns can work when based on messages that are consistent with the experience of those whom they target.
Tobacco was de-glamorized, taxed, and regulated; it has not been banned.
No country has devised a comprehensive solution to the drug problem.
But a solution need not require a stark choice between prohibition and legalization. The worst prohibition is the prohibition to think.
Now, at last, the taboo that prevented debate has been broken.
Alternative approaches are being tested and must be carefully reviewed.
At the end of the day, the capacity of people to evaluate risks and make informed choices will be as important to regulating the use of drugs as more humane and efficient laws and policies.
Yes, drugs erode people’s freedom.
But it is time to recognize that repressive policies towards drug users, rooted as they are in prejudice, fear, and ideology, may be no less a threat to liberty.
Ending the Tragedy of Darfur
The critical conditions that continue to prevail in Darfur are causing immense suffering to its people.
Both sides of the conflict – the government of Sudan and its allied forces, as well as all the opposition groups in Darfur – must understand that civilians should no longer fall victim to their political disputes.
The Sudanese government’s consent to the deployment of the hybrid United Nations/African Union mission, which aims to keep peace in the region, is of course a welcome development.
But the mandate of this mission must be strong enough to allow for full protection of the civilian population.
Moreover, the force must have sufficient manpower, capacity, and funding to put this vital objective into practice efficiently.
The countries and institutions that have committed additional funds in order to help secure the success of this mission – notably France, Spain, and the European Commission – should all be applauded.
It is important for international actors to assure Sudan’s government that the UN/AU mission will not strive for regime change in the country or otherwise exceed its peacekeeping mandate.
At the same time, the Sudanese government must be fully aware that only by adhering to past commitments and by cooperating in helping to prepare, deploy, and maintain the mission will the international community be encouraged to continue its support.
As for the Darfur opposition, the recent efforts by some of its leaders to overcome fragmentation and re-unify their movement are a welcome development.
It is essential that all major opposition groups achieve agreement about their aims and negotiating positions.
Only then can they act as credible partners of the international community and the Sudanese government.
All parties to the conflict must realize that, ultimately, there is no way to end their dispute other than through an equitable and sustainable peace agreement endorsed by all stakeholders.
The return of internally displaced persons and due care for them must be a core component of any such arrangement.
Responsible people around the globe, particularly politicians and journalists, must remain focused on Darfur. For the grievances and harm suffered daily by millions of victims and refugees remain as gruesome as ever, notwithstanding the fatigue from the prolonged conflict that some may perceive.
Now that there are signs of possible stabilization in the months to come, it is time to start preparing for increased volumes of international reconstruction and development assistance, in addition to humanitarian aid.
Economically advanced countries in particular should meet their global responsibility and help Darfur move toward renewal and prosperity.
This increased assistance should emerge from an extension or re-focusing of national development cooperation programs.
Additionally, international arrangements aiming at effective use of synergies should be carefully explored.
In facilitating the complex relations between the international community and the local actors in Darfur, the UN currently plays an indispensable role and must be actively supported.
China in particular should use its considerable influence in Sudan to bring the country’s decision-makers to a definitive peaceful settlement of the dispute.
Moreover, because Darfur is emblematic of wider difficulties in the world, the international community must look beyond the immediate circumstances of the conflict and increase efforts to deal with the threats that have played a role in the disaster, such as climate change and environmental degradation.
Indeed, the accelerating expansion of deserts will likely lead to a decrease of agricultural yields from the surrounding areas, acute deterioration of the availability of water, and possibly to further conflicts and displacement of people.
Similar conditions exist – or may begin to exist – in several locations worldwide.
So the global nature of this problem must be recognized and addressed in places where environmental degradation is already bringing about a dangerous deterioration in peoples’ lives.
Where such damage looms as a threat, early prevention is required.
ЖИТС-тың соңы
НЬЮ-ЙОРК – 1981-2016 жылдар аралығында ЖИТС (Жұқтырылған иммун тапшылығы синдромы - AIDS) пандемиясы 36 миллион адамның өмірін жалмаған.
Осынша адам қазір АИВ (Адамның иммун тапшылығы вирусы - HIV) вирусымен өмір сүріп жатыр.
Өткен жылы 1,2 миллион адам ЖИТС дертінен көз жұмса, 1,8 миллионы ауруды жұқтырды.
Бұл статистика үрейлендіреді, бірақ бір қуаныштысы – «ЖИТС-тан ада ұрпақ» жобасының қойған мақсаты шынайы, оған қол жеткізуге болады. Қажетті саяси шешімдер АҚШ-тың жаңа сайланған президенті Дональд Трамп әкімшілігі қызметіне кіріскен соң бірден қабылданбақ. 
«Эпидемияны  тоқтатуға болады» деп сенімді түрде айтуымызға 2011 жылы ашылған ғылыми жаңалық себеп. Ол жаңалық бойынша, АИВ вирусы бар адамдар антиретровирустық (АРВ) ем қабылдаса, олардың қанындағы АИВ вирусы әлсірейтіні сондай, оны секс немесе ортақ инені пайдалану арқылы басқаларға жұқтыру мүмкін болмай қалады.
Бұл жаңалық «аурудың алдын алу мақсатында емдеу» концепциясын бекітті.
Егер АИВ вирусы бар адамдардың көбі АРВ емін қабылдаса, бұл олардың өмірін сақтауға ғана емес, вирустың әрі қарай таралмауына да септігін тигізеді, сөйтіп эпидемияның өзін тоқтатады.
Осы жаңалықты негізге алған ЖИТС бойынша мамандар «90-90-90» және «ЖИТС-тен емдеу каскады» деген екі түрлі идея ұсынып отыр.
90-90-90 бағдарламасы бойынша, 2020 жылға қарай АИВ-ға шалдыққандардың 90 пайызы бойында вирус бар екенін біледі (алғашқы 90); ауруынан хабардар жандардың 90 пайызы АРВ емін қабылдайды (екінші 90); АРВ емін қабылдайтындардың 90 пайызы қанындағы АИВ вирусын әлсіретеді.
«Каскад» жобасының идеясы: осы үш 90-ның әрқайсысы діттеген межесіне жете алса, яғни 90% x 90% x 90% десек, АИВ жұқтырғандардың арасында ол вирусты әлсіреткендердің жалпы үлесі 72 пайыз болмақ.
Егер қазір дертпен ауыратындардың 72% бұл ауруды басқаларға тарата алмайтын болса, онда ЖИТС эпидемиясы тоқтайды.
Ал 2020 жылғы 90-90-90 жобасы 2030 жылы 95-95-95-ке айналатын болса, онда АИВ вирусы бар, бірақ оны басқаға жұқтыра алмайтындардың жалпы үлесі 86 пайызға өседі.
Ірі қаладағы балалардың 80 пайызына екпе салып, қалған 20 пайызы екпе алмаған болса да қызылша эпидемиясының таралуы тоқтайды. Дәл сол сияқты бұл шара да эпидемияны ауыздықтайды.
Бірен-саран науқас болғанымен, жалпы ЖИТС қасіреті аяқталады.
Мемлекеттер нәтижеге ұмтылатын болса, 2020 жылға дейін 90-90-90 межесіне, 2030 жылға қарай 95-95-95 көрсеткішіне жетуге болады.
Жақында Швеция 90-90-90-ға жеткенін хабарлады.
Бақуатты елдердің көбі бұл деңгейге жақын тұр.
Халықаралық қауымдастықтың көмегі мен мемлекеттердің табандылығының арқасында дамушы елдер де 90-90-90 биігін бағындыра алады.
2020 жылға дейін АИВ вирусын жұқтырғандардың 90 пайызының тексеруден өтіп, бұл ауруға шалдыққандарына көз жеткізуі – әлемнің көп елі үшін ең қиын шаруа болып тұр.
Бұл межеге жету үшін бойында аурудың симптомдары бар немесе жұқтыру қаупі жоғары адамдардың емдеу мекемелеріне баруға мүмкіндігі болуы керек.
АИВ-ға шалдыққандардың 90 пайызы тексеруден өткен соң екінші 90-ды бағындыру қаржының бөлінуі мен тиісті қызметкерлердің болуына байланысты.
Денсаулық саласына лайықты қаражат бөлінсе, вирус жұқтырғандардың бәріне дәрі беріледі.
Үшінші 90-ға жету (вирустың белсенділігін төмендету) АРВ емін қабылдап жатқандардың дәріні уақытында ішуіне байланысты болмақ.
Бұл үшін әлеуметтік қызметкерлер науқастарды аурудан толық айығып кетсе де дәріні ішіп жүруге ынталандырып, оларды дәрімен толық қамтамасыз етіп отыруы керек.
Тіпті медициналық қызметпен қамтылмаған кедей тұрғындардың арасында да смартфонның көмегіне сүйенетін қоғамдық денсаулық қызметкерлерінің арқасында 90-90-90 межесіне жетуге болады.
Кем дегенде орта білімі бар, АИВ жұқтыруы мүмкін деген адамдарды анықтап, оларды анализ тапсыру үшін емханаға әкелу, медициналық ем-домды уақытында қабылдату сияқты шараларға машықтандыратын бірнеше айлық тренингтен өткен адамдар қоғамдық денсаулық қызметкерлері болуы керек.
Смартфонға орнатылған арнайы бағдарлама олардың жұмысын жеңілдетеді.
Африканың дәрігерлері өте аз, ЖИТС-қа шалдыққандары көп ауылдық жерлерінде қоғамдық денсаулық қызметкерлерінің адам өмірін сақтаудағы рөлі орасан зор екені дәлелденген.
Оның үстіне қоғамдық денсаулық қызметкері болып жұмыс бастау жастардың карьерасына көп көмектеседі.
Алғашқы жалақылары өте төмен болғанымен (айына 100 АҚШ доллары шамасында), тәжірибе мен тренингтің арқасында жас қызметкерлер медбике сияқты мамандық алуға, білімін жетілдіріп, табысын молайтуға ұмтыла алады.
Дегенмен, ЖИТС эпидемиясын тоқтату мүмкіндігі туғанына қарамастан, әлем қазір тығырықта тұр.
Өкінішке қарай, біздің елдердің үкіметтері үлкен мақсаттар қойып, соған жетуге ұмтылудың орнына «ескі сүрлеумен» жүре бергенді жөн көреді.
Осыдан он алты жыл бұрын қаржы болмағандықтан, ЖИТС-ке шалдыққан кедейлерге ешқандай ем қолданбау саясаты бар болатын.
Сол кезде мен ЖИТС-ты емдеу үшін «Ғаламдық қор» құру туралы бастама көтердім, кейіннен бұл идея жүзеге асып, Африкада ЖИТС-ті бақылау жолға қойылды.
АҚШ президенті Джордж Буш әкімшілігі ЖИТС-қа байланысты қаржылық міндеттемелер алды, Ғаламдық қор мен АҚШ-тың бағдарламаларының арқасында миллиондаған адам ем қабылдай бастады. Алайда, 2008 жылғы әлемдік қаржы дағдарысынан соң президент Барак Обама АҚШ бөлетін қаржыны біршама азайтты, сөйтіп әлемдегі ЖИТС-ты ауыздықтау шаралары орта жолда тоқтап қалды.
2016 жылғы мәлімет бойынша АИВ жұқтырғандардың жартысына жуығы ғана АРВ емін қабылдайды, ал бұл 90 пайыздық межеден әлдеқайда төмен.
Жақында билікке келетін Трамп әкімшілігі үкіметтің және басқа да демеушілердің көмегімен қаржы бөлу арқылы ЖИТС-ті жоюдың тарихи мүмкіндігін пайдалануы керек.  АҚШ жыл сайын бөлетін 3-4 миллиард долларға қосымша жылына 10 миллиард доллар қаржы жиналып отырса, бұл шаруаны аяғына жеткізуге болады.
Скептиктер «Трамп мұндай істерге көмектесетін адам емес» деп миығынан күлуі мүмкін.
Бірақ, ашығын айтсақ, 15 жыл бұрын ЖИТС-қа қарсы күреске қомақты қаржы құйылуына Джордж Буш серпін береді деп кім ойлаған?
Тарихта жағымды, жағымсыз тосын сыйлар көп болады, егер қол жеткізе алсақ, ЖИТС-ті жою – біздің буынның тарихи жетістігі болатын түрі бар.
The End of the European Supernation?
MADRID – Since the eurozone crisis began in 2008, the European Union has, from a political perspective, led an intergovernmental life in supranational clothing.
But as the EU prepares to negotiate Britain’s exit, it is becoming increasingly apparent that the Union no longer has any clothes at all.
The question now is whether the EU’s status as an enterprise dominated by its member states is permanent.
The supremacy of member states – especially Germany – in EU decision-making is far from new.
It was evident throughout the euro crisis, when German Chancellor Angela Merkel and her finance minister, Wolfgang Schäuble, along with the European Council’s then-president, Belgium’s Herman Van Rompuy, took center stage.
But the myth of European supranationalism persisted.
In particular, after Jean-Claude Juncker took over as President of the European Commission in 2014, the EU’s executive branch began to bill itself as a Brussels-based institution capable of leading the way toward what Juncker called in his 2015 State of the Union speech “more Union in our Union.”
This year, Juncker delivered a far more sober speech.
Indeed, it seems that the June Brexit vote has chastened not only Juncker, but all of the Commission’s Europhiles, who have largely been sidelined in the ensuing battle over what Europe will look like. (The notable exception is Competition Commissioner Margrethe Vestager’s very public stand on taxation, the outcome of which is still to be determined.)
Instead, that battle has been playing out largely within the European Council, with Merkel assuming a central role.
While it is impossible to say exactly what the EU that emerges will look like, it seems clear that it will look nothing like the Brussels-centric, deeply integrated Shangri-La long sought by many at the Commission.
Council President Donald Tusk has been especially adamant on this point, criticizing “naive Euro-enthusiastic visions” and calling for a more modest Europe that promises less and delivers more.
Tusk reiterated this position just before the recent informal European Council summit in Bratislava – the first not to include the United Kingdom – declaring that “giving new powers to European institutions is not the desired recipe.”
Merkel, for her part, spent the summer preparing a member-state-led approach to the Brexit negotiations and Europe’s future.
The discussion and outcome of the Bratislava summit underscored these efforts.
As for the Commission, its only real action in recent months was to appoint Michel Barnier in July as its chief representative in the Brexit negotiations.
With the Council taking command of that process, it is far from clear what Barnier will actually do.
In fact, with member states’ domestic politics playing a more important role than the European Council in driving whatever EU policy momentum exists, even an intergovernmental EU may be too much to hope for.
Consider Germany, where the dreadful performance of Merkel’s Christian Democrats in a string of regional elections, including in her home state of Mecklenberg-West Pomerania, has caused many to question the country’s trajectory.
Now, the wait is on for next year’s federal election, which may send the country – and its approach to EU leadership – in a very different direction.
Uncertainty is also coming from other directions: Italy will hold a constitutional referendum by the end of this year, and France and the Netherlands will hold elections next year.
None of this is to say that supranationalism is a thing of the past.
But it is likely that parochial interests will become even more dominant, at least until major elections are complete.
An opening for a European approach may follow, but only if the current torpor does not lead to institutional atrophy.
Earning the public’s trust is crucial.
In the past, the EU has forged ahead, as if the public approved. It does not.
As Hubert Vedrine, a former French foreign minister, recently estimated that only 15-20% of Europeans are Europhiles, another 15-20% oppose the EU outright, and the remaining 60% are “euro-allergic.” It is a rough but fair portrait.
Put simply, for much of the public, EU institutions lack legitimacy.
The reasons are well known: poor communication, a democratic deficit, finger pointing between member states and the Commission, a flawed institutional architecture.
Juncker and Martin Schulz, the president of the European Parliament, can speak about méthode communautaire until they are blue in the face; it is not happening in the foreseeable future.
The result is clear: in the struggle over how Europe will develop, the EU institutions lack the authority or support to put up much of a fight – or even fully enter the ring.
But this moment of national navel-gazing among the member states may actually present an important opportunity for EU institutions to work on closing the legitimacy gap.
This means resisting the urge to wax poetic about future actions that never actually materialize, or to roll out impressive-looking programs with few real-world effects.