It is not doing so now.
On the contrary, Greece’s creditors – and its own politicians – have handled the crisis in a way that has thrown the entire constitutional achievement of the past four decades into doubt.
Indeed, the political turmoil caused by the crisis has broken the back of the old two-party system.
Between 2010 and 2012, the center-left PASOK was in government, doing whatever it took to preserve Greece’s membership of the euro and ward off formal default.
The result was that its electoral support plunged from 44% to 12%.
It is now a wizened and humiliated husk of a party.
The entire center left is in flux, and new parties will probably come and go.
The center-right New Democracy has also lost ground, though not as badly.
But a new force has emerged on its flank: Golden Dawn, a frankly neo-Nazi party that is spreading violence on the streets and in public life, and seeing its popular support increase as a result.
The catalyst of Golden Dawn’s sudden rise is not Greece’s large population of illegal immigrants – their presence predates the rightward shift by many years – but rather the massive rise in poverty and unemployment over the last three years and, above all, growing popular anger with the political class as a whole.
In short, the crisis has produced a deep delegitimization of Greece’s democratic politicians and their supposed achievements.
This is not Weimar.
But it does illustrate how rapidly in early twenty-first-century Europe democracy has been undermined through the endless application of the economics of austerity, and by the failure of political leadership at home and abroad.
What might replace democracy is another matter.
But we should not be complacent merely because we cannot imagine the alternatives.
Austerity and the Modern Banker
WASHINGTON, DC – Santa Claus came early this year for four former executives of Washington Mutual (WaMu), a large US bank that failed in fall 2008.
The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) had brought a lawsuit against the four, actions that included taking huge financial risks while “knowing that the real estate market was in a ‘bubble.’”
The FDIC sought to recover $900 million, but the executives have just settled for $64 million, almost all of which will be paid by their insurers; their out-of-pockets costs are estimated at just $400,000.
To be sure, the executives lost their jobs and now must drop claims for additional compensation.
But, according to the FDIC, the four still earned more than $95 million from January 2005 through September 2008.
So they are walking away with a great deal of cash.
This is what happens when financial executives are compensated for “return on equity” unadjusted for risk.
The executives get the upside when things go well; when the downside risks materialize, they lose nothing (or close to it).
At the same time, their actions – and similar actions by other bankers – are directly responsible for both the run-up in housing prices and the damaging collapse that followed.
That collapse has impacted non-bankers in many negative ways, including through the loss of more than eight million jobs.
It is also leading to austerity – taxes are increasing and government spending is falling at the local and state level around the country.
A difficult fiscal conversation still lies ahead at the federal level, but cuts and contractions of various types seem likely.
Some people argue that Americans need to tighten their belts.
That’s an interesting discussion, particularly at a time with unemployment is still above 8% (with recent declines largely the result of many jobless workers’ decision to stop looking and drop out of the labor force altogether).
Precipitate austerity is hardly likely to help the economy find its way back to higher employment levels.
But what about government support for the big banks?
Is this contracting in the light of our current fiscal pressures?
Unfortunately, it is not; much government support remains, implicitly through allowing banks to be “too big to fail,” and explicitly through various kinds of backing provided by the Federal Reserve.
The rationale – or perhaps we should call it ideology – behind supporting big banks is that they are needed for the economy to recover.
But this position looks increasingly doubtful when the banks are sitting on piles of cash while creditworthy consumers and businesses are reluctant to borrow.
The same situation exists in Europe today, where the reality is even starker.
Banks are receiving ever-larger bailouts, while countries that borrowed are cutting social programs and face rising social tensions and political instability as a result.
Countries like Greece, Italy, and arguably Portugal over-borrowed, and now their citizens face severe consequences.
But the bankers face no consequences whatsoever for over-lending.
To be sure, some major European financial institutions may now face difficulties, and – who knows – perhaps some of their executives will end up being fired.
But does anyone think that the people who ran European banks into the ground will leave their positions with anything less than considerable wealth?
There is no real austerity – now or possibly in the future – for leading bank executives.
The protesters of “Occupy Albany” issued a powerful consensus statement recently, which reads in part:
“The interests of those who purchase influence are rewarded at the expense of the People, from whom the government’s just power is derived.
We believe that this failure in our system is at the core of many interconnected issues we face as a society, and its resolution is key to a just future.
We therefore demand true democracy, decoupled from the corrosive influence of concentrated economic power, and we call all who share in this common goal to stand with us and take action toward this end.”
Big banks represent the ultimate in concentrated economic power in today’s economies.
They are able to resist all meaningful reform that could really change their compensation schemes.
Their executives want to get all the upside while facing none of the true downside.
But capitalism without the prospect of failure is not any kind of market economy.
We are running a large-scale, nontransparent, and dangerous government subsidy scheme for the benefit primarily of a very few, extremely wealthy people.
Jon Huntsman, a candidate for the Republican presidential nomination, is addressing this directly – insisting that we should force the largest banks to break up and to become safer. No other candidate for the presidency is seriously confronting this issue head-on: just saying “we’ll let them fail” is no kind of answer when the failure of megabanks would cause so much damage.
We should learn from both the WaMu and the Occupy movement. In both cases, the lesson is the same: concentrated financial power is a gift that keeps on giving – but not to you.
Back to the Brink for the Eurozone?
ISTANBUL – When European Central Bank President Mario Draghi announced in late July that the ECB would “do whatever it takes” to prevent so-called “re-denomination risk” (the threat that some countries might be forced to give up the euro and reintroduce their own currencies), Spanish and Italian sovereign-bond yields fell immediately.
Then, in early September, the ECB’s Council of Governors endorsed Draghi’s vow, further calming markets.
The tide of crisis, it seemed, had begun to turn, particularly after the German Constitutional Court upheld the European Stability Mechanism, Europe’s bailout fund.
Despite the ECB’s imposition of conditionality on beneficiaries of its “potentially unlimited” bond purchases, financial markets across Europe and the United States staged a major rally.
It seems, however, that the euphoria was short-lived.
Yields on Spanish and Italian government bonds have been inching up again, and equity investors’ mood is souring.
So, what went wrong?
When I welcomed Mario Draghi’s strong statement in August, I argued that the ECB’s new “outright monetary transactions” program needed to be complemented by progress toward a more integrated eurozone, with a fiscal authority, a banking union, and some form of debt mutualization.
The OMT program’s success, I argued, presupposed a decisive change in the macroeconomic policy mix throughout the eurozone.
There has been some progress, albeit slow, toward agreement on the institutional architecture of a more integrated eurozone.
The necessity of a banking union is now more generally accepted, and there is a move to augment the European budget with funds that could be deployed with policy or project conditionality, in addition to ESM resources.
(Germany and its northern European allies, however, insist that this be an alternative to some form of debt mutualization, rather than a complement to it.)
The ESM, supported by the ECB, could become a European version of the International Monetary Fund, and the new funds in the European budget could become, with support from the European Investment Bank, Europe’s World Bank.
All of this will take time, but there is some movement in the right direction.
Where there has been virtually no progress at all is in the recalibration of the macroeconomic policy mix.
The prevailing strategy in Europe remains simply to force internal devaluation on the southern countries, with excessive austerity aimed at causing severe wage and price deflation.
While some internal devaluation is being achieved, it is producing so much economic and social dislocation – and, increasingly, political upheaval – that there is no supply response, despite the accompanying structural reforms.
Indeed, the deflationary spiral, particularly in Greece and Spain, is causing output to contract so rapidly that further spending cuts and tax increases are not reducing budget deficits and public debt relative to GDP.
And Europe’s preferred solution – more austerity – is merely causing fiscal targets to recede faster.
As a result, markets have again started to measure GDP to include some probability of currency re-denomination, causing debt ratios to look much worse than those based on the certainty of continued euro membership.
While all of this is happening in Europe’s south, most of the northern countries are running current-account surpluses.
Germany’s surplus, at $216 billion, is now larger than China’s – and the world’s largest in absolute terms.
Together with the surpluses of Austria, the Netherlands, and most non-eurozone northern countries – namely, Switzerland, Sweden, Denmark, and Norway – northern Europe has run a current-account surplus of $511 billion over the last 12 months.
That is larger than the Chinese surplus has ever been – and scary because it subtracts net demand from the rest of Europe and the world economy.
Inflicting excessive austerity on the southern European countries while limiting their exports by restricting effective demand in the north is like administering an overdose to a patient while withholding oxygen.
The political and economic success of southern Europe’s much-needed structural reforms requires the proper dose and timing of budgetary medicine and buoyant demand in the north.
The northern countries argue that permitting wage growth and boosting domestic demand would reduce their competitiveness and trade surplus.
But that misses the entire point: surplus countries must contribute no less than deficit countries to global and regional rebalancing, because the world economy cannot export to outer space.
This argument was always emphasized when the Chinese surplus was deemed excessive, but it is virtually ignored when it comes to northern Europe.
If conservative politicians and economists in Europe’s north continue to insist on the wrong overall macroeconomic policy mix in Europe, they could yet bring about the end of the eurozone, and, with it, the end of the European project of peace and integration as we have known it for decades.
This is not to argue against the need for vigorous structural and competitiveness-enhancing reforms in the south; it is to give those reforms a chance to succeed.
Austerity Politics, Then and Now
PRINCETON – Britain’s policy of fiscal consolidation, recently announced by Chancellor of the Exchequer George Osborne, sent shock waves around the world.
Osborne argued that Britain was on the brink: that there was no alternative to his policy if the country was to avoid a massive crisis of confidence.
Other countries, such as Greece, needed to have a full-blown crisis in order to prompt such adjustment measures, whereas Britain was acting prudently and preemptively.
If Britain, with a relatively low share of public debt to GDP (64.6%) is worried, the implication is that many other countries should be much more concerned.
But drastic attempts at fiscal consolidation immediately evoke memories of the Great Depression.
Andrew Mellon, the United States Treasury Secretary at the time, talked about liquidating workers, farmers, stocks, and real estate in order “to purge the rottenness out of the system.”
In Britain back then, Philip Snowden, a small man with a narrow, pinched face, who needed a cane to walk, seemed to want to remake the British economy in his physical image.
Given these historical analogies, a slew of heavyweight Keynesian critics are warning that the world is about to repeat all the disasters caused by bad fiscal policy in the 1930’s.
But this interpretation of the Great Depression, common though it is, is misguided.
In the first place, the critics get their history wrong.
US President Herbert Hoover’s administration did not initially respond to the depression by emphasizing the need for fiscal austerity.
On the contrary, Hoover and other figures argued in a perfectly modern, Keynesian fashion that large-scale public-works programs were needed to pull the economy out of the trough.
Moreover, today’s Keynesians ignore the urgency behind the depression-era concern with balanced budgets.
When the Hoover administration did swing to fiscal tightening, it was responding to pressures from the capital and foreign-exchange markets, which in turn were responding to the crises in Latin America and Central Europe, where public finances had been a major part of the problem.
Beginning in September 1931, the markets became nervous about the US, causing large outflows from American banks – and thus from the dollar.
The Depression had rendered capital markets incapable of absorbing large quantities of government (or, indeed, any other) debt.
As a result, fiscal consolidation appeared to be the only way to restore confidence.
Great Britain in 1931 already grasped this logic.
Snowden was worried that any attempt by the British government to borrow would fail, which would constitute an “admission of national bankruptcy.”
That September, concerns about public debt and the British government’s ability to enforce austerity led to a run on the pound.
Rather than trying to mount a last-ditch defense of the fixed exchange rate, the government, at the suggestion of the Bank of England, agreed to abandon the gold standard and devalue the pound.
A third problem with the conventional Keynesian interpretation is that the balanced-budget approach during the Great Depression did actually work.
It calmed markets, and Britain’s departure from the gold standard freed monetary policy from its previous constraints, and allowed a monetary stabilization.
The country was no longer subject to imported deflation via the fixed exchange rate.
But an equally important part of the recovery process was that Britain had left gold with a more or less balanced budget.
That was why monetary policy could be managed with greater flexibility.
The balanced budget thus allowed Britain to have a strong recovery, ensuring that the 1930’s were a much better decade for the British economy than the 1920’s had been.
Finally, those who view the Great Depression as fundamentally a product of tight fiscal policies and “Treasury orthodoxy” overlook the much greater culpability of a fixed exchange-rate regime for the transmission of bad monetary policy, and thus for fueling the contraction.
The major question today should be whether the failure of capital markets (and the implications for government debt) after 2007 has been as severe as during the Great Depression.
At the moment, there has not been widespread revulsion against all government debt, and some countries today clearly have better access than others to capital markets, enabling them to finance their deficits externally.
The debate about room for fiscal maneuver in practice soon becomes a debate about whether countries that have easily financed debt in the past can automatically continue to do so.
We are still in the last stages of a bubble in government debt that arose in the first stage of the financial crisis from the “flight to security” of US Treasuries.
When that bubble collapses, it will hit not just the weaker countries – the equivalent of sub-prime mortgages – but also stronger creditors.
In the Great Depression, one of the big surprises was the devastating abruptness with which markets turned on the US.
In the late summer of 1931, the dollar, alongside the French franc, appeared to be the strongest currency in the international system.
That precedent should serve as a warning of how vulnerable governments and their finances can rapidly become, and of how fiscal policy can stand in the way of a monetary approach oriented toward stability.
Greece in the spring of 2010 sent a wake-up call to Great Britain.
The British response should prompt other industrial economies, above all the US, to tackle their long-term fiscal weaknesses.
The Austerity Pandemic
NEW YORK – At this year’s International Monetary Fund/World Bank spring meetings in Washington, DC, the IMF urged European countries to ease their austerity policies and focus on investment, marking a shift from past rhetoric.
But, in the corridors of those two multilateral institutions, there was talk of double standards.
In fact, most countries are cutting public expenditures – with the IMF’s support.
So, even as some northern countries begin to question the austerity prescription, their southern counterparts (including southern European countries) are increasingly adopting fiscal-adjustment measures.
According to IMF projections, of the 119 governments that are shrinking their 2013 budgets (relative to GDP), three-quarters are in developing countries (including 21 low-income and 68 middle-income countries).
Fiscal consolidation affects an estimated 80% of developing-country citizens, and its impact is expected to intensify steadily through 2015.
During this time, the magnitude of contraction will be significant, with roughly one-quarter of all developing countries expected to cut expenditures below pre-crisis levels.
A review of policy discussions from 314 IMF country reports published since 2010 – part of a comprehensive update on the global shift toward austerity – shows that many adjustment measures are most prevalent in developing countries, where citizens are especially vulnerable to austerity’s economic and social consequences.
The most common adjustment measure, which governments in 78 developing countries are considering, is subsidy reduction.
Deliberations on the subject are often – indeed, in 55 developing countries – accompanied by discussion of the need for a targeted social safety net to offset higher food, energy, or transport costs for the poorest citizens.
But developing and implementing a social-protection floor takes time, and governments do not seem to be willing to wait.
At a time when the need for food assistance is particularly high, some governments have withdrawn food subsidies and others have scaled back subsidies for agricultural inputs like seeds, fertilizer, and pesticides, hindering local food production.
Similarly, public-sector wage cuts and caps – currently being pursued by 75 developing countries – threaten to undermine service delivery to citizens, particularly at the local level in poor rural areas, where a single teacher or nurse can determine whether a child receives an education or health care.
This danger is heightened as policymakers in 22 developing countries consider health-care reforms and those in 47 developing countries discuss pension reforms.
On the revenue side, as many as 63 developing countries are considering raising consumption taxes, such as the value-added tax.
But taxing basic foods and household items can have a disproportionate impact on lower-income families, whose limited disposable incomes are already stretched thin, and thus can exacerbate existing inequalities.
Instead of slashing expenditures, developing-country leaders should focus on providing decent job opportunities and improved living standards for their citizens.
They must recognize that austerity will not help them to achieve their development goals.
On the contrary, spending cuts will hurt their most vulnerable citizens, widen the gap between rich and poor, and contribute to social and political instability.
Indeed, civil unrest is already on the rise across the developing world.
From the Arab Spring to the violent food riots that have erupted in recent years across Asia, Africa, and the Middle East, populations are reacting to the cumulative effects of pervasive unemployment, high food prices, and deteriorating living conditions.
Ours does not have to be an age of austerity; governments, even in the poorest countries, have options to foster a socially responsive economic recovery.
These include, among other measures, debt restructuring, increasing the progressivity of taxation (on personal income, property, and corporations, including the financial sector), and curbing tax evasion, the use of tax havens, and illicit financial flows.
Ultimately, reducing wages, public services, and household income impedes human development, threatens political stability, lowers demand, and delays recovery.
Rather than continuing to adhere to policies that do more harm than good, policymakers should consider a new approach – one that actually contributes to their countries’ social and economic progress.
Mengimani Perubahan Iklim (No Agnostics in the Climate Foxhole)
SYDNEY – Baru-baru ini dalam penerbangan yang saya tempuh dari Los Angeles ke Sydney selama 14.5 jam, saya berkesempatan membaca kumpulan tulisan kolumnis Charles Krauthammer yang berjudul Things that Matter.
Cocok sekali sebagai bacaan selama perjalanan yang melelahkan.
Selama beberapa tahun terakhir saya sering membaca dan menyukai tulisan Krauthammer, namun ada satu hal dalam buku beliau yang menurut saya sangat meresahkan: cara beliau menggambarkan dirinya sebagai seorang “agnostik” perubahan iklim.
Beliau mengatakan “nalurinya yakin bahwa melepaskan karbon dioksida dalam jumlah besar ke atmosfer tidak akan menghasilkan kebaikan,” akan tetapi di saat yang sama beliau “sangat percaya bahwa seseorang yang meyakini akibat dari tindakan tersebut hanya bicara omong kosong.”
Kata yang menurut saya paling menjengkelkan adalah “agnostik” – bukan saja karena Krauthammer adalah ilmuwan terlatih, namun juga karena istilah tersebut digunakan berulang kali oleh mantan Perdana Menteri Australia John Howard ketika beliau berbicara di hadapan sekelompok penyangkal perubahan iklim (climate-change deniers) di London pada akhir tahun 2013.
Howard berkata kepada sekelompok orang skeptis ini, “salah satu permasalahan dalam debat ini timbul karena beberapa orang fanatik yang terlibat dalam gerakan tersebut memandangnya sebagai pengganti agama.”
Sebagaimana diketahui oleh Howard dan Krauthammer juga, topik mengenai perubahan iklim bukan persoalan agama, tapi ilmu pengetahuan.
Berdasarkan survei di tahun 2013 atas sejumlah publikasi tinjauan sejawat mengenai perubahan iklim, sekitar 97% ilmuwan mendukung pandangan bahwa manusia mengakibatkan perubahan iklim.
Siapapun yang familiar dengan proses ilmiah pasti paham bahwa peneliti dididik untuk tidak bersepakat atau menentang hipotesa dan kesimpulan orang lain.
Kesepakatan yang dicapai atas kebesaran ini ibaratnya sama dengan memperoleh fakta ilmiah yang diakui.
Mengingat bahwa Krauthammer bahkan mengakui atmosfer yang terisi penuh oleh karbon dioksida “tidak akan berakibat baik,” langkah logis berikutnya dalam perdebatan ini ialah menentukan cara terbaik untuk mengatasi masalah.
Sebagai seorang ahli ekonomi, saya memilih sistem cap-and-trade berdasarkan lelang guna menetapkan harga karbon.
Namun saya juga memahami adanya potensi manfaat dalam upaya-upaya pengaturan seperti penetapan target energi terbarukan, larangan penggunaan bohlam pijar, dan perintah penggunaan biofuel.
Namun saya tidak bisa terima jika seseorang memilih diam tetapi mengklaim orang lain yang mengada-ada, saat kita justru menawarkan solusi.
Beruntungnya opini-opini bernada sama dengan Krauthammer semakin jarang ditemui.
Tentunya masih ada penolakan, contohnya Perdana Menteri Australia Tony Abbott, yang menggantikan pajak karbon (carbon tax) dengan rencana memungut pajak dari warga negaranya untuk membayar pencemar agar mengurangi emisi.
Sebagai suatu kebijakan, gagasan ini tidak adil, tidak efisien, dan tidak mungkin bisa menurunkan emisi pada laju yang cukup untuk memenuhi persyaratan perjanjian internasional tentang perubahan iklim yang diharapkan bisa dicapai di Paris bulan Desember nanti.
Pertanda pasti terjadinya perubahan mentalitas adalah meningkatnya pengakuan lembaga keuangan bahwa pinjaman dan investasi bisa jadi terlalu sering terpapar risiko-risiko perubahan iklim.
Risiko ini meliputi bencana alam, bertambahnya frekuensi cuaca ekstrim, upaya pemerintah mengurangi emisi gas rumah kaca, dan dampak negatif revolusi teknologi pada energi terbarukan, efisiensi energi, dan teknologi alternatif.
Menurut organisasi Asset Owners Disclosure Project, yang saya ketuai, 500 asset owners global terkemuka sangat terkena bahaya perubahan iklim.
Lebih dari setengah investasi mereka dilakukan pada industri-industri yang terpengaruh dampak buruk perubahan iklim; kurang dari 2% yang berinvestasi pada industri rendah-karbon.
Sebagai akibatnya terdapat risiko investasi dan properti tersebut menjadi “terdampar”, seiring dengan kebijakan atau keadaan pasar menurunkan nilai infrastruktur,, properti lain, dan cadangan bahan bakar fosil.
Ketika krisis keuangan global terjadi di tahun 2008, Hank Paulson, Menteri Keuangan Amerika Serikat, pernah memperingatkan dengan menyampaikan bahwa risiko-risiko krisis keuangan yang diakibatkan oleh iklim dapat mengkerdilkan risiko-risiko krisis subprima.
Harga batubara, contohnya, merosot hingga setengah dari tingkat tertinggi dan bisa menurun lagi.
Dampaknya adalah saham perusahaan-perusahaan batubara turun sebesar 90%, sehingga asset owners berebut ingin melepaskannya.
Sebaliknya, investasi pada perusahaan seperti Tesla Motors – kini telah mengembangkan baterai yang dapat diisi ulang diperuntukkan bagi pemakaian di rumah, yang dapat mengarah pada kenaikan besar-besaran jumlah rumah tangga yang beralih ke penggunaan tenaga surya – terlihat jauh lebih menarik.
Seiring dengan penyerapan kesadaran ini ke dalam pasar, asset owners tengah melindungi taruhan mereka (hedging their bets) dengan menambah investasi mereka pada industri dan perusahaan rendah karbon seperti Tesla.
Ke depannya kondisi ini akan menciptakan dampak signifikan pada dana investasi global.
Krauthammer mungkin merasa saya bicara omong kosong, namun saya yakin bahwa segera nantinya beliau – dan orang lain yang berpandangan sama dengannya – akan terkejut.
Playing by the Rules in Asia
CANBERRA – China’s adventurism in the South China Sea has prompted a change in Australian policymaking that merits wide international attention.
In making maintenance of a “rules-based global order” a core strategic priority, Australia’s new Defense White Paper adopts language not often found at the heart of national defense charters.
It is all the more surprising coming from a conservative government that is usually keen to follow the United States down any path it takes.
Australia wanted a readily defensible basis for contesting China’s claims that could not be portrayed as just another reflexive embrace of the American position.
For a country trying – as are others in the region – to avoid zero-sum choices between our strategic partner, the US, and our economic partner, China, the White Paper’s words were astutely chosen and deserve emulation.
Part of the attraction of a “rules-based global order” is that it would constrain all relevant players.
US policymakers, unlike those in most of the rest of the world, don’t find the concept inherently attractive.
Although they – like everyone else – do pay lip service to it, willingness to be bound by international rules is not part of US officials’ DNA.
The invasion of Iraq in 2003 remains Exhibit A. But there are others, including the overreach (alongside the United Kingdom and France) of the UN Security Council’s mandate in Libya in 2011, and what Jessica Mathews has described as the “wasteland for multilateral commitments” in the US approach to binding treaties, including the Convention on Biodiversity, the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty, the Protocol on Torture, and, most relevant to the South China Sea, the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS).
The more immediate sting in the Australian White Paper is for China.
Whatever else is going on in the South China Sea, it is not respect for a rules-based global order.
Playing by the rules would imply a number of changes to Chinese behavior.
First, it would mean clearly articulating specific sovereignty claims, based on long use or occupancy of particular habitable islands, in the Paracel or Spratly groups or elsewhere.
When those claims overlap with claims by other states, as most of them do, China must be prepared to resolve them, preferably by international adjudication or arbitration, which it has so far strongly resisted, or at the very least by genuine give-and-take negotiation.
Second, China would have to abandon its “nine-dash line” as a basis not only for sovereignty claims relating to land features bounded by it, but also for claims to ill-defined “historical waters” or “traditional Chinese fishing grounds.”
With Chinese fishing vessels constantly intruding into what have hitherto been others’ undisputed 200-nautical-mile exclusive economic zones (EEZs) under UNCLOS, these claims are now causing real friction with countries like Indonesia.
UNCLOS – now generally accepted as customary international law even by countries that have not joined it, like the US – is the only acceptable framework for resolving these issues.
Even if every one of China’s current sovereignty claims to particular habitable islands were to be accepted, the 12 nautical miles of territorial waters, and the 200 nautical miles of EEZ associated with each of them, would not begin to add up to the 80% of the South China Sea now encompassed by China’s nine-dash line.
Third, China would need to limit severely its actions relating to reefs and shoals, never previously habitable, where it has been reclaiming land and building airstrips and other installations capable of military use, and seeking to deny others’ the use of adjacent waters and airspace.
International law tolerates some such building – as the Philippines, Vietnam, and Malaysia have been doing for years, though on a much smaller scale.
But it does not tolerate any military use, or support more than a 500-meter “safety zone” around such installations – not a territorial sea, EEZ, “air defense identification zone,” or anything else.
Fourth, China should moderate its position that no foreign ship or aircraft may engage in surveillance or intelligence collection not only within its territorial waters, about which international law is clear, but within its entire EEZ, about which China’s argument is not at all strong.
Adherence to this position sustains a constant risk of inflammatory incidents.
So long as China refuses to play by accepted international rules, others are entitled to push back, including with the fly-by or “freedom of navigation” sail-by exercises in which the US has been engaging, and which Australia and others should separately emulate.
China’s insistence that it has no intention to disrupt commercial shipping or flight lanes should be believed; to do otherwise would be to cut off its nose to spite its face.
But its behavior is testing the limits of regional and global understanding and patience.
The remaining attraction of making a “rules-based global order” central to Australia’s policy is the discipline this imposes on Australia itself – as it would on any state that adopts this language.
To be taken seriously, we have to put our money where our mouths are, by accepting international duties and responsibilities – like helping to stop atrocity crimes in faraway places – that are consistent with our claims to good international citizenship but serve no immediate traditional national security or economic interest.
In Australia’s case, this means thinking again about some of our efforts to limit our exposure to the International Court of Justice and certain dispute-resolution mechanisms under UNCLOS.
In this imperfect world, there is considerable tolerance for all sorts of imperfect behavior.
But hypocrisy always catches up with you.
Preaching the virtues of a rule-based order to others, but being coy about some of those rules oneself, is not a good look.
What’s the Matter With Austria?
MUNICH – Last month, Austria avoided the election of a president from the xenophobic Freedom Party by the skin of its teeth.
Indeed, the Freedom Party is now challenging the result.
Given the worrying nature of the populist challenge, and its implications for European politics and the handling of the refugee crisis, it is important to diagnose what ails Austria, so that the cure doesn’t end up being worse than the disease.
Austria was once lauded as Germany’s more successful neighbor, one of Europe’s fastest-growing countries.
But its economy has been sputtering since 2012, with GDP up last year by a meager 0.7%; only Greece and Finland performed more poorly.
And Austria’s unemployment rate has soared, from 5% in 2010 to 10% today.
These developments have their origins in how Austria engaged with Central and Eastern Europe after the fall of communism.
At first, Austria benefited from the European Union’s eastern enlargement.
International trade soared, Austrian firms invested heavily in the region, and Austrian banks opened subsidiaries there, financing these countries’ modernization.
All of this was good for business, and the Austrian economy grew rapidly.
But a hidden dynamic ultimately turned the tables on this success.
Central and Eastern European countries had low per capita income, but were rich in skills. Austria, far wealthier, was not.
In 1998, 16% of Central and Eastern Europeans (including Russia and Ukraine) had academic degrees, compared to just 7% of Austrians.
So, when Austrian firms invested in Eastern Europe, they did not just relocate low-skilled manufacturing jobs; they also offshored the parts of the value chain that required specialized skills and produced valuable research.
According to my research, from 1990 to 2001, Austrian subsidiaries in Eastern Europe employed five times as many people with academic degrees, as a percentage of staff, as their parent firms did. They also engaged 25% more research personnel in their labs.
This relocation of research activity lowered growth in Austria and boosted growth in Eastern Europe.
Research spills over to the rest of the economy, as new knowledge diffuses into commercial activities. Tapping the knowledge produced by Austrian subsidiaries was one of the ways Eastern European economies were able to grow so quickly.
Today, Bratislava, Prague, and Warsaw – the location of most Austrian subsidiaries – have higher per capita incomes than Vienna.
Indeed, according to the Hungarian economist Zsolt Darvas, in terms of purchasing power parity, all three cities surpassed Vienna in 2008.
This is a remarkable development, given that Vienna has served as a reference point for these capitals for centuries.
Germany’s growth was not similarly affected, for three reasons. To begin with, after the fall of Communism, Austria reoriented its foreign direct investment almost exclusively to Eastern Europe, which accounted for nearly 90% of its FDI outflows.
In Germany, just 4% of FDI moved to Eastern Europe in the 1990s, reaching 30% at the turn of the century. As a result, Austria became much more integrated with Eastern Europe.
Second, Germany was richer in skills than Austria.
In 1998, the share of the German population with academic degrees was 15%, more than double the Austrian level.
German firms did relocate high-skilled work to the east, but not to the extent that Austria did.
As a proportion of the workforce, German affiliates in Eastern Europe employed three times as many people with academic degrees as their parent firms did. And German subsidiaries employed 11% more researchers than their parent companies.
Finally, many of the Austrian parent companies were themselves subsidiaries of foreign firms, while German firms were German multinationals, which transplanted their corporate culture to their Central and Eastern European subsidiaries.
They employed more German managers relative to local managers, which gave them more control over innovation.
Furthermore, most German investments were based on the transfer of an established technology; only 8% of the country’s FDI in the region involved cutting-edge research.
By contrast, Austrian firms adapted their business to the region’s environment and employed more local managers than Austrians.
As a result, their subsidiaries were more autonomous in their innovation decisions. There was no mechanism that guaranteed that the knowledge created in a subsidiary also benefited the parent company.
If Austria is to return to its previous growth path, it will have to become more attractive as a location for innovation.
And to do this, Austrian firms must employ highly qualified people in their research labs.
Educating a highly skilled workforce takes time, of course.
But fortunately, Austria has another option: immigrants.
Austrian policymakers could choose to follow Canada’s example and introduce a selective immigration policy that welcomes highly skilled migrants and refugees.
Austrians nearly closed the door on that option.
Now they must recognize that what populists call a weakness could be Austria’s best hope for reviving growth.
Authentic Leadership
COLOMBO – The theme of this year’s World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland, is “Responsible and Responsive Leadership.”
But one possible reading of Donald Trump’s victory in the United States presidential election is that voters these days care less about responsibility than “authenticity.”
Voters welcomed Trump’s reckless comments on sensitive issues because he was speaking his mind and being true to himself.
Ordinary politicians, by always saying the “right” thing, seem packaged and staged.
But does authenticity need to involve recklessness?
Alternatively, can “politically correct” behavior be a form of recklessness, to the extent that it evades difficult issues and focuses on what is easier to justify rather than what is right?
Does authenticity involve facing the anxiety and anguish that Jean-Paul Sartre thought was the inevitable companion of freedom and responsibility?
These are questions for economic policymakers as much as for anyone else.
Policymakers approach their task in two fundamentally different ways.
One paradigm regards economic policies as a set of universal best practices.
The more you adopt, the more they (investors) will come.
The other paradigm views policies as solutions to specific problems.
Because each society has a unique set of characteristics, constraints and goals, policies are necessarily idiosyncratic: the path is made by walking.
This does not mean that one should disregard what can be learned from others; but imitation without adaptation is a recipe for ineffectiveness, if not worse.
It can easily imply importing solutions to non-existent problems, while letting real problems fester.
Colombia and Panama illustrate the contrast between these approaches.
For much of the recent past, economic policymaking in Colombia has been driven by two goals: signing a free-trade agreement with the US (in effect since 2012) and joining the OECD (in negotiation since 2013).
(True, other important initiatives have been the peace process and the expansion of the road network, though these are not, strictly speaking, economic policies).
In the meantime, Colombia’s main obstacle to growth, which arguably is the lack of export dynamism, given the fall in oil prices, has not been addressed.
Despite the FTA – and a 38% depreciation of the peso since 2014 – exports to the US have gone nowhere: they have stagnated overall, fallen as a share of overall exports, and become even more concentrated in traditional products such as oil, coffee, gold, and flowers.
This stands in marked contrast to the impact of the North American Free Trade Agreement on Mexico’s exports: between its entry into effect in 1994 and 2000, exports to the US tripled, from $50 to $150 billion.
In the following decade, Vietnam generated an even larger export boom, with no major trade agreements.
Clearly, NAFTA was crucial for Mexico; but whatever is preventing Colombia from becoming a more successful exporter is not the kind of transaction costs that FTAs can address.
But it is highly unlikely that these issues will be tackled by joining the OECD.
The OECD demands a smorgasbord of reforms affecting corporate governance, private insurance markets, competition policy, statistics, health, technology, agriculture, and many other regulatory areas.
Whether any of these reforms nurture a new suite of export industries that can propel Colombia forward is, to put it bluntly, a crapshoot.
Now consider Panama – by far Latin America’s fastest-growing economy during the 2004-2014 commodity price boom.
Panama’s annual GDP growth averaged 8.2%, despite the fact that it did not profit directly from the commodity bonanza that benefited Colombia and much of South America.
Now that the boom is over, Panama is still growing at 5%, while Colombia is bordering on a recession.
How did Panama do it?
After the Panama Canal reverted to national control in 1999, policymakers started to think about how to maximize the Canal’s potential spillover effects.
Ultimately, they transformed the US military bases into special economic zones.
They granted concessions to build new ports, in order to facilitate logistics activities around the Canal.
They developed the airport, to support the local private airline COPA as it became a regional player.
They invested 7% of GDP in expansion of the Canal, a project completed in 2016.
And they created a special tax and migration regime to attract regional headquarters of multinational companies.
Panama’s leaders also authorized a pipeline to transport oil across the isthmus, with port facilities on either side.
Together with the pre-existing Colon Free Trade Zone and the International Financial Center, the whole ended up being much more than the sum of its parts.
The synergies between the airport, the new ports, the logistics facilities, banks, and the regional headquarters generated a boom in services exports and investment, underpinning rapid economic growth.
And with it have come gastronomy, arts, and tourism.
The non-residential construction boom this created helped not only to absorb the labor force that was leaving rural areas but also to achieve a remarkable reduction in inequality.
In this services-export-led growth strategy, skill shortages did not become a major problem, thanks to a fairly open immigration policy, which allowed the country to use the talent that Colombia, among other countries, was unable to keep.
The comparison between these two approaches is clear.
Colombia’s policymakers have been hoping that if they adopt best-practice legislation and regulation, somebody will come.
And if they do not, they can still bask in the international accolades they receive from foreign entities.
Panama, by contrast, took the risk of imagining some key strategic, export-oriented investments, and then focused on creating the conditions to make them happen.
In many cases, the private sector took the initiative.
But policymakers did not shy away from large strategic public investments when needed, as in the case of the Canal expansion or the airport.
The special tax regimes and other policies they adopted may make some at the OECD cringe.
But, arguably, this helped create the ecosystem that makes Panama so attractive to so many Fortune 500 companies.
Authentic leadership requires a commitment to real goals.
But, to achieve them, there are no prêt-à-porter solutions.
Tailoring policies to specific problems, without disregarding the lessons from the past or from elsewhere, involves risks, and any responsible leader will necessarily feel the anxiety this creates.
Authenticity does not, in the end, require Trumpian recklessness.
But abandoning economic goals and imitating the means taken by others is not only inauthentic: it is also deeply irresponsible.
Russia and China: The Movie
NEW YORK – The times we live in are often most clearly reflected in the mirror of art.
Much has been written about post-communism in Russia and China.
But two recent films, Jia Zhangke’s A Touch of Sin, made in China in 2013, and Andrey Zvyagintsev’s Leviathan, made in Russia in 2014, reveal the social and political landscapes of these countries more precisely than anything I have seen in print.
Jia’s movie is episodic; four loosely linked stories about lone acts of extreme violence, mostly culled from contemporary newspaper stories.
Leviathan is about a decent man whose life is ruined by the mayor of his town in collusion with the Russian Orthodox Church and a corrupt judiciary.
Both films are visually stunning, despite their stories’ bleakness.
The dark skies over the northern Russian coast in Leviathan look ravishing, and Jia even manages to make the concrete and glass jungle of Shenzhen, the monster city between Guangzhou and Hong Kong, look gorgeous.
The other thing both films share is a fascination with mythical stories, the Book of Job in Leviathan, and martial-arts fiction in A Touch of Sin.
Real estate plays a major part in both movies.
In the first episode of A Touch of Sin, the local boss has become a private-plane-owning billionaire by stripping and selling all of his region’s collective assets.
Everything in this new China – where the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) still rules, but the ideas of Karl Marx are as dead as they are in Russia – is for sale, even the trappings of its Maoist past.
In one scene, we see prostitutes in a nightclub titillating overseas Chinese businessmen by parading up and down in sexy People’s Liberation Army uniforms.
The story of Leviathan focuses on the house built by a simple mechanic named Nikolay.
He is robbed of his property by the corrupt mayor, who is paid by the Orthodox Church for the right to build a new church on Nikolay’s land.
Nikolay is disposed of by having him framed for his wife’s murder and tried by a crooked court.
The importance of real estate in both films is no coincidence.
Property, construction, and land are the common currencies of power in mafia societies – in China and Russia no less than in Sicily.
One reason China has been transformed into a gigantic building site, with huge new cities emerging almost overnight, is that this drives a red-hot and highly corrupt economy, ruled by a Leninist party that has monetized political power by asset-stripping and construction.
It is irrelevant that President Vladimir Putin’s United Russia Party, unlike the CCP, makes no claim to any form of Marxist ideology.
The way both governments operate is quite similar: party bosses, tycoons, and corrupt bureaucrats divide the spoils, while promoting chauvinism and “traditional values” – whether those of the Orthodox Church or Confucianism.
Judges are bought or intimidated to ensure that bosses remain above the law.
Putin’s party was elected in Russia, as was President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan’s Justice and Development Party in Turkey, Prime Minister Viktor Orbán’s Fidesz in Hungary, and President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi’s military regime in Egypt.
The CCP was not.
But this, too, is largely irrelevant.
What these governments share is the fusion of capitalist enterprise and political authoritarianism.
This political model is now seen as a serious rival to American-style liberal democracy, and perhaps it is.
But during the Cold War, authoritarian capitalism, usually under military regimes, was anti-Communist and very much on America’s side.
South Korea’s strongman, Park Chung-hee, current President Park Geun-hye’s father, was in many ways a pioneer of the type of society that we now see in China and Russia.
So was Chile’s General Augusto Pinochet.
Because the dictatorships in America’s client states ended more or less when the Cold War did, and were replaced by liberal democracies, many were lulled into the comforting belief that liberal democracy and capitalism would naturally – even inevitably – come together everywhere.
Political freedom is good for business, and vice versa.
This great twentieth century myth has now been shattered.
Orbán claimed earlier this year that liberal democracy was no longer a viable model.
He cited China and Russia as more successful countries, not for ideological reasons, but because he thinks that they are more competitive in today’s world.
There are reasons to doubt this, of course.
The Russian economy is far too dependent on oil and other natural resources, and the legitimacy of China’s one-party system could collapse quickly in an economic crisis.
The way that illiberal regimes use the law for their own ends will not inspire the confidence of investors, either – at least not in the long run.
And yet, for now, the societies depicted so acidly in Leviathan and A Touch of Sin continue to look good in the eyes of many people who are disillusioned with Europe’s economic stagnation and America’s political dysfunction.
Western businessmen, artists, architects, and others who need large amounts of money for expensive projects enjoy working with authoritarian regimes that “get things done.”
Illiberal thinkers on the far right and left admire strongmen who stand up to America.
A Touch of Sin has been shown to great acclaim all over the world, but not in China.
Leviathan, by contrast, has been submitted as the official Russian entry for the Oscars.
Perhaps China’s rulers are less sure of themselves than Putin.
Or perhaps Putin is just a bit cannier.
His followers in Russia are unlikely to see, let alone be influenced by, an art film, and this sliver of Russian free expression might just persuade foreigners that there is still some liberalism left in Putin’s authoritarian democracy – at least until that, too, ends up as a shattered illusion.
Automatic Savers
People are fascinated by wealth.
They enjoy watching the wealthy, savoring the thought of their fine homes, luxurious vacations, fancy cars, and gourmet dining.
But if you infer from this that people spend a lot of time planning the lifetime accumulation of their own wealth, you would be wrong.
Most people do not seem to think very hard about how much to save from their income, or about how big the differences in their wealth could be in their later years if they just adjusted their saving rate today.
Most people just pay off their mortgage, make the mandatory contributions to their state or private pension (if they have one), and keep some money for short-run contingencies.
That’s about it.
The economist Frank Ramsey, in a famous article published in 1928, said that people have a “weakness of the imagination” about how their actions today affect their own future.
He said that if people thought about it correctly, they might well conclude that they should save half their income.
That way, the accumulated wealth might make them very happy in their later years.
But, mostly, they don’t even think about that possibility.
Richard Thaler, a contemporary economist, spoke in 1980 of an “endowment effect.”
Even though people may admire other things, they act as if they are mostly happy enough with whatever they already have, and lack the will to consider real change.
One of the biggest challenges governments face is humans’ apathy about future saving.
Thoughtful leaders recognize that the problem is there and tangible, not to be ignored.
Yet it is hard to fit solutions into either a traditional liberal or traditional conservative political philosophy.
Since 1955, Singapore has taken a direct approach: a compulsory national saving plan, which generates very high saving rates.
The contribution rate for the Central Provident Fund is now 34.5% for people with higher incomes.
The United States has no compulsory saving plan, and it has an abysmally low – in fact, negative – personal saving rate.
But the government is loath to consider a mandatory saving plan.
Instead, it is taking steps to overcome the individual inertia that inhibits saving.
The US Pension Protection Act of 2006 encourages employers to enroll employees automatically in a personal saving plan for old age.
This differs fundamentally from Singapore’s scheme, since employers are not required to do so, and, while enrolled employees’ paychecks are deducted without their consent, they can drop out of the plan at their own request.
New Zealand’s recent “KiwiSaver” plan and the United Kingdom’s Pensions Act of 2007 are similarly based on automatic enrollment for employees with free opt-out provisions.
Nevertheless, according to Brigitte Madrian of Harvard University, automatic enrollment in savings plans is critically important, even if the employee is completely free to drop out.
If employers tell their new employees that a pension saving plan is available, and even promise to match employees’ contributions, a significant fraction of employees still will not participate.
But if employers actually enroll their employees automatically in the plan, telling them that they can drop out at any time simply by notifying the employer, a large majority of employees will just accept the plan.
Moreover, it appears that whatever contribution rate the employer chooses tends to be accepted passively by the employee, as does whatever investment allocation (between stocks and bonds, for example) is established.
The research of Madrian and her colleagues suggests that the new pension plans will improve saving in the countries that adopt them.
Maybe these countries could do even better by adopting a compulsory saving plan, but they are not about to do so.
So, although they won’t succeed in raising saving on the scale that Singapore has, they can make real progress.
The best reason not to make savings plans compulsory is that different people face very different circumstances that only they know about.
Some people love their work, and never want to retire; for them, saving is less important.
Some people want to spend a lot now on education, or psychotherapy, or whatever else is important to them now, and so want to postpone saving until later.
The fundamental problem is that while some people postpone saving for sensible reasons, and will resume saving later, many others fail to save for no good reason, and are unlikely to make up for it later.
A government saving plan that is based on automatic, though not compulsory, enrollment has the ability to deal with this problem, if only imperfectly.
Automatic enrollment creates a saving plan that is sensible for the typical person.
People who are not paying attention and are just not active will simply remain in the plan, while those who want badly enough to opt out can do so by writing a letter.
These saving plans show that there are methods other than outright compulsion to overcome human inertia.
One hopes that, in the future, such plans will be adopted on a large enough scale that we can devise a variety of new programs that serve both inertial and active individuals well.
Automation, Productivity, and Growth
BERLIN – It seems obvious that if a business invests in automation, its workforce – though possibly reduced – will be more productive.
So why do the statistics tell a different story?
In advanced economies, where plenty of sectors have both the money and the will to invest in automation, growth in productivity (measured by value added per employee or hours worked) has been low for at least 15 years.
And, in the years since the 2008 global financial crisis, these countries’ overall economic growth has been meager, too – just 4% or less on average.
One explanation is that the advanced economies had taken on too much debt and needed to deleverage, contributing to a pattern of public-sector underinvestment and depressing consumption and private investment as well.
But deleveraging is a temporary process, not one that limits growth indefinitely.
In the long term, overall economic growth depends on growth in the labor force and its productivity.
Hence the question on the minds of politicians and economists alike: Is the productivity slowdown a permanent condition and constraint on growth, or is it a transitional phenomenon?
There is no easy answer – not least because of the wide range of factors contributing to the trend.
Beyond public-sector underinvestment, there is monetary policy, which, whatever its benefits and costs, has shifted corporate use of cash toward stock buy-backs, while real investment has remained subdued.
Meanwhile, information technology and digital networks have automated a range of white- and blue-collar jobs.
One might have expected this transition, which reached its pivotal year in the United States in 2000, to cause unemployment (at least until the economy adjusted), accompanied by a rise in productivity.
But, in the years leading up to the 2008 crisis, US data show that productivity trended downward; and, until the crisis, unemployment did not rise significantly.
One explanation is that employment in the years before the crisis was being propped up by credit-fueled demand.
Only when the credit bubble burst – triggering an abrupt adjustment, rather than the gradual adaptation of skills and human capital that would have occurred in more normal times – did millions of workers suddenly find themselves unemployed.
The implication is that the economic logic equating automation with increased productivity has not been invalidated; its proof has merely been delayed.
But there is more to the productivity conundrum than the 2008 crisis.
In the two decades that preceded the crisis, the sector of the US economy that produces internationally tradable goods and services – one-third of overall output – failed to generate any increase in jobs, even though it was growing faster than the non-tradable sector in terms of value added.
Most of the job losses in the tradable sector were in manufacturing industries, especially after the year 2000.
Although some of the losses may have resulted from productivity gains from information technology and digitization, many occurred when companies shifted segments of their supply chains to other parts of the global economy, particularly China.
By contrast, the US non-tradable sector – two-thirds of the economy – recorded large increases in employment in the years before 2008.
However, these jobs – often in domestic services – usually generated lower value added than the manufacturing jobs that had disappeared.
This is partly because the tradable sector was shifting toward employees with high levels of skill and education.
In that sense, productivity rose in the tradable sector, although structural shifts in the global economy were surely as important as employees becoming more efficient at doing the same things.
Unfortunately for advanced economies, the gains in per capita value added in the tradable sector were not large enough to overcome the effect of moving labor from manufacturing jobs to non-tradable service jobs (many of which existed only because of credit-fueled domestic demand in the halcyon days before 2008).
Hence the muted overall productivity gains.
Meanwhile, as developing economies become richer, they, too, will invest in technology in order to cope with rising labor costs (a trend already evident in China).
As a result, the high-water mark for global productivity and GDP growth may have been reached.
The organizing principle of global supply chains for most of the post-war period has been to move production toward low-cost pools of labor, because labor was and is the least mobile of economic factors (labor, capital, and knowledge).
That will remain true for high-value-added services that defy automation.
But for capital-intensive digital technologies, the organizing principle will change: production will move toward final markets, which will increasingly be found not just in advanced countries, but also in emerging economies as their middle classes expand.
Martin Baily and James Manyika recently pointed out that we have seen this movie before.
In the 1980’s, Robert Solow and Stephen Roach separately argued that IT investment was showing no impact on productivity.
Then the Internet became generally available, businesses reorganized themselves and their global supply chains, and productivity accelerated.
The dot-com bubble of the late 1990s was a misestimate of the timing, not the magnitude, of the digital revolution.
Likewise, Manyika and Baily argue that the much-discussed “Internet of Things” is probably some years away from showing up in aggregate productivity data.
Organizations, businesses, and people all have to adapt to the technologically driven shifts in our economies’ structure.
These transitions will be lengthy, rewarding some and forcing difficult adjustments on others, and their productivity effects will not appear in aggregate data for some time.
But those who move first are likely to benefit the most.
Avatar and Empire
NEW YORK – Do nations have psychological processes – even Freudian processes, such as collective egos that can be injured, and repressed guilt feelings that can well up from the collective unconscious – just as individuals do?
I believe that they do.
I also believe that just as an individual’s dreams and slips of the tongue reveal his or her repressed knowledge, so a culture’s “dreamwork” – its films, pop music, visual arts, and even in the resonant jokes, cartoons and advertising images – reveal the signs of this collective unconscious.
Moreover, a nation’s “irrational dreamwork” often reflects its actual condition more truthfully than its “ego” – its official pronouncements, diplomatic statements, and propaganda.
So take this theory with you when you see James Cameron’s Avatar , and watch for two revealing themes: the raw, guilty template of the American unconscious in the context of the “war on terror” and late-stage corporate imperialism, and a critical portrayal of America – for the first time ever in a Hollywood blockbuster – from the point of view of the rest of the world.
In the Hollywood tradition, of course, the American hero fighting an indigenous enemy is innocent and moral, a reluctant warrior bringing democracy, or at least justice, to feral savages.
In Avatar , the core themes highlight everything that has gone wrong with Americans’ view of themselves in relation to their country’s foreign policy.
The hero, Jake Sully, is crippled from combat in a previous American conflict, but is not well cared for by his own country; if he does his job of genocide properly, “the corporation” will reward him with proper medical treatment.
He signs on, essentially, as a corporate contractor – shades of Blackwater’s massacre of civilians in Baghdad’s Nisour Square.
The enterprise is a “mission” in which the soldiers fight not “for freedom” but “for a paycheck.”
They take their direction from corporate bureaucrats in waging war against the indigenous people, whose sacred land is sited on vast reserves of “unobtainium,” which the corporation wishes to secure at all costs.
The soldiers are portrayed as being manipulated by their leaders – through vicious racism and religious derision – into brutal action against the non-aggressive “hostiles.”
When the villain, the American military leader of the attack, plans to bomb flat the indigenous people’s sacred tree, he boasts that he will blow such a massive hole in their “racial memory” that they won’t come “within a thousand clicks” of the place again.
Even the machinery of US military combat is portrayed non-heroically.
Instead of the classic images of the US Cavalry courageously sweeping down on the savages, or of decent American doughboys bravely clearing out nests of Nazis, bored technocrats, insulated by immense layers of technology, firebomb green valleys, slaughtering enemy warriors and defenseless women and babies while sipping coffee and casually fiddling with touch screens.
The characters’ lines (all quotes are approximate) are those that never pierce the bubble of American self-regard with respect to Iraq and Afghanistan.
“You should not be here!” exclaims the indigenous heroine, and eventual love interest, Neytiri, as if she is speaking of the entire US enterprise overseas.
“You are like a baby.” Gesturing at the mayhem caused by the destructive but self-regarding hero, before he “goes native,” she says, “This is your fault.
They should never have had to die.”
Later, as Sully starts to become sympathetic towards those whom he has been sent to betray, he tells the bureaucrats: “If people are sitting on something you want, you call them the enemy.”
When he has fully identified himself with their cause, he joins a movement that is essentially a counterinsurgency, even a jihad (“Let’s show the Sky People [the US] whose land this is!”).
He and his small band of Americans are even locked in a small Guantánamo-style cell and called “traitors.”
The indigenous people are an amalgam of echoes from all the great wars of empire that have troubled the recent American conscience.
Although they are physically a fantasy sci-fi mix of blue skin and cat-like movement, they are culturally a mix of Native Americans and Vietnamese, with Arabic accents thrown in.
They have qualities that Americans would do well to emulate.
They respect their environment, whereas the Americans must “return to a dying planet,” because, as the indigenous people put it, “they have killed their own mother.”
Sully’s journey is not one of conquest but of awakening to his and his people’s true relationship to others: “What am I, the bad guy?” he laughs at first, as if that were impossible.
In the end, however, he tries to warn his own imperialist team of the futility of their brutal approach: “What do we have to offer them?
Light beer?
Blue Jeans?
They will never leave the Hometree [their sacred land].
We have nothing that they want.”
Ironically, Avatar will probably do more to exhume Americans’ suppressed knowledge about the shallowness of their national mythology in the face of their oppressive presence in the rest of the world than any amount of editorializing, college courses, or even protest from outside America’s borders.
But I am not complaining about this.
Hollywood is that powerful.
But, in the case of Avatar , the power of American filmmaking has for once been directed toward American self-knowledge rather than American escapism.
A Velvet Climate Revolution?
BUDAPEST – In the discussions now underway in Copenhagen, the fate of Earth’s climate is at stake.
Although many of the participants recognize the urgency, the actions of many of them suggest that a business-as-usual approach will suffice.
But it will not.
The world needs a decisive break with the past, and that break needs to start now.
Fortunately, we have recent precedents for changes that fundamentally alter the economic and political landscape – i.e., of revolutionary change undertaken peacefully and with enthusiastic popular support. The collapse of communism in Central and Eastern Europe 20 years ago, and the establishment of new democratic polities with market economies, was precisely such a decisive and positive rupture with the past.
Those regime changes required people to change not only their way of life, but also their habits of mind.
The ecological revolution that the world demands today – a transition to a low-carbon global economy and a low-carbon way of daily life – will require a similarly comprehensive change.
Obviously, such a comparison has its limits.
Yet, apart from the clear differences between the revolution of 1989 and the green revolution that is to come, there are striking similarities. First, a thoroughgoing alteration of highly complex systems will be needed to preserve the world’s climate, just as such root-and-branch changes were needed 20 years ago in the postcommunist countries.
Second, the crisis of today must be managed in a peaceful manner, which was also our goal in 1989 – reflected in dissidents’ startling idea of regime change through negotiation.
Finally, today, too, comprehensive transformation is supposed to occur in a very short time, which 1989 taught us is eminently possible.
The method of change that we followed then – and which I recommend now – precludes violence and minimizes costs.
The tool for achieving it was – and remains – agreement in advance on the fundamental goals of change and on a roadmap to guide the interested parties.
The essence is that the decision to carry out fundamental change must be made (and clearly communicated to everyone involved!) at the outset.
The idea of “reforming” or adapting the old system without decisive change must be rejected before the process begins.
Hungary and Poland reached agreement on the rules for peaceful transformation through a series of negotiations between the ruling communist parties and the opposition organizations.
This bears a similarity to climate conferences where countries – developed, emerging, or poor – sit down at the same table and try to reach agreement on a common goal: a fair model for reducing CO2 emissions.
The people of Central and Eastern Europe simply wanted democracy and prosperity – but the elite had to be able to convince them to accept many unforeseen concurrent events, which was by no means easy.
Similar acts of compromise on sustainability, measures to limit consumption, and to ensure equality will require the involvement of all stakeholders in order to gain their acceptance.
This underlines the huge responsibility of those charged with guiding and managing these changes.
Even though the transformation cannot be fully planned in advance, insisting on certain key points at the start is a basic requirement.
One such requirement during the changes in 1989 concerned the creation of minimum institutions to guarantee the rule of law: free elections, civil liberty, and an independent judiciary.
The factors forcing ecological regime change – climate, biodiversity, injustice – cannot be managed in isolation from one another.
Nevertheless, a key component must have priority: reducing the effects of and adjusting to climate change.
Can We Feed the World?
LONDON – In the 1960’s, the Green Revolution – which included the development of high-yielding crop varieties, the expansion of irrigation infrastructure, and the distribution of modern fertilizers and pesticides to developing-country farmers – bolstered agricultural production worldwide.
But chronic hunger remains pervasive, particularly in developing countries, which are affected most by crop shortages and food-price volatility.