Even if China manages to mitigate such risks, unseating the US dollar as the dominant global currency will be no easy feat.
Inertia favors currencies that are already in use internationally, and China lacks deep and liquid financial markets, an important precondition that any international reserve currency must meet.
Furthermore, China’s banking system, which remains subject to extensive government control, lags far behind those of the US and Europe in terms of efficiency and transparency.
If, however, China succeeds in developing a more convertible capital account and bolstering its financial system’s efficiency, the renminbi is likely to emerge as a new international reserve currency, complementing the US dollar and the euro.
This would benefit companies and central banks alike, by enabling them to diversify their foreign-currency holdings further.
History suggests that a shift in global currency dominance is likely to occur gradually.
For now, China is focused on winning the renminbi’s inclusion, even with a small share, in the SDR currency basket.
The IMF’s major shareholders should seriously consider it.
The renminbi’s continued internationalization, not to mention further progress on critical financial reforms, would contribute to the creation of a more stable and efficient global reserve system.
The Renminbi Goes Forth
LONDON – The Nobel laureate Robert Mundell once said, “great powers have great currencies.”
China, whose government Mundell long advised, seemed to take this notion to heart, prodding the International Monetary Fund for years to add the renminbi to the basket of currencies that determine the value of the IMF’s reserve asset, the Special Drawing Right (SDR).
And now the IMF has decided to do just that, in what amounts to a huge vote of confidence in China’s capacity to play a major role in international finance.
Many market participants, however, remain skeptical about the decision.
Does the renminbi really belong in the same category as the US dollar, the euro, the Japanese yen, and the British pound in the international monetary system?
No doubt, China has made remarkable progress over a relatively short period.
Since 2009, the share of China’s trade settled in renminbi has increased from less than 1% to more than 20%.
And the renminbi now ranks fourth among the world’s currencies used for international payments.
But the renminbi’s 3% share in global payments lags far behind that of the dollar (45%) and the euro (27%).
Moreover, growth in the use of the renminbi to settle trade has been concentrated largely in the Asia-Pacific region, and specifically in transactions between China and its neighbors.
And demand for renminbi-denominated assets remains relatively low, with a mere 1.5% of total renminbi bank deposits held outside China.
The contrast between the renminbi and its SDR counterparts is stark.
The renminbi offshore bond market amounts to just 0.5% of the world’s total, with 40% issued in dollars, 41% in euros, nearly 10% in pounds, and 2% in yen.
The value of loans denominated in renminbi – CN¥188 billion ($29.2 billion) – is tiny, especially when one considers that almost 50% of total international banking liabilities are denominated in dollars, approximately 30% in euros, 5% in pounds, and about 3% in yen.
And the renminbi accounts for 0.6-1% of global foreign-exchange reserves held by central banks, whereas the dollar and the euro account for 62% and 23%, respectively.
In short, unlike the rest of the currencies in the SDR basket, the renminbi is an international currency in the making, just as China is an economic and financial power in the making.
Indeed, like most developing countries, China remains an “immature creditor” that lends mainly in dollars; and if it needed to borrow in international markets, it would have to issue most of its debt in dollars, not renminbi.
Clearly, China’s standing in international finance does not match its status in international trade.
Nonetheless, there is a distinct sense that the renminbi will become a key player in global financial markets.
After all, unlike other developing countries – even large ones like Brazil, India, and Russia – China has an economy that is large enough to provide critical mass to its currency’s development.
Furthermore, Chinese leaders are determined to push through reforms – especially of the banking sector and state-owned enterprises – that will help drive forward this development.
They have made it clear that one of their key goals for the next five years is to narrow the gap between the international standing of the renminbi and that of the world’s “great currencies,” as they promote use of the renminbi far beyond the Asia-Pacific region.
It is important to note, however, that China’s leaders do not seem to be angling for the renminbi to replace the dollar as the dominant international currency.
Their approach – based on the belief that a more diversified, and thus more liquid, international monetary system would contribute to a more balanced and less volatile global economy – is more pragmatic.
Anticipating a shift from a dollar-based (and, more broadly, US-dominated) system toward a multi-currency, multipolar system, China’s leaders are laying the groundwork for their country (and its currency) to grasp one of the positions at the top, alongside other great powers.
This goal certainly seems attainable.
Indeed, IMF Managing Director Christine Lagarde’s assessment of the renminbi’s chances of joining the SDR basket earlier this year – the question is “not if, but when” – seems to apply to China’s broader financial rise.
While some countries – the United States and Japan, in particular – are far from enthusiastic about that, it is difficult to deny what seems inevitable (neither country formally opposed the SDR decision when it came).
And, as China gains more financial clout, its role in global economic governance will undoubtedly grow as well.
Given all of this, it is unsurprising that the reform of the international monetary system and its governance will feature prominently at next year’s G-20 summit, hosted by China, which will hold the group’s rotating presidency.
It is not yet clear how China will shape the debate.
But the mere fact that it will happen at the G-20, rather than at the long-dominant G-7, sends a clear message that the global economic and monetary system is changing for good.
Great Expectations for the Renminbi
SHANGHAI – The International Monetary Fund’s recent decision to add the Chinese renminbi to the basket of currencies that determine the value of its reserve asset, the Special Drawing Right, has captured headlines around the world.
But the SDR itself has not exactly dominated discussions – much less transactions – since its creation in 1969.
So does the decision really matter?
In fact, given the SDR’s very limited role in the global economy, the move will have few concrete effects in the short term.
In the longer term, however, the attention the decision has attracted could spur wider use of the SDR.
More important, at least for now, the decision amounts to an endorsement by the IMF of the progress China has made toward renminbi internationalization, while reflecting – and reinforcing – China’s growing economic clout.
Since China joined the World Trade Organization in 2001, its GDP has surged from about CN¥20 trillion ($3.1 trillion) to CN¥60 trillion.
In 2009 China became the world’s largest exporter.
And last year, according to the IMF, China overtook the United States to become the world’s largest economy (in purchasing power parity terms).
The acknowledgement by the IMF board, which represents all 188 of the Fund’s member countries, that the renminbi meets “all existing criteria” for inclusion in the SDR basket is another step forward along this path of progress.
It is important to note, however, that meeting “all existing criteria” does not place the renminbi on par with, say, the US dollar – or, indeed, with any of the other SDR currencies (the euro, the British pound, or the Japanese yen) – in terms of international usage.
On the contrary, despite China’s massive GDP and trade volume, the renminbi’s share in the global foreign-exchange market remains negligible.
And the process of internationalizing the renminbi is far from complete.
Given this, the IMF could easily have rejected the renminbi’s bid for inclusion in the SDR basket, as it did five years ago.
But the IMF seemed eager (especially in the last few months) to bring China on board this time around.
What brought about the Fund’s change of heart?
The explanation, I believe, lies largely in the August 11 devaluation of the renminbi, after a decade of appreciation.
By moving away from the renminbi peg to the US dollar – an undoubtedly risky move – China demonstrated its willingness to allow market forces to establish the exchange rate in the long term.
Of course, now that the renminbi has been accepted into the SDR basket, China must prove that it can manage dramatic currency depreciation effectively and continue to make progress toward internationalization.
This will be no easy feat, especially at a time of slowing economic growth.
A gradual depreciation would create expectations of further exchange-rate weakening, thereby fueling capital outflows and undermining companies’ willingness to use renminbi in exports and imports.
The renminbi offshore market, which has strengthened considerably over the last few years, would lose value, forcing the People’s Bank of China to channel foreign-exchange reserves toward that market to offset the decline.
Already, China’s reserves have declined considerably – by $87.2 billion last month alone.
Despite these challenges, China’s leaders anticipate that, in the longer term, the renminbi’s inclusion in the SDR basket will help to bring about the currency’s steady appreciation and, by serving as a kind of certification of credibility, support its continued internationalization.
They are probably right.
Nonetheless, what will really drive the renminbi’s continued rise will not be the SDR (though it will help), but China’s own long-term economic performance.
Indeed, as Arvind Subramanian has argued, China’s share of global GDP and trade is what makes the renminbi likely to become a global reserve currency.
The question is when.
According to Subramanian, it could occur as early as 2020.
Chinese researchers are somewhat less optimistic.
Five years ago, Pan Yingli of Shanghai Jiao Tong University projected that, without accounting for other currencies’ incumbency advantage, the renminbi’s share of foreign-exchange reserves worldwide could reach 26% by 2025 (about the current level of the euro).
Accounting for the incumbency advantage, the share falls to 10%.
But even at that level, the renminbi could be the world’s third reserve currency, after the dollar and the euro, by 2030.
In short, the inclusion of the renminbi in the SDR basket does matter, and not just symbolically.
By demonstrating its confidence in the renminbi’s continued rise, the IMF has reinforced global expectations of – and lent implicit support to – the renminbi’s progress toward internationalization.
Whatever challenges China faces, its steady march to the forefront of the global economy is set to continue.
China’s Lonely Fight Against Deflation
HONG KONG – In early February, as China celebrated the start of the Year of the Monkey, a widely circulated hedge-fund newsletter roiled financial markets by predicting a hard landing for the economy, the collapse of the shadow-banking system, and the devaluation of the renminbi.
Stability returned only after People’s Bank of China Governor Zhou Xiaochuan, in an interview with Caixin magazine, explained the logic of China’s exchange-rate policy.
But China’s ability to maintain that stability depends on a multitude of interrelated factors, such as low productivity growth, declining real interest rates, disruptive technologies, excess capacity and debt overhangs, and excess savings.
In fact, the current battle over the renminbi’s exchange rate reflects a tension between the interests of the “financial engineers” (such as the managers of dollar-based hedge funds) and the “real engineers” (Chinese policymakers).
Foreign-exchange markets are, in theory, zero-sum games: the buyer’s loss is the seller’s gain, and vice versa.
Financial engineers love speculating on these markets, because transaction costs are very low and leveraged naked shorts are allowed, without the need to hedge an underlying asset.
The exchange rate, however, is an asset price that has huge economic spillovers, because it affects real trade and direct-investment flows.
Nowadays, financial engineers increasingly shape the exchange rate through financial transactions that may not be linked to economic fundamentals.
Because financial markets notoriously overshoot, if the short-sellers win by pushing exchange rates and the real economy into a low-level equilibrium, the losses take the form of investment, jobs, and income.
In other words, financial engineers’ gain is real people’s pain.
In order to achieve these gains, financial engineers use the media to influence market behavior.
For example, short-sellers portray sharp declines in commodity and oil prices as negative factors, even though lower energy prices actually benefit most consumers – and even some producers, by allowing them to compete with their oligopolistic counterparts.
It is estimated that lower oil and commodity prices could add some $460 billion to China’s trade balance, largely offsetting the loss in foreign-exchange reserves in 2015.
Similarly, China’s growth slowdown and the rise of non-performing loans are being discussed as exclusively negative developments.
But they are also necessary pains on the path to supply-side reform aimed at eliminating excess capacity, improving resource efficiency, and jettisoning polluting industries.
The real engineers, excluding those whose judgment is clouded by personal financial interests, should counter this influence, while refusing to succumb to the temptation of quick fixes.
Fortunately, China’s authorities have long understood that a stable renminbi exchange rate is critical to national, regional, and global stability.
Indeed, that is why they did not devalue the renminbi during the Asian financial crisis.
They saw what most analysts missed: leaving the US dollar as the main safe-haven currency for global savings, with near-zero interest rates, would have the same deflationary impact that the gold standard had in the 1930s.
In the face of today’s deflationary forces, however, real engineers in the world’s major economies have been unwilling or unable to reflate.
The United States, the world’s largest economy, will not use fiscal tools to that end, owing to domestic political constraints.
Europe’s unwillingness to reflate reflects Germany’s deep-seated fear of inflation (which underpins its enduring commitment to austerity).
Japan cannot reflate because of its aging population and irresolute implementation of Prime Minister Shinzo Abe’s economic plan, so-called Abenomics.
And China is still paying for the excessive reflation caused by its CN¥4 trillion ($586 billion) stimulus package in 2009, which added over CN¥80 trillion to its own debt.
Meanwhile, the consequences of financial engineering are intensifying.
Zero and negative interest rates have not only encouraged short-term speculation in asset markets and harmed long-term investments; they have also destroyed the business model of banks, insurance companies, and fund managers.
Why should savers pay banks or fund managers 1-2% intermediation costs when prospective returns on investments are zero?
A system in which financial intermediaries can increase profits only by increasing leverage – sustainable only by increasing quantitative easing – is doomed to fail.
Indeed, in hindsight, it seems clear that financial engineers outperformed the real economy only with the support of super-financial engineers – that is, central banks.
Initially, balance-sheet expansion – by $5 trillion since 2009 – provided banks with the cheap funding they needed to avoid failure.
But bank deleveraging (brought about by stiffer regulatory requirements), together with negative interest rates, caused financial institutions’ equity prices to fall, leading to further pro-cyclical destruction of value through price deflation, increasing illiquidity, and crowded exits.
Past experience has taught China’s real engineers that the only way to escape deflation is through painful structural reforms – not easy money and competitive devaluation.
The question is whether the US and other reserve-currency countries will share the burden of maintaining global currency stability, through an agreement resembling the 1985 Plaza Accord, in which five major economies agreed to depreciate the US dollar against the Japanese yen and the German Deutsche Mark.
If not, why would Asia’s net lenders, especially China, continue funding speculation against themselves?
The US dollar is a safe haven, but savers in need of liquidity still lack an impartial lender of last resort.
Depositing in reserve currencies at near-zero interest rates makes sense only if the banker is not funding financial speculation against the depositor.
But, as it stands, financial engineers have a lot of freedom; indeed, if they are big enough, they can’t fail or, apparently, even go to jail.
China’s G-20 presidency this year offers an important opportunity to emphasize that renminbi stability is important not only for China, but also for the global financial system as a whole.
If the US dollar enters into another round of revaluation, the only winners will be financial engineers.
Ultimatum Ekonomi untuk Negara-Negara Arab
WASHINGTON, DC – Jika negara-negara Timur Tengah tidak mulai membuat kemajuan nyata di bidang reformasi politik dan ekonomi, maka gejolak regional lebih jauh tidak dapat dihindari.
Dengan sistem rente yang dipertahankan negara-negara Timur Tengah selama beberapa dekade tengah mengalami banyak tantangan, para pembuat keputusan harus memulai proses pembuatan kontrak sosial yang baru walaupun hal ini sulit untuk dilakukan.    
Kontrak ini mulai terkikis di negara-negara Arab pada saat pergantian abad, ketika pemerintah dengan anggaran meningkat dan birokrasi yang kembung tidak lagi mampu memberikan pasokan layanan dasar yang mecukupi, seperti layanan kesehatan dan pendidikan, menciptakan lapangan kerja yang cukup, atau mempertahankan subsidi makanan dan bahan bakar.
Meskipun bantuan negara berkurang, kebanyakan pemimpin negara terus mendesak warga negaranya untuk memenuhi peran mereka dengan tidak berpartisipasi secara berarti dalam kehidupan publik. 
Pemerintah negara-negara Arab mampu mempertahankan perekonomian yang tidak efisien selama beberapa decade karena mereka didukung oleh pendapatan minyak.
Dalam beberapa dekade terakhir, kebanyakan negara-negara Arab mendapatkan keuntungan dari cadangan minyak dan gas bumi berlimpah di Timur Tengah.
Negara-negara penghasil hidrokarbon menggunakan keuntungan tersebut untuk membeli kesetiaan warga negara mereka dan menciptakan negara kesejahteraan; dan negara yang tidak memproduksi minyak menikmati keuntungan dari bantuan, arus masuk modal, dan remiten yang dikirim warga negara mereka yang bekerja di negara yang kaya sumber daya.
Karena pemerintah negara-negara penghasil minyak menggunakan pendapatan untuk menyediakan sebagian besar kebutuhan masyarakatnya – termasuk pekerjaan, layanan, dan bantuan – mereka memupuk budaya ketergantungan, daripada mendorong kemandirian dan kewirausahaan untuk mengembangkan sektor swasta.
Terlebih lagi, karena pemerintah tidak perlu menerapkan pajak untuk pendapatan negara, warga negara tidak bisa menentang sistem otoriter yang berlaku.
Budaya politik ini mencerminkan prinsip sederhana: “tidak ada pajak, tidak ada perwakilan”.
Karena harga minyak menurun dan mungkin akan tetap rendah selama beberapa tahun, jika tidak secara permanen, sistem rente negara-negara Timur Tengah mengalami tantangan yang sangat signifikan.
Arab Saudi, sebagai contoh, menaikkan pajak, memotong subsidi domestik, dan mengubah paradigma bantuan luar negeri menjadi investasi.
Kerajaan ini telah sejak lama memberikan dukungan finansial kepada Mesir, Jordan, dan negara-negara lain di wilayah tersebut, sehingga hal ini akan memberikan tekanan kepada pemerintahan-pemerintahan tersebut untuk mengejar pertumbuhan sektor swasta untuk meningkatkan kinerja ekonomi negara mereka.  
Namun, walaupun pemerintah negara-negara Arab telah mencapai batas kemampuan mereka untuk mempekerjakan warga negara, meningkatkan hutang publik, dan menarik hibah dari luar negeri, anggota kelompok elit politik dan ekonomi, yang diuntungkan dengan sistem rente yang berlaku sekarang, kemungkinan akan menolak upaya reformasi yang bermakna.
Dan kita bisa menduga akan ada penolakan lebih lanjut dari birokrat negara, yang tidak mempunyai visi untuk transisi ke model ekonomi yang inklusif dan berkelanjutan.   
Namun, negara-negara Timur Tengah tidak bisa mengharapkan ekonomi yang makmur tanpa transisi tersebut, Setelah bergantung pada sumber daya selama beberapa dekade, pemerintah-pemerintah ini harus mengganti tidak hanya model pertumbuhan mereka, tapi juga model pemerintahan yang lebih mewakili warganya.
Ketika masyarakat Arab diminta untuk menerima subsidi yang lebih kecil, lapangan kerja di pemerintahan yang lebih sedikit, dan pada umumnya bantuan pemerintah yang lebih sedikit, mereka akan meminta bagian lebih besar dalam proses pembuatan keputusan.
Saat ini, nagara-negara Arab terjebak diantara ekonomi yang tidak berkelanjutan dan status quo politik yang bagi orang dengan pemikiran pragmatis harus digantikan dengan sistem ekonomi inklusif dan berdasarkan meritokrasi.
Terlalu banyak negara-negara Arab yang menaruh diri mereka dalam situasi yang tidak bisa diperhankan ini, karena mereka tidak menaruh pertimbangan akan pembangunan institusi pemerintah yang dibutuhkan negara mereka.   
Gelombang pertama pemberontakan di Arab, yang dimulai pada bulan Desember 2010 dan menyebabkan gerakan Arab Spring, adalah respon dari kegagalan kontrak sosial yang lama.
Dengan kondisi dimana harga minyak turun dan sistem politik tertutup masih berlaku, gelombang protes baru dapat muncul, khususnya di pemerintahan yang tidak dapat melihat bahwa berakhirnya sistem rente juga menandai berakhirnya kontrak sosial yang lama.
Bagi pemerintahan seperti ini, reformasi ekonomi adalah masalah kelangsungan hidup.
Di sistem yang lebih terbuka, pemerintahan Arab harus melakukan privatisasi banyak perusahan milik pemerintah, dan mempermudah wirausaha untuk mendaftarkan startup dan meluncurkan bisnis baru.
Dan, pada akhirnya, reformasi ekonomi negara-negara Arab akan berhasil jika masyarakat mempunyai suara yang lebih kuat di pemerintahan.
Tunisia adalah satu-satunya negara dimana kontrak sosial yang baru telah menggantikan sistem rente.
Negara-negara Arab lain mempunyai dua pilihan.
Pimpinan negara-negara Arab bisa mulai mengubah status quo yang tidak berkelanjutan, dengan penderitaan dan ketidakpastian perubahan; atau mereka bisa menunggu hingga kondisi menjadi lebih buruk, dan mereka ikut tenggelam didalamnya.     
Re-Orienting America
NEW YORK – Some 40 years ago, when I entered Oxford University as a graduate student, I declared my interest in the Middle East.
I was told that this part of the world came under the rubric of “Oriental Studies,” and that I would be assigned an appropriate professor.
But when I arrived for my first meeting at the professor’s office, his bookshelves were lined with volumes bearing Chinese characters.
He was a specialist in what was, at least for me at the time, the wrong Orient.
Something akin to this mistake has befallen American foreign policy.
The United States has become preoccupied with the Middle East – in certain ways, the wrong Orient – and has not paid adequate attention to East Asia and the Pacific, where much of the twenty-first century’s history will be written.
The good news is that this focus is shifting.
Indeed, a quiet transformation is taking place in American foreign policy, one that is as significant as it is overdue.
The US has rediscovered Asia.
“Rediscovered” is the operative word here.
Asia was one of the two principal theaters of World War II, and again shared centrality with Europe during the Cold War.
Indeed, the period’s two greatest conflicts – the wars in Korea and Vietnam – were fought on the Asian mainland.
But, with the end of the Cold War and the demise of the Soviet Union, Asia receded from American interest.
In the first decade of the post-Cold War era, the US trained much of its attention on Europe.
American policymakers focused primarily on enlarging NATO to encompass many of the former Warsaw Pact countries, and on contending with the post-Yugoslav wars.
The second phase of the post-Cold War era began with the 9/11 terror attacks.
What followed was a decade of US focus on terrorism and the large-scale commitment of American military forces to Iraq and Afghanistan.
The two conflicts have claimed more than 6,000 American lives, cost more than $1 trillion, and consumed countless hours for two presidents and their senior staff.
But now this phase of American foreign policy is ending.
President Barack Obama has announced that US armed forces will be out of Iraq by the end of 2011.
In Afghanistan, US force levels have peaked and are declining; the only questions concern the pace of withdrawal and the size and role of any residual US military presence after 2014.
This is not to argue that the Middle East is irrelevant or that the US should ignore it.
On the contrary, it is still home to massive oil and gas reserves.
It is a part of the world where terrorists are active and conflicts have been common.
Iran is moving ever closer to developing nuclear weapons; if it does, others may well follow suit.
With its large populations and fast-growing economies, it is difficult to exaggerate the region’s economic importance.
American companies export more than $300 billion in goods and services to countries in the region each year.
Meanwhile, Asian countries are a critical source of investment for the US economy.
Maintaining regional stability is thus critical for US (and global) economic success.
The US has multiple alliance obligations – with Japan, South Korea, Australia, the Philippines, and Thailand –&#160;which are needed, in part, to deter North Korean aggression.
Moreover, US policy must create an environment in which a rising China is never tempted to use its growing power coercively – within or outside the region.
For this reason, recent US efforts to strengthen ties with India and several Southeast Asian countries make good sense.
The US is right to shift its focus from the Middle East to the Far East.
The good news is that this conclusion seems to be shared across the US political spectrum.
Mitt Romney, the likely Republican nominee for president, pledges to increase the rate of shipbuilding – a commitment linked to an increased US presence in the Pacific.
And US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton speaks of America pivoting away from the greater Middle East: “The world’s strategic and economic center of gravity is shifting east, and we are focusing more on the Asia-Pacific region.”
Regardless of whether the twenty-first century will be another “American century,” it is certain that it will be an Asian and Pacific century.
It is both natural and sensible that the US be central to whatever evolves from that fact.
The World Without America
NEW YORK – Let me posit a radical idea: The most critical threat facing the United States now and for the foreseeable future is not a rising China, a reckless North Korea, a nuclear Iran, modern terrorism, or climate change.
Although all of these constitute potential or actual threats, the biggest challenges facing the US are its burgeoning debt, crumbling infrastructure, second-rate primary and secondary schools, outdated immigration system, and slow economic growth – in short, the domestic foundations of American power.
Readers in other countries may be tempted to react to this judgment with a dose of schadenfreude, finding more than a little satisfaction in America’s difficulties.
Such a response should not be surprising.
The US and those representing it have been guilty of hubris (the US may often be the indispensable nation, but it would be better if others pointed this out), and examples of inconsistency between America’s practices and its principles understandably provoke charges of hypocrisy.
When America does not adhere to the principles that it preaches to others, it breeds resentment.
But, like most temptations, the urge to gloat at America’s imperfections and struggles ought to be resisted.
People around the globe should be careful what they wish for.
America’s failure to deal with its internal challenges would come at a steep price.
Indeed, the rest of the world’s stake in American success is nearly as large as that of the US itself.
Part of the reason is economic.
The US economy still accounts for about one-quarter of global output.
If US growth accelerates, America’s capacity to consume other countries’ goods and services will increase, thereby boosting growth around the world.
At a time when Europe is drifting and Asia is slowing, only the US (or, more broadly, North America) has the potential to drive global economic recovery.
The US remains a unique source of innovation.
Most of the world’s citizens communicate with mobile devices based on technology developed in Silicon Valley; likewise, the Internet was made in America.
More recently, new technologies developed in the US greatly increase the ability to extract oil and natural gas from underground formations.
This technology is now making its way around the globe, allowing other societies to increase their energy production and decrease both their reliance on costly imports and their carbon emissions.
The US is also an invaluable source of ideas.
Its world-class universities educate a significant percentage of future world leaders.
More fundamentally, the US has long been a leading example of what market economies and democratic politics can accomplish.
People and governments around the world are far more likely to become more open if the American model is perceived to be succeeding.
Finally, the world faces many serious challenges, ranging from the need to halt the spread of weapons of mass destruction, fight climate change, and maintain a functioning world economic order that promotes trade and investment to regulating practices in cyberspace, improving global health, and preventing armed conflicts.
These problems will not simply go away or sort themselves out.
While Adam Smith’s “invisible hand” may ensure the success of free markets, it is powerless in the world of geopolitics.
Order requires the visible hand of leadership to formulate and realize global responses to global challenges.
Don’t get me wrong: None of this is meant to suggest that the US can deal effectively with the world’s problems on its own.
Unilateralism rarely works.
It is not just that the US lacks the means; the very nature of contemporary global problems suggests that only collective responses stand a good chance of succeeding.
But multilateralism is much easier to advocate than to design and implement.
Right now there is only one candidate for this role: the US.
No other country has the necessary combination of capability and outlook.&#160;
This brings me back to the argument that the US must put its house in order – economically, physically, socially, and politically – if it is to have the resources needed to promote order in the world.
Everyone should hope that it does: The alternative to a world led by the US is not a world led by China, Europe, Russia, Japan, India, or any other country, but rather a world that is not led at all.
Such a world would almost certainly be characterized by chronic crisis and conflict.
That would be bad not just for Americans, but for the vast majority of the planet’s inhabitants.
Libya’s Anti-Military Militias
NEW YORK – As the United States struggles to understand last September’s attack on its diplomatic mission in Benghazi, which took the lives of four Americans, including US Ambassador J. Christopher Stevens, a formal investigation has not even been opened in Libya – and likely never will be.
The country’s leaders face myriad challenges – from a vocal federalist movement in the East, aimed at usurping the central government’s prerogatives, to a wave of assassinations targeting security officials – which leaves them few resources to allocate to a case that poses no immediate threat to their domestic standing.
Instead, they are focusing on rebuilding the state that former leader Muammar el-Qaddafi destroyed.
They have been grappling with the need to create effective administrative institutions and foster an independent judiciary.
While the National Transitional Council (NTC), the interim governing body that replaced Muammar el-Qaddafi’s regime, failed to lay the groundwork for a modern state, it is too soon to pass judgment on the elected leadership that took power in November 2012.
The litmus test will be progress on security.
The Benghazi attack, and the lack of a credible Libyan response, demonstrated that the country is neither governed by the rule of law nor in a position to impose it.
The new government must change this situation by disbanding militias and integrating their members into official Libyan security forces.
For starters, the government must stop coddling the militias, and focus on building the national army – something that the NTC neglected.
To be sure, persuading the militias to transfer their loyalties to the state will not be easy, especially given the fighters’ strong, often ideological connections to their individual units.
But it is a crucial step toward establishing order and enhancing the newly elected government’s legitimacy.
Brigades in eastern Libya, or Cyrenaica, for example, are strongly rooted in traditional Islamist ideology.
Fighters in the region have been organized into powerful units, such as the February 17 Martyrs Brigade, the large government-allied force that was hired to protect the US mission in Benghazi, and the Libya Shield Force, the widely deployed coalition of militias that assisted the US mission on the night of the attack.
By contrast, militias in western Libya, or Tripolitania, tend to emerge in individual cities, with the most powerful brigades based in Misrata and Zintan.
These groups want to join the security services as units, rather than as individual fighters, in order to retain their communal bonds and, in turn, to prevent their full integration into a national army.
For its part, the government has treated the creation of national armed forces as an afterthought.
During the revolution, NTC leaders funneled resources and funding to the Islamist brigades with which they shared a common ideology, rather than to the fledgling Libyan National Army (LNA).
After Islamist fighters killed the commander-in-chief of the rebel forces, Abdul Fattah Younes, in July 2011, the military was sidelined.
Indeed, the NTC willingly facilitated the military’s demise.
When tribal clashes erupted in the remote desert town of Kufra early last year, the council dispatched the Libya Shield Force, not LNA units, to quell the unrest.
Moreover, the military receives inadequate financing, with officers forced to use their personal funds to purchase gas for military vehicles.
Meanwhile, the governments of the wealthy Gulf States provide funding directly to militias, allowing them to purchase new vehicles and cutting-edge communications equipment.
Libyans complain that the new government has continued the NTC’s policy of favoring revolutionary brigades over institutionalized security services.
After the September 11 attack in Benghazi, frustrated Libyans poured into the streets shouting anti-militia slogans.
Ten days later, protesters overran the base of Ansar al-Sharia, the Islamist militia suspected of masterminding the attack, as part of a sweep of raids on militia compounds throughout the city.
Only a few hours after the demonstrations began, government authorities sent a mass text message that urged the protesters to return to their homes, adding that “the Rafallah al-Sahati Brigade, the February 17 Brigade, and the Libya Shield Force are legal, and are subject to the authority of the [military] general staff.”
President Mohamed Magariaf later confirmed this view.
In response, a former NTC member lamented that the government had “lost a chance to finish off all of the militias,” stating that the groups responsible are backed by Qatar, and that the government did not want to interfere with their agenda.
Such patronage extends to the military establishment itself.
Chief of Staff Yousef al-Manqous is said to favor Cyrenaican militias over the military units under his command, while government officials complain about the lack of an effective chain of command.
For example, in June, Defense Minister Osama al-Juwali attacked the NTC for failing to consult with the appropriate officials on its decisions, stating that his role had been reduced to “signing the plans of the chief of staff.”
With ample foreign funding and preferential treatment from the government, the militias have no incentive to disband.
Furthermore, they are wary of turning over control of their brigades to military commanders whom they claim supported Qaddafi or, at least, failed to oppose him.
While there is no shortage of challenges facing Libya’s new government, disbanding the militias must be at the top of its agenda.
Otherwise, the aspirations that drove the anti-Qaddafi revolution – an end to corruption, stability, and shared prosperity – will never be fulfilled.
A New Climate-Policy Paradigm
BERLIN – Let’s be serious: the ongoing United Nations climate negotiations will probably fail.
To be sure, as with the recent gathering in Bonn, expectations for the November climate conference in Warsaw are so low that there is almost no room for failure.
But, with climate negotiators promising to deliver the global agreement that they could not deliver in Copenhagen in 2009, the December 2015 summit in Paris is almost certain to be another debacle.
For the European Union, the leading authority in international climate policy, the outcome of the Copenhagen summit was particularly disappointing.
After years of negotiation and numerous scientific-assessment reports, delegations had the highest expectations for concluding a comprehensive climate treaty.
Those expectations turned out to be illusory.
This time will not be different.
While an agreement might be reached in 2015, it will probably not cover all major emitters, and it definitely will not be ambitious enough to achieve the overarching goal of international climate cooperation, which is to prevent global temperatures from rising more than 2° Celsius above pre-industrial levels.
Moreover, negotiators will not get another chance.
After more than two decades of largely fruitless debate, during which CO2 emissions have continued to rise, another failed summit will trigger a profound crisis for international climate diplomacy, forcing its proponents either to change the rules of the game or accept that it cannot be won.
The first victim of such a crisis will be the top-down approach to climate policy pursued by the EU and many prominent scientists.
This policy-making model begins with the limit for tolerable climate change; the world’s remaining emissions budget until 2050 is calculated from the agreed boundary, then divided among the 193 UN member states.
Should the Paris summit fail (and it likely will), the resulting collapse in confidence in the top-down approach could lead to one of two outcomes.
In the worst-case scenario, the very concept of global climate policy would lose all value, with decades of climate alarmism giving way to fatalism.
Given that the UN formally accepted the 2°C limit as the starting point for the top-down approach in 2010, the well-practiced strategy of obscuring current failures by announcing more ambitious future efforts would become unsustainable.
At that point, the EU’s role as global climate-policy leader would be weakened, as would its emphasis on building a green economy.
With the EU forced to promote second- and third-rate strategies, countries would lose confidence in international climate policy’s problem-solving potential and become unwilling to pursue shared solutions.
As a result, international climate policy would become unrecognizable, ineffective, and, ultimately, irrelevant.
Countries would begin to focus almost entirely on enhancing their own ability to adapt to climate change, with ambitious emissions-reduction agreements giving way to exclusively national initiatives in areas ranging from regulatory policy to geo-engineering.
This would leave the EU no choice but to change its internal plans, undermining its ability to stay on track to meet emissions-reduction aspirations for 2050 and diminishing member states’ willingness to agree to ambitious and legally binding climate and energy targets for 2030.
Furthermore, the loss of legislative continuity beyond 2020 would create considerable insecurity for businesses in the EU, leading to diminished investment and interrupting – if not terminating – Europe’s advance toward a low-carbon economy.
Once such a process begins, the politically fragile EU will be unable to stop it, at least in the foreseeable future.
The other, more promising scenario involves a fundamental shift in how the problem of climate change is understood, and thus in how potential solutions are framed.
A new bottom-up approach, whose contours are only just emerging, is predicated on the basic principle that the less emissions, the better.
In order to ensure this outcome, the EU must begin preparing a Plan B that accounts for the coming climate-policy paradigm shift.
Such a plan would prioritize measurable progress toward decarbonizing the world’s largest economies over the establishment of global climate treaties or long-term global targets.
While the new paradigm would safeguard the legitimacy of existing regulatory and diplomatic instruments, such as emissions trading, the EU would have to reconsider the framework for applying them.
Plans for flexible, incentive-led cooperation between developed and developing countries (so-called “clubs”) would become increasingly important, with progress depending on the cooperation of major emitters like the United States, China, and India.
In the future, the EU will have to approach climate change primarily as a matter of politics, rather than in terms of scientifically defined objectives.
Only by adjusting to the international system’s practical constraints can the EU stay the course of economic transformation, remain relevant internationally, and help to contain global warming.
The Republican Bankruptcy Illusion
WASHINGTON, DC – There is now near-unanimity that the United States’ Dodd-Frank financial reform legislation, enacted in 2010, did not end the problems associated with some banks being “too big to fail.”
When it comes to proposed solutions, however, no such consensus exists.
On the contrary, financial regulation has become a key issue in November’s presidential and congressional elections.
So who has the more plausible and workable plan for reducing the risks associated with very large financial firms?
The Democrats have an agreed and implementable strategy that would represent a definite improvement over the status quo.
The Republican proposal, unfortunately, is a recipe for greater disaster than the US (and the world) experienced in 2008.
On the Democratic side, Hillary Clinton’s campaign materials and the party platform point to a detailed plan to defend Dodd-Frank and to go further in terms of pressing the largest firms to become less complex and, if necessary, smaller.
Banks must also fund themselves in a more stable fashion.
If Clinton wins, she will draw strong support from Congressional Democrats – including her rival for the Democratic nomination, Bernie Sanders, and his fellow senator, Elizabeth Warren – when she pushes in this direction.
Some commentators claim that Clinton has been “pulled to the left” on financial regulation during the campaign.
But if you look carefully at her statements during this election cycle, they have been, from the very beginning, almost identical to what Warren has been seeking for the past half-dozen years.
And these goals are perfectly aligned with what all responsible officials want.
Everyone in their right mind wants to prevent the largest banks from getting out of control, shifting risk into shadowy, unregulated activities (on or off their balance sheet), and fleecing consumers.
This is an entirely responsible and sensible agenda.
It is opposed, of course, by people who are paid – one way or another – to represent the largest banks.
On the Republican side, Donald Trump’s precise intentions are less clear, though he proudly calls himself the “king of debt,” which is not particularly encouraging.
Huge mountains of debt may help enrich individual property developers or financiers, but they typically add up to trouble for the macroeconomy.
It was precisely those mountains that collapsed on the US and global economy in 2008.
Many were buried in the Great Recession that followed; many more are still digging out.
Unlike Trump, House Republicans have formulated and published detailed plans that can fairly be compared to what the Democrats have presented.
And, in the event of a Trump presidency, financial policy would likely be crafted in large part by the House Financial Services Committee, whose chairman’s clearly stated priorities are to reduce consumer protection and remove any effective constraints on big banks’ activities.
At the heart of the House Republican strategy is a simple idea: all financial firms should be able to go bankrupt without damaging the rest of the economy and without the government becoming involved.
That is fine as a campaign slogan.
But there is a major problem with the logic.
In September 2008, Lehman Brothers did go bankrupt – and no form of government support was provided.
There were catastrophic consequences for the rest of the financial sector, for the non-financial economy, and for employment.
The House Republicans propose to fix that by amending the bankruptcy code.
This, too, sounds good, but what exactly does it mean?
Just promising not to provide a bailout is not credible.
The US is a large and powerful country and, when danger hits, investors buy up federal government debt – driving down interest rates.
America has a “fortress” balance sheet, as well as one of the most credible central banks in the history of the world.
If the policymakers of the moment think that government or central-bank support will help prevent a global economic meltdown, they will act accordingly.
That is what Treasury Secretary Henry Paulson, Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke, and President George W. Bush (all Republicans) did after the full impact of the Lehman collapse became apparent.
The viability of the Republican bankruptcy proposal boils down to this: who will provide financing to a large complex financial institution – operating globally – while it is being restructured in bankruptcy?
The private sector won’t provide it.
The courts themselves cannot borrow.
If there is no financing, the scheme collapses – and we have another “Lehman moment,” or worse.
So we must be talking about a scenario in which some part of the federal government, with or without express legislative approval, scrambles to provide an ad hoc loan in the range of tens or hundreds of billions of dollars, via a judge.
This is mind-boggling and deeply disturbing.
Think of the business mistakes that will be made and the political backlash.
Add the economic distortions implicit in providing so much free downside insurance.
The Democrats are lined up behind an approach to finance that will make the financial system safer, so that it never comes to this point again.
The Republicans’ plan would only help too-big-to-fail banks.
And that help would make them more dangerous.
The End of Republican Obstruction
CAMBRIDGE – What a difference two months make.
When the Republican Party scored strong gains in last November’s US congressional elections, the universally accepted explanation was that voters were expressing their frustration with disappointing economic performance.
Indeed, when Americans went to the polls, a&nbsp;substantial share thought that economic conditions were deteriorating; many held President Barack Obama responsible and voted against his Democratic Party.
Now, suddenly, everyone has discovered that the US economy is doing well – so well that Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell has switched from blaming Obama for a bad economy to demanding credit for a good one.
Recent favorable economic data were, he claimed, the result of “the expectation of a Republican Congress.”
But the improvement in US economic performance began well before the November election.
Indeed, it began well before September, when polls started to indicate that the Republicans were likely to do exceptionally well, taking control of the Senate and enlarging their majority in the House of Representatives.
The fact is, job growth was vigorous throughout 2014, averaging 246,000 per month – three million for the year – bringing the unemployment rate down to 5.6% in December 2014 (from 6.7% a year earlier).
This represented an acceleration relative to the monthly average of 185,000 in 2011-2013, and it looks even better compared to the previous economic expansion of 2002-2007, when monthly job creation stood at 102,000.
Indeed, the recent numbers recall the halcyon days of Bill Clinton’s presidency.
Similarly, GDP growth began to pick up in the spring of 2014, running above the rate of the preceding three years.
Partly as a result of income growth, the US budget deficit last year was lower than forecast, at about 2.8% of GDP.
This represents a record improvement relative to 2009, when the budget deficit amounted to nearly 10% of GDP.
The mystery, until recently, was why economic performance had been so weak.
There were four types of explanations.
The first account relied on the view, most closely associated with the economists Carmen Reinhart and Kenneth Rogoff, that recovery from a recession takes longer if the cause was a crash in housing and financial markets.
But this historical pattern is more a statement about the magnitude of the initial decline and the time needed to recover fully than a prediction about the annual rate of growth during the recovery phase.
The second explanation was that the slow recovery was part of a longer-term trend, attributable to secular stagnation or a dearth of important technological innovations.
It is true that productivity growth and labor-force growth have slowed since 1975.
Still, the economy should have been able to achieve a stronger recovery than the 2.1% growth rate recorded in 2011-2013.
The third interpretation for slow growth during these three years is that the depressed investment and long-term unemployment caused by the deep recession of 2008-2009 had taken a toll on the capital stock and the size and skills of the labor force.
But the fourth explanation seems the simplest: America’s dysfunctional fiscal politics in 2011-2013 – years that featured the “fiscal cliff,” debt-ceiling standoffs, flirtation with federal default, a government shutdown, and budget sequesters.
One does not need to assume big Keynesian “multiplier effects” to conclude that the combined impact of these conflicts shaved at least one percentage point from growth each year, especially if one believes that the risk created by such behavior discourages firms from hiring or investing.
(According to one measure, the 2011 debt-ceiling crisis and the 2013 government shutdown caused uncertainty comparable to that sparked by the September 2001 terrorist attacks and the 2008 collapse of Lehman Brothers.)
This explanation also accords with stronger US economic performance in 2014, which was the first year since the Republicans gained a House majority in November 2010 that dysfunctional fiscal policy did not actively impede economic recovery.
Having borne the brunt of the blame for the government shutdown of October 2013, Republican leaders decided to stifle their more radical “Tea Party” members and refrain from similar dead-end showdowns in 2014.
One could have predicted that a year in which Congress stopped actively impeding economic recovery would be a year in which the pace of expansion in output and employment picked up.
If the new Congress in 2015 refrains from standoffs, sequesters, and shutdowns, there is no reason why the economy cannot continue to do well.
Of course, shortcomings remain.
Wage growth continues to be slow.
Median household income has barely begun to recover, and is still well below its 2000 level.
This is because most of the gains from economic recovery have gone to people at the top of the income distribution.
Indeed, of the various possible reasons why the electorate in 2014 did not perceive the economic recovery that was underway, the most plausible is that the typical American had not benefited from it.
The irony is that rising inequality is usually thought to play to the Democrats’ electoral advantage.
Re-Repairing Bosnia
Bosnia’s future is becoming increasingly uncertain.
An ethnic veto has long made the central government ineffective, and, most recently, Milorad Dodik, the leader of the Serb-controlled entity, Republika Srpska, has responded to efforts at reform with a threat to hold a referendum on independence.
Many consider secession unlikely, but Dodik’s threat does heighten fear that today’s fragile status quo could break down.
While nobody expects the mass violence of the 1990’s to recur, that does not justify diplomatic indifference and inaction.
The Dayton Accords of 1995 ended Serb-instigated ethnic cleansing and established peace in Bosnia.
But that agreement did not create a functional Bosnian central government with the capacity to undertake the reforms needed to meet the terms of accession to the European Union.
To appease Bosnian Serbs led by Slobodan Milosevic (who died while on trial for war crimes), Radovan Karadzic (who remains on trial for war crimes) and Ratko Mladic (who was indicted for war crimes and is still on the run in Serbia), the West accepted the territorial division of Bosnia at the war’s end.
This acceptance was manifested in a constitutional structure that gave the Bosnian Serb region quasi-independence and the power to obstruct the emergence of an effective central government in Sarajevo.
The EU, having helped rescue Bosnia from its past by mortgaging its future, seems in no hurry to change the country’s purgatory-like status.
European leaders have allowed their most useful tool for preserving the peace and leveraging change – the once-respected office of the High Representative – to be diminished to the point that many Bosnian officials treat the incumbent with disdain.
But it should be recognized that, in post-Cold War Europe, it has proven highly dangerous to allow disrespect for European purpose and resolve to take root.
If the Bosnians lack the capability to modify the iron corset bequeathed to them at Dayton, the EU remains indifferent, and the United States is preoccupied with the Middle East, South Asia, and China, what lies ahead?
Leaving Bosnians to explore the options that befall a failed state (with a Muslim plurality) – located within Europe but on the margins of its prosperity, unity, and relative social cohesion – is to acknowledge policy bankruptcy and let others roll the dice on ways to end the current stalemate.
Some in Europe assert that over time the parties may eventually see the benefits of greater cooperation, that dissolution will not occur, or that, if it does, it will likely be relatively tranquil.
Such assumptions do not inspire confidence.
Violence has been the traditional agent of change in the Balkans, and the level of frustration in Bosnia is growing.
Faute de mieux , the Americans have allowed the burden of dealing with these issues and sorting out the unfinished business of Dayton to fall to the EU.
Indeed, it is past time for the EU to take the diplomatic lead in fixing what Dayton left undone.
While the new EU’s governance structure seems, at least on paper, to lend itself to more robust efforts in the Balkans, diplomatic habits die hard, and the Union will need to overcome its continuing legacy of relying on carrots without sticks to deal with knotty Balkan problems.
Regardless of the EU’s unhappy diplomatic past in the Balkans, the most practical way forward is to seek political reform in Bosnia rather than hoping for the US to resume its leadership role.
Any EU effort should be based on the following reinforcing elements:
·         A conference of the three Bosnian parties this spring to fix the Dayton agreement by strengthening the central government sufficiently to enable Bosnians to fulfill the requirements of the EU accession process while maintaining the existing entities.
This gathering should include both the US and Serbian governments as active observers.
European and US leaders would have to convey to the Bosnians and others that failure is not an option and convince them of the EU’s bottom-line unwillingness to accept opposition from those in Bosnia who impede the EU accession process.
·         Since Serbia is essential to the continued existence of Republika Srpska, pressure must be brought to bear on its government, which seeks EU membership, to make clear to obstructionist Bosnian Serb leaders that they cannot hold a referendum on independence, and that they must accept enhanced central-government powers.
·         Support for civil-society groups and democratic parties prior to elections throughout Bosnia this October.
The EU and the US should underscore the need for political change and for candidates who support EU accession as indispensable to Bosnia’s economic and political progress.
The alternative – tinkering with reform while hoping that time, EU money, and a watchful eye will move the three Bosnian communities toward political harmony – is not prudent policy.
Rescuing Annapolis
TOLEDO, SPAIN – The Israeli-Palestinian peace talks that began three months ago at Annapolis do not suffer from a lack of ideas about how to address the conflict’s core issues.
After years of frustrated attempts to reach a settlement, and with dozens of official and back-channel peace plans at the negotiators’ disposal, there remains little room for creativity in producing an agreement.
But the deeper problem lies elsewhere, in the poverty of the leadership, and in the fragmentation of Palestinian politics.
Indeed, the only man who could have made a peace agreement based on a two-state solution legitimate in Palestinians’ eyes, Yasser Arafat, took this legitimacy with him to the grave.
President Mahmoud Abbas was never an inspiring figure for Palestinians. With the loss of Gaza to Hamas, his political clout has been diminished even further.
In fact, Abbas does not even control the militias of his own party, Fatah, which have been even more active than Hamas in staging terrorist attacks against Israel.
The Palestinian Authority’s rule over the West Bank would have collapsed long ago if it were not for the Israelis’ daily incursions against Hamas and Fatah in areas under Abbas’ control.
Throughout history, nationalist movements, almost invariably consisting of radical and pragmatic wings, had to split in order to reach the Promised Land.
Consensus is the negation of leadership and frequently a recipe for political paralysis.
Zionism is a case in point.
If Menachem Begin’s ultra-nationalist Irgun had joined a coalition with Ben-Gurion’s pragmatic Mapai in 1947, Zionists would have rejected the partition of Palestine, and Ben-Gurion would not have been allowed to declare the Jewish state in May 1948.
Of course, this lesson should not be elevated to a dogma.
In the Palestinian case, with the lack of the kind of leadership that Arafat provided, the radical wing, Hamas, cannot be discarded from the process leading to Palestinian statehood.
Moreover, unlike in the case of Israel, the radical wing in Palestine represents the democratic majority, as it emerged victorious from the elections two years ago.
As a result, the question that dominates Israeli discourse nowadays is whether or not to invade Hamas-controlled Gaza.
Locked in a self-imposed conceptual paralysis that does not allow for a non-military solution, Israel refuses to see that Hamas’s rocket attacks on Israeli territory are not intended to draw Israel into an invasion.
Instead, they are an attempt to establish a new deterrent against Israel that would force it to agree to a cease-fire ( Tahdiye) .
It is self-deceiving to assume that those on the Palestinian side involved throughout the discredited Oslo process can still muster the necessary popular legitimacy to win support for a compromise with Israel that would require painful concessions on issues central to the Palestinian national ethos.
Nor is it at all clear that a major invasion of Gaza could bring end the attacks on Israel.
Hamas, with the help of Iran, has been undergoing a process of Hezbollahization.
Its units are no longer simple terrorist cells; they are highly trained and well-equipped combat units, and its rockets, like those in southern Lebanon, are launched with timers from crude underground silos.
The traumatic experience of the Lebanon war in 2006 has made Israel’s leadership wary of yet another asymmetric war where a clear-cut victory can never be claimed, and where the arithmetic of blood is always bound to turn the casualties of the superior force, Israel, into a domestic crisis.
Israel must change its strategic objective in Gaza from toppling Hamas to rescuing the Annapolis process, and with it the last chance for a two-state solution.
This requires not only a cease-fire with Hamas, but also a return to a Palestinian national unity government that alone can offer the peace process the vital legitimacy that it lacks today.
Without the resurrection of the Mecca agreement, which put Hamas and the PLO in a coalition government, Hamas cannot expect to secure its control of Gaza and the PLO cannot deliver a peace settlement with Israel.
The notion, dear to the architects of the Annapolis process, that peace can be achieved only when a wedge is driven between Palestinian “moderates” and “extremists” is a misconception.
A Palestinian national unity government would not impede a settlement for the simple reason that the moderates now negotiating with Israel must in any case strive for an agreement that the extremists could not label as a treacherous sell-out.
Hence, the difference between the Palestinian positions in the current negotiations and those they may hold when a unity government is restored would only be very minor.
Rescuing a Revolution
Brussels – There is no more depressing sight in politics than a leader who, desperate to cling to power, ruins his country in the process.
By his recent actions, President Viktor Yushchenko of Ukraine now looks like he has joined the long list of rulers who have sacrificed their country’s future simply to prolong their misrule.
Yushchenko’s recent moves in both politics and economics suggest that his instinct for self-preservation knows no limits.
Once a proud supporter of the free market and the man who banished hyper-inflation in Ukraine in the 1990’s, Yushchenko has in recent weeks vetoed – sometimes on flimsy grounds, and sometimes for no stated reason at all – a series of vital privatizations.
He blocked the sale of regional energy companies, for example, because he claims that their privatization will threaten Ukraine’s “national security,” though it is corrupt and incompetent state management of these companies that is threatening Ukraine’s security by making it vulnerable to energy cut-offs.
Yushchenko seems motivated only by a desire to damage his prime minister, Yuliya Tymoshenko, who he perceives as the biggest threat to his re-election in 2010.
To undermine the Tymoshenko cabinet even more, Ukraine’s central bank, under the leadership of a presidential crony, is pursuing a policy that is importing high inflation.
When confronted about this, Volodymyr Stelmakh, the bank’s governor, is said to have told Tymoshenko that his policies would destroy her government before they broke the back of the economy.
In politics, too, Yushchenko is playing with fire, having lost the support of most of “Our Ukraine,” the party he created.
Since his victory in 2004, Yushchenko’s popularity ratings have plummeted to around 8%.
As a result, the party has been reduced to junior-partner status in Tymoshenko’s coalition government.
Instead of trying to recover support by pursuing the reforms and privatizations that he promised during the Orange Revolution, Yushchenko is planning to take the few members of “Our Ukraine” that he still controls and forge a strategic alliance with the Party of the Regions, the very party that opposed Ukraine’s turn to democracy and an open society.
To clinch this deal, the Regions would dump their unelectable leader, Viktor Yanukovych, as their presidential candidate and adopt Yushchenko as their standard bearer.
Yushchenko has only himself to blame for his political predicament. His decision in 2006 to bring Yanukovych out of the wilderness and back into the premiership was an act from which he has never recovered.
Only when Yanukovych sought to use parliament to strip the president of his powers did Yushchenko summon the will to fight back, dismissing Yanukovych’s government and calling for a special election last year.
That election, however, was won by Tymoshenko, who has parlayed her return to power into a commanding lead in the polls for the coming presidential election.
Throttling Ukraine’s economy and political system need not have been Yushchenko’s legacy. After he came to power in 2005 on a huge wave of popular support, he started off well.
The economy was growing, and he and Tymoshenko began to tackle the country’s black hole of corruption.
Moreover, he seemed genuinely committed to reconciliation between Ukraine’s Russian-speaking east and Ukrainian-speaking west.
Throughout his presidency, he has overseen fair elections and a free and vibrant press.
But Yushchenko’s chronic dithering and poor political judgement consistently undermine his fundamental democratic credentials.
Sadly, he now appears poised to make another serious political miscalculation, because he is backing a radical constitutional reform aimed at creating a purely presidential system.
That proposal has no chance of success in Ukraine’s parliament.
Yushchenko sought to circumvent parliament by way of a national referendum, but Ukraine’s Constitutional court has ruled that only parliament may determine how constitutional reform is to occur.
Although Yushchenko seems unable to save himself politically, Europe can help both him and Ukraine’s democracy.
Tymoshenko is prepared to offer Yushchenko a compromise that Europe’s leaders should urge him to accept. Her proposals for constitutional reform would make Ukraine a pure parliamentary republic, while retaining a president as head of state and commander in chief of the armed forces.
Yushchenko can yet secure an honorable place in history if, instead of undermining and obstructing Tymoshenko at every turn, he supports her anti-corruption initiatives and constitutional reform, the latter aimed at bringing Ukraine’s political system closer to Europe’s parliamentary democracies as well as to facilitate Ukraine’s European integration.
Given that Yushchenko has almost no chance of winning the next presidential election, Tymoshenko has made him a generous offer.
If accepted, it promises Ukraine, which aspires to EU membership and is currently negotiating a Free Trade Agreement with the Union, the stable, effective, and democratic government that it needs.
Europe’s leaders, who helped broker a peaceful and democratic end to the Orange Revolution, should once again help Ukraine avoid political deadlock.
Rescuing Nuclear Non-Proliferation
As a declared non-nuclear weapon state, Indonesia has always striven for nuclear non-proliferation - indeed, for a world free of nuclear weapons.
But the cause of nuclear non-proliferation is now in deep trouble, as countries are once again tempted to acquire the means of oblivion.
For over three decades, the nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) has been the cornerstone of the world's non-proliferation regime, a position that derives from growing acknowledgement of the legal and normative standards that it established.
Adherence to the NPT has increased steadily, reaching a stage of near universal acceptance.
But there is a general feeling that implementation has fallen short of expectations, particularly with regard to nuclear disarmament.
Moreover, there is increasing concern over non-compliance and the associated risks of proliferation - to worrisome states, particularly in Asia, and, even more ominously, into the hands of private individuals and terrorist organizations.
In the face of these threats, what can be done to strengthen the non-proliferation regime?
The NPT regime stands on three pillars: non-proliferation, nuclear disarmament, and peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
The Treaty envisages the construction of each pillar through a matching series of steps taken by both nuclear weapon states and non-nuclear weapon states.
Strengthening the non-proliferation regime in order to confront today's challenges would require no more than following this strategy.
Unfortunately, this has not been the case since 1995, when the NPT Review and Extension Conference made the duration of the NPT's validity indefinite.
The Conference, which included the original five nuclear weapon states (the United States, Russia, China, France, and Great Britain) as well as a great number of other UN members, did not reach consensus on a "Final Declaration."
But it did adopt three other decisions, entitled Strengthening the Review Process for the Treaty , Principles and Objectives for Nuclear Non-Proliferation and Disarmament , and Resolution on the Middle East .
These constituted a unified package that was meant to be implemented in its entirety.
Five years later, the 2000 Review Conference finally adopted a Final Document , which contained concrete measures, including "13 practical steps" for systematic and progressive efforts to achieve nuclear disarmament.
The evolution of the NPT - its adaptation to new environments and problems that were not anticipated at the time of its adoption - appeared to ensure the Treaty's continuing effective implementation.
But actions speak louder than words, and challenges to the NPT regime have continued to undermine its basic principles, causing considerable backsliding.
Today, the challenges posed by proliferation are more complex than ever:
· proliferation of nuclear weapons technologies by one de facto nuclear-capable state;
· one stated withdrawal from the NPT;
· one case of non-compliance;
· increasing assertion of the role of nuclear weapons in military doctrines;
· improvements in nuclear weapons by some nuclear weapon states.
The possibility that non-state actors could acquire nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction poses an especially grave new threat.
Confronting it effectively will require the support of all NPT signatories.
But a continuing imbalance and selectivity in the emphasis placed by different states on the Treaty's three pillars damages the unity that the NPT regime needs.
In particular, imbalances in implementing the NPT obligations by the nuclear haves and have-nots are sharpening.
For example, some countries want to develop smaller and "usable" nuclear weapons designed for pre-emptive or preventive military action.
Many non-nuclear weapon states, particularly those from the developing world, remain frustrated with the fact that peaceful nuclear cooperation is yet to be fully realized.
These challenges to the non-proliferation regime not only jeopardize the credibility, efficacy, and viability of the Treaty; they have also cast a long shadow of doubt on the future of nuclear disarmament itself.
Deliberations and negotiations both within the NPT regime and in other areas of disarmament have reached a difficult stage, if not a stalemate.
To jump-start progress, all NPT signatories should re-affirm that the Treaty's provisions are mutually reinforcing and must be pursued jointly and faithfully.
The most dangerous force eroding the Treaty's credibility is the inclination of some nuclear-weapon states to reinterpret at will the package of agreements reached in the past.
Despite the NPT's shortcomings, the overwhelming majority of non-nuclear states fully comply with their Treaty obligations.
This constrains the number of nuclear weapon states, thus fulfilling one of the NPT's most important goals.
One of the best ways to strengthen the non-proliferation regime now would be to implement fully the agreements that have already been reached.
Selectivity and narrow reinterpretation can only weaken the Treaty.
Developing a new set of non-proliferation mechanisms would be a waste time that we cannot afford, because any new protocol would have a dubious legal basis and encourage further imbalances in implementation.
If we are serious about saving the non-proliferation regime, the time to act is now.
Rescuing Yemen