Online retail and supporting logistics is expanding in a wide range of advanced and developing economies.
In China, where the expansion is occurring extremely quickly, estimates suggest that only part of the expansion is at the expense of traditional retail.
In fact, online retail appears to be accelerating the expansion of the overall consumer market.
Knowledgeable participants expect the new retail model to be an integrated form of online and physical retail, each modified by the presence of the other.
Think again of the 3D printing model, a potential form of demand-driven mass-customization, and its combination with online mobile payments systems and social media.
The integration of sourcing with logistics and retail will become the third leg of the stool.
The world we are entering is one in which the most powerful global flows will be ideas and digital capital, not goods, services, and traditional capital.
Adapting to this will require shifts in mindsets, policies, investments (especially in human capital), and quite possibly models of employment and distribution.
No one knows fully how all of this will play out.
But attempting to understand where the technological forces and trends are leading us is a good place to start.
The Gain in Spain
MILAN – The Spanish economy is beginning to attract investors’ attention – and not only because asset prices are depressed in the current climate (arguably implying a good buy for longer-term, value investors).
While there are huge problems that must still be overcome, there is also a clear sense on the ground that the economy has passed a turning point, roughly at the start of this year.
To skeptics, green shoots of recovery will not bloom without access to the credit spigot, which is still clogged by balance-sheet damage in many banks.
But, though the road back to full employment and sustainable growth will not be built overnight, progress on it may be faster than most observers expect.
It is easy to get lost in the details of recovery patterns, so a sound framework for assessing potential growth helps.
In fact, the Spanish economy is a classic case of a defective growth pattern followed by a predictable, policy-assisted recovery that is driven (with a delay) mostly by the tradable sector.
Prior to the crisis, Spain’s economy relied on demand created by a leveraged real-estate bubble – a pattern not dissimilar in some respects to that in the United States.
Thus, both growth and employment came at the expense of the tradable side of the economy.
Unit labor costs rose steadily relative to Germany – not only in Spain but also in all of southern Europe, and in France – in the decade beginning in 2000, following the euro’s introduction.
The crisis struck domestic demand, and the tradable sector was incapacitated, because the rapid rise in relative unit labor costs, combined with an over-valued euro, had undermined competitiveness.
Moreover, the crisis-related damage to banks’ balance sheets constrained demand by severely limiting household credit and lending to small and medium-size businesses.
Spain was not in an enviable position.
The rapid deterioration of fiscal position after the crisis made any substantial countercyclical response impossible, while regulatory constraints limited the economy’s structural flexibility.
The path to recovery, though difficult and lengthy, has been relatively clear and specific.
First, unit labor costs needed to decline toward productivity levels to restore competitiveness – a painful process without the exchange-rate mechanism.
In fact, there has been substantial post-crisis re-convergence toward German levels.
Second, both capital and labor needed to flow to the tradable sector, where demand constraints can be relaxed as relative productivity converges.
Like many other southern European countries, however, labor-market and other rigidities dramatically reduced the speed and increased the costs of structural economic adjustment, resulting in lower levels of growth and employment, especially for young people and first-time job-seekers.
But Spanish policymakers and business leaders appeared to grasp the nature of the pre-crisis economic imbalances – and the importance of the tradable sector as a recovery engine.
Recognizing that the economy could not benefit from a partial restoration of competitiveness without structural shifts, the government passed a significant labor-market reform in the spring of 2013.
It was controversial, because, like all such measures, it rescinded certain kinds of protections for workers.
But the ultimate protection is growing employment.
With a lag, the reform now appears to be bearing fruit.
Indeed, though domestic investment is constrained by credit availability, major European and Latin American multinationals have begun investing in the Spanish economy, attracted partly by its enhanced competitive posture and structural flexibility, and, on a slightly longer time horizon, by a recovery in domestic demand.
Private equity is flowing in as well, not only because the valuations are attractive, but also because potential growth in Spain now seems within reach.
Though Spain and Italy are similarly depressed in terms of current growth and employment, especially for the young, two significant differences stand out.
One is that, unlike Spain, Italy has experienced relatively little convergence of unit labor costs with productivity.
That restricts the potential of the tradable part of the economy as a growth engine.
The second difference is that labor-market reform and market liberalization in Italy remain on the to-do list for Prime Minister Matteo Renzi’s new government.
If Italy is to take advantage of the growth potential on the tradable side of the economy, following through is crucial – just as it was for Spain.
There is no chance in either country that domestic demand alone will support sustained growth in the short to medium term.
Moreover, both countries need growth-oriented policies to help with deleveraging.
As Spain’s experience has shown, though structural flexibility is difficult to achieve politically, it is essential for strong economic performance.
One reason is that rebalancing is needed when a defective growth pattern distorts the economy’s structure, particularly the balance between the tradable and non-tradable sectors.
Another is that technological and global market forces are imposing structural change on all advanced economies, even those that are not unbalanced.
Built-in rigidities impede adaptation and adversely affect growth and employment. 
Generally, the successful economies in the past three decades have been those that adopted reforms and policies aimed at increasing structural adaptability: one thinks of the US after Ronald Reagan, the United Kingdom after Margaret Thatcher, Germany after Gerhard Schröder, and China after Deng Xiaoping.
Spain appears to be in the early stages of restoring a balanced and sustainable growth pattern.
One hopes that others will soon follow its example.
What’s Stopping Robust Recovery?
MILAN – The growth map of the global economy is relatively clear.
The US is in a partial recovery, with growth at 1.5-2% and lagging employment.
Europe as a whole is barely above zero growth, with large variations among countries, though with some evidence of painful re-convergence, at least in terms of nominal unit labor costs.
China’s growth, meanwhile, is leveling off at 7%, with other developing countries preparing for higher interest rates.
Many advanced economies must still address the end of the pre-crisis growth pattern generated by excessive domestic demand.
In such economies, that pattern not only typically depended on leverage; it also enlarged the non-tradable side of the economy and shrank the tradable side.
And yet, given that the non-tradable sector is constrained by its reliance on domestic demand, recovery – if it comes – will depend on the tradable sector’s growth potential.
To realize that potential, the tradable sector has to re-expand at the margin: as a weakening currency causes imports to fall and real unit labor costs decline as nominal wages flatten out, unemployed labor and capital flow toward external markets for goods, services, and resources.
This is already happening in the United States, where exports are above their previous peak while imports remain subdued; the current-account deficit is declining; and even net employment in the tradable sector is increasing (for the first time in two decades).
Indeed, recent data suggest that more than half of the acceleration in US growth is occurring on the tradable side, even though it accounts for only about one-third of the economy.
And that contribution is probably an underestimate, because income generated on the tradable supply side produces income that becomes demand on the non-tradable side – a multiplier effect that crosses the tradable/non-tradable boundary.
The US economy is relatively flexible, and this kind of structural adjustment in the private sector occurs reasonably quickly.
And yet employment still lags, owing to longer-term factors like labor-saving technology and reconfigurations of global supply chains, in which lower-value-added segments and functions tend to be concentrated in lower-income countries.
One reason the US recovery is only partial is fiscal drag, a lingering effect of the post-2008 downturn, which shifted some leverage to the public sector, resulting in a growing debt burden that has been addressed – controversially so – by immediate austerity.
But the main problem is that public-sector investment remains well below growth-sustaining levels.
The hard part of fully realizing potential growth is shifting the composition of domestic demand from consumption to investment without adding leverage.
That means paying for it on the public-sector side, via taxes and a reduction in household consumption (and in wealth accumulation).
It also means getting the balance between domestic and external demand right, and appreciating the sensitivity of medium- and long-term growth to the composition (and size) of domestic aggregate demand.
Against this background, monetary policymakers must be cautious, because low interest rates can shift the growth model back toward leverage and domestic consumer demand, stalling the structural shift to the tradable side that is underway.
Several European countries also became too dependent on domestic demand and need to rebalance toward the tradable side.
But the challenge for them is much bigger and the process slower.
In the first decade of the euro, nominal unit labor costs rose sharply in Greece, Ireland, Italy, Portugal, and Spain, while virtually flatlining in Germany.
Absent the common currency, these divergences would have been accompanied by exchange-rate adjustments – certainly after (and perhaps even before) the pattern of excessive leverage and domestic demand ended.
But such adjustments cannot happen in a monetary union, so unit labor costs are slowly re-converging via a protracted process of flat nominal wage growth and slowly declining real wages (a process that would be quicker with higher inflation in Germany and Northern Europe).
With domestic demand in short supply, this slow road essentially postpones or impedes growth via expansion of the tradable sector.
The speed of structural adjustment is also strongly influenced by how easily employment can shift from an economy’s non-tradable to its tradable side and across segments of global supply chains.
Countries’ degree of labor-market flexibility varies considerably, and the reforms that increase it are critically important.
For example, the German reforms of 2003-2006 increased flexibility significantly (though in a more benign global and eurozone setting).
Much is made of Germany’s large current-account surpluses.
But, just as the eurozone’s struggling economies have an overvalued currency, Germany has an undervalued one, which tends to produce external surpluses and, by definition, an excess of savings over investment.
An undervalued currency also tends to produce an unbalanced growth model of the opposite kind: an outsize tradable sector and insufficient domestic aggregate demand.
Because the non-tradable sector in advanced economies tends to create more jobs, this model can lead to an employment problem (even if it is partly masked by cutting hours rather than workers).
In principle, Germany could try to boost domestic demand by leveraging up; but, unless the exchange rate adjusts upward to shrink the tradable sector at the margin, doing so would be inflationary.
The European Central Bank would then have to intervene to maintain the credibility of its commitment to price stability, which is its primary mandate.
It is little wonder that Germany finds it difficult to achieve a sustainable pattern of balanced growth in the eurozone as it is currently configured.
Anyone familiar with China’s structural shifts on the supply and demand side will recognize some similarities with the German case.
The main point is that restoring growth requires a careful analysis of structural balance, attention to demand constraints in the non-tradable sector, and a focus on the impediments to expanding the tradable sector.
Some of those impediments are supply-side rigidities; others have more to do with bloated domestic demand.
Neither can be ignored if robust recovery is to be achieved.
Rebooting China
MILAN – Despite China’s widely discussed economic slowdown, annual GDP growth remains above 7%, implying little cause for alarm – at least for now.
The question is whether the government’s efforts to implement structural reforms and transform the economy’s growth model are working – that is, whether internal imbalances continue to threaten long-term economic performance.
Given that China remains the global economy’s most important growth engine, the answer matters to everyone.
Assessing China’s economic stability requires considering the conflicts and tensions affecting the country – none of which advances the cause of growth.
For starters, China’s territorial disputes with many of its neighbors, including Japan, Vietnam, and the Philippines, are undermining regional peace, not to mention economic integration.
Moreover, China’s relationship with the United States is deteriorating, owing to conflict over America’s foreign-policy “pivot” toward Asia and disputes over cyber security.
China has already restricted access to its market for some US-based technology firms, and more such actions may follow.
Meanwhile, China’s domestic political system is being shaken up by President Xi Jinping’s anti-corruption campaign – an effort that is essential to boosting the government’s accountability and legitimacy as it pursues deep systemic reforms.
But, at a time of rising international tension, there is a risk that Xi’s campaign could mutate into a broader assault on political dissent attributed to “corrupt” foreign influences.
Since China launched its process of “reform and opening up” more than three decades ago, it has benefited from its willingness to consider – if not adapt – foreign ideas.
In many areas – economic policy in a market economy, business management, technology, energy, the environment, and health care, to name a few – selective learning has accelerated China’s development (and benefited the countries that have learned from Chinese experience).
Lumping outside influences together with a legitimate anti-corruption campaign would undermine this positive dynamic, with potentially serious consequences for China’s quest to transform its growth model and achieve high-income status.
The good news is that the data – while incomplete – show progress in China’s economic transformation.
Weak growth in China’s major export markets (particularly in Europe, North America, and Japan), together with rapidly rising domestic wages and incomes, is driving the tradable part of the economy toward higher-value components in global supply chains.
Meanwhile, inflation, rising wages, and the renminbi’s nominal appreciation have driven up the real effective exchange rate, though this trend has been tempered, to some extent, by the euro’s persistently high value.
How businesses handle this transition – which is already contributing to China’s growth slowdown – will determine the transformation’s progress.
China has no choice but to change its growth model.
Its share in global markets is now so large that the economy could be demand-constrained for the first time in four decades.
The only way to avoid this outcome is by pursuing a balanced program comprising high-return investment, high-value government services, and a higher level of household consumption.
Public and private investment – which has served as a key driver of China’s growth over the last four decades – can play a central role in expanding domestic demand, but only if returns are high.
While low-return investments generate aggregate demand, they do not increase future income or productive potential, and thus do not foster sustainable growth.
Given this, China’s leaders must use a combination of financial-sector reforms and improved public-sector incentives to increase access to capital in sectors with high potential rates of return.
In fact, this process is underway with the licensing of new private banks and the development of China’s shadow banking system.
Given the limited capacity of investment demand to drive growth, high-value government services and increased household consumption are also needed.
As it stands, private consumption accounts for an unusually small share of China’s GDP.
But rising wages – partly the result of mandated minimum-wage increases in some regions – are boosting household incomes, and there is already some evidence that the downward trend in consumption’s share of GDP has reversed.
Consider the telecommunications-equipment industry, which has been growing at more than 15% annually in the past couple of years.
Gross merchandise volume in online retail sales is approaching CN¥2 trillion ($316 billion), and growing at a rate of 40-60% annually.
Many other industry segments serving domestic demand are also growing at double-digit rates, suggesting that domestic consumption is already making a more significant contribution to China’s GDP growth.
But there remains the question of whether consumption share growth is sustainable – that is, whether it is the result of income share growth or rising leverage.
If it is supported by excessive leverage, effectively shifting future consumption to the present, China could face a significant slowdown – or even a major crisis.
Leverage has undoubtedly increased at unsustainable rates in recent years.
But, given that debt growth began from a low base, it will not necessarily lead to a crisis – as long as appropriate risk management is in place.
Most important, shadow banks’ activities must be regulated in a way that enhances transparency and deters excessive risk-taking, while allowing the sector to continue to contribute to financial-sector development by providing savings options to households and credit to small and medium-size firms.
As for the official banking sector, liberalization of interest rates on deposits, scheduled for 2016, will reduce financial repression and implicit investment subsidies.
That, in turn, should help to rebalance the demand side of the growth pattern.
Such complex structural changes cannot be perfectly synchronized and thus are likely to be accompanied by a dip in growth rates.
The government has expressed a willingness to accept somewhat slower growth in pursuit of a more stable, sustainable economy.
But whether a slowdown is the start of a trend or a temporary part of a complex transition, will not be apparent from the start.
Ensuring that it is the latter will require the patience and discipline – in both domestic and foreign policy – befitting the major transformation now underway.
What\u0027s Ailing France?
PARIS – France is gravely ill.
So ill, in fact, that Standard & Poor’s recently cut its sovereign-credit rating – the country’s second downgrade in less than two years.
The decision was accompanied by warnings that the budgetary and structural reforms that President François Hollande’s administration has implemented over the last year have been inadequate to improve France’s medium-term growth prospects.
Now, the pressure is on for structural reforms covering everything from labor markets to taxation.
While the S&P downgrade was unexpected, it was not exactly shocking.
The recent downturn in France’s industrial output has created large trade deficits, and is undermining the competitiveness of small and medium-size enterprises.
Unemployment stands at about 11%, with a record-high 3.3 million workers registered as jobless in October.
At the same time, political crisis is impeding the government’s pursuit of difficult reforms.
French leaders have demonstrated an inability to communicate effectively or apply past experiences in analyzing current threats.
Instead, they are resorting to diversionary tactics by engaging in overblown rhetorical battles about minor controversies.
But they cannot ignore their problems forever, and the consequences of delaying the reforms that France needs could be catastrophic.
And yet, viewed from a broader perspective, France’s problems are largely symptoms of a disease that is affecting the entire global economy (including the European Union’s southern members).
In recent decades, unfettered capitalism has produced significant mutations worldwide.
For starters, industrialism has become obsolete.
In the advanced countries, the market for first-time purchases of mass-market goods like cars, refrigerators, and televisions is saturated, while the secondary market for used and reconditioned goods has become much less dynamic, undermining employment in repairs and renovations.
With no industrial good that still requires a large-scale labor force – and the communications and services industries unable to fill the gap – employment is shrinking and economic growth is stagnating.
The second mutation stems from excessive shareholder dominance, which has been on the rise for more than three decades.
Gathered into pension, investment, and hedge funds, shareholders can place considerable pressure on companies to extract dividends, using performance-based bonuses to gain executive support for their preferred policies.
This has led to excessive workforce externalization, high rates of CEO turnover, takeover bids, and restructurings of all kinds – all which have far-reaching consequences.
In OECD countries, the share of salaries in GDP has fallen by about ten percentage points, on average, to roughly 57%.
Cumulative figures for the last 30 years vary from $200-300 trillion.
For this reason, consumption – the main driver of economic growth – has stagnated since 2000, while unemployment rates have risen almost everywhere, creating instability that affects even those who still have jobs.
Capitalism’s third mutation is the extreme financialization of economies and societies.
Financial and industrial managers are compensated at a level that most of the world would struggle even to imagine.
And the unrestrained expansion of financial markets, notably the proliferation of derivatives, led directly to the crisis that engulfed the Western banking system in 2007-2008.
Governments, in order to contain the fallout of the crisis, ran up public debt, including in countries whose balance sheets had already been weakened significantly by declining GDP growth.
In many countries – particularly in Southern Europe – bleak economic circumstances are generating social tension, political apathy, civil unrest, and delinquency.
The persistent specter of climate change only compounds public anxiety.
This is obviously not the ideal environment for France – not to mention the struggling economies of Southern Europe – to implement difficult structural reforms.
But, by changing its economic doctrine, Europe can improve its prospects considerably.
Instead of remaining on the German-led path of orthodoxy – which, through counter-productive austerity and deflation (forcing down domestic wages and prices), has turned stabilization into recession – Europe must develop a growth-based strategy to overcome the crisis once and for all.
Many economists, including the Nobel laureates Paul Krugman and Joseph Stiglitz, advocate precisely such a policy change for Europe.
Only by heeding their recommendations, and demonstrating a shared capacity for – and commitment to – long-term thinking, can France and its troubled southern European neighbors finally begin to recover enough strength to do what they must for their long-term health.
The Age of Violence
PARIS – Global problems are rarely straightforward.
But, in general, careful analysis of their various facets leads to some understanding of their causes and, in turn, to reasonably promising solutions.
Indeed, the opportunity to analyze such problems regularly is precisely what makes my role as a columnist so gratifying.
Lately, however, promising solutions have been increasingly elusive.
Simply put, much of the world is mired in conflict, with little hope of escape.
In Ukraine, violent clashes between pro-Russian separatists and the police are just the latest development in the country’s deteriorating security situation.
Syria remains locked in a brutal civil war.
And tensions between Israel and Iran over the latter’s nuclear program – not to mention Israel’s decades-old conflict with Palestine – are exacerbating instability in the Middle East, where ten countries, taken together, have become the world’s largest market for weapons, purchasing more new arms annually than China.
Several African countries – Mali, Central African Republic, South Sudan, and Somalia – are engulfed in permanent civil war, leaving citizens without potable water, much less schools, hospitals, and other social infrastructure.
In Nigeria, the Islamic militia Boko Haram – a glorified gang of criminals – brings disgrace on the Prophet, in the name of whom they abducted more than 200 schoolgirls to sell or use as sex slaves.
In Asia, China’s military buildup and increasingly assertive approach in pursuing its territorial claims in the South and East China seas – which overlap with claims by Japan, the Philippines, South Korea, and Vietnam – is raising concerns among its regional neighbors.
It does not help that China’s economic growth, which provided a powerful boost to the region’s smaller economies in recent decades, has slowed considerably.
China is not the only major emerging economy experiencing diminished growth.
Brazil, too, is suffering from slow growth, not to mention stubborn inflation and mounting deficits.
Meanwhile, Latin American countries like Mexico and Colombia remain under threat from drug cartels that sometimes are better armed than the police or the military.
Meanwhile, in the European Union, an election has come to a close.
But it was an election for nothing; the outcome merely reinforced the growing divide between pro-Europeans and Euro-skeptic populist parties.
While the global economy may seem to be recovering from the recent crises, it remains fraught with risk, stemming from the $750 trillion in liquidity – up $50 trillion since 2006 – sloshing around in speculative markets.
This capital does not finance investments or fuel economic growth; its sole purpose is to reap enormous but unpredictable profits for a select few.
This bubble, like all bubbles, will burst, triggering a much more severe crisis than that of 2008.
At least event organizers are keeping busy.
The United Nations is preparing its 21st climate conference, to be held in Paris in 2015, with world leaders knowing full well that it, too, will end in failure to conclude a comprehensive global agreement.
Given the scale of the world’s ecological challenges, our leaders’ incapacity to cooperate effectively on the environment could not be more problematic.
For example, at the current rate, the world’s fish resources will be extinguished in the next half-century.
Yet Russia, Ukraine, and China recently opposed the establishment of Protected Marine Areas, which are critical to the survival of numerous species.
We have only one planet, and we must learn to coexist on it.
Yet the overwhelming feeling is one of chaos and degradation.
We cannot afford to wait for world leaders to solve our problems any longer.
The global public must unite to compel decision-makers to take real action aimed at overcoming obstacles to peace, harmony, and sustainability.
The first obstacle is international law’s lack of enforcement authority.
While respecting individual countries’ sovereignty is vital, so is accountability – and that requires some international authority to monitor and punish crimes.
The good news is that the global public is increasingly supportive of international intervention in some cases.
But it must go further, demanding that any treaty should include a provision for surveillance and sanctions; that a country’s right to veto intervention be limited according to the amount of time that has passed and the issue at stake; and that measures to protect populations be decided upon by majority vote.
The second major obstacle is the intellectual demise of what could be called “the science of economics.”
Nowadays, the banking industry shapes decision-making worldwide, exemplified in its enduring right to unlimited speculation and its capacity to capture profits that are unmatched by any other industry, especially for its senior managers, while exposing the world to overwhelming risk.
Instead of allowing a single self-interested sector to dictate the economy’s functioning, policymakers must determine precisely what the acceptable balance is between risky speculative activities and financial stability – and ensure that the financial sector adheres to it.
Governments’ emphasis should always be on reducing unemployment, instability, and inequality.
The third major obstacle to global peace and prosperity is the disappearance of ethics from the functioning of states and markets.
Governments and multilateral bodies like the UN have gradually been discredited, along with the value systems on which they are based.
While major religions retain some value-based authority, most have remained largely silent on the real political, economic, environmental, and security challenges that the world faces.
Why do Christian churches continue to focus on people’s private behaviors and not on the rules of the social and economic game?
Why does the Chief Rabbinate of Israel never discuss peace, much less make a statement on what, in the eyes of God, should have priority: a piece of land or millions of human lives?
Why do Muslim authorities so rarely condemn crimes supposedly committed in the name of the Prophet?
Perhaps that will change, too.
Pope Francis, for example, appears to be leading the Catholic Church in the direction of greater social engagement.
It is the global public’s duty to take the same route.
Taming Europe’s Banks
PARIS – Last month, the European Commission unveiled its much-anticipated blueprint for banking reform, aimed at reining in risk-taking by the European Union’s largest banks.
But the proposal has met significant resistance, with some warning that it would erode European banks’ competitiveness, and others arguing that it is inadequate to mitigate banking risks effectively.
How this debate unfolds will have profound implications for the EU’s future.
According to Michel Barnier, the EU commissioner spearheading the reform effort, the proposed measures – including regulatory authority to divide banks’ riskier trading activities from their deposit-taking business, and a ban on proprietary trading by the largest banks – would enhance financial stability and protect taxpayers.
But the draft regulation falls far short of the recommendations made by a high-level expert group in 2012, which included an impermeable wall between banks’ speculative-trading business and their retail and commercial banking activities.
Nonetheless, many claim that Barnier’s proposal goes too far.
Perhaps the strongest reaction came from Bank of France Governor Christian Noyer, who called the proposals “irresponsible and contrary to the interests of the European economy.”
The positions taken in this complex debate do not align neatly with the traditional left-right political spectrum.
Barnier is a center-right Frenchman recommending more public control over private banking activities.
(Indeed, stricter banking regulation has been endorsed by all.)
And, while Noyer’s position at the central bank makes him independent, he is championing banking-sector autonomy in a country led by a left-wing government.
What is at stake is Europe’s capacity to avoid another financial meltdown – one that could be even more devastating than the 2007 crisis.
Of course, to some degree, a capitalist system will always be vulnerable to shocks and crises.
The question is how to respond to them to minimize the fallout, while bolstering the system’s resilience.
In 1929, a crisis among speculating capitalists prompted poorly conceived and excessive reactions, leading to a deep and prolonged depression.
Less than four years later, US President Franklin D. Roosevelt’s newly elected government passed the Glass-Steagall Act, which prohibited commercial banks from trading securities with clients’ deposits.
By forbidding investment banks from holding cash deposits, Glass-Steagall helped to support more than a half-century of financial stability after World War II.
This – together with the gold exchange standard, which ensured that credit did not exceed the economy’s productive capacity – contributed to sustained global economic growth.
Everything changed in 1971, when US President Richard Nixon, unable to contain the fiscal deficit resulting from spending on the Vietnam War and expanded social-welfare programs, abolished the dollar’s direct convertibility to gold.
The resulting exchange-rate, interest-rate, and commodity-price volatility continues to this day.
The financial sector has since made every effort to design instruments that protect against price fluctuations, to transform private debt into tradable financial securities, and to gain access to speculative markets.
But these efforts were conducive to fraud and delinquency, and thus spurred a wave of new financial crises – in Europe in 1992, in Asia in 1997, and in Russia in 1998 – as well as a recession in Europe and the United States in the early 2000’s.
Two other destabilizing developments emerged in the last quarter of the twentieth century: a strong incentive to use debt to prop up demand, and a shift toward financing public debt through private institutions at market prices, under the pretext of fighting inflation.
These trends boosted public-debt burdens, while flooding the global financial system with liquidity generated by private banking activities that were unconnected to transactions in the real economy.
As a result, by 2006, global liquidity amounted to more than twice the value of world GDP.
Add to that the American financial sector’s untenable subprime and securitization activities, and it is not surprising that the next two years brought the global financial system to the brink of outright collapse.
To prevent the crash from triggering another Great Depression, governments intervened with massive taxpayer-funded bailouts, causing public-debt burdens to swell further, reaching unsustainable levels in many developed economies.
Making matters worse, the US, the United Kingdom, and Japan began implementing quantitative-easing policies – that is, they began printing money – in an attempt to sustain GDP growth.
Through all of this, governments have strengthened bank regulation only slightly, leaving key issues like liquidity creation, exposure to derivatives, and tax avoidance largely unaddressed.
Today, 98% of the $750 trillion in global liquidity is in speculative markets.
Like all bubbles, this one is bound to burst.
The European Commission has acknowledged the danger, declaring that the only way to mitigate it is to separate the real economy from speculative markets by preventing banks from being involved in both.
But, according to Noyer, such a move would not work in the eurozone, where banks’ profits depend largely on their risky activities.
If those activities move to the UK, the eurozone economy will suffer considerably.
From a short-term perspective, Noyer’s position is largely correct.
But the profits that would be lost remain lower than the potential costs of another major financial crisis.
The eurozone’s member states should never again have to face such costs.
Pembiayaan Mikro untuk Ketahanan Perubahan Iklim
LONDON – Sejumlah kelompok sangat rentan akan menyaksikan kejamnya dampak perubahan iklim, mulai dari kenaikan permukaan air laut, peristiwa cuaca ekstrem, hingga kemarau berkepanjangan dan banjir parah.
Menurut Bank Dunia, tanpa upaya-upaya mitigasi yang efektif, perubahan iklim akan menjerumuskan lebih dari 100 juta orang ke jurang kemiskinan pada tahun 2030.
Agar masyarakat paling rentan sanggup berdaya tahan dari akibat buruk perubahan iklim, lembaga-lembaga keuangan harus mendukung usaha-usaha kecil dan menengah (UKM).
Di negara-negara emerging economies, UKM berkontribusi terhadap 45% pekerjaan dan 33% PDB – angka tersebut akan meroket ketika UKM informal juga dimasukkan.
Ketika UKM mampu membangun ketahanan terhadap perubahan iklim, efek berganda (cascading effect) akan tercipta bagi komunitas di sekitarnya.
Sayangnya, pemilik UKM umumnya kesulitan mendapat pinjaman bank, sehingga condong mengandalkan pinjaman informal dan sumber pendanaan alternatif lain untuk menyokong bisnisnya.
Menurut Bank Dunia, 50% UKM formal mengalami keterbatasan akses pada kredit formal, dan total kesenjangan kredit di kalangan UKM formal dan informal mencapai 2,6 triliun dolar AS di seluruh dunia.
Meskipun derajatnya berbeda-beda, Afrika dan Asia menghadapi kesenjangan terbesar.
Pembiayaan mikro bisa menutup kesenjangan tersebut melalui pemberian pinjaman kepada UKM agar bisnisnya bisa berjalan dan berkembang.
Menurut OECD, lembaga-lembaga keuangan mikro, termasuk badan pembangunan asing, bank, koperasi simpan pinjam, dan organisasi nirlaba, telah menyalurkan layanan keuangan dasar kepada lebih dari 100 juta pengusaha miskin di dunia, yang mana 90% diantaranya adalah perempuan.
Peranan pembiayaan mikro dalam meningkatkan ketahanan UKM terhadap perubahan iklim harus diperkuat.
Di Afrika, Asia, dan Amerika Latin, pembiayaan mikro memungkinkan UKM untuk budidaya tanaman tahan kemarau, merancang sistem irigasi lebih baik, dan membeli asuransi iklim untuk melindungi pendapatannya apabila gagal panen yang disebabkan curah hujan tinggi – atau kekeringan.
Proyek-proyek tersebut memiliki rekam jejak yang terpercaya.
Berdasarkan sebuah kajian yang dilakukan OECD, 43% dari aktivitas kredit mikro di Bangladesh pada tahun 2010 telah meningkatkan ketahanan masyarakat.
Proyek-proyek tersebut mencakup program pinjaman rumah tahan cuaca buruk dan pembelian bibit toleran kekeringan dan salinitas, sehingga menambah daya tahan terhadap iklim.
Di Nepal, kredit mikro membantu tanggap bencana dan kesiapsiagaan, diversifikasi tanaman pangan, dan perluasan akses pada irigasi.
Kredit mikro juga membantu transisi UKM menuju business model yang rendah karbon, melalui pengucuran dana untuk penggunaan sumber energi terbarukan dan peralihan menuju produksi dan rantai pasok yang berkelanjutan.
Pembiayaan mikro bukan satu-satunya solusi yang ada dan tentu juga mendapat kritik.
Untuk menghilangkan kekhawatiran tentang penyalahgunaan dana, lembaga-lembaga keuangan mikro harus memberi penghargaan kepada pemilik-pemilik UKM yang menggunakan dana yang diterima untuk membiayai ketahanan terhadap perubahan iklim dan proyek energi terbarukan.
Tindakan semacam itu tidak dikelompokkan sebagai tanggung jawab sosial perusahaan (CSR).
Bahkan, menurut Komisi Bisnis dan Pembangunan Berkelanjutan (Business and Sustainable Development Commission), yang mana saya menjadi ketua, pendekatan tersebut adalah kepentingan pribadi di masing-masing lembaga keuangan mikro.
Sektor swasta perlu menyadari bahwa krisis iklim juga sebuah peluang, apalagi bicara tentang UKM.  Bahkan, sejumlah pemain di sektor swasta sudah mengenalinya.
GSMA – sebuah asosiasi dagang yang beranggotakan ratusan operator telekomunikasi dan direktur jenderalnya, Mats Granryd, juga anggota Komisi Bisnis – dan perusahaan yang tergabung di dalamnya memfasilitasi kredit mikro di daerah-daerah pedesaan.
Melalui pemakaian telepon seluler, petani bisa mendapat beragam informasi secara cepat, mulai dari harga bibit hingga pola cuaca, dan mengakses dana yang dibutuhkan dalam waktu singkat untuk menyelesaikan transaksinya.
Informasi yang tersedia dari perangkat mobile memberdayakan petani dalam pengambilan keputusan, sehingga menghemat pengeluaran mereka sekaligus menambah ketahanan terhadap pola cuaca ekstrem dan kekeringan.
Selain itu, penyedia layanan seluler juga mendapat profit dengan meluasnya cakupan operasi mereka di wilayah pedesaan.
Terdapat peluang lain yang muncul dari jaringan pinjam-meminjam langsung (peer-to-peer lending), yaitu platform digital yang bisa mempertemukan pihak yang membutuhkan pinjaman dengan pemberi pinjaman.
Platform penyaluran kredit mikro secara peer-to-peer seperti lendwithcare.org, Lendico, dan RainFin terbukti sukses dan bisa membangkitkan gairah penggiat kredit mikro dan memperluas akses pada pinjaman bagi UKM di negara-negara berkembang.
Instrumen-instrumen keuangan seperti derivatif cuaca/iklim (weather derivatives) – ditujukan untuk melindungi panen dan pemilik UKM serta penduduk termiskin di dunia – juga mempunyai potensi.
Apabila kita sungguh-sungguh dalam memitigasi dampak-dampak terburuk perubahan iklim, terutama bencana yang mungkin menimpa kelompok sangat rentan, sektor publik dan swasta harus mendukung upaya-upaya perluasan kredit mikro bagi UKM.
Mereka yang berjuang di garda depan demi mempertahankan nyawa dan  penghidupannya tidak mampu berhasil tanpa bantuan pihak lain.
The Arab World’s Vanishing Christians
PRINCETON – This Christmas, like every Christmas, thousands of pilgrims and tourists will travel to the Middle East to celebrate the holiday in the land of the Bible.
In Bethlehem, the birthplace of Jesus, the Latin Patriarch of Jerusalem will lead a midnight mass, while in Syria – where some Christians still speak dialects of Aramaic, similar to the ancient language Jesus spoke – celebrations are likely to be subdued, curtailed by the dangers of a war that is tearing the country apart.
At a time when the Middle East is aflame with sectarian strife, the observance of the Christian holiday is a sad reminder that the region’s distinctive religious, ethnic, and cultural diversity is rapidly disappearing.
At the beginning of the twentieth century, Christians made up roughly 20% of the Arab world.
In certain areas – including southern Egypt, the mountains of Lebanon, and southeastern Anatolia – they formed an absolute majority.
Today, just 5% of the Arab world is Christian, and many of those who remain are leaving, forced out by persecution and war.
Jews, too – once a vital presence in cities like Cairo, Damascus, and Baghdad – have all but disappeared from the predominantly Muslim parts of the Middle East, relocating to Israel, Europe, and North America.
Even in Muslim communities, diversity has been dwindling.
In cities like Beirut and Baghdad, mixed neighborhoods have been homogenized, as Sunni and Shia seek shelter from sectarian attacks and civil war.
The waning of diversity in the Middle East goes back more than a century, to the bouts of ethnic and religious cleansing that took place during the Ottoman Empire, including the murder and displacement of 1.5 million Armenian and Syriac Christians in eastern Anatolia.
After the empire’s collapse in 1918, the rise of Arab nationalism placed Arabic language and culture at the center of political identity, thereby disenfranchising many non-Arab ethnic groups, including Kurds, Jews, and Syriacs.
Many Greeks who had been living in Egypt for generations, for example, lost their livelihoods in the 1950s, when President Gamal Abdel Nasser, the great standard-bearer of pan-Arabism, nationalized privately owned businesses and industries.
Others were forced to flee the country altogether.
The rise of political Islam following the Arab-Israeli Six-Day War in 1967 dealt another blow to religious minorities.
By promoting Islamic revival as a solution to the region’s ills, Islamism led to the marginalization of non-Muslims, including groups that had played outsize roles in the region’s economic, cultural, and political life for centuries.
As a result, in places like Egypt, Christians have faced harsh social discrimination and violence, sometimes at the hands of the nominally secular state.
The Arab Spring upheavals have given rise to grave new challenges to cultural and religious diversity in the Middle East.
Many of the authoritarian regimes now under threat of collapse cultivated the support of minorities.
This was especially true in Syria, where the Alawite-dominated Baath Party fostered ties to Christians and other small communities by presenting itself as a bulwark of secularism and stability in the face of a supposedly threatening Sunni majority.
Now that Syria’s Sunnis have risen up against their Alawite rulers, Christians’ loyalty to the regime has become a liability, even a danger.
In some corners, Christians are regarded as complicit in the government’s brutal crackdown, making them targets for attack.
The rise of the Islamic State over the last year has sparked even more violence against minorities.
Powered by a fundamentalist Wahhabi ideology and a boundless appetite for bloodshed, the Islamic State seeks a return to an imagined pre-modern caliphate that subjugates Shia and treats non-Muslims as second-class citizens.
When the Islamic State captures a city, its fighters give Christians the choice of paying a medieval tax known as the jizya, converting to Islam, or being killed.
Many simply flee.
The Yazidis of northern Iraq – whose plight on Mount Sinjar was much publicized this past summer – are even less lucky.
The Islamic State regards them as pagans, and therefore, undeserving of the protections traditionally accorded to Christians or Jews under Islamic law.
As a result, many Yazidis are murdered or enslaved.
In addition to persecuting minorities, the Islamic State has set about erasing all physical traces of religious diversity.
Its forces have demolished Sufi shrines, Shia mosques, Christian churches, and ancient monuments they consider to be remnants of a corrupt and profane past.
Western governments’ protection of ethnic and religious minorities in the region has been a controversial matter for more than a century, and it remains so today.
Many Sunnis, for example, accuse America of favoritism: the United States intervenes to protect Kurds, Yazidis, and Christians in northern Iraq, they say, but does little to stop the slaughter of hundreds of thousands of Sunnis in Syria.
In fact, America’s complicated history of church-state relations at home has made it reluctant to intervene on the part of any religious groups abroad, especially when the population is small.
The end of diversity in the Middle East is a tragedy not only for those who have died, fled, or suffered.
The region as a whole will be worse off as a result of their absence.
Minorities have historically served as brokers between the Middle East and the outside world, and if they disappear, the region will lose an important class of cultural, economic, and intellectual leaders.
How a society handles ethnic and religious diversity can tell us a great deal about its capacity to negotiate disagreements and transform pluralism from a liability into an asset.
Yet diversity is all too often considered a source of weakness in the Middle East.
It should be considered a strength, and one that is worth protecting.
Who’s Winning the Middle East’s Cold War?
LONDON – A cold war is taking place in a very hot place.
A key component of the sectarian competition between Shia and Sunni Islam in the Middle East is geopolitical, with Iran facing off against Saudi Arabia and its Gulf allies in a struggle for regional dominance.
As with the original Cold War between the Soviet Union and the United States, the conflict does not involve direct military confrontation between the main rivals, at least not yet.
It is being fought diplomatically, ideologically, and economically – especially in the oil markets – and through proxy wars, such as the conflicts in Syria and Yemen.
There are few problems in the wider Middle East that cannot be traced back to the power rivalry between Saudi Arabia and Iran.
For the moment, the Iranians seem to be riding high.
Following Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei’s decision to agree to an international deal limiting Iran’s nuclear capability to peaceful purposes, Western sanctions have been all but removed.
Now that it is once again acceptable to do business with Iran, its ailing economy is set for a rebound.
Meanwhile, Iran’s creeping de facto annexation of parts of Iraq – astonishingly, with American acceptance – continues because no one except the so-called “Islamic State” has the stomach to stand up to it.
Iran also has an overwhelming manpower advantage, with a population of an estimated 77 million, compared to Saudi Arabia’s 28 million.
And while its army is far less well equipped than its rival’s, it is much larger.
Moreover, Iran’s main Arab ally, Syrian President Bashar al-Assad, has been given a reprieve as the conflict in his country drags on without conclusion.
This has left the Saudis feeling abandoned and vulnerable.
They believe that their great traditional ally, the US, betrayed them by concluding the nuclear deal with Iran.
Meanwhile, they fear that the chaos in neighboring Iraq has exposed them to chronic strategic risks.
The Saudis are also recoiling under a barrage of criticism of their Wahhabi brand of Islam, which is widely blamed for incubating extremism and inspiring terrorism.
Meanwhile, Saudi Arabia’s human rights record – including the denial of elementary rights for women – is under constant scrutiny.
Against this background, the Kingdom is taking the fight to its enemies.
King Salman bin Abdulaziz Al Saud is the country’s above-the-fray ruler, but his son, Prince Mohammad bin Salman Al Saud, currently wields much of the power.
As Minister of Defense, Mohammad has continued the Saudi policy of backing anti-Assad rebels in Syria, in concert with Turkey, while unleashing a war on pro-Iranian tribesmen in Yemen (at an enormous humanitarian cost).
He has also backed, if not instigated, an increase in domestic repression, and has launched an economic offensive against Iran – the consequences of which have been seen, until recently, in plunging global oil prices.
In early May, Saudi Arabia’s longstanding oil minister, Ali al-Naimi, was replaced by Khalid al-Falih, an ally of Mohammad’s.
The reshuffle is an indication of Mohammad’s determination to use oil prices as a weapon against Iran and its ally, Russia.
As the world’s swing producer, with boundless reserves of cheaply extractable oil, Saudi Arabia can flood or throttle the market at will.
And for now, the Saudis are flooding the market.
They are seeking to rein in Iran and Russia, both of which need higher oil prices to sustain economic growth.
And they are hoping to bankrupt the US shale-oil producers that have reduced America’s dependence on Middle Eastern oil.
As Mohammad recently declared, the Kingdom doesn’t care about oil prices; “$30 or $70 – they are all the same to us.”
Iran and Russia, by contrast, need a barrel of oil to be worth at least $70.
The US oil industry has proved more adaptable and resilient than expected; cheaper shale fields have opened even as old ones have closed.
But the Saudi oil offensive has helped convince Iran and Russia to drag Assad, kicking and screaming, to the negotiating table.
Mohammad’s new economic plan, Vision 2030, unveiled in May, is another front in the economic war, designed to show that Saudi Arabia is immune to the domestic economic pressures afflicting Iran and Russia.
The plan calls for economic diversification and envisages the establishment of a huge sovereign wealth fund to cushion the impact of lower oil revenues that the ruling class has traditionally used to purchase social peace.
The Saudi strategy is not without its costs.
Gulf remittances of around $10 billion a year to Egypt (itself under increasing economic pressure and a dizzying fall in tourist receipts after recent terrorist attacks) have been scaled back to around $3 billion.
And funding to Lebanon has been cut almost completely.
And yet the long-term outcome of this cold war is not hard to predict.
Iran and Russia can never be more than foothold powers in the Arab world.
The Shia might be able to maintain influence in Iraq, Syria, and Lebanon (through Hezbollah), but they will be unable to compete more broadly.
Some 90% of Arabs are Sunni Muslims, and thus potential Saudi allies.
The Saudis can afford to be more mature, and less suspicious than they have been.
The US should take steps to reassure them – while never easing up pressure to improve human rights and implement political and economic reforms.
Managing Compromise in the Middle East
CAIRO – The Middle East, and especially the Arab world, is experiencing a period of fundamental change and even more fundamental challenges.
But the region’s ability to meet the many challenges that it faces has been complicated by national, regional, and international disagreements about what form change – both across the region and in individual societies – should take.
The international community undoubtedly has a central role to play in supporting social and economic reform in the region, and in assisting governments to find both the will and the way to undertake the necessary changes.
But it is far more important that Arabs themselves adopt a forward-looking perspective in reckoning with the challenges that they face, and that they take charge of their own destiny.
That much became clear with the Arab Spring revolts in 2011.
Even though the region was already being transformed by demographic changes, including rapid population growth, urbanization, and a spike in unemployed, university-educated young adults, the eruption of protests took many Middle Eastern and North African countries by surprise.
Arab youths were a major force behind demands for change.
So, too, were new digital technologies that freed up information and facilitated communication among ordinary citizens, essentially dismantling the monopolies that many governments held on knowledge and connectivity.
But the greatest reasons for disruption have been rooted in the inability of Arab governments and societies to manage effectively the changes sweeping the region, and their excessive dependence on foreign countries to ensure their security.
Many governments, having grown sclerotic and rigid, were quickly outpaced by social and geopolitical forces beyond their control, and have proved unable or unwilling to adapt to any trend challenging the status quo.
This also reflects the fact that central features in many governments’ domestic and regional agendas are not even of their own making, but were imposed from outside the region.
To move to a more effective, proactive form of governance, Middle Eastern countries need to create a space for genuine politics and civil-society initiatives that redistribute power and foster cooperation.
The region is facing problems that are simply too complex and deep-rooted to be addressed with isolated, top-down solutions.
The creativity within Arab societies must be tapped.
Some countries will need economic and social support to create the necessary domestic conditions, while others will need to address outstanding geopolitical issues.
Consider Tunisia, which many people outside the Middle East see as one of the region’s greatest recent success stories.
To be sure, political factions in Tunisia have set a good example by often compromising with one another in order to create a viable governance structure; but domestic social and sectarian grievances are still very much a part of Tunisian politics.
The Tunisian government must tread carefully, and it cannot assume that all of its citizens are satisfied with the new arrangements.
Creating the space for national, municipal, and even tribal leaders to engage politically is especially important for the region’s more unstable countries, which must, as a first step, limit the availability of weapons that can be used to challenge the authority of legitimate governments.
For example, establishing a functioning government in Libya will require international assistance, including a joint force comprising the United Nations, the Arab League, and the African Union, as well as an arrangement among Algeria, Egypt, and Tunisia to monitor and control borders and maritime access.
Egypt is undergoing its own fundamental sociopolitical transformation.
Lacking a culture of political compromise, the breakdown of central authority in 2011 was not surprising.
Egypt now must restore a broad, constitution-based consensus on the fundamental economic and social rules of the game, which will require all stakeholders in government and civil society to demonstrate a real willingness to reach agreements that account for the legitimate needs of everyone.
To help things along, Egyptians should seek ways to use new technologies to include all constituencies in the debates that must shape this process.
Syria – which has become a true humanitarian disaster, with no end in sight – poses the most severe test of the region’s ability to compromise and reconcile.
Because the conflict is so complex, it will allow no clear military victor.
Not even the great powers that are now involved there, the United States and Russia, can manage the transition to peace alone.
Of course, the US and Russia will be indispensable to guide the reshaping of the political and military landscape, through sanctions, military force, or the power of political persuasion.
But any viable and lasting peace in Syria will require the cooperation of a large number of actors.
Specifically, it will require a multidimensional bargain: between the US and Russia; among Gulf states, especially Saudi Arabia and Iran; and between the Syrian opposition and supporters of President Bashar al-Assad’s regime.
The need for broad cooperation is apparent across the region, where problems are deep-seated and, therefore, cannot be resolved with simple, quick fixes.
Dynamic, peaceful societies will never emerge across the Middle East unless all of their citizens embrace the lost art of compromise and embark on a consensual process of nation building.
Closing the Middle East’s Education Deficit
NILE DELTA – About 60 miles north of Cairo’s Tahrir Square – the epicenter of the Egyptian uprising in 2011 – there is a secondary school students call “the prison.”
A deformed box of concrete packed with dilapidated classrooms, the school is pockmarked with age and neglect.
One teacher in the sleepy Nile Delta village morbidly quips that it doubles as a morgue.
“We never saw a revolution here,” he said a few months ago, withholding his name for fear of losing his job.
“A lot of the hope we had is now dead…it was killed.”
The plight of Egypt’s public schools is a critical indicator of how Egypt’s revolution has failed its people.
Outside observers saw the popular rebellion against Hosni Mubarak’s regime as a struggle for democracy over dictatorship; the generals who once again rule Egypt portray it as a fight for secularism that was hijacked by radical Islam.
In fact, it was a revolt for human dignity, for a better life for ordinary citizens.
Without education, that hope is stillborn, not only in Egypt but across the Middle East.
According to the United Nations, ongoing conflicts in the Middle East and North Africa are depriving more than 13 million children of an education.
But it’s not just in war-torn Syria and Yemen where youth are systematically neglected; shortcomings abound in relatively stable countries such as Egypt and Jordan.
Inadequate education goes hand in hand with the region’s unemployment crisis.
According to the International Labor Organization, the Middle East had the world's highest youth unemployment rates in 2014, with 46% of women and 24% of men out of work.
This toxic combination of poor education and high youth unemployment leaves millions of young people lingering in a purgatory that American University professor Diane Singerman calls “waithood.”
The term describes the prolonged adolescence that young people must endure until they can afford marriage, the region’s institutional and cultural gateway to societal recognition, not to mention sexual activity.
Unfortunately, governments and international institutions regard education and unemployment as development issues, not political or security issues.
The US gives Egypt $1.3 billion in annual military aid (second only to Israel), but just $250 million for civilian projects and programs.
Supporters of military assistance argue that weapons systems are needed to fight affiliates of Al Qaeda and the so-called Islamic State in the Sinai and to maintain American influence with Egypt’s generals.
Yet, unless Egyptian youth have hope and opportunity, security assistance is only a Band-Aid.
Long-term security depends on a government’s willingness to provide adequate public goods and services.
Suppose the United States and the International Monetary Fund conditioned military and financial assistance to Egypt on straightforward measures of educational progress.
At the aggregate level, Egypt could improve its performance in global rankings.
In the World Economic Forum’s latest report on global competitiveness, Egypt was ranked 139th out of 140 countries for quality of primary education.
Other changes, such as reducing the need for and the cost of private tutoring, would make a material difference in the lives of ordinary Egyptians.
In Manshiyat Naser, one of Cairo’s poorest neighborhoods, young people like 18-year-old Ashraf Khalil have been studying for Thanaweya Amma, the infamous national secondary school examination.
Their results will mean the difference between a coveted university spot and a life of second-class citizenry in a country with almost no social mobility.
“Things are actually worse since the revolution,” Khalil said while hopping on a minibus to a nearby wealthy residential compound where he gardens.
He’s trying to make enough money to hire a private tutor for the exam.
Indeed, private tutoring has become the de facto Egyptian education system.
Some teachers have admitted off the record that they teach the bare minimum in class, so that they can profit from the same students in private lessons.
According to some estimates, Egyptian families spend more than $1 billion on private tutoring to compensate for poor education – a cost that often amounts to almost a quarter of household income.
The US and European governments, which have a vital interest in the stability and prosperity of countries throughout the Middle East and North Africa, could also marshal and support consortia of private investors.
A few years ago, the Egyptian investor Ahmed Alfi started a virtual classroom called Nafham (Arabic for “We understand”).
In an effort to reduce the country’s dependence on private tutoring, the web-based startup provides crowd-sourced educational videos.
The service now has 500,000 users and offers a Syrian curriculum to service the 50% of that country’s refugee youth who are out of school.
But Alfi says it’s been challenging to find outside funding, and he is not alone.
Last April, Abdul Aziz al-Ghurair, a billionaire businessman from the United Arab Emirates, launched the Arab world’s largest education fund, allocating $1.14 billion in grants for underserved youth from the region.
According to Maysa Jalbout, CEO of the Abdulla al-Ghurair Foundation for Education, the fund hopes to provide scholarships for 15,000 Middle Eastern students over the next ten years.
Beginning in September, students will receive financial assistance to attend the region’s top four universities; eventually, study at international universities will be funded as well.
But individual initiatives are not enough.
“Efforts need to be systematic and institutionalized,” Jalbout explains. “No one fund can fix these problems….[W]e need all hands on deck.”
For that to happen, the education of Middle Eastern youth must be regarded as a strategic issue, worthy of just as much global foreign-policy attention as the fight against extremist groups.
The region should be armed with pens, not just swords.
Inovasi Pendidikan di Timur Tengah
LONDON – Urgensi membantu jutaan pengungsi asal Timur Tengah menuntut pengerahan sumber daya yang jauh melampaui kapasitas PBB, ini pun senantiasa menjadi tantangan pemberian bantuan kemanusiaan bagi perusahaan, yayasan, dan lembaga donor sektor publik.
Meskipun pasukan penjaga perdamaian PBB (peacekeepers) didanai oleh sumbangan wajib (assessed contributions), bantuan kemanusiaan bergantung pada donasi sukarela.
Pendidikan, umumnya dinomorduakan setelah kebutuhan kelangsungan hidup dasar seperti pangan dan papan, seringkali ditinggalkan.
Kegagalan ini jauh lebih berbahaya dibandingkan persepsi awal.
Faktanya, dunia menghadapi krisis pendidikan yang dapat mengakibatkan generasi pemuda yang hilang (lost generation) dan tidak memiliki harapan masa depan.
Mayoritas dari enam juta anak pengungsi Suriah masih putus sekolah, sementara 250.000 pemuda terputus dari pendidikan tinggi.
Di negara yang dilanda perang seperti Yaman dan Irak, jutaan anak juga mengalami putus sekolah.
Kebanyakan anak-anak melalui usia sekolahnya tanpa sekali pun masuk ruang kelas.
Meski demikian, berkat the Platform for Education in Emergencies Response (PEER), lembaga amal, organisasi filantropi, dan yayasan bisa memadukan upayanya membantu siswa-siswa pengungsi memperoleh kesempatan pendidikan tinggi, sekaligus memberi perlindungan/tempat aman bagi dosen dan pengajar yang menjadi korban rezim Presiden Suriah Bashar al-Assad.
PEER akan menghubungkan pengungsi Suriah yang siap menjalani perkuliahan dan sejumlah kampus yang siap menerima pengungsi, dan pada akhirnya menjadi penyalur pendidikan tinggi berbasis-web bagi siswa pengungsi di setiap tingkatan di seluruh dunia.
PEER didukung oleh Institute of International EducationdanCatalyst Foundation for Universal Education, badan amal pendidikan didirikan oleh mantan Rektor New York University John Sexton.
Selain dari PEER, the Catalyst Foundation juga menyiapkan beberapa proyek untuk meningkatkan audit sekolah, menggiatkan social-impact investing di sektor pendidikan, dan memperkenalkan kurikulum untuk memupuk hidup berdampingan secara damai di Timur Tengah dan seluruh penjuru dunia.
Sekolah ialah tempat pertama kita bisa meningkatkan kesadaran kewarganegaraan (inclusive citizenship) di negara-negara Timur Tengah.
Maka dari itu, the Catalyst Foundation tengah mengkaji proyek-proyek pendidikan kewarganegaraan di kawasan tersebut – serta Eropa Timur, Afrika, dan Amerika Serikat – guna mengetahui bagaimana kurikulum di sekolah bisa menciptakan kerukunan antar umat beragama secara optimal.
Banyak pemuda-pemudi yang tumbuh di Timur Tengah dan Afrika Utara – segera mencapai 200 juta jiwa – akan mempeoleh model pendidikan yang memupuk hidup berdampingan meski beragam budaya, terutama ketika segelintir politisi di dunia Barat menolak mengakui bahwa koeksistensi itu mungkin.
Kurikulum tersebut jangan terbatas pada mengajarkan Aturan Emas (golden rule) atau mengagung-agungkan dogma-dogma agama yang bersifat universal. Sekolah pun harus memberi pelajaran yang mengajarkan anak-anak bahwa keberagaman adalah kekuatan dan penting bagi kesejahteraan warga.
Ini rencana aksi oleh the Catalyst Foundation.
Usulan mereka adalah bekerja sama dengan enam sekolah percontohan, termasuk satu SMP di Uni Emirat Arab, empat SMA di Amerika Serikat dan Eropa, dan satu SMP di Lebanon yang saat ini mendidik siswa-siswa pengungsi Suriah.
Lebanon adalah negara peserta yang terpenting.
Meski terkenal dengan riwayat panjang yang diwarnai perpecahan politik, sosial, dan keagamaan, semua anak usia 9 tahun diberikan kurikulum pendidikan yang menegaskan kepada semua anak – baik itu Syiah, Sunni, atau Kristen – harkat dan martabat semua agama dan kepercayaan dan benang merah dari masing-masing agama.
Model yang diterapkan Lebanon adalah titik awal baik untuk menyusun kerangka keja yang bisa digunakan di negara lain.
Kurikulum yang dibuat the Catalyst Foundation akan memuat tema-tema universal untuk menggugah pemuda dari negara, agama, serta latar belakang budaya yang berbeda untuk berinteraksi satu sama lain, baik tatap muka atau secara online, melalui berbagi pandangan dan pengalaman.
Tujuannya adalah meningkatkan kesadaran berbudaya dan beragama dan dialog antar pemuda di tahap vital pendidikannya, dengan harapan mereka akan tumbuh menjadi pemimpin di komunitas dan negaranya.
Betul bahwa para reformis berpeluang besar menciptakan lingkaran kebajikan baru (virtuous cycles) di sektor pendidikan di Timur Tengah dan mereka harus mengingat pembelajaran dari inisiatif awal sang pendahulu yaitu Sir Ronald Cohen dalam social-impact investing dan social enterprise.
Para pengusaha sosial (social entrepreneurs) di sektor pendidikan kini memiliki instrumen pembiayaan lebih banyak dibandingkan dahulu – mulai dari modal ventura hingga dana investasi dan bentuk aset lainnya – dan mereka bisa memainkan peran sentral dalam mengangkat pendidikan Timur Tengah menjadi terkemuka di abad ke-21.
Sudah terlalu banyak gagasan lampau dari organisasi nirlaba yang terganjal masalah pendanaan.
The Catalyst Foundation bertujuan memberi bibit modal bagi start-up di bidang pendidikan dan membantu mereka mengembangkan program yang berhasil.
Bagi anda yang peduli akan pendidikan di Timur Tengah, tugas kami jelas: menyediakan bantuan kepada jutaan pemuda miskin dan rentan agar mendapat kebutuhan yang memungkinkan mereka mengubah dan memperbaiki kehidupannya melalui pembelajaran.
Kami di sini ingin menunjukkan bahwa usaha sosial (social enterprise) yang kecil pun bisa berpengaruh besar.
Jatuh Bangun Sistem Kesehatan di Timur Tengah
SEATTLE – Banyak kemajuan yang diraih negara-negara Arab di Timur Tengah dan Afrika Utara dalam beberapa dekade terakhir justru mengalami kemunduran akibat keresahan politik dan perang saudara yang marak di kawasan tersebut.
Kemunduran ini terutama tampak jelas di sistem kesehatan di sejumlah negara seperti Mesir, Yordania, Libya, Suriah, Tunisia, dan Yaman, yang secara perlahan sudah membaik.
Sebelum tahun 2010, negara-negara tersebut menunjukkan kenaikan angka harapan hidup serta penurunan beban penyakit menular dan kematian ibu.
Namun sayangnya sekarang ini gangguan terhadap sistem kesehatan nasional semakin menambah penderitaan dan kesengsaraan yang muncul akibat konflik yang melanda kawasan.
Temuan ini diperoleh dari studi terbaru yang saya rumuskan untuk The Lancet, yang menganalisis data dari Global Burden of Disease Study 2013 untuk menentukan efek kemunduran sistem kesehatan di negara-negara Mediterania Timur.
Kami menemukan bahwa perkiraan angka harapan hidup di kawasan tersebut berkurang sejak tahun 2010.
Contohnya, apabila kenaikan angka harapan hidup di Suriah pada periode 1990-2008 terus meningkat dengan cepat, usia perempuan akan lebih tinggi 5 tahun dan bagi laki-laki lebih tinggi 6 tahun dibandingkan sekarang.
Di Libya, rata-rata angka harapan hidup berkurang 5 tahun bagi perempuan dan 9 tahun bagi laki-laki.
Sama halnya di Mesir, Tunisia, dan Yaman, angka harapan hidup berkurang 0.25 tahun selama tahun 2010 hingga 2013.
Penurunan usia harapan hidup yang terbesar diperkirakan akan menimpa Suriah dan Libya, mengingat perang saudara di kedua negara.
Utusan Khusus PBB di Suriah memperkirakan jumlah korban meninggal akibat tindak kekerasan dalam lima tahun terakhir di Suriah mencapai 400.000 orang.
Selain itu, di tengah perang dan kerusuhan sosial yang parah, profesional di bidang medis dan kesehatan mental umumnya pindah dan mencari lingkungan lebih aman, merampas hak-hak korban – terlepas dari status atau pendapatannya – dari pemenuhan pelayanan dasar mulai dari pengobatan luka fisik sampai penyalahgunaan obat-obatan terlarang atau alkohol.
Faktanya, konflik di kawasan justru paling berbahaya bagi warga yang menderita gangguan kejiwaan dan penyalahgunaan obat.
Tingkat beban penyakit (disease burden) untuk gangguan kejiwaan/penyakit mental dan penyalahgunaan obat, yang diukur dengan tahun hidup (life years), naik dari 4% di tahun 1990 menjadi 7% di tahun 2013, bahkan ditemukan kenaikan beban lebih tinggi di beberapa negara.
Mengingat krisis yang berkepanjangan, bisa jadi konsekuensinya terus bertambah parah di tahun 2016.
Tren kesehatan negatif juga muncul di negara-negara yang mengalami pertumbuhan ekonomi.
Baik Qatar maupun Uni Emirat Arab juga berhadapan dengan meningkatnya pemakaian obat-obatan terlarang dan alkohol, menunjukkan bahwa stres akibat kedekatan dengan kekerasan yang ramai di daerah sekitarnya, juga diperburuk dengan semakin terbuka dan maraknya produksi obat-obatan gelap di wilayah konflik seperti Afghanistan, bisa mendorong seseorang berpaling ke obat-obatan sebagai coping mechanism.
Negara tetangga atau berbatasan dengan zona-zona tersebut juga kian bertambah bebannya karena krisis pengungsi terbesar dalam 70 tahun.
Membanjirnya warga yang memasuki kamp-kamp penampungan di Lebanon dan Yordania telah membuat layanan sanitasi kewalahan, hingga menyebabkan merebaknya wabah penyakit menular dan bahkan di beberapa lokasi ditemukan kemunculan penyakit-penyakit yang sudah hampir diberantas sepenuhnya, seperti polio di kalangan pengungsi Suriah di Irak.
Mayoritas negara yang menampung pengungsi tidak siap menghadapi arus warga secara besar-besaran yang membutuhkan layanan medis dan sosial.
Kemunduran sistem pelayanan kesehatan yang melanda Timur Tengah dan Afrika Utara dalam lima tahun terakhir sangat mengkhawatirkan.
Namun kemajuan yang diraih banyak negara di kawasan pada dekade-dekade sebelumnya bisa memberi harapan bahwa kondisi tersebut dapat diputarbalikkan.
Investasi tambahan pada pendidikan, diagnosis, dan pengobatan, misalnya, akan membantu menghapuskan stigma terhadap gangguan kejiwaan yang melekat di banyak negara Arab.
Tetapi, membangkitkan kembali kemajuan di kawasan akan mustahil tanpa solusi-solusi politik yang sanggup mereda tindak kekerasan dan kegelisahan sosial.
Sebagaimana kami simpulkan dalam studi kami, “kawasan Mediterania Timur yang sehat adalah kawasan Mediterania Timur yang stabil secara politik dan bisa memberi manfaat pada dunia secara keseluruhan.”
Penstabilan negara yang terkoyak konflik adalah prasyarat untuk perbaikan sistem pelayanan kesehatan.
Ketika kestabilan tersebut tercapai, upaya-upaya regional dan domestik harus dipercepat untuk memperbaiki pencegahan penyakit dan infrastruktur layanan kesehatan, agar sebuah kawasan mampu berdiri sendiri dan melangkah pada jalur menuju pemenuhan kesehatan dan kemakmuran bagi rakyatnya.