And what is important to bear in mind is that the slowdown in China and the deep recessions in the Russian Federation and Brazil only explain part of the broad falloff in growth.
True, falling demand for natural resources in China (which accounts for nearly half of global demand for base metals) has had a lot to do with the sharp declines in these prices, which have hit many developing and emerging economies in Latin America and Africa hard.
Indeed, the UN report lists 29 economies that are likely to be badly affected by China’s slowdown.
And the collapse of oil prices by more than 60% since July 2014 has undermined the growth prospects of oil exporters.
The real worry, however, is not just falling commodity prices, but also massive capital outflows.
During 2009-2014, developing countries collectively received a net capital inflow of $2.2 trillion, partly owing to quantitative easing in advanced economies, which pushed interest rates there to near zero.
The search for higher yields drove investors and speculators to developing countries, where the inflows increased leverage, propped up equity prices, and in some cases supported a commodity price boom.
Market capitalization in the Mumbai, Johannesburg, São Paulo, and Shanghai stock exchanges, for example, nearly tripled in the years following the financial crisis.
Equity markets in other developing countries also witnessed similar dramatic increases during this period.
But the capital flows are now reversing, turning negative for the first time since 2006, with net outflows from developing countries in 2015 exceeding $600 billion – more than one-quarter of the inflows they received during the previous six years.
The largest outflows have been through banking channels, with international banks reducing their gross credit exposures to developing countries by more than $800 billion in 2015.
Capital outflows of this magnitude are likely to have myriad effects: drying up liquidity, increasing the costs of borrowing and debt service, weakening currencies, depleting reserves, and leading to decreases in equity and other asset prices.
There will be large knock-on effects on the real economy, including severe damage to developing countries’ growth prospects.
This is not the first time that developing countries have faced the challenges of managing pro-cyclical hot capital, but the magnitudes this time are overwhelming.
During the Asian financial crisis, net outflows from the East Asian economies were only $12 billion in 1997.
Of course, the East Asian economies today are better able to withstand such massive outflows, given their accumulation of international reserves since the financial crisis in 1997.
Indeed, the global stock of reserves has more than tripled since the Asian financial crisis.
China, for example, used nearly $500 billion of its reserves in 2015 to fight capital outflows and prevent the renminbi’s sharp depreciation; but it still has more than $3 trillion in reserves.
The stockpile of reserves may partly explain why huge outflows have not triggered a full-blown financial crisis in developing countries.
But not all countries are so fortunate to have a large arsenal.
Once again, advocates of free mobility for destabilizing short-term capital flows are being proven wrong.
Many emerging markets recognized the dangers and tried to reduce capital inflows.
South Korea, for example, has been using a series of macro-prudential measures since 2010, aimed at moderating pro-cyclical cross-border banking-sector liabilities.
The measures taken were only partially successful, as the data above show.
The question is, what should they do now?
Corporate sectors in developing countries, having increased their leverage with capital inflows during the post-2008 period, are particularly vulnerable.
Capital outflows will adversely affect their equity prices, push up their debt-to-equity ratios, and increase the likelihood of defaults.
The problem is especially severe in commodity-exporting developing economies, where firms borrowed extensively, expecting high commodity prices to persist.
Many developing-country governments failed to learn the lesson of earlier crises, which should have prompted regulations and taxes restricting and discouraging foreign-currency exposures.
Now governments need to take quick action to avoid becoming liable for these exposures.
Expedited debtor-friendly bankruptcy procedures could ensure quick restructuring and provide a framework for renegotiating debts.
Developing-country governments should also encourage the conversion of such debts to GDP-linked or other types of indexed bonds.
Those with high levels of foreign debt but with reserves should also consider buying back their sovereign debt in the international capital market, taking advantage of falling bond prices.
While reserves may provide some cushion for minimizing the adverse effects of capital outflows, in most cases they will not be sufficient.
Developing countries should resist the temptation of raising interest rates to stem capital outflows.
Historically, interest-rate hikes have had little effect.
In fact, because they hurt economic growth, further reducing countries’ ability to service external debts, higher interest rates can be counterproductive.
Macro-prudential measures can discourage or delay capital outflows, but such measures, too, may be insufficient.
In some cases, it may be necessary to introduce selective, targeted, and time-bound capital controls to stem outflows, especially outflows through banking channels.
This would entail, for example, restricting capital transfers between parent banks in developed countries and their subsidiaries or branches in developing countries.
Following the successful Malaysian example in 1997, developing countries could also temporarily suspend all capital withdrawals to stabilize capital flows and exchange rates.
This is perhaps the only recourse for many developing countries to avoid a catastrophic financial crisis.
It is important that they act soon.
The views expressed here do not represent the views of the United Nations or its member states.
Reversing Africa’s Medical Brain Drain
OXFORD – There is understandable consternation over Uganda’s plan to send almost 300 health workers to Trinidad and Tobago.
The plan reportedly includes four of Uganda’s 11 registered psychiatrists, 20 of its 28 radiologists, and 15 of its 92 pediatricians.
In return, the Caribbean country (which has a doctor-to-patient ratio 12 times higher than Uganda’s) will help Uganda exploit its recently discovered oil fields.
Uganda’s foreign ministry says the agreement is part of its mandate to promote the country’s interests abroad through the transfer of skills and technology, as well as an opportunity to earn foreign exchange by sourcing employment for its citizens.
But Uganda’s international donors are not convinced; the United States has voiced strong concern, and Belgium has suspended development aid to Uganda’s health-care sector.
Two of my friends, a gynecologist and a pediatrician, have applied to go.
Had I still been working with them in Uganda, I might have been tempted to join the exodus.
Uganda’s health-care professionals are talented and highly qualified.
But they often work in appalling conditions at great personal sacrifice.
So it is not surprising that they become disheartened and seek professional opportunities elsewhere.
They know that the status quo is failing, and that something has to change.
I knew it, too.
In 2009, I was on track to become only the sixth neurosurgeon in Uganda, working at Mulago National Referral Hospital, the country’s main tertiary institution.
We sometimes had to cancel major operations when the malfunctioning sewage system in our theatre regurgitated waste into what was supposed to be a sterile environment.
We were severely understaffed.
Once, during a string of consecutive night shifts, I was so tired that I accidentally pricked myself with a needle while drawing blood from an HIV-positive patient.
I was given an antiretroviral treatment called Post-Exposure (PEP) for a month and had to take time off work because of the drug’s side effects.
Meanwhile, adding to my anguish, the government delayed payment of our salaries – and not for the first time.
The deal between Uganda and Trinidad and Tobago violates the World Health Organization’s global code on the International Recruitment of Health Personnel, which is aimed at discouraging the recruitment of personnel from countries that have a critical shortage of health-care workers.
A Ugandan think tank, the Institute of Public Policy Research, has called the plan a “state-sanctioned brain drain.”
It has taken the government to court in an effort to force it to reverse its decision.
But the truth is that Uganda may have inadvertently stumbled upon an innovative policy.
If the plan is executed properly, it could benefit both the health-care sector and the country, by raising additional funds, strengthening medical workers’ skills and motivation, and creating a model for engaging with the diaspora.
Other developing countries facing similar challenges with retaining health-care workers could learn from Uganda’s experience.
Of course, this type of mass recruitment could have a major adverse impact on developing countries’ health-care systems.
But it also should be recognized that it is not sensible to chain health-care workers to a failing system.
There has to be a way to encourage doctors to contribute to their country’s health-care system, while offering them an opportunity to achieve their personal and professional goals.
In order to make it work, the recipient country would have to agree to recruit health-care professionals solely through the government.
The country could then tax the foreign income of its workers and use the revenues to develop its health-care system.
Moreover, any agreement should explicitly require the provision of education and professional-development opportunities for recruited health-care workers.
The recipient country might open their medical schools and health-care training to new recruits, or help pay for health-care education and a scholarship fund back home.
That way, developing countries like Uganda could not only train more health-care professionals, but also have funds to send workers abroad for training.
The impact of such programs could be far-reaching, because the deficit of medical professionals is not limited to Sub-Saharan Africa.
With so many qualified doctors emigrating to the United Kingdom and the US, the rest of the world, including developed countries, is also experiencing a tremendous medical brain drain.
Roughly 35,000 Greek doctors have emigrated to Germany, while Bulgaria is “bleeding doctors,” losing up to 600 every year (equal to the country’s annual number of medical-school graduates).
But developing countries face the biggest challenge.
Eighty percent of countries where the density of skilled health workers is less than 22.8 per 10,000 people are in Africa, and another 13% are in Southeast Asia.
The effects of such shortages were made clear during the recent Ebola crisis in West Africa.
The trouble is that the so-called brain drain in Uganda and elsewhere is not the cause of this dearth of health-care workers.
It is only a symptom of health-care systems that are already in crisis.
The ultimate solution is not to discourage professionals from working abroad; it is to ensure better training and more amenable working conditions.
That way, we health-care professionals can focus on the task at hand: providing health care to our people.
Growth in a Time of Disruption
FORT LAUDERDALE, FLORIDA – Developing countries are facing major obstacles – many of which they have little to no control over – to achieving sustained high growth.
Beyond the headwinds generated by slow advanced-economy growth and abnormal post-crisis monetary and financial conditions, there are the disruptive impacts of digital technology, which are set to erode developing economies’ comparative advantage in labor-intensive manufacturing activities.
With the reversal of these trends out of the question, adaptation is the only option.
Robotics has already made significant inroads in electronics assembly, with sewing trades, traditionally many countries’ first entry point to the global trading system, likely to come next.
As this trend continues, the imperative to build supply chains based on the location of relatively immobile and cost-effective labor will wane, with production moving closer to the final market.
Adidas, for example, is already building a factory in Germany, where robots will produce high-end athletic shoes, and is planning a second one in the United States.
Given all of this, developing countries need to act now to adapt their growth strategies.
A sensible framework for doing so must account for several key factors.
First, the problems in advanced countries – from slow economic growth to political uncertainty – are likely to persist, reducing potential growth everywhere for an extended period.
In this context, developing countries must not succumb to the temptation to try to boost demand through unsustainable means, such as the accumulation of excess debt.
Instead, developing countries, particularly those in the earlier stages of economic development, must find new external markets for their goods, by maximizing trade opportunities with their counterparts in the developing world, many of which have considerable purchasing power.
While such demand will surely not offset the drop in advanced-country demand completely, it can help to soften the blow.
Second, investment, both public and private, remains a powerful growth engine.
In economies with excess productive capacity, targeted investment can yield a double benefit, generating short-run demand and boosting growth and productivity thereafter.
Given this, shortfalls in investment that promises high social and private returns must be reduced, and even eliminated.
These growth- and productivity-enhancing investments should be financed primarily from domestic savings, though some can also be financed with debt.
Long-term, stable infrastructure investments can be financed at least partly by international development institutions.
Third, it is critical to manage the capital account in a way that protects and enhances the real economy’s growth potential.
Large inflows of capital from countries with low interest rates can easily push up exchange rates, putting the tradable part of the economy under pressure.
At the same time, the prospect of a capital-flow reversal adds risk, deters investment, and can produce sudden credit-tightening events.
In this context, selective capital controls and careful reserve management can help to stabilize the balance of payments and ensure that the terms of trade do not change too fast to be offset by productivity growth.
In fact, successful developing countries were pursuing such policies even before the global economic crisis hit.
Fourth, a realistic approach to the digital revolution is needed.
On one hand, developing countries should recognize that disruption, while happening fast, will not render their growth models obsolete overnight.
China’s continued growth and rising household income are creating opportunities for lower-income economies in low-cost manufacturing.
On the other hand, developing countries must accept the inevitability of changes to their growth models caused by digital technologies.
Instead of viewing these changes as a threat, and trying to resist them, developing economies should be getting ahead of them, by embracing disruptive innovations.
This means investing in the capacity – physical and human – to support their use.
Beyond upgrading manufacturing, developing countries should be preparing for the shift toward services that they will inevitably undergo as incomes rise (though the precise timing is hard to predict).
Indeed, they should be seeking ways to exploit opportunities to boost their trade in services, much like India and the Philippines have done.
Fifth, the distribution of gains from economic growth cannot be ignored.
The advanced economies tried that, and the result has been rising political polarization, intensifying anti-establishment sentiment, declining policy coherence, and weakening social cohesion.
In a low-growth environment, in particular, developing countries cannot afford to make the same mistake.
Sixth, it is important to establish sustainable growth patterns early on.
A “green” approach would not only stimulate additional growth; it would also be likely to increase the quality of growth, not to mention the lives of ordinary people.
Moreover, it will lead to a far more resilient economy in the long run.
Finally, entrepreneurial activity is vital to translate economic potential into reality.
Policies that support such activity, such as by removing obstacles to new business creation and enhancing financing opportunities, cannot be left out of growth strategies.
Opening channels for flows of information, ideas, expertise, and talent from abroad can only enhance these efforts.
Developing economies may not have much control over the headwinds that they face today, but that does not mean that they are powerless.
Much can be done not just to sustain moderate growth, but also to secure a more prosperous and resilient future.
A New Direction for Global Health
NEW YORK – It is easy to be discouraged about the state of international cooperation today, but global health remains an area in which the world has come together to do significant good.
Over the last dozen years, international initiatives have delivered HIV/AIDS treatment to millions, expanded childhood immunization, and spurred a dramatic increase in global support for addressing other health challenges, from malaria to maternal health.
International support for global health is an investment in developing countries’ future prosperity and the wellbeing of their people.
It is an investment that the world’s richest countries can well afford.
For example, the United States is the leading contributor of global health aid, which accounted for just 0.23% of US spending in 2013.
The returns on that investment have been remarkable.
Child mortality is plunging.
Millions who would have otherwise perished from HIV/AIDS are still alive.
Countries that were aid recipients are increasingly self-sufficient – and have become better trade and strategic partners as a result.
But the health needs of low- and middle-income countries are now shifting.
Dramatic changes in urbanization, global trade, and consumer markets – which occurred over decades in wealthy countries – are happening at a faster rate, and at a much larger scale, in still-poor countries.
These trends have brought substantial health benefits, such as better sanitation and increased food production, but have given rise to significant challenges as well.
Ebola is one high-profile example.
Prior to this year, Ebola had killed fewer than 2,000 people, all in Central Africa, since it was first identified in 1976.
The virus has killed more than three times that number in 2014, with enough cases spreading internationally to dominate nightly news broadcasts and spook voters in recent US state and local elections.
A major reason is the growth of small- and medium-size cities.
Urbanization is increasing in West Africa at a rate of 3% per year (compared to 0.2% and 0.3%, respectively, in North America and Europe).
The result has been the proliferation of settlements of a million people or fewer living with limited public-health infrastructure.
These cramped cities are ideal incubators for outbreaks of emerging infectious diseases like Ebola.
With greater trade and travel to the region, outbreaks are likely to spread before international containment can coalesce.
Another example of changing global health needs is the stunningly fast increase of heart disease, cancers, and other noncommunicable diseases (NCDs) in low- and middle-income countries.
Once thought to be challenges for affluent countries alone, these diseases have quickly become the leading cause of death and disability in developing regions, killing nearly eight million people before their 60th birthdays in 2013.
In a recent report sponsored by the Council on Foreign Relations, we highlight the contrast between rising rates of heart disease, cancer, diabetes, and other NCDs in developing countries and the success of international efforts on HIV/AIDS and other infectious diseases.
From 1990 to 2010, death and disability from NCDs in low-income countries increased 300% faster than the rate of decline in infectious diseases.
Some of the same factors at work in the recent Ebola outbreak drive the high rates of NCDs.
Inhabitants of densely packed urban areas in emerging economies often face both indoor and outdoor pollution, and are less likely to have access to adequate nutrition.
Most health systems in these countries are not built for chronic or preventive care and lack basic consumer protections.
From 1970 to 2000, cigarette consumption tripled in developing countries.
But only $0.09 was spent per DALY lost to heart disease, cancer, and other NCDs.
Meanwhile, the emerging NCD epidemic is worsening.
Indeed, the World Economic Forum is predicting $21.3 trillion in losses from these diseases in developing countries by 2030.
Yet progress on NCDs is possible.
Despite much higher rates of obesity in high-income countries, premature death and disability from heart disease, cancers, and other NCDs have declined substantially.
Most of the tools and policies underlying this success are cheap, but not widely implemented in developing countries.
They include low-cost drugs to reduce heart attacks, vaccines to prevent cervical cancer, and the same tobacco taxes and advertising rules that dramatically cut smoking rates throughout Europe and the US.
Pilot programs have successfully integrated these tools and policies into donor-funded programs on HIV/AIDS and other infectious diseases in low- and middle-income countries.
If, over the next decade, low- and middle-income countries could improve NCD prevention and treatment at the same rate as the average rich country from 2000 to 2013, they would avert more than five million deaths.
That return is comparable to the most successful global health investments in HIV and childhood immunization, and it is an investment worth making for the same reason: a peaceful, inclusive global economy presupposes healthier, more productive lives.
Why Economists Put Health First
PALO ALTO – In an ideal world, everyone, everywhere, would access the health services they need without having to pay more than they could afford.
But is “health for all” – also known as universal health coverage – really possible, not just in rich countries, but in the poorest countries, too?
In short, yes.
That’s why we joined hundreds of fellow economists in almost 50 countries to urge leaders to prioritize investments in universal health coverage.
And the broader impetus behind this Economists’ Declaration, convened by The Rockefeller Foundation and now with more than 300 signatures, has placed global health and development at a historic crossroads.
In September, the United Nations General Assembly adopted a new set of 15-year global goals to guide the world’s efforts to end poverty, foster inclusive prosperity, and secure a healthy planet by 2030.
As world leaders prepare to enact the most ambitious global to-do list yet – the Sustainable Development Goals will be launched on January 1 – deciding where to begin may seem a daunting task.
For economists, however, the answer is clear: The next chapter of development strategy should assign a high priority to better health – and must leave no one behind.
Reaching everyone with high-quality, essential health services without the threat of financial ruin is, first and foremost, the right thing to do.
Health and survival are basic values to virtually every individual.
Furthermore, unlike other valuable goods, such as food, they cannot be supplied without deliberate social policy.
The fact that “preventable deaths” remain common in low- and middle-income countries is a symptom of broken or under-resourced health-care delivery systems, not a lack of medical know-how.
If we increase investments in health now, by 2030 we can be that much closer to a world in which no parent loses a child – and no child loses a parent – to preventable causes.
Universal health coverage is also smart.
When people are healthy and financially stable, their economies are stronger and more prosperous.
And, with benefits ten times greater than initial costs, investing in health first may ultimately pay for the rest of the new global development agenda.
So the question is not whether universal health coverage is valuable, but how to make it a reality.
More than a hundred countries have taken steps down this path; in the process, they have revealed important opportunities and strategies to accelerate progress toward the goal of health for all.
In particular, we believe that three areas – technology, incentives, and seemingly “non-health” investments – have the potential to advance universal health coverage dramatically.
First, technology is fast becoming a game changer, especially in developing countries, where the gap in access to health care is the widest.
In Kenya, which already leads the world in mobile money through “m-PESA,” an upsurge in telemedicine is enabling rural patients and health practitioners to interact, through video conferencing, with staff in Kenya’s main hospitals – thereby increasing quality of care at very little cost.
The m-PESA Foundation, in partnership with the African Medical Research Foundation, has also begun implementing online training of community health volunteers and complementing these trainings with bulk SMS/WhatsApp group messages to keep the group connected and share important updates.
Investments in high-value, low-cost technologies will help us achieve more with every dollar.
Harnessing the power of incentives is another way to accelerate health reforms.
This can and should be done without forcing the poor to pay for health-care services at the point of delivery.
For example, when the state pays the private sector based on outcomes (for example, the number or share of vaccinated children), both accountability and results have been known to improve.
Voucher programs for reproductive health care in Uganda and Kenya are now providing access to quality services from the private sector.
Finally, building resilient health-care systems – flexible enough to bend, but not break, in the face of shocks – means improving other public goods that are closely linked to human health.
These include clean water and sanitation, and roads and infrastructure that enable emergency care and delivery of services.
Health systems do not exist in a vacuum, and if we are serious about sustainable development, it is time to understand that investments in complementary systems are “trade-ons” not trade-offs.
We should be wary of viewing medicine as the only path to better health.
The success of the world’s development goals hinges on our ability to reach the poorest and most marginalized populations, who continue to bear the brunt of death and disability worldwide.
A natural progression of the status quo will not be enough to reach them.
Instead, we must push public health systems beyond their usual boundaries by investing in and promoting new technologies, sharpening incentives, and recognizing that health systems do not exist in a vacuum.
Universal health coverage is right, smart, and overdue.
To achieve a world where everyone’s health needs are met and nobody is trapped in poverty, our leaders must heed this message and act on it.
Apakah Basic Income Bisa Membantu Negara-negara Miskin?
BERKELEY – Gagasan kuno tentang menyusun kembali welfare state (negara kesejahteraan) dengan memperkenalkan unconditional universal basic income (jaminan pendapatan dasar diberikan tanpa syarat bagi semua warga negara) akhir-akhir ini menjadi sorotan dalam spektrum politik.
Di satu sisi, konsep ini dipandang sebagai alat untuk menghapuskan birokrasi kesejahteraan yang rumit sembari mengakui adanya kebutuhan atas kewajiban transfer sosial (social transfer) melalui cara yang tidak melemahkan insentif secara drastis.
Konsep ini juga memberikan jaminan atas masa depan yang menakutkan ketika robot menggantikan manusia sebagai pekerja di berbagai sektor.
Tapi apakah konsep ini akan berfungsi?
Sejauh ini, pertanyaan tersebut muncul dan dibahas terutama di negara-negara maju – dan statistiknya kurang menjanjikan.
Meskipun Kanada, Finlandia, dan Belanda kini dilaporkan tengah menggodok ide basic income, beberapa ekonom terkemuka dari negara maju memperingatkan bahwa ide ini jelas terlampau mahal.
Di Amerika Serikat, misalnya, pemberian sebanyak 10.000 dolar AS per tahun kepada setiap individu dewasa – kurang dari batas kemiskinan (poverty threshold) resmi – dapat menghabiskan hampir seluruh pemasukan federal dari pajak, jika diberlakukan dengan sistem sekarang.
Barangkali perhitungan seperti ini yang memacu pemilih di Swiss menolak ide tersebut secara tegas pada referendum yang dilakukan di awal bulan ini.
Tapi bagaimana dengan negara-negara berpendapatan rendah atau menengah?
Faktanya adalah basic income mungkin sangat layak secara fiskal (fiscally feasible) – bahkan didambakan secara sosial – di negara yang mana batas kemiskinannya rendah dan jaring pengaman sosial (social safety nets) yang sudah berlaku dinilai sudah usang dan pengelolaannya memakan biaya besar.
Ambil contoh India, negara dengan seperlima penduduk yang hidup di bawah garis kemiskinan, yang mana angka tersebut tergolong sangat rendah.
Ketika pemegang kartu “di bawah garis kemiskinan” berhak mendapat bantuan pemerintah, sejumlah survei menunjukkan hampir setengah penduduk miskin tidak mempunyai kartu tersebut – sementara sepertiga penduduk tidak miskin justru mendapatkannya.
Banyak negara berkembang lain menghadapi permasalahan serupa, pemberian manfaat ditujukan bagi penduduk miskin untuk memperbaiki kondisi keuangan mereka, namun banyak penerima manfaat yang seharusnya malah tersisihkan akibat kolusi politik dan administratif serta tantangan-tantangan struktural yang nyata.
Penerapan means-testing dinilai sangat sulit dalam kondisi dimana lapangan kerja terpusat di sektor informal, terutama pekerja lepas (self-employment) tanpa pembukuan resmi atau data pendapatan.
Dalam situasi seperti ini, identifikasi penduduk miskin akan memakan biaya besar, rumit, bersifat kontroversial, dan berpotensi korup.
Jaminan pendapatan dasar tak bersyarat (unconditional basic income) bisa menghilangkan kekacauan tersebut.
Isunya menjadi apakah pemerintah bisa membiayainya tanpa menambah beban wajib pajak dan melemahkan insentif ekonomi.
Di India, jawabannya mungkin ya.
Apabila masing-masing penduduk di India yang berjumlah 1,25 miliar jiwa mendapat basic income tahunan sebanyak 10.000 rupee (149 dolar AS) – sekitar tiga-perempat garis kemiskinan – total pengeluaran berkisar pada 10% dari PDB.
The National Institute of Public Finance and Policy di Delhi memperkirakan bahwa setiap tahunnya pemerintah India membelanjakan lebih banyak daripada jumlah di atas baik untuk subsidi implisit maupun eksplisit yang bertujuan memperbaiki kondisi keuangan warga, belum lagi pengecualian pajak bagi korporasi.
Dengan menghapuskan beberapa atau seluruh subdisi tersebut – tentu saja ini tidak termasuk pengeluaran di berbagai sektor seperti kesehatan, pendidikan, gizi, pembangunan desa dan kota, dan perlindungan lingkungan hidup – pemerintah mampu menghemat anggaran untuk menyalurkan basic income yang wajar kepada semua orang, kaya maupun miskin.
Jika pemerintah kurang memiliki keberanian politik untuk menghapuskan subdisi, masih ada dua opsi.
Pemerintah bisa menerapkan kebijakan untuk menambah pendapatan dari pajak, misalnya dengan meningkatkan pengumpulan pajak tanah dan/atau bangunan (saat ini terlalu rendah), atau menurunkan jumlah basic income yang hendak disalurkan.
Tapi satu hal yang tidak boleh dilakukan pemerintah adalah mendanai skema basic income dengan dana dari program kesejahteraan sosial lainnya.
Meskipun basic income bisa menggantikan sejumlah belanja sosial yang berjalan buruk atau tidak berfungsi, skema tersebut tidak bisa menggantikan pendidikan dan layanan kesehatan, program gizi di sekolah, atau jaminan ketenagakerjaan di pekerjaan umum.
Bagaimanapun juga, basic income sifatnya terbatas dan tidak ada jaminan bahwa individu akan mengalokasi pendapatan yang diterima secara mencukupi guna mencapai tingkat pendidikan, kesehatan, atau gizi yang diharapkan masyarakat.
Ketika keterbatasan tersebut dipertimbangkan, sedikit alasan untuk berpikir bahwa program basic income tidak bisa diterapkan di negara-negara berkembang.
Sesungguhnya argumen yang paling sering diutarakan untuk menolak skema ini tidak meyakinkan.
Kelemahan terbesarnya, menurut kritisi, ialah basic income akan mengurangi motivasi bekerja, terutama di kalangan penduduk miskin.
Pengkritik berpendapat nilai kerja melampaui sekadar penghasilan sehingga hal ini bisa menciptakan masalah serius.
Kelompok sosial-demokrat di Eropa, misalnya, khawatir basic income akan melemahkan solidaritas pekerja yang melandasi program jaminan sosial yang berlaku.
Tapi di negara-negara berkembang, pekerja yang mendominasi sektor informal sekarang pun sudah terkecualikan dari program jaminan sosial.
Dan tidak ada basic income layak (feasible) yang cukup besar jumlahnya, setidaknya sekarang, untuk membuat warga meninggalkan pekerjaannya begitu saja.
Faktanya, bagi kelompok-kelompok termiskin, basic income akan mengangkat martabat -dan solidaritas- memaksimalkan efek bekerja, dengan menghilangkan beban pada kelompok tertentu – terutama perempuan – yang saat ini terlalu banyak kerja (overworked).
Alih-alih terus-menerus cemas memikirkan penghidupannya, pekerja lepas (self-employed), seperti produsen dan vendor skala kecil, dapat terlibat dalam proses pengambilan keputusan yang lebih strategis, memanfaaatkan daya tawar mereka melawan pedagang, perantara, kreditor, dan tuan tanah.
Sanggahan lain terhadap basic income adalah penduduk miskin akan menggunakan uang yang diterima dalam kegiatan-kegiatan yang membahayakan pribadi atau masyarakat, seperti berjudi dan mengkonsumsi alkohol.
Namun pengalaman dari bantuan langsung tunai (direct cash transfer) di sejumlah negara, seperti Ekuador, India, Meksiko, dan Uganda, tidak menunjukkan bukti penyalahgunaan sebagaimana dikhawatirkan; secara umum, uang tunai dikeluarkan untuk barang dan jasa yang bermanfaat.
Usulan penerapan universal basic income, dambaan kaum sosialis utopis dan libertarian, mungkin dianggap terlalu dini bagi negara-negara maju.
Namun skema tersebut hendaknya tidak diremehkan oleh negara-negara berkembang, dimana kondisinya mengizinkan mereka untuk menawarkan alternatif yang lebih terjangkau atas program-program kesejahteraan sosial yang tidak efektif dan dikelola secara buruk.
Skema basic income bukan obat mujarab; tapi bagi penduduk overworked yang hidup dalam kemiskinan ekstrem di negara-negara berkembang, hal tersebut pasti bisa menjadi obat pereda.
Inovasi Pelayanan Kesehatan di Negara-negara Selatan
DHAKA – Setiap hari terjadi kematian anak akibat penyakit-penyakit yang bisa dicegah dan diobati seperti diare dan pneumonia (paru-paru basah) yang mana mayoritas korban meninggal berada di negara-negara berkembang.
Kebutuhan untuk menghasilkan solusi inovatif dan cost-effective bagi negara-negara yang memiliki keterbatasan sumber daya kini semakin mendesak.
Salah satu contohnya adalah pneumonia, penyakit yang menyebabkan 15% kematian pada anak di bawah 5 tahun – hampir satu juta anak – setiap tahunnya.
Komponen utama pengobatan bagi anak-anak yang dirawat di RS karena menderita pneumonia akut adalah “bubble CPAP” (continuous positive airway pressure), yang mana sebuah kompresor mengalirkan oksigen kepada pasien, mempertahankan aliran udara konstan selama proses pengobatan.
Di negara-negara maju, alat bantu nafas mekanik/ventilator merupakan alat bantu seperti bubble CPAP.
Namun ventilator mekanik terlampau mahal bagi sistem kesehatan negara-negara berkembang, akibatnya jutaan pasien di negara-negara Selatan (Global South) tidak mampu mengakses bubble CPAP yang bisa menyelamatkan hidup mereka.
Tetapi melalui gabungan keahlian medis dan pemikiran inovatif, Jobayer Chisti, rekan saya di lembaga riset kesehatan icddr,b, mengembangkan alternatif sederhana dan terjangkau yang menggunakan bahan-bahan tersedia di negara-negara miskin sekalipun, seperti botol shampo kosong dan pipa/tabung plastik.
Tahun lalu, Chisti dan tim, bekerja sama dengan  rekan-rekan dari Australia serta dana yang disalurkan Australian Agency for International Development, telah melakukan uji klinis di Bangladesh guna membandingkan khasiat dari perangkat alternatif  yang dirancang terhadap terapi oksigen aliran rendah-tinggi yang dianjurkan Organisasi Kesehatan Dunia/WHO di negara-negara yang kekurangan sumber daya.
Hasilnya sangat menginspirasi.
Pemakaian bubble CPAP dengan alat rendah biaya terbukti sama efektif dengan terapi oksigen aliran rendah-tinggi yang standar.
Faktanya adalah hanya 4% bayi meninggal selama pengobatan dengan alat bubble CPAP yang baru dirancang, dibandingkan dengan 15% bayi meninggal selama pengobatan dengan terapi oksigen aliran rendah.
Dukungan bagi pengujian lanjutan atas pemakaian sistem alternatif bubble CPAP rancangan Chisti dan tim – termasuk penggunaannya di negara-negara yang tidak memiliki pengobatan alternatif – jelas ada.
Jika pengujian di masa depan menunjukkan khasiat yang sama baiknya, bubble CPAP rendah biaya bisa menjadi pengobatan standar bagi penderita pneumonia di negara-negara yang kekurangan sumber daya dan menyelamatkan ribuan nyawa setiap tahunnya.
Namun riset yang dilakukan Chisti berdampak lebih luas dibandingkan sekedar penemuan alat itu aja.
Riset tersebut menegaskan sebuah gagasan, yang menjadi landasan motivasi saya memimpin Divisi Kesehatan Ibu dan Anak di icddr,b, bahwa inovator yang hidup dan bekerja di negara-negara yang berkekurangan itu lah yang paling andal dan berkeahlian untuk merancang dan menguji solusi-solusi kesehatan yang cost-effective.
Bagaimanapun juga, orang yang paling memahami keterbatasan dalam sistem kesehatan yang lemah adalah orang yang bekerja di dalamnya.
Itu sebabnya fungsi dan peran lembaga-lembaga riset kesehatan dengan jaringan global dan berbasis di negara berkembang seperti icddr,b tidak ternilai.
Lembaga tersebut menyediakan platform bagi peneliti dan inovator lokal untuk memanfaatkan peluang yang tidak pernah terpikirkan orang asing serta mengembangkan dan menilai gagasan mereka sesuai dengan peruntukannya.
Melalui data yang dikumpulkan, inovator bidang pelayanan kesehatan di negara-negara berkembang bisa mempersiapkan kemajuan-kemajuan klinis berikutnya untuk diwujudkan ke dalam kebijakan publik lingkup nasional, yang tidak hanya bisa diadopsi di negara asalnya tapi juga di negara lainnya.
Hasilnya dapat mengubah kehidupan setiap warga terlantar dan miskin dimana pun mereka tinggal.
Blood Quest
WASHINGTON, DC – In most developed countries, patients can be confident about the safety of blood transfusions.
The problem is that maintaining a steady, uncontaminated supply of donor blood is not always easy.
Is it possible to ensure an adequate supply of safe blood once and for all?
Today’s blood supplies, often donated by volunteers, can be contaminated with HIV and other infectious agents.
And donor blood must be kept in cold storage, where it has a 28-day shelf life.
Given fear of contamination – and military interest in a more durable supply – research into synthetic alternatives has long been a medical priority.
The idea of using blood substitutes was first advanced in the seventeenth century, and continues to attract researchers today.
Several products that could revolutionize transfusion medicine have already been developed in the pursuit of shelf-stable, portable, one-type-fits-all blood substitutes, which could replace standard blood transfusions in extreme situations, such as on the battlefield.
But, after more than three decades of active research and development, no clinically viable product has obtained regulatory approval, owing to the significant scientific challenges.
Blood is a complicated stew of plasma proteins, red blood cells, platelets, and other cellular components.
These elements perform crucial functions, such as transporting oxygen, nutrients, and immunoglobulins (which defend against infection), and regulating water content, temperature, and pH level.
In the early twentieth century, researchers began to examine hemoglobin – the protein responsible for carrying oxygen from the respiratory organs to the rest of the body – in red blood cells.
They found that, when isolated from aging cells – whether from human or cow blood, or from genetically engineered sources – free hemoglobin can be rejuvenated, chemically stabilized, and re-infused as a blood “substitute” that can carry oxygen as effectively as red blood cells, but for a much shorter time.
(Non-hemoglobin synthetic blood substitutes, known as fluorocarbons, have proved to be less effective oxygen carriers.)
But free hemoglobin can wreak havoc in the human body, causing hypertension, cardiac arrest, or even death.
Indeed, in almost all living creatures, hemoglobin is encapsulated in red blood cells, which protect the body from the protein’s negative effects (and, in turn, protect hemoglobin from the body’s digestive enzymes).
Experts nonetheless believe that hemoglobin-based products can be used to save the lives of trauma patients, as well as to treat patients who object to donated blood on religious grounds (for example, Jehovah’s Witnesses).
Hemoglobin contains hemes, chemical compounds that contain iron – a transition metal that can undergo oxidation, or “rusting” processes.
Outside of red blood cells, “good” ferrous iron – the only oxygen-carrying form – is oxidized uncontrollably to form the “bad” ferric and “ugly” ferryl forms of hemoglobin.
When released into a person’s circulatory system, hemoglobin in these higher oxidation states eventually self-destructs, damaging molecules in surrounding tissue.
Given that these mischievous forms of hemoglobin are difficult to study in living systems, researchers have largely ignored them.
Instead, they have focused on strategies for preventing the kidneys from filtering the infused hemoglobin; the hemoglobin from leaking through the blood-vessel walls; and synthetic hemoglobin from destroying nitric oxide (a gas produced in blood vessels that helps them to dilate and increase blood flow).
Some researchers consider the reaction with nitric oxide the most problematic, because it raises blood pressure.
But progress has been made in finding ways to control these oxidation reactions.
Researchers (including at my laboratory) have investigated how the body naturally handles the occasional release of hemoglobin from aging red blood cells and from cells affected by blood diseases, such as hemolytic anemia.
They have found that the body’s first line of defense against hemoglobin oxidation is a process of reduction, in which molecules like uric acid or ascorbic acid (vitamin C) impede oxidation by reducing the iron to a less oxidizing species.
Moreover, a host of blood proteins are specialized scavengers of hemoglobin or its fragments.
They reduce its toxicity and safely clear it for further processing within specialized cells called macrophages.
For example, haptoglobin tightly binds to hemoglobin subunits, while hemopexin captures the heme when the hemoglobin releases it.
Some recent therapeutic possibilities include the co-infusion of haptoglobin with hemoglobin in circulation or with vitamin C – additives that hold promising implications for the development of safe and effective blood substitutes.
Researchers must build on this progress.
Safe blood substitutes and new therapeutic options that make blood transfusion more effective would significantly improve treatment in challenging situations.
Ultimately, that promises to save many lives.
Mengatasi Keterbatasan Data Layanan Kesehatan
BOSTON – Di tengah membludaknya informasi yang beredar di berbagai negara, dunia tidak luput dari lokasi yang mengalami kelangkaan informasi.
Kelangkaan itu lah yang terkadang menyebabkan hilangnya nyawa seseorang.
Di ruang bersalin di fasilitas kesehatan masyarakat terbesar di Zanzibar, RS Mnazi Mmoja, data pasien dimuat di sebuah papan tulis.
Informasi di papan berisikan jumlah ibu hamil, jenis dan tingkat keparahan kondisi pasien, serta pasien bertahan hidup dan meninggal dunia.
Lebih baik ada sedikit data daripada tidak sama sekali, tapi yang tersedia sekarang pun terlalu sedikit.
Tidak ada informasi tanggal dan waktu, urutan kejadian, atau sistem pengarsipan jangka panjang.
Belum lagi diberlakukannya larangan memfoto papan di RS, akibatnya umur informasi hanya bertahan sepanjang tulisan di papan tidak dihapus.
Cara Zanzibar menyikapi riwayat kesehatan juga ditemukan di negara lain.
Bahkan, Zanzibar barangkali lebih berhati-hati dibandingkan negara-negara lain di Asia dan Afrika dimana sistem pengumpulan data tidak dikenal sama sekali.
Ketika sebuah negara mengalami defisit data, semua hal terkait dengan kebijakan, anggaran, dan strategi kesehatan masyarakat diputuskan berdasarkan kesesuaian politik atau perkiraan.
Kadang estimasi tersebut benar, namun seringkali salah.
Kondisi ini merupakan tantangan besar bagi sistem pelayanan kesehatan di negara-negara berkembang.
Pengumpulan informasi yang akurat terhadap seluruh pasien (sembari tetap menghormati privasi mereka) sangat vital untuk menelusuri risiko-risiko kesehatan, kelalaian selama perawatan, dan kesalahan medis, dan juga menjadi landasan pokok untuk pembahasan isu-isu pelayanan kesehatan secara terbuka atas hal-hal yang berpengaruh pada komunitas atau negara.
Berdasarkan analisis dimuat dalam British Medical Journal oleh Martin Makary dan Michael Daniel dari Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, di Amerika Serikat, kesalahan medis berada di peringkat ketiga penyebab kematian, persis di bawah penyakit jantung dan kanker.
Dalam konteks analisis mereka, kesalahan medis termasuk dokter yang tidak mumpuni, keputusan klinis yang buruk, miskomunikasi antar staf atau departemen, dan kesalahan diagnosis.
Tidak diragukan lagi, masalah tersebut tidak terbatas di Amerika Serikat saja.
Manajemen layanan kesehatan di negara-negara berkembang sering dihadapkan dengan tantangan-tantangan yang tidak bertambah mudah, misalnya rendahnya kapasitas teknis di kalangan manajemen rumah sakit, kekurangan jumlah staf, pelatihan yang kurang memadai, obat-obatan kualitas rendah, dan kebal hukum relatif jika terjadi kelalaian medis atau malpraktik.
Sayangnya, kita memiliki keterbatasan data, kita tidak mengetahui dengan persis sejauh mana pengaruh faktor-faktor tersebut pada pelayanan kesehatan yang buruk dan kematian yang dapat dihindari (avoidable deaths) di negara-negara berkembang.
Selain potensi menyelamatkan jutaan bahkan miliaran nyawa, data yang terpercaya akan mengurangi kerugian, baik secara finansial maupun psikologis.
Beban finansial yang timbul dari pelayanan kesehatan di negara-negara berpendapatan rendah dan menengah relatif besar, meskipun sudah terdapat beberapa kemajuan dalam pemberantasan HIV, malaria, dan tuberkulosis.
Di luar penyakit-penyakit tersebut, yang mana ada pengobatan dan pemetaan berkat kesadaran yang tinggi, banyak penyakit yang tidak diketahui dan terus merongrong layanan kesehatan bagi publik.
Memperoleh pemahaman atas penyebab-penyebab umum kematian adalah satu-satunya cara memperbaiki layanan kesehatan di tengah masyarakat dengan tingkat beban penyakit tinggi, struktur patriarkal, dan populasi penduduk pedesaan yang besar dan menyebar yang mengandalkan obat-obatan tradisional.
Dalam kondisi seperti ini, interaksi pasien dan dokter relatif jarang, sehingga penting sekali untuk mengumpulkan riwayat medis mereka di setiap kesempatan.
Setiap komunitas memiliki kebutuhan layanan kesehatannya masing-masing, dan kemampuan mengidentifikasinya tentu bukan hal mudah.
Tapi prosesnya bisa dimulai dengan tiga tahapan.
Langkah pertama adalah menggalakkan kesadaran masyarakat.
Setiap orang ingin hidup sehat dan produktif bagi dirinya dan orang-orang terdekatnya, jadi mereka akan menyambut pengetahuan baru yang menggali penyebab warga sekitarnya meninggal dunia atau sakit.
Dengan memanfaatkan bangkitnya jurnalisme warga dan media sosial, bahkan di negara-negara miskin, biaya kampanye kesadaran publik kini jauh lebih terjangkau.
Langkah kedua adalah merancang cara-cara pengumpulan data yang lebih baik.
Mayoritas negara berkembang kekurangan dana, infrastruktur, dan pelatihan yang dibutuhkan untuk menggunakan alat pengumpulan data modern; namun bukan berarti mereka tidak bisa melakukan perbaikan yang signifikan.
Sebagaimana ditunjukkan oleh Atul Gawande dari Harvard University’s School of Public Health, ceklis sederhana dinilai efektif dalam pengumpulan data dan pengambilan keputusan.
Ketika profesional di bidang pelayanan kesehatan dan pembuat kebijakan mengetahui data apa yang berguna serta alasannya, mereka lebih mampu mengubah keluaran kesehatan masyarakat.
Langkah terakhir adalah membentuk sistem pengawasan yang transparan untuk memantau data yang dikumpulkan.
Sejumlah data bisa jadi mengarah pada kesimpulan yang sulit secara politik atau counterintuitive, dan politisi mungkin tergoda untuk menyembunyikannya.
Di era sosial media dan jurnal akses terbuka, kita harus menuntut data yang baru dikumpulkan agar tersedia bagi beragam kelompok yang melakukan riset isu-isu kesehatan masyarakat dan memberikan layanan kesehatan.
Pada akhirnya, kita mungkin tidak bisa mencegah kematian yang diakibatkan dari jenis penyakit tertentu.
Tapi dengan tambahan informasi, kita lebih berdaya dan memiliki kendali untuk mencegah kematian yang disebabkan oleh sikap puas diri atau inkompentensi.
Development 3.0
BEIJING – Until the Industrial Revolution, the world was quite flat in terms of per capita income.
But then fortunes rapidly diverged, with a few Western industrialized countries quickly achieving political and economic dominance worldwide.
In recent years – even before the financial crisis erupted in 2008 – it was clear that the global economic landscape had shifted again.
Until 2000, the G-7 accounted for about two-thirds of global GDP.
Today, China and a few large developing countries have become the world’s growth leaders.
Yet, despite talk of a rising Asia, only a handful of East Asian economies have moved from low- to high-income status during the past several decades.
Moreover, between 1950 and 2008, only 28 economies in the world – and only 12 non-Western economies – were able to narrow their per capita income gap with the United States by ten percentage points or more.
Meanwhile, more than 150 countries have been trapped in low- or middle-income status.
Narrowing the gap with industrialized high-income countries continues to be the world’s main development challenge.
In the post-colonial period following World War II, the prevailing development paradigm was a form of structuralism: the aim was to change poor countries’ industrial structure to resemble that of high-income countries.
Structuralists typically advised governments to adopt import-substitution strategies, using public-sector intervention to overcome “market failures.”
Call this “Development Economics 1.0.”
Countries that adhered to it experienced initial investment-led success, followed by repeated crises and stagnation.
Development thinking then shifted to the neoliberal Washington Consensus: privatization, liberalization, and stabilization would introduce to developing countries the idealized market institutions that had been established in advanced countries.
Call this “Development Economics 2.0.”
The results of the Washington Consensus reforms were at best controversial, and some economists have even described the 1980’s and 1990’s as “lost decades” in many developing countries.
Given persistent poverty in developing countries, bilateral donors and the global development community increasingly focused on education and health programs, both for humanitarian reasons and to generate growth.
But service delivery remained disappointing, so the focus shifted to improving project performance, which researchers like Esther Duflo at MIT’s Poverty Action Lab have pioneered with randomized controlled experiments.
I call this “Development Economics 2.5.”
But, judging from experience in North Africa, where education improved greatly under the old regimes, but failed to boost growth performance and create job opportunities for educated youth, the validity of such an approach as a fundamental model for development policy is dubious.
The East Asian and other economies that achieved dynamic growth and became industrialized did not follow import-substitution strategies; instead, they pursued export-oriented growth.
Likewise, countries like Mauritius, China, and Vietnam did not implement rapid liberalization (so-called “shock therapy”), which the Washington Consensus advocated; instead, they followed a dual-track gradual approach (and often continued to perform poorly on various governance indicators).
Both groups of countries achieved great advances in education, health, poverty reduction, and other human development indicators.
None of them used randomized control experiments to design their social or economic programs.
Today, a “Development Economics 3.0” is needed.
In my view, the shift from understanding the determinants of a country’s economic structure and facilitating its change is tantamount to throwing the baby out with the bath water.
Remember that Adam Smith called his great work An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations.
In a similar spirit, development economics should be built on inquiries into the nature and causes of modern economic growth – that is, on structural change in the process of economic development.
Development thinking so far has focused on what developing countries do not have (developed countries’ capital-intensive industries); on areas in which developed countries perform better (Washington Consensus policies and governance); or on areas that are important from a humanitarian point of view but do not directly contribute to structural change (health and education).
In my book New Structural Economics, I propose shifting the focus to areas where developing countries can do well (their comparative advantages) based on what they have (their endowments).
With dynamic structural change starting from there, success will breed success.
In our globalized world, a country’s optimal industrial structure – in which all industries are consistent with the country’s comparative advantages and are competitive in domestic and international markets – is determined by its endowment structure.
A well-functioning market is required to provide incentives to domestic firms to align their investment choices with the country’s comparative advantages.
If a country’s firms can do that, the economy will be competitive, capital will accumulate quickly, the endowment structure will change, areas of comparative advantages will shift, and the economy will need to upgrade its industrial structure to a relatively higher level of capital intensity.
So successful industrial upgrading and economic diversification requires first-movers, and improvements in skills, logistics, transportation, access to finance, and various other changes, many of which are beyond the first-movers’ capacity.
Governments need to provide adequate incentives to encourage first-movers, and should play an active role in providing the required improvements or coordinating private firms’ investments in those areas.
Structural change is, by definition, innovative.
Developing countries may benefit from the advantage of backwardness by replicating the structural change that has already occurred in higher-income countries.
Based on the experiences of successful countries, every developing country has the potential to sustain 8% annual growth (or higher) for several decades, and to become a middle- or even a high-income country in one or two generations.
The key is to have the right policy framework in place to facilitate private-sector alignment with the country’s comparative advantages, and to benefit from latecomer advantages in the process of structural change.
Development Aid for Development’s Sake
Almost daily, the United States and Europe brandish threats to impose economic sanctions or cut off development assistance unless some vulnerable government accepts their political strictures.
The most recent threats are towards the new Hamas-led government in Palestine.
Other recent examples include threats vis-à-vis Chad, Ethiopia, Haiti, Kenya, Bolivia, Uganda, and long-standing sanctions against Myanmar.
Such tactics are misguided.
The use of development aid as a political stick merely deepens the suffering of impoverished and unstable countries, without producing the political objectives sought by donors.
To understand why requires taking a long-term view of geopolitics, particularly the gradual decline of US and European global domination.
Technology and economic development are proliferating across Asia and the developing world, while the spread of literacy and political awareness during the past century made national self-determination by far the dominant ideology of our age, leading to the end of colonialism.
Nationalism continues to produce powerful political “antibodies” to American and European meddling in other countries’ internal affairs.
The failure to understand this lies behind repeated US foreign policy debacles in the Middle East, at least since the toppling of the Shah of Iran in 1979.
The US naively continues to view the Middle East as an object of manipulation, whether for oil or for other purposes.
In the Middle East, the Iraq war is widely interpreted as a war for US control of Persian Gulf oil – a rather plausible view given what we know about the war’s true origins.
Only incredible hubris and naiveté could bring US (and UK) leaders to believe that Western troops would be greeted as liberators rather than as occupiers.
The politicization of foreign aid reflects the same hubris.
Even as the US rhetorically champions democracy in the Middle East, its first response to Hamas’s victory was to demand that the newly elected government return $50 million in US aid.
Hamas’s doctrines are indeed unacceptable for long-term peace, as even some Arab states, such as Egypt, have made clear.
But cutting aid is likely to increase turmoil rather than leading to an acceptable long-term compromise between Israel and Palestine.
A newly elected Palestinian government should be treated, at least initially, with legitimacy.
Later, if it behaves badly by sponsoring terror, policies can change.
An aid cutoff should be a policy of last resort, not a first strike.
Aid cutoffs regularly fail to produce desired political results for at least two reasons.
First, neither the US nor European countries have much standing as legitimate arbiters of “good governance.”
Rich countries have long meddled, often with their own corruption and incompetence, in the internal affairs of the countries that they now lecture.
The US preaches “good governance” in the shadow of an unprovoked war, congressional bribery scandals, and windfalls for politically connected companies like Halliburton.
Second, US and European threats to cut off aid or impose sanctions are in any case far too weak to accomplish much besides undermining already unstable and impoverished countries.
Consider the recent threats to cut Ethiopia’s aid, which is on the order of $15 per Ethiopian per year – much of it actually paid to US and European consultants.
It is sheer fantasy to believe that the threat of an aid cutoff would enable the US and Europe to influence the course of Ethiopia’s complex internal politics.
An aid cutoff to Ethiopia would nonetheless lead to a lot of death among impoverished people, who will lack medicines, improved seeds, and fertilizer.
Indeed, the track record of on-again-off-again aid is miserable.
Stop-and-go aid has left Haiti in an unmitigated downward spiral.
The decade-long sanctions against Myanmar have not restored Aung San Suu Kyi to power, but have deepened the disease burden and extreme poverty in that country.
Threatened aid cutoffs in Kenya, Chad, and elsewhere would make desperately bad situations worse.
None of this is to suggest that the US and Europe should abide every move by every corrupt dictator.
But realism in international economic affairs requires accepting that official development assistance can help achieve the broad political objectives of stability and democracy only in the long run.
The most reliable path to stable democracy is robust and equitable economic progress over an ample period of time.
The overwhelming standard for supplying official development assistance should therefore be whether official assistance actually promotes economic development.
As such, it must be reliable, predictable, and directed towards development needs in ways that can be monitored, measured, and evaluated.
Can the aid be monitored and measured?
Is it being stolen?
Is it supporting real development needs, such as growing more food, fighting disease, or building transport, energy, and communications infrastructure?
If development aid can be directed to real needs, then it should be given to poor and unstable countries, knowing that it will save lives, improve economic performance, and thus also improve the long-term prospects for democracy and good governance.
Making the Most of More Aid
PARIS – The effort to eradicate global poverty has never been more intense.
In 2014, for the second consecutive year, official development assistance (ODA) totaled a historic high of $135 billion, according to new OECD data.
This indicates that advanced economies remain committed to promoting global development, despite their own recent problems.
Add to this total the substantial spending by China, Arab states, and Latin American countries in the form of investments and loans, and it is clear that flows of ODA toward the developing world have reached unprecedented levels.
And yet happiness about the headline numbers should not be allowed to obscure opportunities to channel these funds more effectively.
Official aid from donor countries has helped to halve extreme poverty and child mortality, and it has driven progress on many other fronts as well.
But it is becoming clear that sustained flows of development aid will not be enough to eradicate extreme poverty by 2030 and implement the new United Nations Sustainable Development Goals, which are to be agreed upon later this year.
The money being spent on aid today could have a substantially greater impact if it were used to mobilize domestic tax flows and private investment in aid-dependent countries.
This use of ODA can be better captured in the new indicator introduced on April 8 by the OECD: Total Official Support for Development.
On average, developing countries raise 17% of their GDP in taxes, compared with 34% in OECD countries.
Some collect as little as 10%.
Much of the lost tax revenue escapes in illicit flows and ends up abroad.
Africa, for example, loses around $50 billion a year in illicit flows, much more than it receives in development aid.
Enabling developing countries to generate just 1% more of GDP in taxes would mobilize twice as much money as the total amount of ODA – and all of it could be channeled into education, health, security, or cash disbursement schemes.
The returns from money spent on strengthening tax systems can be staggering.
In Kenya, Tax Inspectors Without Borders, a project led by the OECD, found that every dollar spent working with authorities on cracking down on tax avoidance produced $1,290 in increased revenues.
Similarly, in the Philippines, a half-million dollars provided to support tax reform generated well over $1 billion in additional tax receipts.
Yet today, only 0.1% of all development aid, just under $120 million, goes toward supporting tax systems in developing countries.
Development aid, properly channeled, also has the potential to mobilize private investment if it is spent to reduce risk.
Guarantees, soft loans, and equity investments backed by development aid can help attract investors, as has occurred with solar energy projects in Mali and manufacturing plants in Ethiopia.
In 2014, then-EU Commissioner for Development Andris Piebalgs reported that grants worth €2.1 billion ($2.2 billion) had “achieved an estimated leverage of €40.7 billion in 226 projects since 2007.”
It is important, too, that aid target the areas where it is most needed.
Even as aid remained at record levels last year, funds provided to the world’s least-developed countries actually dropped.
Long-standing programs in better-off countries received greater amounts of money, while a string of poorer candidates were once again overlooked.
When world leaders meet in Addis Ababa in July for the Financing for Sustainable Development Summit, they must agree to channel aid to those countries with the least access to other sources of finance, the greatest difficulty in attracting investors, and the weakest tax systems.
Vulnerable groups, such as ethnic and religious minorities and indigenous rural populations struggling to break out of poverty, should receive special attention.
The 29 member countries of the OECD’s Development Assistance Committee have committed to reversing the decline in aid to the world’s poorest countries.
These donor countries have also pledged to meet a UN target of spending at least 0.15% of their gross national income on development assistance to the least-developed countries.
Moreover, they have agreed on new rules that should channel more resources on softer terms to the poorest countries, and that implement new safeguards to ensure debt sustainability.
We are the first generation in human history with the means to pull every person on the planet out of abject poverty.
There is enough money in the world.
It is critical that we use it more wisely.
Leave No Refugee Behind
NEW YORK – Dunia telah memasuki era dimana jumlah pengungsi mencapai tingkat yang belum pernah terjadi sebelumnya.
Di tahun 2014, konflik dan penganiayaan mengakibatkan 42.500 orang meninggalkan rumahnya, hampir empat kali lipat jumlah pengungsi di tahun 2010.
Hampir 60 juta orang kini terlantar – krisis yang tak tertandingi sejak Perang Dunia II.
Kondisi ini tidak dapat diterima, tetapi tidak bisa dihindari.
Pada tahun 1945, dunia menanggapi konflik paling mematikan dalam sejarah manusia dengan mendirikan Perserikatan Bangsa-Bangsa (PBB).
Kini, selaku kepala badan pengungsi dan pembangunan di bawah PBB, kami menyerukan dunia untuk menanggapi pergolakan besar ini dengan menyediakan perangkat yang diperlukan untuk membangun kembali kehidupan mereka.
Kami percaya bahwa jalan ke depan dimulai dengan Tujuan Pembangunan Berkelanjutan periode 2015-2030 (SDGs), ketika PBB menegaskan janji “leave no one behind” (setiap orang harus memperoleh manfaat dari pembangunan) dalam memerangi kemiskinan dan ketidaksetaraan, yang telah diadopsi dengan suara bulat pada bulan September lalu.
Pendekatan yang diterapkan saat ini oleh komunitas internasional perihal isu penelantaran bergantung utamanya pada bantuan kemanusiaan, yang memberikan tindakan penyelamatan jiwa yang cepat sementara pencarian solusi permanen masih berlangsung.
Tetapi solusinya terbukti semakin sulit diperoleh.
Hanya 1% pengungsi yang dapat kembali ke kediamannya pada tahun 2014. Sebagian besar pengungsi ini tidak menghabiskan hidupnya di pengasingan dalam hitungan hari atau bulan saja, tapi tahunan atau beberapa dekade, atau bahkan seumur hidupnya.
Mereka berisiko tertinggal dalam pembangunan.
Contohnya Somaya, seorang pengungsi generasi ketiga di Kenya.
Beberapa dekade yang lalu, neneknya melarikan diri ke kamp pengungsi Hagadera demi meninggalkan konflik brutal di Somalia.
Ibunya lahir disana dan begitu pula Somaya.
Tidak satu pun dari mereka pernah menginjakkan kaki ke luar kamp pengungsi yang seluas lima mil persegi (13 kilometer persegi).
Mereka hidup dengan kondisi penuh keterbatasan, menunggu kesempatan untuk bisa maju.
Seperti Somaya, sebagian besar pengungsi tinggal di negara berkembang.
Namun seringnya, badan-badan pembangunan yang bisa memberikan bantuan kepada mereka memiliki keterbatasan dana dan berhadapan dengan peraturan kaku yang membatasi mereka untuk memenuhi kebutuhan pengungsi.
Penelantaran jangka panjang (long-term displacement) menimbulkan beban besar pada orang-orang seperti Somaya.
Pengungsi sering mengalami kesulitan dalam hal kemampuan bekerja dan bergerak secara leluasa, sehingga mustahil bagi mereka untuk bisa memberi nafkah pada keluarga atau berkontribusi pada masyarakat di lingkungan mereka tinggal.
Mereka hidup dalam kondisi antara hidup dan mati, hanya bisa mengandalkan bantuan kemanusiaan.
Atau mereka terpaksa mencari penghidupan di sektor informal, sehingga berisiko menjadi korban eksploitasi seksual, buruh anak, atau  bentuk penganiayaan lainnya.
Perhatikan contoh lain: Anas, seorang pengungsi Suriah berusia 13 tahun di Lebanon.
Keluarganya tidak bisa bertahan hidup tanpa uang $5 yang ia dapatkan setiap hari.
Jadi ketimbang bersekolah, ia justru menyortir tumpukan batubara lalu dijual sebagai bahan bakar.
Pengungsi seperti Anas berjuang untuk mendapat hak-hak tersebut – pendidikan, pelayanan kesehatan, kebebasan bergerak, dan akses kepada pekerjaan, lahan, dan perumahan – yang sifatnya wajib agar bisa meninggalkan jurang kemiskinan.
Perbaikan ini memerlukan perubahan politik dan ekonomi yang memungkinkan komunitas/lembaga pembangunan untuk memberikan dukungan lebih.
Kaitan antara pembangunan dan penelantaran jelas dan kita perlu mulai memperlakukan tantangan-tantangan ini sebagai tanggung jawab bersama.
Penelantaran skala besar akan menghabiskan sumber daya publik, bahkan di negara-negara berpendapatan menengah; tanpa bantuan dari luar yang memadai, masalah ini dapat merusak kemajuan yang telah diraih.
Kecuali kita bisa memberikan dukungan lebih besar dan lebih baik kepada negara-negara tuan rumah dan pengungsi yang tinggal disana, hampir dipastikan kita akan terus membiayai program-program kemanusiaan dalam jumlah besar yang tidak ada habisnya.
Tetapi ada dua sisi mata koin.
Ketika pengungsi diberi kesempatan untuk mengembangkan keterampilan dan mengejar aspirasi mereka, mereka menciptakan peluang baru untuk pertumbuhan.
Itulah sebabnya mengapa badan-badan pembangunan harus memiliki lebih banyak fleksibilitas untuk mengatasi siklus baru kemiskinan dan kerapuhan – di negara manapun – sebelum lepas kendali.
Kini tiba waktunya untuk membuang gambar klise tentang pengungsi sebagai penerima bantuan yang pasif, duduk diam dengan tangan terbuka.
Justru citra seperti itu mencerminkan kondisi yang dikenakan terhadap pengungsi dan dipertegas dengan minimnya respon dunia.
Para pengungsi adalah wirausaha.
Mereka adalah seniman, guru, insinyur, dan pekerja dari berbagai jenis pekerjaan.
Mereka adalah sumber modal manusia yang melimpah yang gagal kita kembangkan.
Komunitas internasional tidak bisa lagi mengabaikan begitu banyak potensi atau hanya berdiam diri sementara kelompok masyarakat yang paling rentan semakin terpinggirkan.
Ketika berita-berita utama menyerukan perhatian atas kerugian manusia akibat tragedi ini, kita harus ingat bahwa kita punya pilihan untuk menanggapinya dengan lebih dari sekedar terkejut.
Kita bisa menolak pembatasan yang ketat dalam partisipasi ekonomi (economic exclusion) bagi mereka yang tinggal diantara kita tapi lahir di tempat lain.
Kita bisa melipatgandakan upaya untuk mencari solusi politik atas konflik dan penganiayaan.
Kita bisa memberdayakan mitra dari badan-badan kemanusiaan dan pembangunan untuk bekerja sama sejak krisis terjadi.
Singkatnya, kita bisa menjunjung tinggi janji “leave no one behind.”
Financing the Fight Against Climate Change