And yet the Putin regime has emerged unscathed each time.
Indeed, terrorist attacks at the turn of the century solidified public opinion against Chechen rebels and gave Putin the public support he needed to raze Grozny, Chechnya’s capital.
Putin’s confidence in dealing with terrorism reflects the design of Russia’s security state.
Russia spends more on internal security than it does on national defense.
It has interior ministry troops, federal security agency (FSB) special forces, OMON (mobile special service) troops, military intelligence troops, and a vast network of internal spies and informants.
Regime opponents are not allowed to run for office, their rights to demonstrate are restricted, and they are subject to a legal arbitrariness in the courts.
Citizens have virtually no protection from wiretaps or the interception of their electronic communications.
Every society must balance civil rights against national security.
Putin’s Russia has swung to one extreme of the spectrum, while the United States and Europe (despite the protests of civil libertarians) have chosen to occupy the other end.
Indeed, Russia is an example of the upper limit of what state power can do to control terrorist activity.
It would be a rare extremist group that had not been infiltrated with an informant who reports to Moscow.
There is even evidence that those who carried out the Beslan massacre were infiltrated by Russian intelligence.
Moreover, any terrorist group knows that their operations will be met with the most extreme use of force.
In Beslan, for example, Russian special forces used thermobaric weapons.
As the reaction to the attacks in Paris illustrates, the seemingly random murder of 130 civilians has monumental resonance in the West – especially when the religious and ideological motives are difficult to understand.
But the Kremlin places a lower value on human lives than Western societies do.
In Putin’s calculations, the loss of lives in extremist attacks is unwelcome, but ultimately acceptable if it does not threaten the regime.
The Russian people might be horrified and frightened.
But the Russian regime is primarily concerned with its own survival – and with how it might use the public’s horror to its benefit.
Working with the West to combat the Islamic State serves neither of those purposes.
Hard to be Easing
NEW YORK – The United States Federal Reserve’s decision to undertake a third round of quantitative easing, or QE3, has raised three important questions. Will QE3 jump-start America’s anemic economic growth?
Will it lead to a persistent increase in risky assets, especially in US and other global equity markets?
Finally, will its effects on GDP growth and equity markets be similar or different?
Many now argue that QE3’s effect on risky assets should be as powerful, if not more so, than that of QE1, QE2, and “Operation Twist,” the Fed’s earlier bond-purchase program.
After all, while the previous rounds of US monetary easing have been associated with a persistent increase in equity prices, the size and duration of QE3 are more substantial.
But, despite the Fed’s impressive commitment to aggressive monetary easing, its effects on the real economy and on US equities could well be smaller and more fleeting than those of previous QE rounds.
Consider, first, that the previous QE rounds came at times of much lower equity valuations and earnings.
In March 2009, the S&amp;P 500 index was down to 660, earnings per share (EPS) of US companies and banks had sunk to a financial-crisis low, and price/earnings ratios were in the single digits.
Today, the S&amp;P 500 is more than 100% higher (hovering near 1,430), the average EPS is close to $100, and P/E ratios are above 14.
Even during QE2, in the summer of 2010, the S&amp;P 500, P/E ratios, and EPS were much lower than they are today.
If, as is likely, economic growth in the US remains anemic in spite of QE3, top-line revenues and bottom-line earnings will turn south, with negative effects on equity valuations.
Moreover, fiscal support is absent this time: QE1 and QE2 helped to prevent a deeper recession and avoid a double dip, respectively, because each was associated with a significant fiscal stimulus.
In both 2010 and 2011, leading economic indicators showed that the first-half slowdown had bottomed out, and that growth was already accelerating before the announcement of monetary easing.
Thus, QE nudged along an economy that was already recovering, which prolonged asset reflation.
By contrast, the latest data suggest that the US economy is performing as sluggishly now as it was in the first half of the year.
Indeed, if anything, weakness in the US labor market, low capital expenditures, and slow income growth have contradicted signals in the early summer that third-quarter growth might be more robust.
Meanwhile, the main transmission channels of monetary stimulus to the real economy – the bond, credit, currency, and stock markets – remain weak, if not broken.
Indeed, the bond-market channel is unlikely to boost growth.
Long-term government bond yields are already very low, and a further reduction will not significantly change private agents’ borrowing costs.
The credit channel also is not working properly, as banks have hoarded most of the extra liquidity from QE, creating excess reserves rather than increasing lending.
Those who can borrow have ample cash and are cautious about spending, while those who want to borrow – highly indebted households and firms (especially small and medium-size enterprises) – face a credit crunch.
The currency channel is similarly impaired.
With global growth weakening, net exports are unlikely to improve robustly, even with a weaker dollar.
Moreover, many major central banks are implementing variants of QE alongside the Fed, dampening the effect of the Fed’s actions on the dollar’s value.
Perhaps most important, a weaker dollar’s effect on the trade balance, and thus on growth, is limited by two factors.
First, a weaker dollar is associated with a higher dollar price for commodities, which implies a drag on the trade balance, because the US is a net commodity-importing country.
Second, any improvement in GDP derived from stronger exports leads to an increase in imports.
Empirical studies estimate that the overall impact of a weaker US dollar on the trade balance is close to zero.
The only other significant channel to transmit QE to the real economy is the wealth effect of an equity-market increase, but there is some circularity in the argument that QE3 will lead to a persistent rise in equity prices.
If persistent asset reflation requires a significant GDP growth recovery, it is tautological to say that if equity prices rise enough following QE, the resulting increase in GDP from a wealth effect justifies the rise in asset prices.
If monetary policy’s transmission channels to the real economy are broken, one cannot assume that QE will have a significant effect on economic growth.
Fed Chairman Ben Bernanke has recently emphasized the importance of an additional channel: the confidence channel, through which the Fed’s commitment to maintaining generous monetary conditions for longer could improve private spending.
The issue is how substantial and durable such effects will be.
Confidence is fragile in an environment characterized by ongoing deleveraging, macro uncertainties, weak labor-market growth, and a fiscal drag.
In short, QE3 reduces the tail risk of an outright economic contraction, but is unlikely to lead to a sustained recovery in an economy that is still enduring a painful deleveraging process.
In the short run, QE3 will lead investors to take on risk, and will stimulate modest asset reflation.
But the equity-price rise is likely to fizzle out over time if economic growth disappoints, as is likely, and drags down expectations about corporate revenues and profitability.
Shinzo Abe’s Monetary-Policy Delusions
NEW HAVEN – The politicization of central banking continues unabated.
The resurrection of Shinzo Abe and Japan’s Liberal Democratic Party – pillars of the political system that has left the Japanese economy mired in two lost decades and counting – is just the latest case in point.
Japan’s recent election hinged critically on Abe’s views of the Bank of Japan’s monetary policy stance.
He argued that a timid BOJ should learn from its more aggressive counterparts, the US Federal Reserve and the European Central Bank.
Just as the Fed and the ECB have apparently saved the day through their unconventional and aggressive quantitative easing (QE), goes the argument, Abe believes it is now time for the BOJ to do the same.
It certainly looks as if he will get his way.
With BOJ Governor Masaaki Shirakawa’s term ending in April, Abe will be able to select a successor – and two deputy governors as well – to do his bidding.
But will it work?
While experimental monetary policy is now widely accepted as standard operating procedure in today’s post-crisis era, its efficacy is dubious.
Nearly four years after the world hit bottom in the aftermath of the global financial crisis, QE’s impact has been strikingly asymmetric.
While massive liquidity injections were effective in unfreezing credit markets and arrested the worst of the crisis – witness the role of the Fed’s first round of QE in 2009-2010 – subsequent efforts have not sparked anything close to a normal cyclical recovery.
The reason is not hard to fathom.
Hobbled by severe damage to private and public-sector balance sheets, and with policy interest rates at or near zero, post-bubble economies have been mired in a classic “liquidity trap.”
They are more focused on paying down massive debt overhangs built up before the crisis than on assuming new debt and boosting aggregate demand.
The sad case of the American consumer is a classic example of how this plays out.
In the years leading up to the crisis, two bubbles – property and credit –&#160;fueled a record-high personal-consumption binge.
When the bubbles burst, households understandably became fixated on balance-sheet repair – namely, paying down debt and rebuilding personal savings, rather than resuming excessive spending habits.
Not only is QE’s ability to jumpstart crisis-torn, balance-sheet-constrained economies limited; it also runs the important risk of blurring the distinction between monetary and fiscal policy.
Central banks that buy sovereign debt issued by fiscal authorities offset market-imposed discipline on borrowing costs, effectively subsidizing public-sector profligacy.
Unfortunately, it appears that Japan has forgotten many of its own lessons – especially the BOJ’s disappointing experience with zero interest rates and QE in the early 2000’s.
But it has also lost sight of the 1990’s – the first of its so-called lost decades – when the authorities did all they could to prolong the life of insolvent banks and many nonfinancial corporations.
Zombie-like companies were kept on artificial life-support in the false hope that time alone would revive them.
It was not until late in the decade, when the banking sector was reorganized and corporate restructuring was encouraged, that Japan made progress on the long, arduous road of balance-sheet repair and structural transformation.
US authorities have succumbed to the same Japanese-like temptations.
From quantitative easing to record-high federal budget deficits to unprecedented bailouts, they have done everything in their power to mask the pain of balance-sheet repair and structural adjustment.
As a result, America has created its own generation of zombies – in this case, zombie consumers.
Like Japan, America’s post-bubble healing has been limited – even in the face of the Fed’s outsize liquidity injections.
Household debt stood at 112% of income in the third quarter of 2012 – down from record highs in 2006, but still nearly 40 percentage points above the 75% norm of the last three decades of the twentieth century.
Similarly, the personal-saving rate, at just 3.5% in the four months ending in November 2012, was less than half the 7.9% average of 1970-99.
The same is true of Europe. The ECB’s über-aggressive actions have achieved little in the way of bringing about long-awaited structural transformation in the region.
Crisis-torn peripheral European economies still suffer from unsustainable debt loads and serious productivity and competitiveness problems.
And a fragmented European banking system remains one of the weakest links in the regional daisy chain.
Is this the “cure” that Abe really wants for Japan?
The last thing that the Japanese economy needs at this point is backsliding on structural reforms.
Yet, by forcing the BOJ to follow in the misdirected footsteps of the Fed and the ECB, that is precisely the risk that Abe and Japan are facing.
Massive liquidity injections carried out by the world’s major central banks – the Fed, the ECB, and the BOJ – are neither achieving traction in their respective real economies, nor facilitating balance-sheet repair and structural change.
That leaves a huge sum of excess liquidity sloshing around in global asset markets.
Where it goes, the next crisis is inevitably doomed to follow.
Why Remember Pearl Harbor?
NEW YORK – December 7 marks the 67th anniversary of the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor.
Over the years, “the day of infamy” has become a classic reference point for galvanizing patriotic sentiment in America.
In the wake of the September 11, 2001 terrorist attack, for example, analogies to Pearl Harbor were made frequently.
But despite its central place in America’s collective memory, Pearl Harbor remains little understood.
Why did Japan initiate such a seemingly self-destructive war in the first place?
Aside from lessons that Japan must learn from its momentous decision, is there something to be learned by the United States as well?
The decision to attack Pearl Harbor was reached after five months of deliberations that included numerous official conferences.
It was a gradual process in which more sympathetic, albeit firm, US engagement might have helped sway Japan in a different direction.
In fact, Japanese government opinion was so divided that it is surprising that it was able to unite in the end.
Many in the Japanese Army initially regarded the Soviet Union as the main threat facing the country.
Others saw the US as the primary enemy.
Some were concerned with more abstract, ideological enemies, such as Communism and “Americanism,” while there were also voices highlighting the menace of the “white race” (including Japan’s allies, Germany and Italy) against the “yellow race.”
Then there were those who preferred not to fight any enemy at all, particularly the US, whose long-term war-making power, the government knew, far surpassed Japan’s own.
The tactical mastermind of the Pearl Harbor operation, Admiral Isoroku Yamamoto, was one of them.
Over the course of the summer of 1941, events slowly tilted Japan towards the possibility of war with the West.
But Pearl Harbor was in no way inevitable.
Germany’s attack on the Soviet Union compelled Japan in July 1941 to prepare a plan of attack.
Although it made clear Japan’s desire to take advantage of the European conflict and gain a foothold in the European colonies in Southeast Asia, the plan was not clear about who constituted Japan’s true enemy.
Japan’s military thrust into Southeast Asia led President Franklin Delano Roosevelt’s administration to impose sanctions.
The US froze Japanese assets, an example followed by Britain and the Dutch East Indies.
When Japan responded by taking over southern French Indochina, the US retaliated by imposing an embargo on oil exports to Japan.
Rather than telling Japan that the US was determined to search for a diplomatic solution, America’s categorical reaction confirmed it to the Japanese as an arrogant and conceited enemy.
Moreover, by transferring its Pacific Fleet from San Diego to Pearl Harbor, the US encouraged the Japanese understanding that the US fully anticipated war with Japan.
World War II in the Pacific finally came about for many different reasons.
But it was, above all, the sense of encirclement and humiliation that united the deeply divided Japanese government.
Feeling defeated by a series of failed approaches to the US, including an overture to hold direct talks with Roosevelt, Prime Minister Fumimaro Konoe resigned on October 16, making hard-line Army Minister Hideki Tōjō his successor.
The high-handed tone of the Hull Note of November 26, demanding Japan’s withdrawal of all its troops from China, was a final blow to the moderates in Japan’s government, who still hoped for diplomatic negotiations.
By this time, many policymakers were convinced that the US was not ready to hear them out.
It was ultimately in the name of saving Asia for all Asians from what was regarded as Western arrogance that the government united to wage war.
On December 1, it was decided that the war would commence in six days.
There were legitimate historical reasons for Japan to feel humiliated on the eve of war.
The gunboat diplomacy that resulted in the opening of Japan and unequal treaties in the mid-19th century was but a beginning.
More immediately, the Great Depression and the subsequent compartmentalization of the world into economic blocs also worked to the advantage of the already powerful.
Coupled with the economic hardship of the interwar years were instances of racial prejudice in the US that aimed at preventing Japanese immigration.
United by this long-simmering and humiliating sense of exclusion, Japanese policymakers, whatever their differences, stumbled toward the December 1 decision to go to war.
With almost 70 years of hindsight, Pearl Harbor should offer some lessons for US foreign policy today.
Despite obvious differences between Pearl Harbor and recent Islamist terrorist tactics, they show the common desire of self-proclaimed Davids to topple their Goliaths in a clearly lop-sided battle.
These Davids depend on Western technologies to overcome imbalances of power, and are driven by a sense of real or imagined humiliation.
But no matter how strong and historically justified such grievances may be those who resort to murderous tactics must be condemned.
However, high-handedness and tough talk alone are an inadequate response, for this approach further humiliates those who already feel humiliated, and alienates those who might otherwise proffer a more moderate voice.
Diplomacy no longer works with terrorism, but it can help to prevent it by dealing carefully with potentially hostile states.
With global expectations mounting for a fresh start in US foreign policy, it is vital not just to remember, but to understand the attack on Pearl Harbor.
America’s Global Election
NEW YORK – Most people around the world will not be able to vote in the United States’s upcoming presidential election, even though they have a great deal at stake in the result.
Overwhelmingly, non-US citizens favor Barack Obama’s re-election over a victory for his challenger, Mitt Romney.
There are good reasons for this.
In terms of the economy, the effects of Romney’s policies in creating a more unequal and divided society would not be directly felt abroad.
But, in the past, for better and for worse, others have often followed America’s example.
Many governments quickly subscribed to Ronald Reagan’s mantra of deregulated markets – policies that eventually brought about the worst global recession since the 1930’s.
Other countries that followed America’s lead have experienced growing inequality –&nbsp;more money at the top, more poverty at the bottom, and a weaker middle class.
Romney’s proposed contractionary policies –&nbsp;the attempt to reduce deficits prematurely, while the US economy is still frail –&nbsp;will almost surely weaken America’s already anemic growth, and, if the euro crisis worsens, it could bring on another recession.
At that point, with US demand shrinking, the rest of the world would indeed feel the economic effects of a Romney presidency quite directly.
That raises the question of globalization, which entails concerted action on many fronts by the international community.
But what is required with regard to trade, finance, climate change, and a host other areas is not being done.
Many people attribute these failures partly to an absence of American leadership.
But, while Romney may summon bravado and strong rhetoric, other world leaders would be unlikely to follow him, owing to the belief (correct in my judgment) that he would take the US – and them – in the wrong direction.
American “exceptionalism” may sell well at home, but it does poorly abroad.
President George W. Bush’s Iraq war – arguably a violation of international law –&nbsp;showed that though America spends almost as much on defense as the rest of the world combined, it could not pacify a country with less than 10% of its population and less than 1% of its GDP.
Moreover, it turned out that US-style capitalism was neither efficient nor stable.
With most Americans’ incomes stagnating for a decade and a half, it was clear that the US economic model was not delivering for most citizens, whatever official GDP data said.
Indeed, the model blew up even before Bush left office.
Together with the abuses of human rights under his administration, the Great Recession – the predictable (and predicted) consequence of his economic policies – did as much to weaken America’s soft power as the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan did to weaken the credibility of its military power.
In terms of values – namely, the values of Romney and his running mate, Paul Ryan – things are not much better.
For example, every other advanced country recognizes the right to accessible health care, and Obama’s Affordable Care Act represents a significant step toward that goal.
But Romney has criticized this effort, and has offered nothing in its place.
America now has the distinction of being among the advanced countries that afford the least equality of opportunity to their citizens.
And Romney’s drastic budget cutbacks, targeted at the poor and middle class, would further impede social mobility.
At the same time, he would expand the military, spending more money on weapons that do not work against enemies that do not exist, enriching defense contractors like Halliburton at the expense of desperately needed public investment in infrastructure and education.
While Bush is not on the ballot, Romney has not really distanced himself from the Bush administration’s policies.
On the contrary, his campaign has featured the same advisers, the same devotion to higher military spending, the same belief that tax cuts for the rich are the solution to every economic problem, and the same fuzzy budget math.
Consider, for example, the three issues that are at the center of the global agenda mentioned earlier: climate change, financial regulation, and trade.
Romney has been silent on the first, and many in his party are “climate deniers.”
The world cannot expect genuine leadership from Romney there.
As for financial regulation, while the recent crisis has highlighted the need for stricter rules, agreement on many issues has proven to be elusive, partly because the Obama administration is too close to the financial sector.
With Romney, though, there would be no distance at all: metaphorically speaking, he is the financial sector.
One financial issue on which there is global agreement is the need to close down offshore bank havens, which exist mainly for purposes of tax evasion and avoidance, money laundering, and corruption.
Money does not go to the Cayman Islands because sunshine makes it grow faster; this money thrives on the absence of sunshine.
But, with Romney unapologetic about his own use of Cayman banks, we are unlikely to see progress even in this area.
On trade, Romney promises to launch a trade war with China, and to declare it a currency manipulator on Day One – a promise that gives him little wiggle room.
He refuses to note the renminbi’s large real appreciation in recent years, or to acknowledge that, while changes in China’s exchange rate may affect the bilateral trade deficit, what matters is America’s multilateral trade deficit.
A stronger renminbi would simply mean a switch in the US from China to lower-cost producers of textiles, apparel, and other goods.
The irony –&nbsp;again lost on Romney – is that other countries are accusing the US of currency manipulation.
After all, one of the main benefits of the Federal Reserve’s policy of “quantitative easing” – perhaps the only channel with a significant effect on the real economy – derives from the depreciation of the US dollar.
The world has a lot riding on America’s election.
Unfortunately, most people who will be affected by it – almost the entire world – will have no influence on the outcome.
The Battle Cry of the Non-Oppressed
TEL AVIV – Nobody should be surprised that Scotland’s recent referendum on independence left the United Kingdom intact.
In the past, regions or communities have achieved statehood almost exclusively after a struggle against colonial subjection and oppression, galvanized by an appeal to a distinctive religious, cultural, or ethnic identity.
Complaints about economic dynamics, social policies, or governance inefficiencies – the basis of Scotland’s “yes” campaign – are not the cris de coeur of a successful independence movement.
That is bad news for secessionists elsewhere in the West.
Of course, Scotland’s technocratic nationalism made sense.
As the movement’s leader, Alex Salmond, acknowledged in a 2012 consultation document, “Scotland is not oppressed and we have no need to be liberated.”
The struggle for independence, he explained, was aimed at creating the kind of efficient administrative and economic structures that would enable Scotland to reach its potential.
The “yes” campaign hoped to win supporters with a utopian vision of an independent Scotland that included European Union and NATO membership; a currency union with England, but no fiscal union; improved public services and social benefits; and lower taxes.
In other words, Scotland would have everything it has now, only better, and on its own terms.
This vision was undoubtedly appealing to many Scots.
But it proved significantly less compelling than the economic doomsday scenarios advanced by its unionist opponents, including former US Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan, former World Bank President Robert Zoellick, and Chancellor of the Exchequer George Osborne.
In other words, many people’s votes were driven by risk aversion, fear, and intimidation, rather than hope, passion, or deep emotional attachment to a common identity.
This contrasts sharply with the motivations espoused by Scotland’s nobles in the fourteenth century, when they succeeded in preserving their country’s independence from English rule.
“It is in truth not for glory, nor riches, nor honors that we are fighting,” they declared, “but for freedom alone, which no honest man gives up but with life itself.”
In fact, the “no” campaign’s victory might have been even more resounding if the Westminster establishment’s desperate, last-minute offer to grant Scotland more powers on taxation, spending, and welfare had been included as an option in the ballot.
National movements driven by a historical mission or an uncompromising quest to assert group identity against a dominant power normally do not succumb to economic considerations and last-minute economic bait.
It was none other than the founder of the Zionist fundamentalist right, Ze’ev Jabotinsky, who warned in 1924 against “the naive assumption that the aspiration of the Palestinians&hellip;will be paralyzed by such means as subsidies, economic advantages, or bribery.”
Recognizing that their “natural patriotism is pure and noble,” he knew that they could not be “bought off.”
Now, Salmond is probably re-thinking his avoidance of nativist identity politics.
What Edmund Burke defined as&nbsp;a group’s attachment to “the inns and resting places of the human spirit” – that is, ethnic, religious, and community ties – would have been a much more powerful mobilizing force for an independence movement.
The “yes” campaigners would not have had to look far for inspiration.
James Joyce – himself not devoid of traces of Irish nationalism – wrote that “nationality, language, [and] religion” are “the nets” into which “a man is born.”
Similarly, George Orwell distinguished between Celtic nationalism and Anglophobia, stating that the former is belief “in the past and future greatness of the Celtic peoples.”
True, Scotland’s great minds in the age of Enlightenment, such as David Hume, Adam Smith, and even the national poet, Robert Burns, were all fervent advocates of “Britishness,” whatever that might mean today.
Yet an identity-based campaign could have resorted to the heritage of the Scottish Renaissance of the mid-twentieth century or to the Celtic Revival and Celtic Twilight movements, which awakened a spirit of cultural nationalism among Scots in the late nineteenth century.
In the run-up to the referendum, Scotland’s independence movement became an important point of reference for Catalans and Basques in Spain, the Flemish in Belgium, the Veneto and South Tyrol regions in Italy, Corsicans and Bretons in France, and the secessionists of Quebec.
All hoped that Scotland would pave the way for the peaceful breakup of their own states.
With the defeat of Scotland’s independence movement – not to mention Québécois voters’ stunning rejection of the province’s largest separatist party in last April’s election – that hope may be waning.
And with good reason.
There is little historical precedent for the peaceful breakup of a state, with an exception like Czechoslovakia’s consensual split in 1993 occurring in unique circumstances.
A state is far more likely to go to war to defend its unity.
The United States and Spain did it in their civil wars, and today’s Spain would go to the outer limits of its capacity to prevent a Catalan or Basque referendum, let alone independence.
Nationalist groups in Western democracies are not subjugated people.
Theirs is the nationalism of free, liberated people, who can expect the most generous devolution deals possible to protect their singular legacies and address their grievances.
And perhaps that is why federal arrangements like those in Australia and Canada – essentially what Westminster grudgingly offered Scotland – could be their best option.
Long Live China’s Slowdown
NEW HAVEN – At 7.7%, China’s annual GDP growth in the first quarter of this year was slower than many expected.
While the data were hardly devastating relative to a consensus forecast of 8.2%, many (including me) expected a second consecutive quarterly rebound from the slowdown that appeared to have ended in the third quarter of 2012.
China doubters around the world were quick to pounce on the number, expressing fears of a stall, or even a dreaded double dip.
But slower GDP growth is actually good for China, provided that it reflects the long-awaited structural transformation of the world’s most dynamic economy.
The broad outlines of this transformation are well known – a shift from export- and investment-led growth to an economic structure that draws greater support from domestic private consumption.
Less well known is that a rebalanced China should have a slower growth rate – the first hints of which may now be evident.
A rebalanced China can grow more slowly for one simple reason: By drawing increased support from services-led consumer demand, China’s new model will embrace a more labor-intensive growth recipe.
The numbers seem to bear that out.
China’s services sector requires about 35% more jobs per unit of GDP than do manufacturing and construction – the primary drivers of the old model.
That number has potentially huge implications, because it means that China could grow at an annual rate in the 7-8% range and still achieve its objectives with respect to employment and poverty reduction.
China has struggled to attain these goals with anything less than 10% growth, because the old model was not generating enough jobs per unit of output.
As Chinese manufacturing moved up the value chain, firms increasingly replaced workers with machines embodying the latest technologies.
As a result, its economic model spawned a labor-saving, capital-intensive growth dynamic.
On one level, that made sense.
Capital-labor substitution is at the heart of modern productivity strategies for manufacturing-based economies.
But it left China in a deepening hole: increasingly deficient in jobs per unit of output, it needed more units of output to absorb its surplus labor.
Ultimately, that became more of a problem than a solution.
The old manufacturing model, which fueled an unprecedented 20-fold increase in per capita income relative to the early 1990’s, also sowed the seeds of excessive resource consumption and environmental degradation.
Services-led growth is, in many ways, the antidote to the “unstable, unbalanced, uncoordinated, and ultimately unsustainable” growth model that former Premier Wen Jiabao’s famously criticized in 2007.
Yet services offer more than just a labor-intensive growth path.
Compared to manufacturing, they have much smaller resource and carbon footprints.
A services-led model provides China with an alternative, environmentally friendlier, and ultimately more sustainable economic structure.
It is premature, of course, to conclude that a services-led transformation to slower growth is now at hand.
The latest data hint at such a possibility, with the tertiary sector (services) expanding at an 8.3% annual rate in the first quarter of this year – the third consecutive quarter of acceleration and a half-percentage point faster than the 7.8% first-quarter gain recorded by the secondary sector (manufacturing and construction).
But it will take more than a few quarters of mildly encouraging data to validate such an important shift in the Chinese economy’s underlying structure.
Not surprisingly, China skeptics are putting a different spin on the latest growth numbers.
Fears of a shadow-bank-induced credit bubble now top the worry list, reinforcing longstanding concerns that China may succumb to the dreaded “middle-income trap” – a sustained growth slowdown that has ensnared most high-growth emerging economies at the juncture that China has now reached.
China is hardly immune to such a possibility.
But it is unlikely to occur if China can carry out the services-led pro-consumption rebalancing that remains the core strategic initiative of its current (12th) Five-Year Plan.
Invariably, the middle-income trap afflicts those emerging economies that cling to early-stage development models for too long.
For China, the risk will be highest if it sticks with the timeworn recipe of unbalanced manufacturing- and construction-led growth, which has created such serious sustainability problems.
If China fails to rebalance, weak external demand from a crisis-battered developed world will continue to hobble its export machine, forcing it to up the ante on a credit- and investment-led growth model – in effect, doubling down on resource-intensive and environmentally damaging growth.
But I remain hopeful that China’s new leadership team will move quickly to implement its new model.
There are no viable alternatives.
Financial markets, as well as growth-starved developed economies, are not thrilled with the natural rhythm of slower growth that a rebalanced Chinese economy is likely to experience.
Resource industries – indeed, resource-based economies like Australia, Canada, Brazil, and Russia – have become addicted to China’s old strain of unsustainable hyper-growth.
Yet China knows that it is time to break that dangerous habit.
The United States is likely to have a different problem with consumer-led growth in China.
After all, higher private consumption implies an end to China’s surplus saving – and thus to the seemingly open-ended recycling of that surplus into dollar-based assets such as US Treasury bills.
Who will then fund America’s budget deficit – and on what terms?
Just as China must embrace slower growth as a natural consequence of its rebalancing imperative, the rest of the world will need to figure out how to cope when it does.
Why Small Booms Cause Big Busts
BERKELEY – As bubbles go, it was not a very big one.
From 2002 to 2006, the share of the American economy devoted to residential construction rose by 1.2 percentage points of GDP above its previous trend value, before plunging as the United States entered the greatest economic crisis in nearly a century.
According to my rough calculations, the excess investment in the housing sector during this period totaled some $500 billion – by any measure a tiny fraction of the world economy at the time of the crash.
The resulting damage, however, has been enormous.
The economies of Europe and North America are roughly 6% smaller than we would have expected them to be had there been no crisis.
In other words, a relatively small amount of overinvestment is responsible for some $1.8 trillion in lost production every year.
Given that the gap shows no signs of closing, and accounting for expected growth rates and equity returns, I estimate that the total loss to production will eventually reach nearly $3 quadrillion.
For each dollar of overinvestment in the housing market, the world economy will have suffered $6,000 in losses.
How can this be?
It is important to note that not all recessions cause so much pain.
Financial blows in 1987, 1991, 1997, 1998, and 2001 (when some $4 trillion of excess investment was lost when the dot-com bubble burst) had little impact on the broader real economy.
The reason why things were different this time can be found in a recently published paper by Òscar Jordà, Moritz Schularick, and Alan M. Taylor.
Large credit booms, the authors show, can greatly worsen the damage caused by the collapse of an asset bubble.
Historically, when a recession is caused by the collapse of an asset bubble that was not fueled by a credit boom, the economy is roughly 1-1.5% below what it otherwise would have been five years after the start of the downturn.
When a credit boom is involved, however, the damage is significantly greater.
When the bubble is in equity prices, the economy performs 4% below par, on average, after five years – and as much as 9% below par when the bubble is in the housing market.
Given these findings, it is clear that the distress experienced since the beginning of the economic crisis is not far out of line with historical experience.
For many economists, recessions are an inevitable part of the business cycle – the bust that necessarily follows, like a hangover, from any boom. John Maynard Keynes, however, had little time for this view.
“It seems an extraordinary imbecility that this wonderful outburst of productive energy should be the prelude to impoverishment and depression,” Keynes wrote in 1931, after the boom years of the 1920s had given way to the Great Depression.
“I find the explanation of the current business losses, of the reduction in output, and of the unemployment which necessarily ensues on this not in the high level of investment which was proceeding up to the spring of 1929, but in the subsequent cessation of this investment.”
A few years later, Keynes proposed a fix to the problem.
In The General Theory of Employment, Interest, and Money, Keynes explained how booms are created when “investments which will in fact yield, say, 2% in conditions of full employment are made in the expectation of a yield of, say, 6% and are valued accordingly.” In a recession, the problem is flipped.
Investments that would yield 2% are “expected to yield less than nothing.”
The result is a self-fulfilling prophecy, in which widespread unemployment does indeed drive the returns of those investments below zero.
“We reach a condition where there is a shortage of houses,” Keynes wrote, “but where nevertheless no one can afford to live in the houses that there are.”
His solution was simple: “The right remedy for the trade cycle is not to be found in abolishing booms and thus keeping us permanently in a semi-slump; but in abolishing slumps and thus keeping us permanently in a quasi-boom.”
For Keynes, the underlying problem was a failure of the economy’s credit channels.
The financial reaction to the collapse of a bubble and the resulting wave of bankruptcies drives the natural rate of interest below zero, even though there are still many ways to put people productively to work.
Today, we recognize that clogged credit channels can cause an economic downturn.
There are three commonly proposed responses.
The first is expansionary fiscal policies, with governments taking up the slack in the face of weak private investment.
The second is a higher inflation target, giving central banks more room to respond to financial shocks.
And the third is tight restrictions on debt and leverage, especially in the housing market, in order to prevent a credit-fueled price bubble from forming.
To these solutions, Keynes would have added a fourth, one known to us today as the “Greenspan put” – using monetary policy to validate the asset prices reached at the height of the bubble.
Unfortunately, in a world in which fiscal austerity appears to exert a mesmerizing hold over politicians, and in which a 2% inflation target seems set in stone, our policy options are rather limited.
And that, ultimately, is how a relatively small boom can lead to such a large bust.
Rebalancing the State’s Balance Sheet
MILAN – Until recently, relatively little attention was paid to states’ balance sheets.
Measurement and reporting were neglected.
Even today, states’ liabilities receive considerable attention, while their asset sides receive significantly less.
In an earlier era, states owned substantial industrial assets.
This “commanding heights of the economy” model was rejected largely because it seriously under-performed, especially when state-owned sectors were protected from competition (as was the norm).
Efficiency declined.
But, more important, the absence of entry and exit by firms, a key ingredient of innovation, caused dynamism to suffer and losses to grow over time.
The model’s shortcomings led to privatization in many developed and developing countries.
In Europe, privatization was viewed as a key step in the integration process.
The theory, in Europe and elsewhere, was that states could not be impartial owners of industrial assets.
Through regulation, public procurement, and hidden subsidies, they would favor their own assets.
Of course, state ownership is not the only way to impede efficiency and dynamism.
Regulations in a range of countries, from Japan to Italy, create sectors that are sheltered from competition, with detrimental effects on productivity.
This pattern is particularly pronounced in the non-tradable sectors (which account for two-thirds of the economy), where the discipline of foreign competition is absent by definition.
Even here, foreign-based domestic competitors could improve performance.
It is important that more attention is now paid to public liabilities – not only growing sovereign debt, but also larger, non-debt liabilities embedded in social-insurance programs.
A combination of defective growth models, rising longevity, and unanticipated increases in costs (such as health care in America) have caused these longer-term liabilities to explode.
Reining in debt and other liabilities has substantially reduced governments’ scope for sustaining demand in the face of severe negative shocks, thus reducing their ability to buy time for structural adjustment in the private sector.
For now, investment in a shift to a sustainable growth and employment pattern has been crowded out.
Shifting consumption to investment via tax increases is possible, but too problematic politically, with the burden-sharing issue usually leading to impasse and inaction.
Meanwhile, the asset side of states’ balance sheets remains largely invisible. States own land, mineral rights, and infrastructure.
Some have sovereign wealth funds.
Many have public pension funds of substantial magnitude, consisting of diversified portfolios of assets.
These assets are, in a sense, spoken for – there are claims on them in the form of liabilities, which have grown as expected risk-adjusted returns on assets decline; but they do represent a partial funding of public liabilities and are an element of resilience.
By contrast, in China, the asset side of the state balance sheet is very large: land, foreign-currency reserves of $3.5 trillion, and around an 85% stake in state-owned enterprises that account for about 40% of output.
This balance-sheet configuration has helped China to respond to shocks and sustain high levels of public-sector investment.
The liability side will expand as social insurance grows – but slowly, owing to a fear of underestimating the liabilities being created.
In the best case – without a sharp decline in financial assets accelerating an economic downturn, a sudden collapse of a defective growth model, or even rapid increases in liabilities associated with demographic shifts or health-care technology – it might make sense to focus only on controlling liabilities.
In China, where the asset side of the balance sheet is large, the strategy of shrinking it via privatization has been largely rejected, at least for now.
The loss of resilience would be too great.
That leads to the challenge of effective management of public assets – management that promotes rather than impedes market efficiency and innovation.
Here, what might be called the pension/sovereign-wealth-fund model – in which a public entity holds and manages a diversified portfolio of assets as a financial investor with appropriately specified duties and governance – seems to be the right way to go.
The asset side of the balance sheet is maintained in the aggregate, but the management of the assets, particularly the diversification of holdings, can be thought of as prudent and de facto privatized.
For developed countries, increasing resilience and flexibility over time by building public assets should be a long-term priority.
Periodic systemic risk affects entire economies and public finances, not only financial markets, and governments should be able to respond during periods of rapid structural change.
In practice, this means two things.
First, once a collective choice is made about the desired levels of social insurance, the implied liabilities should be fully funded over time.
The alternative is a poor intergenerational burden-sharing choice.
Second, governments, like individuals, households, and businesses, need to save for a rainy day.
That is all the more important in periods – like the current one – of rapid change, high volatility, and only partly predictable systemic instability.
Why Support the TPP?
CAMBRIDGE – Agreement among negotiators from 12 Pacific Rim countries on the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) represents a triumph over long odds.
Tremendous political obstacles, both domestic and international, had to be overcome to conclude the deal.
And now critics of the TPP’s ratification, particularly in the United States, should read the agreement with an open mind.
Many of the issues surrounding the TPP have been framed, at least in US political terms, as left versus right.
The left’s unremitting hostility to the deal – often on the grounds that the US Congress was kept in the dark about its content during negotiations – carried two dangers.
A worthwhile effort could have been blocked, or President Barack Obama’s Democratic administration could have been compelled to be more generous to American corporations, in order to pick up needed votes from Republicans.
In fact, those concerned about labor rights and the environment risked hurting their own cause.
By seeming to say that they would not support the TPP under any conditions, Obama had little incentive to pursue their demands.
Seen in this light, the TPP that has emerged is a pleasant surprise.
The agreement gives pharmaceutical firms, tobacco companies, and other corporations substantially less than they had asked for – so much so that US Senator Orrin Hatch and some other Republicans now threaten to oppose ratification.
Likewise, the deal gives environmentalists more than they had bothered to ask for.
Perhaps some of these outcomes were the result of hard bargaining by other trading partners (such as Australia).
Regardless, the TPP’s critics should now read the specifics that they have so long said they wanted to see and reconsider their opposition to the deal.
The most controversial issues in the US are those that are sometimes classified as “deep integration,” because they go beyond the traditional easing of trade tariffs and quotas.
The left’s concerns about labor and the environment were accompanied by fears about excessive benefits for corporations: protection of the intellectual property of pharmaceutical and other companies, and the mechanisms used to settle disputes between investors and states.
So what, exactly, is in the finished TPP?
Among the environmental features, two stand out.
The agreement includes substantial steps to enforce the prohibitions contained in the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species (CITES).
It also takes substantial steps to limit subsidies for fishing fleets – which in many countries waste taxpayer money and accelerate the depletion of marine life.
For the first time, apparently, these environmental measures will be backed up by trade sanctions.
I wish that certain environmental groups had devoted half as much time and energy ascertaining the potential for such good outcomes as they did to sweeping condemnations of the negotiating process.
The critics apparently were too busy to notice when the agreement on fishing subsidies was reached in Maui in July.
But it is not too late for environmentalists to get on board.
Similarly, various provisions in the area of labor practices, particularly in Southeast Asia, are progressive.
These include measures to promote union rights in Vietnam and steps to crack down on human trafficking in Malaysia.
Perhaps the greatest uncertainty concerned the extent to which big US corporations would get what they wanted in the areas of investor-government dispute settlement and intellectual property protection.
The TPP’s critics often neglected to acknowledge that international dispute-settlement mechanisms could ever serve a valid purpose, or that some degree of patent protection is needed if pharmaceutical companies are to have sufficient incentive to invest in research and development.
There was, of course, a danger that such protections for corporations could go too far.
The dispute-settlement provisions might have interfered unreasonably with member countries’ anti-smoking campaigns, for example.
But, in the end, the tobacco companies did not get what they had been demanding; Australia is now free to ban brand-name logos on cigarette packs.
The TPP also sets other new safeguards against the misuse of the dispute-settlement mechanism.
Likewise, the intellectual property protections might have established a 12-year monopoly on the data that US pharmaceutical and biotechnology companies compile on new drugs (particularly biologics), thereby impeding competition from lower-cost generic versions.
In the end, these companies did not get all they wanted; while the TPP in some ways gives their intellectual property more protection than they had before, it assures protection of their data for only 5-8 years.
The focus on new areas of deep integration should not obscure the old-fashioned free-trade benefits that are also part of the TPP: reducing thousands of existing tariff and non-tariff barriers.
Liberalization will affect manufacturing sectors such as the automotive industry, as well as services, including the Internet.
Liberalization of agriculture – long a stubborn holdout in international trade negotiations – is noteworthy.
Countries like Japan have agreed to let in more dairy products, sugar, beef, and rice from more efficient producers in countries like New Zealand and Australia.
In all these areas and more, traditional textbook arguments about the gains from trade apply: new export opportunities lead to higher wages and a lower cost of living.
Many citizens and politicians made up their minds about TPP long ago, based on seemingly devastating critiques of what might emerge from the negotiations.
They should now look at the outcome with an open mind.
They just might find that their worst nighttime fears have vanished by the light of day.
Europe’s Non-Deal of the Century
BRUSSELS – As Europe picks over the ruins of the mega-merger that would have created a world-beating new aerospace and defense giant, questions are being asked about the inglorious role that the European Union played in the fiasco.
The European Commission’s failure to champion the $50 billion merger of the Franco-German European Aeronautic Defence and Space Company (EADS), owner of Airbus, and the United Kingdom’s BAE Systems is being seen as a crucial factor in the deal’s collapse.
The integration of the two high-tech aviation and avionics leaders had looked like an EU-inspired blueprint for industrial success.
For several years, EU leaders have been urging the consolidation of Europe’s defense industries, so the proposed deal – which originated in the corporate boardrooms of EADS and BAE Systems – looked like an answer to their calls.
Yet both the Commission and the European Parliament kept silent and withheld the political support that might have ensured that the deal went through.
A timely reminder by EU leaders of the strategic importance of the aerospace sector would have helped allay many of the misgivings in Berlin, and to a lesser degree in London, that ultimately sank the deal.
Aviation, like defense, is the sharpest of the R&amp;D cutting edges available to advanced countries, and regularly produces key technological breakthroughs.
Nationalist squabbles over the details of the merger would surely have been attenuated by a statesmanlike intervention from the Commission in Brussels.
It was therefore a bizarre coincidence that the merger’s collapse came on the day that the Commission unveiled its new industrial strategy for regaining Europe’s competitive edge in the face of Asian and North American competition.
One of the most powerful arguments for the EADS-BAE marriage had been the expectation of industry analysts that within 20 years China will challenge Airbus and Boeing in the global aviation market, while also creating a powerful new defense industry.
That scenario now looks all the more likely.
Why, then, did the European Commission remain silent?
The answer appears to be that it feared negative reactions from the three governments involved in the merger talks, and believed that its own authority would suffer from any public rebuff.
The persistent rumor circulating among defense company executives is that soon after news of the proposed merger leaked, the weekly commissioners’ meeting chaired by Commission President José Manuel Barroso was enjoined to keep silent on the matter in order to avoid any potential dangers.
Whether true or not, the important point is that the merger transcended national considerations, and the European Commission had a duty to involve itself.
The EU’s executive body is meant to be the driving force behind Europe’s efforts to revive laggard industries and fight to reverse the long-term economic decline that the eurozone crisis appears to presage.
Nobody is arguing that the Commission is responsible for the deal’s unhappy end – only that it should have rallied support for it.
The significance of the merger’s collapse is now becoming clear to observers across Europe, especially in Germany, where the media have been extremely critical of how “negative politics” sealed the proposed merger’s fate.
With the EU in the throes of the seemingly endless eurozone sovereign-debt crisis and facing a looming debate over its future decision-making architecture, the collapse of the EADS-BAE merger will be no more than a footnote in the history books.
But it may be said to mark the point when the European Commission openly acknowledged that it has become little more than a secretariat to EU governments.
That is a far cry from the political powerhouse that some Europeans fear – and for which others still hope.
Should Central Banks Target Employment?
WASHINGTON, DC – On December 12, US Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke announced that the Fed will keep interest rates at close to zero until the unemployment rate falls to 6.5%, provided inflation expectations remain subdued.
While the Fed’s governing statutes, unlike those of the European Central Bank, explicitly include a mandate to support employment, the announcement marked the first time that the Fed tied its interest-rate policy to a numerical employment target.
It is a welcome breakthrough, and one that should be emulated by others – not least the ECB.
	Central banks’ statutes differ in terms of the objectives that they set for monetary policy.
All include price stability.
Many add a reference to general economic conditions, including growth and employment or financial stability.
Some give the central bank the authority to set an inflation target unilaterally; others stipulate coordination with the government in setting the target.
There is no recent example, however, of a major central bank setting a numerical employment target.
This should change, as the size of the employment challenge facing the advanced economies becomes more apparent.
Weak labor markets, low inflation, and debt overhang suggest that a fundamental re-ordering of priorities is in order.
In Japan, Shinzo Abe, the incoming prime minister, is signaling the same set of concerns, although he seems to be proposing a “minimum” inflation target for the Bank of Japan, rather than a link to growth or employment.
	The spread of global value-chains that integrate hundreds of millions of developing-country workers into the global economy, as well as new labor-saving technologies, imply little chance of cost-push wage inflation.
Likewise, the market for long-term bonds indicates extremely low inflation expectations (of course, interest rates are higher in cases of perceived sovereign default or re-denomination risk, such as in Southern Europe, but that has nothing to do with inflation).
Moreover, the deleveraging underway since the 2008 financial implosion could be easier if inflation were moderately higher for a few years, a debate the International Monetary Fund encouraged &nbsp;a year ago.
Together with these considerations, policymakers should take into account the tremendous human and economic costs of high unemployment, ranging from the millions of shattered lives, skills erosion, and disappearance of opportunities for an entire generation, to the dead-weight loss of idle human resources.
Is the failure to ensure that millions of young people acquire the skills required to participate in the economy not as great a liability for a society as a large stock of public debt?
	Nowhere is this reordering of priorities more needed than in the eurozone.
Yet, strangely, it is the Fed, not the ECB, that has set an unemployment target.
The US unemployment rate has declined to around 7.7% and the current-account deficit is close to $500 billion, while eurozone unemployment is at a record high, near 12%, and the current account shows a surplus approaching $100 billion.
If the ECB’s inflation target were 3%, rather than close to but below 2%, and Germany, with the world’s largest current-account surplus, encouraged 6% wage growth and tolerated 4% inflation – implying modest real-wage growth in excess of expected productivity gains – the eurozone adjustment process would become less politically and economically costly.
Indeed, the policy calculus in Northern Europe greatly underestimates the economic losses due to the disruptions imposed on the South by excessive austerity and wage deflation.
The resulting high levels of youth unemployment, health problems, and idle production capacity also all have a substantial impact on demand for imports from the North.
	Contrary to conventional wisdom, the ECB’s legal mandate would allow such a re-ordering of priorities, as, with reference to the ECB, the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union states that “The primary (emphasis added) objective of the European System of Central Banks&hellip;shall be to maintain price stability,” and there is another part of the Treaty dealing with general eurozone economic policies that emphasizes employment.
This would seem not to preclude a temporary complementary employment objective for the ECB at a time of exceptional challenge.
Moreover, the ECB has the authority to set the eurozone-wide inflation target, and could set it higher for two or three years, without any treaty violation.
The real problem is the current political attitude in Germany.
Somehow, the memory of hyperinflation in the early 1920’s seems scarier than that of massive unemployment in the early 1930’s, although it was the latter that fueled the rise of Nazism.
Maybe the upcoming German elections will allow progressive forces to clarify what is at stake for Germany and Europe – indeed, the entire world.
	In a more global context, none of this is to dismiss the longer-term dangers of inflation.
In most countries, at most times, inflation should be kept very low – and central banks should anchor inflation expectations with a stable long-term target, although the alternative of targeting nominal GDP deserves to be discussed.
For the coming 2-3 years, however, particularly in Europe, the need for deleveraging, the costs of widespread joblessness, and the risk of social collapse make the kind of temporary unemployment target announced by the Fed highly desirable.
	Read more from our "New Model Central Banking" Focal Point.
Mario Draghi’s Opiate of the Markets
CHICAGO – From the standpoint of European stability, the Italian elections could not have delivered a worse outcome.
Italy’s parliament is divided among three mutually incompatible political forces, with none strong enough to rule alone.
Worse, one of these forces, which won 25% of the vote, is an anti-euro populist party, while another, a Euro-skeptic group led by former Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi, received close to 30% support, giving anti-euro parties a clear majority.
Despite these scary results, the interest-rate spread for Italian government bonds relative to German bunds has increased by only 40 basis points since the election.
In July 2012, when a pro-European, austerity-minded government was running the country, with the well-respected economist Mario Monti in charge, the spread reached 536 basis points.
Today, with no government and little chance that a decent one will be formed soon, the spread sits at 314 points.
So, are markets bullish about Italy, or have they lost their ability to assess risk?
A recent survey of international investors conducted by Morgan Stanley suggests that they are not bullish.
Forty-six percent of the respondents said that the most likely outcome for Italy is an interim administration and new elections.
And they regard this outcome as the worst-case scenario, one that implies a delay of any further economic measures, deep policy uncertainty, and the risk of an even less favorable electoral outcome.
The survey also clearly indicated why the interest-rate spread for Italian government bonds is not much wider: the perceived backstop provided by the European Central Bank.
Although investors believe that the backstop is unlikely to be used, its mere presence dissuades them from betting against Italy.
In other words, the “outright monetary transactions” (OMT) scheme announced by ECB President Mario Draghi last July has served as the proverbial “bazooka” – a gun so powerful that it does not need to be used.
Then-US Treasury Secretary Hank Paulson sought a bazooka during the 2008 financial crisis.
He failed, because he believed that even a fake gun would work if it looked scary enough.
Not falling for the trick, speculators repeatedly called his bluff.
Draghi, with his famous pledge to do “whatever it takes” to ensure the euro’s survival, succeeded where Paulson did not.
After all, he controls the monetary spigot.
But even Draghi’s bazooka is partly a bluff.
Draghi designed it to relieve the ECB of the huge political responsibility of deciding when to save a country from default.
For this reason, triggering the OMT mechanism requires the unanimous consent of eurozone governments.
But, if the bazooka is needed, how likely is it to be fired before the German election in September?
The Morgan Stanley survey did not ask this question, probably because everybody knows the answer: not likely at all.
Thus, markets remain calm because they expect the bazooka not to be needed.
In that case, the fact that it cannot be triggered easily does not pose a significant problem.
Its presence is enough to support a benign self-fulfilling prophecy.
In other words, Draghi’s bazooka has anesthetized markets, impairing their ability to assess risk.
But as with all anesthetics, Draghi’s cannot and will not last forever.
Either the underlying problem is fixed before the patient wakes up, or the pain will be devastating.
The investors surveyed by Morgan Stanley put the chance of a renewed crisis in Italy below 25%.
I believe that it is higher than 50%.
Even after Germany’s election, I am not sure that the government will be willing to support an Italian rescue program without asking for major guarantees concerning the objectives – and even the composition – of Italy’s ruling coalition.
Indeed, German Chancellor Angela Merkel will face a serious dilemma following her likely re-election.
Without strict conditionality, she would risk shifting the domestic consensus in favor of Germany’s emerging Euro-skeptic mood.
But, by insisting on such conditionality, she would trigger a huge political crisis in Europe. If the German government gets to decide who governs Italy, why should Italians bother voting?
The eurozone will look like a German protectorate, rather than a voluntary union of sovereign countries.
The political backlash would be enormous.
The only hope is that the eurozone makes strong progress toward establishing fiscal-redistribution mechanisms, such as European unemployment insurance, before Draghi’s anesthetic wears off.
Otherwise, Europe will face a very rude awakening indeed.
Why the Fed Should Postpone Rate Hikes
JACKSON HOLE, WYOMING – As central bankers from around the world gather this week in Jackson Hole for the Federal Reserve’s annual Economic Policy Symposium, one key topic of discussion will be the current global stock-market turmoil.
There are many reasons for these gyrations, but the expectation that the Fed will start to raise interest rates – perhaps as early as September – is clearly one of them.
The arguments for a rate hike are valid.
The United States’ economy is gaining traction.
The International Monetary Fund forecasts 3% annual growth in 2015 and 2016, accompanied by inflation rates of 0.1% and 1.5%, respectively.
When an economy is normalizing, it is reasonable to reduce expansionary measures, such as those introduced after the crisis of 2008.
Because the Fed has clearly communicated that it will move gradually toward less expansionary policies, its credibility would be damaged if it did not follow through.
But there are strong reasons for the Fed to postpone interest-rate hikes and to keep monetary policy expansionary over the coming quarters.
For starters, the US recovery remains weak.
Historically, 3% growth during a recovery is far from impressive.
In other recent recoveries, growth often hit 4% or even 5% when increased capacity utilization pushed up productivity and investment.
Over the past three decades, the US has been able to grow at an average annual rate of around 2.5%.
Some attribute relatively slow growth to demographic factors, which have reduced the labor force, as well as to weak productivity levels, which have been low.
But America’s potential output may be underestimated, and its inflation propensity exaggerated.
The US labor market works well.
Unemployment is down to 5%, with no signs of overheating.
The employment cost index suggests that wage increases so far have been surprisingly low.
One reason for this is that labor-market flexibility increased during the recovery.
Self-employment, short-term contracts, or part-time arrangements account for many of the jobs that have been created over the past few years.
Full-time jobs with comprehensive benefits are now much rarer.
This ongoing “Uberization” of the US labor market means that the balance in the wage-setting process has shifted.
As a result, it will take longer for demand to feed through to wages and inflation than in the past.
Moreover, the economy is undergoing an ongoing technological shift stemming from digitization and globalization.