It is time for SAARC’s member governments to rise to the challenge.
By working together, we can lay the foundations of a regional economy as dynamic as that of our neighbors to the east.
South Asia’s Whispering Enemies
ISLAMABAD – The leaders of the member countries of the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation met last week in the Maldives for their 17th annual summit.
Previous SAARC summits achieved little in the way of regional cooperation.
If they are remembered at all, it is for the progress made in getting India and Pakistan to talk to each another.
While this time was no different, there are growing signs of a thaw in relations.
Improvement in the India-Pakistan relationship – the main obstacle to greater economic cooperation in South Asia – has come whenever the two countries’ governments have agreed to work together to achieve a common good.
That happened in 2004, when, after agreeing to initiate what they called a “composite dialogue” that would cover eight issues that had kept them apart for decades, India and Pakistan also agreed to work towards the creation of the South Asia Free Trade Area (SAFTA).
Without such limited agreements, stasis in South Asia is the rule.
SAFTA was launched in July 2006, but it did little to increase trade between India and Pakistan, which has barely developed since 1947, when the two countries fought the first of many trade – as well as real – wars against each other.
In November 2008, after a group of terrorists attacked Mumbai, India’s financial center, India accused Pakistan of involvement in the attack and suspended all dealings with its neighbor.
The composite dialogue was put on hold, with both sides unable to cast off the heavy burden of decades of hostility and intense rivalry.
Nevertheless, bilateral relations have warmed slightly over the past 18 months.
The process began at a meeting in Bhutan between Prime Minister Manmohan Singh of India and Yousaf Raza Gilani, his Pakistani counterpart.
India agreed to begin talking again with its neighbor, accepting Pakistan’s argument that it, too, was a victim of terrorism.
Since that meeting, the two countries’ prime ministers have met four times, always on the sidelines of international gatherings. Their foreign ministers have met three times, and their commerce ministers once.
The Indians agreed to resume the suspended dialogue with Pakistan, despite the failure fully to resolve the Mumbai attacks legally, as well as Pakistan’s inability or unwillingness to move against the two domestically-based terrorist groups that India had accused of having masterminded those and several other attacks on its territory.
The most important outcome of these renewed contacts was the Pakistani cabinet’s decision, on November 2, to grant India most-favored-nation (MFN) status in trade relations.
Under the rules of the World Trade Organization, MFN status should have been given after both countries became members.
India granted Pakistan MFN status in 1996, but Pakistan held back, hoping to win concessions from India on the unresolved issue of Kashmir.
That, of course, did not happen, and Pakistan has at last changed its mind.
What that implies is that trade with India will be conducted according to the same set of regulations and tariffs that govern other countries’ trade with Pakistan.
India responded to Pakistan’s gesture by supporting its bid for membership of the United Nation’s Security Council, and by withdrawing its objections to the European Union’s grant of special privileges to Pakistani textile exporters.
So the Maldives SAARC meeting offered an opportunity for further easing of tensions.
The summit started with a one-on-one meeting between the two countries’ prime ministers.
After an hour together, they emerged to tell the press that no new steps aimed at improving relations had been agreed upon.
Gilani did, however, say that they had “discussed all core issues, including Kashmir,” and that they “hope the next round will be more constructive, more positive, and will open up a new chapter in the history of both countries.”
Given that Pakistan’s relations with the United States are arguably at an all-time low, Pakistani leaders seem determined to lower the temperature on its disputes with other global powers, particularly India. Gilani extended another invitation to Singh to visit Pakistan.
Singh, in keeping with past practice (he has received at least six invitations from various Pakistani leaders, starting with then-President Pervez Musharraf), remained non-committal, but showed warmth towards his Pakistani counterpart. “I always regard Gilani as a man of peace, and every time I meet him my belief is further strengthened,” he told the press.
More was expected from the SAARC summit than was achieved, owing in large part to the unmet expectations for the meeting between the Indian and Pakistani prime ministers on the sidelines of the main event.
The “Addu Declaration,” issued after the conclusion of the meeting, promised small moves by the eight SAARC member states, rather than a breakthrough on matters such as the settlement of trade disputes, granting of transit rights, and encouragement of cross-border investments.
Enduring hostility between India and Pakistan, the region’s largest economies, remains the key barrier to such a breakthrough.
Neither Gilani nor Singh was certain of domestic public support for further warming of relations, so they played it safe, rather than displaying the bold leadership that the occasion demanded.
Avoiding Conflict in the South China Sea
OXFORD – When a US Navy P8-A surveillance aircraft recently flew near Fiery Cross Reef in the Spratly Islands in the South China Sea, it was warned eight times by the Chinese Navy to leave the area.
Chinese Foreign Minister Wang Yi said that, “China’s determination to safeguard its sovereignty and territorial integrity is as firm as a rock.”
US Defense Secretary Ashton Carter replied that, “[T]here should be no mistake about this: the United States will fly, sail, and operate wherever international law allows us, as we do all around the world.”
So, is a US-China conflict in the South China Sea imminent?
In 1995, when I was serving in the Pentagon, China began building structures on Mischief Reef, which is claimed by the Philippines and lies much closer to its shores than to China’s.
The US issued a statement that we took no position on the competing claims by five states over the 750 or so rocks, atolls, islets, cays, and reefs that comprise the Spratlys, which cover a vast area – 425,000 square kilometers (164,000 square miles) – of the South China Sea.
We urged that the parties involved settle the disputes peacefully.
But the US took a strong stand that the South China Sea, which includes important sea lanes for oil shipments from the Middle East and container ships from Europe, and over which military and commercial aircraft routinely fly, was subject to the United Nations Law of the Sea Treaty (UNCLOS).
To back up its territorial claim, China relies on a map inherited from the Nationalist period – the so-called “nine-dashed line,” which extends nearly a thousand miles south of mainland China and sometimes as close as 40 or 50 miles from the coastline of states like Vietnam, Malaysia, Brunei and the Philippines.
All of these states claim the 200-mile exclusive economic zones granted under UNCLOS.
When the dispute over Mischief Reef erupted, Chinese officials failed to clarify the meaning of the nine-dashed line, but, when pressed, they agreed that the dashes demarcated areas where China had sovereign claims.
At the same time, they agreed that the South China Sea was not a Chinese lake, and that it was governed by the UN treaty.
On this basis, the US and China avoided conflict over the issue for nearly two decades.
But China did not avoid conflicts with its maritime neighbors.
Although it pledged to adhere to a code of conduct negotiated by the Association of Southeast Asian Nations in 2002, it used its superior military might in disputes with the Philippines and Vietnam.
In 2012, Chinese patrol vessels chased Philippine fishing boats away from Scarborough Shoal off the Philippine coast, and the Philippine government has taken the dispute to the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea (ITLOS), which China claims has no jurisdiction.
In 2014, after China stationed an oil rig in waters claimed by Vietnam, ships from the two countries engaged in ramming and water-cannon battles at sea; anti-Chinese riots in Vietnam followed.
The region’s smaller states sought American support.
But the US remained careful not to be drawn into the competing claims over sovereignty, some of which are tenuous, while on others China sometimes has a stronger legal position.
Moreover, the US had to focus on larger issues in its relationship with China.
This began to change when China initiated an active policy of dredging sand to fill in reefs and build islands in at least five locations.
Earlier this year, analysts released images of what is expected to be a 10,000-foot (3,000-meter) runway on Fiery Cross Reef.
The US argues that UNCLOS grants foreign ships and planes free access beyond a 12-mile territorial limit, while China claims that military flights cannot cross its 200-mile economic zone without its permission.
If China claimed such a zone for each of the sites it occupies, it could close off most of the South China Sea.
As one US official put it, China seems to be trying to “create facts on the ground” – what Admiral Harry Harris, the US commander in the Pacific, calls a new “great wall of sand.”
China correctly declared that it was within its sovereign rights to dredge, and that it was merely following the lead of its neighbors, whose governments had also been creating structures to bolster their claims.
But American suspicions were heightened by the fact that in 2013, in a separate dispute between China and Japan over the Senkaku/Daiyou Islands in the East China Sea, the Chinese government unilaterally declared an Air Defense Identification Zone without prior warning.
The US response was to fly two B-52 bombers through the unrecognized zone.
This set a precedent for the recent naval reconnaissance flight (which had a team of CNN reporters on board).
The US response was designed to prevent China from creating a fait accompli that could close off large parts of the South China Sea.
Nevertheless, the original policy of not becoming embroiled in the sovereignty dispute continues to make sense.
The irony is that the US Senate’s failure to ratify UNCLOS means that the US cannot take China to ITLOS over its efforts to convert reefs into islands and claim exclusion zones that could interfere with the right of free passage – a major US interest.
But, because China has ratified UNCLOS and the US respects it as customary international law, there is a basis for serious direct negotiation over clarification of the ambiguous nine-dashed line and the preservation of freedom of the seas.
With properly managed diplomacy, a US-China conflict in the South China Sea can and should be avoided.
Unlocking ASEAN’s Potential
SINGAPORE – Can ten countries with different cultures, traditions, languages, political systems, and levels of economic development act in concert to expand their collective potential?
That is the question with which the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) has been wrestling for decades.
Judging by their leaders’ ambitious vision for cooperation, the answer may be yes.
What began as a straightforward push to reduce trade tariffs has evolved into a blueprint for a dynamic open market of 600 million consumers and a production base that can compete directly with the world’s largest economies.
Once in place, the so-called ASEAN economic community (AEC) will transform Southeast Asia – and its role in the global economy.
ASEAN’s economic potential is undoubtedly impressive.
Taken together, the group’s members – Brunei, Cambodia, Indonesia, Laos, Malaysia, Myanmar, the Philippines, Singapore, Thailand, and Vietnam – would comprise the world’s seventh-largest economy.
Moreover, ASEAN’s international trade has almost tripled over the last decade.
And foreign-direct investment has been flowing into the region, with multinationals hoping to capitalize on its rapidly expanding middle class and strategic location at the intersection of China, Japan, and India.
The AEC plan aims to build on this momentum by removing barriers to the movement of goods, services, capital, and people throughout the region.
The McKinsey Global Institute (MGI) estimates that, by implementing this integration strategy fully and capturing a larger share of global manufacturing, the ASEAN countries could gain $280-625 billion in annual GDP by 2030.
Part of that growth stems from encouraging local companies to expand beyond their home markets.
By making exporting more efficient and less costly – up to 20% cheaper, in some sectors – a wide range of goods and services would become attainable for millions of new consumers.
This could boost consumption across Southeast Asia, leading to a virtuous circle of growth.
But ASEAN’s quest to become a unified market is far from complete.
While average tariff rates in the original five member states (Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore, and Thailand) have been virtually zero since 2010, some barriers must still be dismantled.
An MGI survey of regional businesses identified restrictions on foreign investment and ownership, inconsistent standards and regulations, and inefficient customs procedures as the biggest remaining barriers to trade.
Though full integration appears unlikely by ASEAN’s target date of 2015, lately the effort has been imbued with a renewed sense of urgency.
As wages in China rise, Southeast Asian economies have a window of opportunity to become the next “factories to the world.”
Of course, competing on the basis of low wages alone would be inadequate to raise living standards in the long term.
ASEAN will also need to compete on productivity – an area in which countries like Cambodia, Indonesia, and Vietnam are currently at a disadvantage.
Excluding Singapore and Brunei, average labor productivity in ASEAN remains about 40% lower than in China.
For ASEAN to become a real manufacturing powerhouse, its lower-income economies will need to focus on modernizing equipment and processes and building their workforces’ skills.
They must also increase – and sustain – investment to address glaring infrastructure gaps and bring down high logistics costs.
Some critics insist that, even with such efforts, ASEAN members vary too widely in terms of their level of economic development to create a smoothly functioning single entity.
But ASEAN, unlike the European Union, is not attempting to form a monetary union.
In fact, ASEAN’s focus on trade makes diversity an advantage, as companies seek to benefit from low-cost labor in some countries and intermediate manufacturing capabilities in others, all while gaining access to one of the world’s most sophisticated financial and logistics centers.
Though member states may sometimes have to compete with one another for market share and multinational operations, their areas of specialization would largely be complementary.
ASEAN’s lower-income economies have expressed concern that they will miss out on many of the benefits of deeper integration.
But this does not have to be the case.
Mexico, for example, has arguably enjoyed greater economic benefits from the North American Free Trade Agreement than the United States or Canada has.
Nonetheless, this uneasiness reflects a central challenge facing ASEAN.
From its inception, the group has fundamentally been a top-down project, driven by the region’s leaders instead of its people.
But, as member countries have become more democratic, solidifying public support has become increasingly important – meaning that ASEAN leaders must work to communicate the benefits of integration more effectively.
At the same time, ASEAN governments must urge businesses – many of whose leaders, according to MGI’s survey, have limited awareness of the opportunities that integration presents – to expand into neighboring markets.
Here, removing a handful of key administrative barriers could go a long way.
As it stands, restrictions on foreign investment and trade barriers continue to shield many domestic industries from competitive pressures.
Now, ASEAN countries must decide whether to retreat into protectionism or reaffirm their commitment to a more open approach.
Though the latter option would undoubtedly create winners and losers, it could also stimulate the region’s overall productivity growth.
As a regional grouping, ASEAN does not have the kind of deep institutional ties and infrastructure links that bind together the EU’s members.
Nor has it built the kind of seamless supply chains that funnel massive trade flows through North America.
But, if ASEAN can execute the vision outlined in the AEC plan, it could exceed the sum of its parts.
Southeast Asia’s Pakistan Problem
MANILA &#45;&#45; Pakistan’s near political chaos, the result of President Pervez Musharraf’s declaration of martial law last year and the assassination of former Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto, has had a tsunami-like impact across Southeast Asia.
Should Musharraf’s government backslide even more on its commitments to restore parliamentary democracy, Pakistan’s crisis would not only be exacerbated, but it might begin to infect the wider region.
At direct stake today is Pakistan’s future, but its future may determine the political fates of neighboring countries that are also struggling with violent Islamic fundamentalism.
Will Pakistan be dragged along the path of Islamic extremism and emergency rule, or finally achieve modernity as a secular nation under civilian leadership?
That choice matters as an example across Asia, because Pakistan has long been the traditional sanctuary of Al Qaeda and its Taliban cohorts, who hide in the inhospitable Pakistani-Afghani border region.
These Islamic terrorists, with their global reach, could well tilt the balance from one extreme to the other in a number of countries.  
The fallout from Bhutto’s assassination was bound to reach beyond Pakistan’s borders.
The country’s mushrooming instability has triggered a bitter debate in the United States about the long-term viability of Musharraf’s military-backed government and whether US financial support for Pakistan should continue.
Now, however, is not the time to freeze out Pakistan, despite the seeming chaos.
Last September, Osama bin Laden’s deputy, Al-Zawahiri, released videotapes calling for jihad in Pakistan and around the world.
Bin Laden’s most recent threats have been equally universal.
Indeed, given extremist violence in Sri Lanka (Tamil Tigers), West Bengal (Naxalites), Bangladesh (Islamic fundamentalists), Southern Thailand (Islamic separatists), Java (Jemaah Islamiyah), and Basilan (Abu Sayyaf), the possibility that Al Qaeda and its satellites are plotting attacks elsewhere, especially against soft targets, poses a real danger to the region.
Regional leaders understand this.
A year ago at their Cebu (Philippines) summit, the leaders of ASEAN adopted the “ASEAN Convention Against Terrorism.”
The Convention aims to prevent the commission of terrorist acts by implementing early warning systems; the use of ASEAN members’ respective territories by those who finance, plan, facilitate, or commit terrorist acts; and movement of terrorists and terrorist groups by means of effective border control and identity/travel documentation.
But cooperation against terror is easier said than done, given the region’s diversity of governance, culture, language, and religion, as well as ASEAN’s central policy of keeping out of non-interference in its members’ internal affairs.
This policy has enabled the group to remain united over the years, despite severe disagreements.
Where anti-terrorist planning is concerned, however, non-interference has become ASEAN’s biggest handicap.
Yet to be forewarned of a weakness is to be forearmed.
The first and crucial preventive step that any government can take in the face of a renewed Al Qaeda offensive in southeast Asia is fully to respect the creativity, mobility, technical expertise, and financial capabilities of suicidal groups.
Their experience in guerrilla warfare produced leaders such as the brothers Abdurajak and Khadaffy Janjalani who founded the terrorist Abu Sayyaf Group, which is now wrecking havoc in the Philippines.
Indeed, just last November, a member of the Philippines’ Congress, Wahab Akbar, a Muslim representing Basilan, was killed with five others in front of the House of Representatives by an improvised explosive device of the type used in Pakistan, Afghanistan, and Iraq.
His death should serve as a warning to all Southeast Asian governments: we must fight Al Qaeda together, or we shall lose to them separately.
Southeast Asia’s Widening Arms Race
Southeast Asia’s return to prosperity since the financial crisis of 1997 has brought a region-wide splurge on new weapons.
Most Southeast Asian countries are, indeed, now busily modernizing their armed forces.
So far, most have done so without compromising their autonomy in security matters.
But, with China’s military build-up causing nervousness everywhere, many governments in the region are starting to work with outside powers.
Indonesia’s President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono has perhaps been the most assertive.
In addition to becoming more active in world diplomacy, Yudhoyono will meet Russian President Vladimir Putin in Moscow this month to discuss buying Russia’s newest fighter jets.
Indonesia is seeking to form an air-defense squadron of 12 jets, with eight Russian fighters to complement the two Russian Su-27SK’s and Su-30MKM’s that it has already bought.
Elsewhere in the region, Singapore has apparently opted to purchase 12 new F-15SG fighter aircraft from the United States.
Thailand’s Prime Minister, Thaksin Shinawatra, met Putin late last year and tentatively agreed to purchase 12 Su-30MKM’s.
Malaysia has agreed to buy 18 Su-30MKM’s over the next two years, while Vietnam has purchased 36 SU-27SK’s, 12 of which are already in service.
With the exception of Singapore, it seems that Russian fighter-attack aircraft are the region’s weapon of choice at the moment.
Russia’s growing slice of the local arms market worries the US, the world’s biggest weapons supplier and still Asia’s greatest military power.
Thus, for example, last November, the US lifted its six-year embargo on military sales to Indonesia, imposed in 1999 in response to human rights abuses in East Timor.
Indonesia immediately expressed its intention to purchase C-130 transport aircraft, as well as fast patrol boats to conduct “anti-terrorism and anti-piracy measures.”
Yet Indonesia is also trying to align itself with Asia’s rising power, China, by seeking greater defense and security cooperation.
As a result of these improved relations, Indonesia has received Chinese short-range missile technology.
The possibility that Southeast Asia’s governments might begin to play America and China off against each other is one of the concerns that most animates the latest US quadrennial defense review, which is intended to “focus on the Pacific Ocean” in awareness of China’s growing naval power.
Undoubtedly, the US will try to build closer ties with Indonesia through greater military cooperation, because Indonesia borders the region’s key sea lines of communications.
In particular, Indonesia will inevitably become involved in the tug of war between the US and China for influence over the vitally important Malacca Strait.
Because China must import vast quantities of oil through the Malacca Strait, that sea lane has become a central element in the country’s security strategy.
For this reason, China is attempting to use economic and military aid as leverage to improve relations even with countries with which it has had military confrontations with in the past, most prominently Vietnam and the Philippines.
India, too, is now joining the military build-up.
It has actively led regional multilateral joint exercises, such as the naval joint exercise that India’s navy hosted in the Andaman Sea, in the eastern Indian Ocean, earlier this year. Nine Asian-Pacific countries took part, including Indonesia, Malaysia, Singapore, and Thailand.
Both India and China are each seeking greater influence over the strategically important country of Myanmar.
For example, after Myanmar signed an agreement with China in 2005 to supply natural gas, India responded by cutting its own gas deal with Myanmar.
South Korea, too, has joined the scramble.
President Roh Moo-hyun visited Malaysia and agreed to expand mutual economic cooperation mainly in information technology, bio-technology, and resources and energy.
Roh reportedly also discussed exporting defense materials worth $2.3 billion, including training aircraft, destroyers, and armed vehicles.
Moreover, in January 2006, Korean Defense Minister Yoon agreed with the Philippines to deliver two used patrol boats.
In this crowded power play, only Japan is left out, choosing for the most part to remain aloof and cultivate its relations with the US.
But, despite deep historical animosity over World War II, there are increasing calls in the region for Japan to expand its influence to counterbalance China.
In reality, Japan is not ready for this, because it still strongly adheres to “self-imposed restraints” against “influence over other countries in security and defense,” including weapons exports.
In the 1960’s, as its economic takeoff was proceeding, Japan initiated a serious dialogue with regional players, aiming to build stronger relations with countries that it had once conquered and occupied.
It is no overstatement to say that those efforts, which boosted trade and investment in the region, formed the foundation of Japan’s national power today.
But now Japan’s political and economic influence in South East Asia is gradually declining, owing in part to its failure to exert influence over security and defense matters.
For those Asian countries that recall Japan’s moderate and sensible advancement of regional policies since the 1960’s, there is a growing expectation that Japan should re-think its stance.
At a time of regional uncertainty about Chinese policies – including the looming prospect of China’s first aircraft carrier – Japan’s participation in the evolving Asian security framework is fundamental to stability.
The time when Japan could remain on the sidelines is over.
Starting South Korea’s New Growth Engines
SEOUL – In the last half-century, South Korea has become a model for developing countries, with remarkable economic growth enabling it to become the world’s eighth largest trading country and achieve per capita income of $26,000.
But lately its economy has been faltering, with GDP growth averaging 3.6% for the last ten years – a significant drop from the 8.1% annual growth rate that prevailed in 1965-2005.
And the OECD projects a further decline – to around 2.5% – in the coming decade.
But a forecast is not fate.
With a new economic strategy that nurtures more diversified sources of growth, while reducing the country’s excessive reliance on exports and large enterprises, South Korea can reinvigorate and sustain strong growth.
South Korea’s economic performance over the last 50 years was attributed largely to good fundamentals, including a high savings rate, strong human capital, sound institutions, and prudent fiscal and monetary management.
Trade openness provided access to inexpensive imported intermediate goods, larger markets, and advanced technologies, thereby contributing to rapid productivity growth in the country’s manufacturing industries.
Performance-based incentives facilitated the continuous upgrading of South Korea’s comparative advantage in global markets.
The problem is that such policies have led South Korea to become excessively dependent on exports for growth.
Exports accounted for about 56% of South Korea’s gross national income in 2013, compared to 34% in 2002 and just 15% in 1970.
As a result, South Korea’s economy has become highly vulnerable to changes in external demand – a fact that became starkly apparent during the 2008 global economic crisis.
South Korea’s relationship with China perfectly illustrates the challenges it faces.
As China’s economic growth soared, so did its share of South Korea’s total exports, which doubled, from 12% to 24%, in the period from 2001 to 2013.
But China’s economy has recently begun to slow, and its growth trajectory is expected to be much less steep in the coming years than it was over the last three decades.
Moreover, China is posing increasingly tough competition for South Korea, by encouraging the emergence of more technologically advanced industries like electronics, information technology, motor vehicles, semiconductors, shipbuilding, and high-end steel products.
China’s efforts to upgrade its own growth model, together with the possibility of long-term stagnation among advanced economies, raises serious concerns about South Korea’s prospects.
Compounding these problems is the wide imbalance between South Korea’s manufacturing and services sectors.
Though services account for 76% of employment, its contribution to overall economic growth is small, owing to low productivity.
Indeed, value added per worker in the services sector remains just 40% of that in the manufacturing sector, and annual productivity growth was only 2% from 1980 to 2010 – significantly lower than the manufacturing sector’s rate of 8.2%.
Against this background, South Korea’s new growth strategy should aim to achieve both a demand-side rebalancing and supply-side productivity increases.
On the demand side, South Korea must begin by boosting household expenditure.
This will require reversing the sharp decline in the proportion of middle-income households, which is down to 67.5%, from 75.4% in 1990.
With more than half of these households earning less than they spend every month, household debt has been rising fast, and now stands above 160% of disposable income – one of the highest levels in the OECD.
Transferring unused corporate savings to households, while reducing the number of low-wage temporary and part-time workers, would boost domestic demand and reduce income inequality.
Policies aimed at increasing female labor-force participation and lowering private education spending would also help.
At the same time, South Korea should work to improve the investment climate to raise the quantity and quality of investment, particularly of small- and medium-size enterprises (SMEs) in the services industry.
On the supply side, structural reforms to stimulate productivity growth could, for example, emphasize the development of modern services industries, including health care, education, telecommunications, business processing, and legal and financial services.
Efforts to ease product regulations and lower barriers to foreign investment would promote competition and technological innovation.
South Korea must also dismantle the obstacles that start-up businesses face.
To this end, the government must redress shortcomings in the venture-capital market, nurture the labor force’s skills, and encourage entrepreneurship.
It must also confront the huge, family-controlled chaebols – such as Hyundai, LG, and Samsung – that contributed significantly to rapid industrialization and technological advancement but also block competition from start-ups and SMEs, stifling dynamism and innovation.
Stricter rules are needed to improve corporate governance and prevent unfair practices by those affiliated with the chaebols.
South Korea is at a crossroads.
Though President Park Geun-hye’s administration, which took office in 2013, has unveiled many economic initiatives to foster a “creative economy,” their effect so far has been minimal.
But her government still has three years to pursue reforms that support the emergence of the services sector, start-ups, and SMEs as South Korea’s new growth engines, capable of powering a more dynamic and innovative economy for the next 30 years.
South Korea’s Rude Awakening
DENVER – On February 10, South Korean President Park Geun-hye announced that she would respond to North Korea’s recent nuclear test and rocket launch by closing the Kaesong Industrial Region, the last major effort at inter-Korean cooperation.
In response, North Korean leader Kim Jong-un seized all South Korean assets in the region, giving the 248 managers living there only a few hours to pack their personal belongings and leave.
Shortly afterward, a member of South Korea’s National Assembly explained Park’s decision to me. “There is a new paradigm here,” he said.
“No one believes anymore that the North will ever give up its nuclear weapons.”
It will take some time before the full meaning of this new paradigm comes into focus.
In the meantime, one thing is clear: South Korea is headed into uncharted waters, where it will require the support of the international community.
For years, South Koreans have hoped that North Korea could be made to understand that a nuclear deal is in its own interest.
After all, in exchange for abandoning its nuclear weapons program, the North would gain economic and energy assistance, a peace treaty with the United States, diplomatic recognition, the opportunity to join the international community, and even – eventually – the world’s blessing to pursue a civil nuclear program.
By any logic, North Korea was being offered a good deal; sooner or later, it should have taken it.
And yet North Korea consistently spurned any attempt to strike an agreement.
For many in the West, and especially for the political right in the US, the futility of attempting to negotiate with the North is hardly a revelation.
But what these critics have failed to understand is how counterproductive the exhortations of those safely living thousands of miles away can be.
It was important – even essential – that South Koreans were allowed to reach their own conclusion regarding the North.
The country’s division in 1945 had nothing to do with the Koreans themselves.
Soviet forces invaded the peninsula in the last days of World War II – a pure land grab – and accepted the surrender of Japanese forces.
The US, concerned that the Soviets would take the entire peninsula, reached a hasty agreement to accept the surrender of Japanese forces south of the 38th parallel.
The resulting division of the peninsula along the 38th parallel has outlasted many other such twentieth-century tragedies, dividing families and fracturing an ancient, vibrant civilization.
The Kaesong Industrial Region has had special symbolic resonance.
The ancient city of Kaesong sits in a shallow valley just to the west along the Demilitarized Zone, on a traditional invasion route for troops heading north or south during more than two millennia of Korean history.
In the original division of the peninsula, it was South Korea’s northernmost city.
During the Korean War, however, it fell under the control of the North Korean and Chinese armies; after the armistice, it became North Korea’s southernmost city.
The 2002 agreement to create the industrial region offered hope that the two countries could be brought together again.
The city offered a lifeline to South Korean companies struggling with rapidly rising wages, allowing them to make use of low-cost North Korean labor.
And providing North Koreans with the opportunity to work for South Korean firms was seen as a first step in overcoming the peninsula’s division.
Many South Koreans have found foreign criticism of the “inter-Korean dialogue,” in which their country sought concessions from grim-faced Northern negotiators, to be grating.
The critics, they say, have not suffered the pain of being split in two.
Foreign accusations that South Koreans were appeasers or irrationally optimistic about Kaesong were angrily rebuffed.
That is why Park’s decision to cancel the project has so much resonance.
Her decision is an explicit recognition that the country can no longer do business with North Korea’s murderous, Caligula-like ruler.
The move is expected to be followed by others, as South Korea puts an end to cooperation across the board.
The new paradigm dramatically changes the strategic calculus in the region.
It ensures that South Korea will adopt a defensive stance against its bellicose neighbor, which opens up the possibility that high-tech US anti-missile batteries will be deployed.
Once-taboo options will gain increasing prominence.
If North Korea begins to fuel another multistage rocket, will South Korea target it on the launch pad in the name of self-defense?
How should Park respond if missile-armed submarines sail out of North Korean ports?
North Korea’s nuclear tests and rocket launch have made the world a more dangerous place.
As South Koreans contemplate their new strategic situation, they must be made to know that they will have international support.
China’s South Korean Future
DENVER – The so-called six-party talks – the on again, off again international mechanism by which the United States, China, Russia, South Korea, and Japan negotiate with North Korea over its nuclear aspirations – are often cited as an example of multilateral diplomacy.
In fact, the talks have served as a platform for addressing a host of issues that range far beyond the North Korean nuclear problem, in the process nurturing interlocking, interrelated bilateral relationships in the region.
For the Chinese, in particular, the talks have been an opportunity to get to know some of their neighbors better – and they have certainly helped Sino-US relations.
But perhaps the key bilateral relationship that has been strengthened by the six-party mechanism is that between China and South Korea.
This will be on full display at the end of June, when South Korea’s new president, Park Geun-hye, visits Beijing to meet China’s new president, Xi Jinping.
China and South Korea need no introduction to each other, of course – such is the burden of history in the region.
But their relationship is about to change, thanks in part to the patterns of official cooperation that the six-party talks created.
If the Chinese are successful in shifting away from North Korea, they have to pivot somewhere.
And that place is South Korea. After all, China needs a sustainable relationship with the neighboring Korean Peninsula.
The bilateral relationship has grown closer in recent decades, owing to active exploration of the Chinese market by South Korea’s large industrial conglomerates.
Today, their bilateral trade dwarfs that between China and North Korea.
Yet the relationship has always had a limited political dynamic.
Given China’s close relationship with the North, its leaders have never warmed to South Korea’s democratically elected governments, whether left or right.
But China is about to experience something new: South Korea’s soft power, personified by Park, who represents a center-right coalition, but defies the usual political labels.
Indeed, she was elected with a curious blend of support: right-wing backers of her father, Park Chung-hee, who ruled the country with an iron fist from 1961 to 1979, and many other Koreans, including some on the left, who wanted someone different from the usual blue-suited, white-shirted Korean politician.
Park is tough-minded on national security, but takes up new issues and agendas with a refreshing combination of intellectual energy and personal calm.
She listens carefully and pauses before responding.
Moreover, rumor has it that she is considering delivering her speech in Beijing in Mandarin.
Such a performance is likely to resonate not only with China’s leaders, but also with ordinary citizens.
South Korea’s soft power is well deserved and extends across Asia.
Its cultural and scientific achievements are increasingly influential throughout the world.
Even when its relations with Japan are difficult, Japanese tourists flock to Seoul to shop and tour the studios that produce the country’s extraordinarily successful television dramas.
Park’s visit to China will give her country’s soft power a human face.
No new agreements or other diplomatic breakthroughs are likely to be announced during Park’s visit.
The Chinese will look at her carefully, and may well be sizing her up as an immediate neighbor should North Korea persist on its current course to total isolation and oblivion.
The Chinese know that Park values her relationship with the United States, but they also understand that she, like most mature South Korean leaders, desires a solid relationship with China as well – one based (unlike in centuries past) on mutual respect.
China’s leaders will also be interested in her thinking on Japan, particularly given the inclinations of her father, who served as an officer in the Imperial Japanese Army during World War II.
Park’s visit to China comes at a time when China’s new leadership is grappling with problems near and far.
Its reluctant pivot away from North Korea, however discernible, should not be regarded as a fait accompli; nor should it be explained away as the result of momentary frustration with the adolescent behavior of Kim Jong-un, North Korea’s boy leader.
Over the centuries, the Chinese have learned a thing or two about when a dynasty’s days are numbered.
China, too, is developing in ways that will be far easier to assess in retrospect than they are today.
And, if South Korea’s own recent past can be any guide, China’s economic transformation is likely to be followed by political and social changes of equally dramatic proportions.
Thus, how the Chinese receive Park may turn out to be less a reflection of change in South Korea than a reflection of change in the People’s Republic – an issue that goes to the heart of China’s identity and mission in the modern world.
South Korea’s Budding Femocracy
TOKYO – This is a year of presidential elections worldwide, and the last to take place – on December 19 – will be in South Korea.
That ballot, however, is already having an international impact, in part because South Korea’s failure to ratify an important new intelligence-sharing treaty with Japan is widely seen as a result of campaign politics.
But the election may well have a more positive impact on the region as a whole.
On July 10, the frontrunner, Park Geun-hye of the ruling Saenuri (New Frontier) Party, became the first to announce her candidacy.
In addition to other opposition candidates, much attention has focused on Ahn Cheol-soo, Dean of the Graduate School of Convergence Science and Technology at Seoul National University, who is a successful entrepreneur and a charismatic figure for South Korea’s young and independent voters.
But it is Park who has so far stimulated the greatest interest.
There is great anticipation among conservative voters, in particular, concerning her policy toward North Korea, a country that continues to be as unpredictable as ever.
(Witness Kim Jong-un’s sudden dismissal of senior military officer Ri Yong-ho, anointment of himself as a marshal, and revelation that he had married a woman first glimpsed when she accompanied him to a concert featuring appearances by Disney’s Mickey and Minnie Mouse.)
So far, Park, sensing that the electorate trusts her foreign-policy instincts, has kept her North Korea cards close to her chest.
For many South Koreans, Park is a tragic heroine.
Both her mother and her father, President Park Chung-hee, were assassinated, in 1974 and 1979, respectively.
Indeed, her father was murdered by his own intelligence chief, KCIA Director Kim Jaegyu.
Park avoided active politics for many years after her parents’ death, but later won a parliamentary seat.
She has also served as a leader of the Saenuri Party (formerly known as the Grand National Party).
In 2006, an assailant slashed her face as she was campaigning on behalf of the GNP’s candidate in Seoul’s mayoral election.
But now the real battle begins.
If elected, Park will become South Korea’s first female president.
Like Japan and other Asian countries, Korean society, which is underpinned by Confucian thought, has experienced little political participation by women, though that appears to be changing rapidly.
In 2000, only 5.9% of the National Assembly’s 299 members were women.
In 2004, however, women more than doubled their share, to 13%, when 39 were elected from single-seat constituencies and through party-list proportional representation.
According to the Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU), that election pushed South Korea from 101st to 62nd place worldwide in terms of the proportion of female MPs , well ahead of 121st-ranked Japan.
The increase in women MPs led not only to an increase in female cabinet members, but also to a variety of policies and institutional improvements aimed specifically at women.
And, although South Korea has slipped to 80th place in the IPU’s most recent rankings, the fall reflects subsequent growth in the proportion of female legislators in other countries.
The main reason for the increase in the number of women MPs was the introduction of a quota system, according to which South Korea’s political parties should ensure that 30% of their candidates are women.
The campaign-finance law was revised to provide additional government funding to parties that meet the quota, and to reduce the amount for parties that do not.
As a result, more than half of the 56 members elected through proportional representation in 2004 were women.
Moreover, 10% of government funding to political parties is now used for the advancement of women in politics, with each party establishing institutions for training women MPs and candidates.
Although the quota system is still a matter of constitutional debate in South Korea, years of effort by women’s groups have made a significant contribution to boosting women’s role in policymaking.
The triumph of a female president would be an important symbolic and practical victory for all who have sought to establish a political environment that is hospitable to women.
And it would provide a powerful example to other Asian countries – including my own – in which women have struggled to gain an electoral foothold.
South Korea’s G-20 Challenge
BERKELEY – On January 1, South Korea takes over the G-20 chairmanship from the United Kingdom.
Korea is not the first emerging market to chair the G-20, but it is the first to do so since the global financial crisis.
And it is the first to do so since the G-20 emerged as the steering committee for the world economy.
G-20 chairs can have considerable influence.
They coordinate the group’s work.
They organize its meetings.
Like most committee chairs, they have significant agenda-setting power.
During the UK’s year chairing the G-20, Gordon Brown had a clear agenda.
He saw the G-20 as a vehicle for building consensus on coordinated monetary and fiscal stimulus and financial regulation.
He also viewed it as a forum to address the problems created for the poorest countries by the global financial crisis.
And he used the chairmanship to elicit commitments to resist protectionism.
In retrospect, Brown’s agenda-setting problem was easy.
Given the nature and gravity of the crisis, it was brutally obvious what the priorities for the G-20 should be.
The priorities for President Lee Myung-bak are less obvious.
Some will say that he should get G-20 countries to coordinate an orderly exit from their expansionary monetary and fiscal policies.
But growth in the advanced economies will almost certainly remain weak in 2010.
With the United States, Europe, and Japan still suffering post-crisis hangovers, this issue can be safely left to the country that chairs the G-20 in 2011.
Others will say that a priority should be agreement on slowing climate change.
But this is best addressed in Copenhagen, in the presence of all world leaders, not in the cozy confines of the G-20.
Small countries – think of Mauritius – are often the ones affected most dramatically by global warming.
They are excluded from the G-20, which is supposed to be made up of the 20 largest economies as a matter of design.
Instead, President Lee should give priority to four issues, starting with financial reform, a problem that Brown targeted but did not solve.
Progress here has been inadequate, despite much talk.
In particular, there has been little action on issues like creating a cross-border resolution authority to deal with the failure of a large financial group, something that can only be done at the international level.
The window of opportunity for financial reform is now closing, and business-as-usual will only result in more crises and more bailouts.
South Korea must therefore do everything it can to reinvigorate the debate.
The second priority should be more progress on global rebalancing.
Asian countries need to do even more to stimulate spending, and they need to move together.
China is incapable of solving this problem on its own, because its economy is still only one-third the size of America’s.
But if Asian countries move together, China will be more willing to let its exchange rate against the dollar become unstuck.
The second factor contributing to the crisis could then be addressed once and for all.
Third, the G-20 must address its own legitimacy deficit.
After all, no one anointed these 20 countries as the designated representatives of the world.
Who speaks for the other 173 internationally recognized countries?
Why should there be so many European G-20 members – other than the fact that they were incumbent members of the earlier “G’s” – and not more African members?
Here, South Korea can propose an obvious solution.
Align G-20 membership with the composition of the International Monetary Fund’s Executive Board.
Twenty-four countries sit there. Big ones have their own seats, while smaller ones represent groups of countries, known as “constituencies.”
In many cases, the constituencies rotate the chair among their members.
Everyone is represented.
Finally, the G-20 needs an emerging-markets caucus.
The US and the Europeans are in constant contact, doing their best to agree on positions and table common proposals.
Emerging markets, failing to do the same, have punched below their weight.
They have allowed the advanced countries to drive the G-20 process.
This is the most delicate issue of all for South Korea.
As chair, it needs to act as an “honest broker.”
It can’t be seen as giving emerging markets special encouragement.
And, given its location, South Korea would be torn between encouraging an emerging-market caucus and encouraging an Asian caucus – for Asia, too, needs to organize itself better in order to represent its interests in the G-20.
Thus, the initiative here might best come from another G-20 country – maybe Brazil, South Africa, or even Russia.
But South Korea could usefully drop a hint.
South Korea’s Political Springtime
SEOUL – The ascension to power of the pudgy 29-year-old Kim Jong-un in North Korea has grabbed headlines around the world, but the most important story involving Korean young people and politics is taking place in the South.
There, young voters are becoming angrier, more politically active, and increasingly hostile to the old established parties.
This demographic challenge to South Korea’s status quo suggests a “liberal” awakening that could completely alter the country’s political landscape.
The election last autumn of the activist Park Won-soon as mayor of Seoul demonstrated the growing strength of the youth vote, which took the ruling Grand National Party completely by surprise.
Young people mobilized themselves spontaneously, using all the tools of social networking and modern communications, to turn out not only voters their own age, but countless others exasperated with South Korea’s rigidity and insulated opportunities.
The sudden surge in young voters has called into question the long-presumed victory of the governing GNP’s likely candidate, Park Guen-hye, in the presidential election due to be held in December.
Indeed, many political analysts now regard the GNP as a sinking ship, particularly after a staffer to one of the party’s MPs allegedly masterminded a cyber-attack on the National Election Commission’s Web site to prevent young voters from getting to the polls.
While some pundits and politicians now suggest that the GNP could collapse sooner than corrupt and poverty-stricken North Korea, Park Geun-hye, an iconic woman in South Korean politics, has made it clear that she will not abandon the GNP.
To further highlight her resolve, Park became the GNP’s interim leader last month.
In Park’s eyes, abandoning the GNP simply because of the party’s deepening unpopularity would show her to lack principles and trustworthiness.
Her refusal to strike out on her own is probably the main reason why she continues to lead various opinion polls.
Nevertheless, recent polls show that a majority of voters distrust the incumbent government and the ruling party.
Indeed, Ahn Cheol-soo, a successful entrepreneur turned pro-reform professor at Seoul National University and the main backer of the city’s new mayor, has now rocked South Korean politics by dropping broad hints that he might become a presidential candidate.
Ahn has already become a lightning rod for all of the country’s anti-Park and anti-President Lee Myun-bak forces, attracting young people as well.
Ahn’s most obvious merits are his personal history of overcoming severe challenges and his modest demeanor.
His signature commercial achievement – the development of anti-virus software – made him immensely wealthy. His decision to give away a large portion of his fortune has made him immensely popular.
More importantly, Ahn knows how to talk to people who are frustrated by South Korea’s rigid economy and business environment, particularly South Korean youth.
He also seems cognizant of the growing power of social networking in politics.
Although the 49-year-old professor remains formally uncommitted to running for office, his frankness and tolerance aids his ability to communicate a clear political message of the need for fundamental change.
Rarely in South Korean politics has a candidate’s personality played so important a role.
Ahn’s economic beliefs, formed mainly by his experiences as a CEO fighting against the entrenched power of South Korea’s chaebol (vast, politically well-connected industrial conglomerates), has rekindled a debate on both the right and the left about whether the chaebol are still capable of leading the country’s economy effectively.
In an era of growing inequality and joblessness, Ahn’s criticism of the chaebol is both smart economics and smart politics.
Economically frustrated youth welcome Ahn with loud cheers wherever he appears, because he expresses their anxiety that the chaebol are stifling new companies that could create much-needed jobs.
One big obstacle that Ahn will face if he decides to run is the need to organize a political party, or else to forge a coalition among South Korea’s fractured opposition parties.
Neither is an easy task, and the precedent of incompetence established by Japan’s Democratic Party since it defeated the long-ruling Liberal Democratic Party may make some South Korean voters reluctant to abandon the familiar and battle-tested GNP.
But, despite these worries, it is difficult to imagine that Ahn would stand aside this April while voters’ demand for him continues to soar.
The near-certainty that Ahn will join the fray is not good news for the already-unstable GNP, especially for Park.
In one of her very rare appearances on a popular television talk show on January 2, she called Ahn “a very popular professor with young people.”
Indeed, while she acknowledged that young men and women have “rebelled” against the established parties, Ahn supposedly spurred them to do so through a series of lectures called “Youth Concert.”
While the “Ice Princess,” as Park is nicknamed, will undoubtedly retain her core voters, more than 20 million South Koreans now access Twitter or Facebook on their cellphones, and follow politics on them.
These are new or disenchanted voters; how they vote in April –&#160;and how many of their fellow citizens follow their lead – will determine whether South Korea has its own political spring.
A Rule of Law for Sovereign Debt
NEW YORK – Governments sometimes need to restructure their debts.
Otherwise, a country’s economic and political stability may be threatened.
But, in the absence of an international rule of law for resolving sovereign defaults, the world pays a higher price than it should for such restructurings.
The result is a poorly functioning sovereign-debt market, marked by unnecessary strife and costly delays in addressing problems when they arise.
We are reminded of this time and again.
In Argentina, the authorities’ battles with a small number of “investors” (so-called vulture funds) jeopardized an entire debt restructuring agreed to – voluntarily – by an overwhelming majority of the country’s creditors.
In Greece, most of the “rescue” funds in the temporary “assistance” programs are allocated for payments to existing creditors, while the country is forced into austerity policies that have contributed mightily to a 25% decline in GDP and have left its population worse off.
In Ukraine, the potential political ramifications of sovereign-debt distress are enormous.
So the question of how to manage sovereign-debt restructuring – to reduce debt to levels that are sustainable – is more pressing than ever.
The current system puts excessive faith in the “virtues” of markets.
Disputes are generally resolved not on the basis of rules that ensure fair resolution, but by bargaining among unequals, with the rich and powerful usually imposing their will on others.
The resulting outcomes are generally not only inequitable, but also inefficient.
Those who claim that the system works well frame cases like Argentina as exceptions.
Most of the time, they claim, the system does a good job.
What they mean, of course, is that weak countries usually knuckle under.
But at what cost to their citizens?
How well do the restructurings work?
Has the country been put on a sustainable debt path?
Too often, because the defenders of the status quo do not ask these questions, one debt crisis is followed by another.
Greece’s debt restructuring in 2012 is a case in point.
The country played according to the “rules” of financial markets and managed to finalize the restructuring rapidly; but the agreement was a bad one and did not help the economy recover.
Three years later, Greece is in desperate need of a new restructuring.
Distressed debtors need a fresh start.
Excessive penalties lead to negative-sum games, in which the debtor cannot recover and creditors do not benefit from the larger repayment capacity that recovery would entail.
The absence of a rule of law for debt restructuring delays fresh starts and can lead to chaos.
That is why no government leaves it to market forces to restructure domestic debts.
All have concluded that “contractual remedies” simply do not suffice.
Instead, they enact bankruptcy laws to provide the ground rules for creditor-debtor bargaining, thereby promoting efficiency and fairness.
Sovereign-debt restructurings are even more complicated than domestic bankruptcy, plagued as they are by problems of multiple jurisdictions, implicit as well as explicit claimants, and ill-defined assets upon which claimants can draw.
That is why we find the claim by some – including the US Treasury – that there is no need for an international rule of law so incredible.
To be sure, it may not be possible to establish a full international bankruptcy code; but a consensus could be reached on many issues.
For example, a new framework should include clauses providing for stays of litigation while the restructuring is being carried out, thus limiting the scope for disruptive behavior by vulture funds.
It should also contain provisions for lending into arrears: lenders willing to provide credit to a country going through a restructuring would receive priority treatment.
Such lenders would thus have an incentive to provide fresh resources to countries when they need them the most.
There should be agreement, too, that no country can sign away its basic rights.
There can be no voluntary renunciation of sovereign immunity, just as no person can sell himself into slavery.
There also should be limits on the extent to which one democratic government can bind its successors.
This is particularly important because of the tendency of financial markets to induce short-sighted politicians to loosen today’s budget constraints, or to lend to flagrantly corrupt governments such as the fallen Yanukovych regime in Ukraine, at the expense of future generations.
Such a constraint would improve the functioning of sovereign-debt markets by inducing greater due diligence in lending.
A “soft law” framework containing these features, implemented through an oversight commission that acted as a mediator and supervisor of the restructuring process, could resolve some of today’s inefficiencies and inequities.
But, if the framework is to be consensual, its implementation should not be based at an institution that is too closely associated with one side of the market or the other.
This means that regulation of sovereign-debt restructuring cannot be based at the International Monetary Fund, which is too closely affiliated with creditors (and is a creditor itself).
To minimize the potential for conflicts of interest, the framework could be implemented by the United Nations, a more representative institution that is taking the lead on the matter, or by a new global institution, as already suggested in the 2009 Stiglitz Report on reforming the international monetary and financial system.
The crisis in Europe is just the latest example of the high costs – for creditors and debtors alike – entailed by the absence of an international rule of law for resolving sovereign-debt crises.
Such crises will continue to occur.
If globalization is to work for all countries, the rules of sovereign lending must change.
The modest reforms we propose are the right place to start.
A Step Forward for Sovereign Debt
NEW YORK – Every advanced country has a bankruptcy law, but there is no equivalent framework for sovereign borrowers.
That legal vacuum matters, because, as we now see in Greece and Puerto Rico, it can suck the life out of economies.
In September, the United Nations took a big step toward filling the void, approving a set of principles for sovereign-debt restructuring.
The nine precepts – namely, a sovereign’s right to initiate a debt restructuring, sovereign immunity, equitable treatment of creditors, (super) majority restructuring, transparency, impartiality, legitimacy, sustainability, and good faith in negotiations – form the rudiments of an effective international rule of law.
The overwhelming support for these principles, with 136 UN members voting in favor and only six against (led by the United States), shows the extent of global consensus on the need to resolve debt crises in a timely manner.
But the next step – an international treaty establishing a global bankruptcy regime to which all countries are bound – may prove more difficult.
Recent events underscore the enormous risks posed by the lack of a framework for sovereign debt restructuring.
Puerto Rico’s debt crisis cannot be resolved.
Notably, US courts invalidated the domestic bankruptcy law, ruling that because the island is, in effect, a US colony, its government had no authority to enact its own legislation.
In the case of Argentina, another US court allowed a small minority of so-called vulture funds to jeopardize a restructuring process to which 92.4% of the country’s creditors had agreed.
Similarly, in Greece, the absence of an international legal framework was an important reason why its creditors – the troika of the European Commission, the European Central Bank, and the International Monetary Fund – could impose policies that inflicted enormous harm.
But some powerful actors would stop well short of establishing an international legal framework.
The International Capital Market Association (ICMA), supported by the IMF and the US Treasury, suggests changing the language of debt contracts.
The cornerstone of such proposals is the implementation of better collective action clauses (CACs), which would make restructuring proposals approved by a supermajority of creditors binding on all others.
But while better CACs certainly would complicate life for vulture funds, they are not a comprehensive solution.
In fact, the focus on fine-tuning debt contracts leaves many critical issues unresolved, and in some ways bakes in the current system’s deficiencies – or even makes matters worse.
All six countries that voted against the UN resolution (the US, Canada, Germany, Israel, Japan, and the United Kingdom) have domestic bankruptcy legislation, because they recognize that CACs are not enough.
Yet all refuse to accept that the rationale for a domestic rule of law – including provisions to protect weak borrowers from powerful and abusive creditors – applies at the international level as well.
Perhaps that is because all are leading creditor countries, with no desire to embrace restrictions on their powers.
Respect for the nine principles approved by the UN is precisely what’s been missing in recent decades.
The 2012 Greek debt restructuring, for example, did not restore sustainability, as the desperate need for a new restructuring only three years later demonstrated.
And it has become almost the norm to violate the principles of sovereign immunity and equitable treatment of creditors, evidenced so clearly in the New York court’s decision on Argentine debt.
The market for credit default swaps has led to non-transparent processes of debt restructuring that create no incentive for parties to bargain in good faith.
The irony is that countries like the US object to an international legal framework because it interferes with their national sovereignty.
Yet the most important principle to which the international community has given its assent is respect for sovereign immunity: There are limits beyond which markets – and governments – cannot go.
Incumbent governments may be tempted to exchange sovereign immunity for better financing conditions in the short run, at the expense of larger costs that will be paid by their successors.
No government should have the right to give up sovereign immunity, just as no person can sell himself into slavery.
Debt restructuring is not a zero-sum game.
The frameworks that govern it determine not just how the pie is divided among formal creditors and between formal and informal claimants, but also the size of the pie.
Domestic bankruptcy frameworks evolved because punishing insolvent debtors with prison was counterproductive – a prisoner cannot repay his debts.
Likewise, kicking debtor countries when they’re down only makes their problems worse: Countries in economic free-fall can’t repay their debts, either.
A system that actually resolves sovereign-debt crises must be based on principles that maximize the size of the pie and ensure that it is distributed fairly.
We now have the international community’s commitment to the principles; we just have to build the system.
Tahun yang Penuh dengan Gagal Bayar Nasional?
MIAMI – Terkait dengan utang negara, istilah “gagal bayar” (default) banyak disalahartikan.
Pada umumnya peristiwa gagal bayar ini tidak penuh atau tetap; bahkan beberapa obligasi di era kekaisaran Rusia berhasil dibayar (walaupun hanya sebagian) setelah revolusi tahun 1917.
Kenyataannya, kegagalan pembayaran (non-payment) – suatu “gagal bayar” (default), menurut agen-agen pemeringkat kredit, terkait dengan kreditor swasta – biasanya diikuti dengan pembicaraan mengenai restrukturisasi utang, yang dapat berarti perpanjangan jatuh tempo, potongan pembayaran kupon, tenggang waktu, atau pemotongan nilai nominal (biasa dikenal sebagai “haircuts”).
Jika kita dapat belajar dari sejarah, pembicaraan sejenis akan banyak dilakukan di tahun 2016.
Seperti banyak ciri lain dari ekonomi global, akumulasi utang dan gagal bayar biasanya memiliki siklus.
Sejak tahun 1800, ekonomi global telah mengalami beberapa siklus sejenis, di mana beberapa negara-negara independen mengalami restrukturisasi setiap tahunnya yang berkisar antara nol dan 50% (lihat gambar).
Namun satu- dan dua dekade tanpa adanya gagal bayar juga biasa ditemui, biasanya diikuti dengan gelombang gagal bayar baru.
Siklus gagal bayar yang terakhir terjadi mencakup krisis utang pasar berkembang (emerging market) di era 80-an dan 90-an.
Kebanyakan negara berhasil menyelesaikan masalah utang eksternal mereka pada pertengahan 90-an, namun sejumlah negara di kelompok pendapatan terendah tetap memiliki tunggakan besar dengan kreditor-kreditor resmi mereka.
Seperti dengan gagal bayar penuh atau restrukturisasi utang kepada kreditor resmi, tunggakan tersebut sering kali dilupakan, kemungkinan karena biasanya tunggakan tersebut dimiliki oleh debitor berpendapatan rendah dengan nilai dolar rendah.
Akan tetapi, tetap besar kemungkinan bahwa tunggakan ini akan mengakibatkan siklus krisis baru, ketika negara-negara yang tidak berhasil melunasi utangnya menghadapi kondisi global yang tidak mendukung.
Dan kenyataannya, kondisi ekonomi global – seperti fluktuasi harga komoditas dan perubahan suku bunga oleh kekuatan ekonomi besar seperti Amerika Serikat atau Cina – memiliki peran penting dalam memicu krisis gagal bayar nasional.
Sebagaimana diungkapkan oleh karya terakhir saya bersama dengan Vincent Reinhart dan Christoph Trebesch, titik tertinggi dan terendah dalam siklus arus modal internasional adalah yang paling berbahaya, dengan peningkatan pesat peristiwa gagal bayar di akhir arus modal masuk besar-besaran ini.
Memasuki tahun 2016, banyak tanda-tanda akan terjadinya terjangan utang/gagal bayar.
Kita sudah dapat melihat gelombang pertamanya.
Untuk beberapa negara, masalah utamanya adalah dinamika utang dalam negeri.
Situasi di Ukraina pada khususnya berbahaya, walaupun mengingat faktor pendorongnya yang unik, mungkin lebih baik untuk tidak mengambil kesimpulan lebih jauh mengenai arahnya saat ini.
Sebaliknya situasi di Yunani sudah sering terjadi.
Pemerintah terus mengakumulasi utang sampai bebannya tidak dapat lagi ditanggung.
Ketika kelebihan utang ini mulai terlihat, kredit baru tidak dapat lagi diberikan, sehingga pelunasan utang yang sudah ada semakin sulit dilakukan.