A clear illustration of the “regime change” that has taken place in the oil market is the current rebound in prices to around the $50 level (the likely ceiling of the new trading range).
The steepest part of this increase occurred after April 17, when OPEC failed to agree on a new price target and persuade the Saudi, Russian, and Iranian governments to coordinate the output cuts that would be required to achieve any such target.
Now that all of the main oil producers are unequivocally committed to maximizing production, regardless of the impact prices, oil will continue to trade just like any other commodity (for example, iron ore) that is in oversupply in a competitive market.
Prices will be determined as described in any standard economics textbook: by the marginal costs of the last supplier whose production is needed to meet global demand.
When oil demand is fairly strong, as it is now and tends to be in early summer, the price will be set by the marginal production costs in US shale basins and Canadian tar sands.
When demand is weak, as it often is in autumn and winter, the market-clearing price will be set by marginal producers of cheap but less accessible oil in Asia and Africa, such as Kazakhstan, eastern Siberia, and Nigeria.
From now on, the costs faced by these marginal producers will set the top and bottom of oil’s trading range.
Low-cost producers in Saudi Arabia, Iraq, Iran, and Russia will continue to pump as much as their physical infrastructure can transport as long as the price is higher than $25 or so.
The price needed to elicit enough production from US shale and Canadian tar sands to meet strong demand may be $50, $55, or even $60, but it is unlikely to be much higher than that.
Unpredictable shifts in supply and demand will, of course, cause fluctuations within this trading range, which past experience suggests could be quite large.
In the 20-year period of competitive pricing from 1985 to 2004, the oil price frequently doubled or halved in the course of a few months.
So the near-doubling of oil prices since mid-January’s $28 low is not surprising.
But now that the $50 ceiling is being tested, we can expect the next major move in the trading range to be downward.
The Price of Oil in 2015
LONDON – In late 1979, I began work on my PhD thesis, an empirical investigation of the OPEC surplus and its disposal.
It was the end of a decade in which oil prices had undergone two dramatic increases, and most of the various geniuses of the day were confidently predicting that they would continue to soar, from under $40 per barrel – a historic high at that time – to above $100.
By the time I finished my research in 1982, the price of oil had begun what would become a 20-year plunge.
It would not hit $100 per barrel until January 2008.
I used to joke that the most important thing I learned from my research was never to attempt to forecast the price of oil.
As 2014 comes to a close, the price of oil has just crossed the $100 threshold again – this time headed down.
One of the big questions for 2015 is whether the decline will continue.
Despite my earlier cynicism, I think I know the answer.
Over the past 33 years, I have had plenty of opportunity to study both oil prices and foreign exchange rates, including overseeing a research department of talented people trying to predict their movements.
The experience has left me with a good deal of skepticism – not to mention bruises.
But I do believe that it is possible to make a broad prediction as to where oil prices are headed.
Over the course of my career, I have tried to determine whether there is such a thing as an equilibrium oil price.
I have spent many hours trying to guide, cajole, and beg my energy analysts to create a model that might identify it, just as we have for currencies, bond yields, and equities.
I have also discussed the idea with industry experts, most of whom believe that one exists, but that it moves around a lot, because it is greatly influenced by the marginal cost of oil production – itself an unstable variable.
My conclusion is that a good indication of this moving equilibrium does exist: the five-year forward oil price, or the amount paid for guaranteed delivery of oil five years from now.
In my ongoing quest to become better at forecasting, I began, a few years ago, to pay attention to the five-year forward oil price as it compares to the Brent crude oil spot price, the price of a barrel of oil today.
I suspect that the five-year forward price is much less influenced by speculation in the oil market than the spot price, and more representative of true commercial needs.
So when the five-year price starts moving in a different direction than the spot price, I take notice.
In 2011, after both prices had recovered from the collapse induced by the 2008 credit crisis, the five-year price started to come down gradually, while the spot price continued to surge for a while.
This jibed with what I had identified as two big factors fundamentally driving the price of oil: the early days of the exploitation of shale oil and gas in the United States, and the shift in China’s economic focus from quantity to quality, which implied that the Chinese economy would no longer be consuming energy at the frenetic rate it had been.
I concluded that there was a fair chance that oil prices were peaking and that before too long spot prices would reverse and start to decline.
I thought it was probably the beginning of a move back down to $80 per barrel – precisely where the price has landed at the end of 2014.
The spot price has even recently slipped below that level.
It was one of my better forecasts.
I no longer make predictions for a living, but I do know one thing: Oil prices will either rise or fall.
And I suspect that I know which way they will go.
I recently read an article that suggested that, if oil prices remain at recent levels, US production of shale oil and gas next year could be 10% below recent projections.
That seems plausible; and, given how important shale oil and gas has become to America’s economic recovery, it also seems like something that US policymakers would be eager to avoid.
They may very well get their wish.
Oil prices may not start rising in the coming months, but, as 2014 comes to a close, forces that will eventually halt their decline are beginning to appear.
The drop in the spot price of oil has taken it significantly below the five-year forward price, which remains close to $80 per barrel.
My hunch for 2015 is that oil prices may continue to drop in the short term; unlike in the past four years, however, they are likely to finish the year higher than they were when it began.
Memacu Investasi Swasta demi Pembangunan
STRASBOURG – Pertumbuhan ekonomi yang berhasil senantiasa mengikuti pola yang umum.
Diperlukan kerja keras untuk mengangkat sebuah negara keluar dari jurang kemiskinan dan menempatkannya pada jalur pembangunan berkelanjutan, adanya sistem yang kuat untuk melindungi hak kepemilikan, dan – yang terpenting – investasi swasta.
Metode tersebut tidak spesifik bagi kawasan atau penduduk tertentu saja.
Sebagaimana ditunjukkan oleh pertumbuhan yang spektakuler di Asia, cara semacam itu bisa dipindahkan ke berbagai budaya.
Jadi sungguh memalukan betapa ahli ekonomi pembangunan dan lembaga-lembaga multilateral dunia gagal menerapkannya secara sistematis pada negara-negara berkembang.
Bantuan dana berjumlah miliaran dolar dikucurkan ke negara-negara berkembang namun itu tidak mencukupi dan hasilnya mengecewakan.
Bank Dunia memperkirakan satu miliar penduduk masih hidup dengan penghasilan kurang dari 1,25 dolar AS per hari, sementara 800 juta penduduk kekurangan pangan.
Tujuan Pembangunan Milenium berusaha menerapkan pendekatan komprehensif untuk mengurangi kemiskinan, namun MDG gagal menanggulangi akar penyebab kemiskinan.
Di atas kertas, setidaknya, Tujuan Pembangunan Berkelanjutan yang baru dikeluarkan PBB tahun lalu, merupakan suatu perbaikan.
Permasalahannya adalah ambisi yang luhur tersebut menyandang label harga yang tinggi sehingga masih ada kekurangan pembiayaan (funding gap) sebanyak 2,5 triliun dolar AS apabila 17 sasaran yang ada hendak dipenuhi.
Selisih yang sedemikian besarnya tidak bisa diatasi hanya oleh pemerintah dengan dana terbatas dan wajib pajak.
Itu sebabnya keputusan terkini oleh Parlemen Eropa untuk mendukung laporan saya dan menyerukan pengerahan modal swasta dalam upaya mengentaskan kemiskinan global menjadi sangat krusial.
Untuk pertama kalinya dalam sejarah Parlemen Eropa, para anggotanya mengakui sektor swasta sebagai mitra pokok dalam peningkatan kesejahteraan di negara-negara berkembang.
Mengingat Uni Eropa merupakan salah satu pemberi dana bantuan pembangunan yang terbesar, keputusan tersebut bisa berdampak signifikan.
Tentu saja memenangkan suara, meskipun bukan urusan enteng, adalah bagian mudahnya.
Tantangannya adalah menerjemahkan pernyataan ke dalam aksi.
Tanda-tanda awal tampak menggembirakan.
Marianne Thyssen, komisioner Uni Eropa yang membawahi urusan ketenagakerjaan, menghendaki agar langkah-langkah implementasi laporan tersebut segera dimulai.
Beliau menjanjikan bahwa Komisi Eropa akan menginvestasikan lebih dari 2 miliar euro (2,27 miliar dolar AS) untuk mendukung sektor swasta di negara-negara berkembang hingga tahun 2020.
Beliau memperkirakan hibah Uni Eropa sejumlah 4,8 miliar euro dapat membangkitkan investasi oleh lembaga keuangan dan perusahaan di Afrika Sub-Sahara, Asia, dan Amerika Latin setidaknya sebanyak 66 miliar euro.
Jika seluruh anggaran pembangunan Uni Eropa juga dimaksimalkan, kita bisa memobilisasi modal sekitar 300 miliar euro yang apabila disalurkan untuk mengakuisisi peralatan, pabrik, dan teknologi dari Eropa, dapat mendongkrak perekonomian Eropa yang lesu.
Pekerjaan awal yang penting untuk mencapai hasil yang diharapkan ialah merancang kondisi agar inisiatif-inisiatif swasta bisa berkembang.
Saat ini, usaha mikro, kecil, dan menengah (UMKM) menyerap 60% pekerjaan di negara-negara berkembang.
Akan tetapi 70% usaha tersebut tidak menerima bantuan dari lembaga keuangan, padahal investasi akan mendorong pertumbuhan bisnisnya dan menciptakan lapangan kerja.
Kita perlu mengubahnya dengan memberikan bantuan finansial dan teknis yang dibutuhkan negara-negara tersebut untuk mendirikan sistem perbankan dan administrasi perpajakan yang dapat diandalkan.
Kesesuaian terhadap standar akuntansi internasional harus didorong.
Transparansi perlu ditingkatkan dan korupsi harus diberantas.
Dan di banyak negara, sistem pendaftaran tanah dan hak kepemilikan harus diformalkan agar individu dan perusahaan memperoleh ekuitas yang bisa dipinjam untuk diinvestasikan ke dalam bisnisnya.
Hasilnya adalah menambah jumlah proyek-proyek bankable yang mana perusahaan lokal dan internasional bisa berinvestasi.
Potensi bagi kemitraan publik swasta (KPS) ada dalam proyek-proyek energi dan telekomunikasi, sumur bor dan irigasi, sektor konstruksi, infrastruktur seperti pembangunan jalan, bandara, dan pelabuhan, serta pabrik pengolahan untuk industri agro, pengolahan daging, buah-buahan, dan sayuran.
Tentu saja safeguards lebih ketat perlu diterapkan.
Investor swasta harus siap menyetujui dan mematuhi aturan-aturan yang mengikat tentang perlindungan lingkungan hidup, sosial, serta hak asasi manusia dan gender.
Perlu dibentuk suatu forum setingkat UE untuk membangun kepercayaan, yang mana sektor swasta, LSM, think-tanks, dan pemerintah bisa mendiskusikan peluang-peluang pembangunan.
Upaya mendukung pertumbuhan di negara-negara berkembang akan merangsang peluang investasi bagi negara-negara Uni Eropa dan membuka pasar baru untuk segala produk keluarannya.
Hasilnya adalah siklus pembangunan yang layak dan memberi manfaat bagi semua pihak – serta mendekatkan kita menuju terwujudnya tujuan-tujuan ambisius yang sudah diadopsi.
New Frontiers in Development Finance
WASHINGTON, DC – When the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) expire at the end of this year, the world will have made significant progress on poverty reduction, the provision of safe drinking water and sanitation, and other important objectives.
In order to ensure that the next development agenda, underpinned by the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), produces even greater progress, world leaders must refine and optimize the MDG framework – particularly when it comes to financing.
The MDGs brought together governments, multilateral organizations, and NGOs to support the implementation of key programs and policies, with global partnerships advocating for resources.
In order to maximize efficiency, the MDGs were pursued and funded individually, rather than as a unit, with new initiatives being implemented when targets were not being met.
But this approach created some imbalances, with global health and education initiatives attracting far more financing than other efforts.
This sectoral model must be reevaluated ahead of the next development agenda's launch to ensure that such imbalances do not persist.
Doing so is particularly important, given that the proposed SDGs attempt to incorporate the social, economic, and environmental dimensions of sustainable development, making them more comprehensive and interdependent than the MDGs.
World leaders will have three critical opportunities to develop an integrated approach.
In July, the United Nations will hold a conference on financing for development in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia.
In September, the UN General Assembly will convene to launch the SDGs.
And in December, world leaders will attend the 21st Conference of the Parties (COP21) of the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change, where they are expected to adopt a binding global agreement on the long-term reduction of greenhouse-gas emissions.
Given the vital importance of finance in supporting development initiatives, it should be among the first issues to be addressed.
World leaders must avoid making the same mistake they made with the MDGs – the implementation of which was delayed for two years, until financing was agreed at the 2002 Monterrey Consensus – by developing an effective and traceable financing program at their earliest opportunity: the conference in Addis Ababa.
The urgency consists partly in the scope of financing that the SDGs will require – an amount that will far exceed the resources needed to implement the MDGs.
Beyond funding for initiatives aimed at eradicating poverty and hunger, improving health and education, strengthening governance, and promoting gender equality, investments must be made in infrastructure, energy, and agriculture.
The SDGs will also call for financing global public goods, including environmental protection and efforts to combat climate change and mitigate its impact.
With governments and international donors unable to foot the bill alone, they must develop programs and policies that can channel a larger share of global savings, which now amount to roughly $22 trillion annually, toward the SDGs.
Specifically, national and local governments and international financial institutions should leverage their resources by deploying tailored financing measures, including public-private partnerships, performance-based instruments, and a variety of credit and political risk guarantees.
This range of financing measures, adjusted to each country's needs and strengths, can help mitigate risks and improve collaboration.
This will be especially pertinent for emerging middle-income economies.
As these countries strengthen their creditworthiness and improve their capacity to manage debt and equity instruments, they will have at their disposal a larger toolkit of financing instruments with which to attract private-sector resources.
By tapping private resources, emerging economies can free up much-needed official development assistance (ODA), which can then be channeled toward poverty-reduction efforts and to countries that international private financial flows largely bypass (and that thus have a lower capacity to raise resources domestically).
Viable financing solutions should be considered on a case-by-case basis across countries and sectors.
To ensure that the Addis Ababa conference produces the needed action, the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund, and several regional multilateral development banks (MDBs) are working on a joint approach that will leverage billions of dollars in grant and ODA funds into the trillions needed to finance the post-2015 agenda.
MDBs already help, individually and collectively, to leverage scarce official assistance to attract enough capital to finance development projects.
In fact, their financial leverage is built into their structure: they are fundamentally financial institutions, funded efficiently by small amounts of paid-in capital, which is backed by callable capital from shareholders.
The MDBs also have significant operational leverage, stemming from their capacity to establish – through innovation, intermediation, and market creation – conditions that are attractive to the private sector, thereby producing sustainable solutions and investment opportunities.
And they provide integrated, cross-sectoral inputs, by investing in the systems, institutions, and capacities that are needed to achieve development goals.
To support this joint approach, the World Bank is providing an analysis, based on 11 case studies, of how countries in diverse circumstances can use a combination of public, private, domestic, and international sources of financing most effectively to fund the implementation of the SDGs.
The analysis will also recommend a pragmatic approach to assessing the SDGs' financing needs at the country level.
The MDBs will discuss their common approach at April's IMF-World Bank Group Spring Meetings.
Their ability to identify tangible financing solutions will be crucial to set the stage for the Addis Ababa conference in July – and, indeed, for the successful implementation of the SDGs and the post-2015 development agenda.
Privatizing Africa’s Development
Lagos – There has been considerable progress on achieving the Millennium Development Goals since their inception in 2000.
But, despite the best efforts of governments, reaching those goals by the 2015 target date still remains a distant prospect for many countries, not the least of in Africa.
Many of us in Africa’s private sector are keen to make a difference in meeting these goals.
At the Africa Finance Corporation (AFC), reducing poverty on the African continent through private-sector initiative is our mission.
For, in the end, the private sector is and will be the engine of growth in Africa, and its increasingly active involvement in the development process bodes well for the continent.
Africa’s development challenges are well known.
More than 40% of its population lives on less than a dollar a day.
Over half a billion people live without modern forms of energy, and the continent’s share of global trade remains a paltry 3%.
Lack of basic infrastructure and industrial capacity remains one of Africa’s biggest problems, for it sustains poverty and undermines the continent’s ability to compete with the rest of the world.
Transport costs for sub-regional trade are double that of other developing regions, and high energy costs contribute significantly to the prohibitive cost of doing business.
Africa needs substantial investments to correct these shortfalls: $75 billion to close its 135-gigawatt power deficit by 2015, and $37 billion to improve transport infrastructure.
And, despite Africa’s huge natural-resource deposits, heavy manufacturing remains elusive.
As a result, most of the value chain for the fossil fuel and mining sectors continues to be outside the continent.
But these challenges have not dampened optimism about Africa’s growth prospects.
The continent’s economy, after all, has been experiencing its strongest growth in three decades, with annual GDP up by 6% in the past three years.
The rebirth of Africa’s private sector – a critical missing ingredient in past development efforts – has played a significant role in driving this performance, and it can fill the investment gap while generating returns in the process.
The AFC is promoting such investment, based on a new development-oriented banking style in Africa that involves the proactive creation and management of infrastructure, industrial, and financial assets, including the six leading industrial sectors: power, transport infrastructure, telecoms, oil and gas, mining, and heavy industries.
These areas offer the greatest development impact and the most attractive returns to investors.  
An AFC-led consortium is financing a project that will develop Sub-Saharan Africa’s first deep-sea container port on the Atlantic coastline area of Olokola, Nigeria.
The completion of this $1 billion landmark project is expected to transform Africa’s shipping and port capacity dramatically.
Guinea-Bissau is also taking advantage of this new private sector-led development approach.
As a member country of the AFC, it will benefit from a private sector-driven initiative to accelerate economic development and reduce poverty.
The AFC, with its project development subsidiary, Africa Infrastructure, and Chinese equity and technical partners, WEMPCO, is launching a power generation initiative in Bissau.
The investment will lead to a rapid deployment of emergency power using heavy fuel power generation, and will involve the rehabilitation and management of transmission and distribution.
There is a huge window of opportunity for private sector-led development in Africa.
But taking advantage of this opportunity requires a new approach to private financing of Africa’s development, in which Africa is the lead investor in its own economic renaissance.
Privatizing the Gulf
JEDDAH – As the Arab world undergoes fundamental changes, its leaders must adapt fast or risk popular uprisings – a lesson that has not been lost on the countries of the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) – Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, and the United Arab Emirates.
With their neighbors embroiled in internal conflict or in the midst of difficult transitions, and with discontent rising at home, the Gulf states are eager to stem the tide of revolution.
Indeed, the GCC has offered generous aid, totaling roughly $160 billion so far, to countries swept by the Arab Spring.
Furthermore, to cool domestic political tensions, some of the Gulf countries have announced additional spending packages that include significant wage hikes, substantial increases in public-sector jobs for their citizens, and higher unemployment benefits.
Simply put, the Gulf states are relying on their wealth to ward off revolution.
After all, the majority of their population has benefited immensely from decades of rapid, natural-resource-based economic growth.
But the GCC economies are also rife with structural problems that short-term economic packages will not address – bloated public sectors, heavy dependence on imported labor, and endemic unemployment, especially among young people, who make up a disproportionately large share of the population.
The region needs sustainable policies aimed at bringing about much-needed economic diversification.
Indeed, without profound structural change, the favorable standard of living that underpins the Gulf states’ political stability is likely to erode.
The public sector is by far the largest employer of GCC citizens: in Saudi Arabia, the government employs 80% of the indigenous workforce; in Kuwait, the figure is 93%.
An estimated 45% of Saudi Arabia’s government budget is allocated to public-sector salaries.
The GCC countries’ new spending packages are likely to perpetuate public-sector hypertrophy.
Unproductive measures, such as public-sector wage increases, will have the immediate effect of crowding out further the private sector.
Next year, salaries for federal employees in the UAE will rise by 30-100%, while their Qatari counterparts’ wages will rise by 60-120%.
But it is not certain that the additional spending will trickle down to the rest of the economy.
In fact, because most consumer goods are imported, it is unlikely that domestic companies will benefit at all.
Reducing public-sector dependence requires increasing citizens’ involvement in local businesses, so increasing the private sector’s role in generating employment is vital.
Yet very little attention has been paid to promoting entrepreneurship, despite its potential to channel the youthful dynamics unleashed by the Arab uprisings in a positive direction.
Wealthy locals, for example, could be given incentives to invest in start-ups, while the government could provide low-interest loans and defer repayment until a particular profit threshold is reached.
But strong legal fundamentals are no less important for creating a business-friendly environment.
Ensuring that intellectual and other property rights are adequately protected for citizens and foreigners alike is essential, as is reducing corruption.
Not all Gulf countries have been impermeable to change.
In response to social-housing shortages – and rising tensions over increasingly conspicuous social inequality – Oman’s leaders pledged to build 2,500 housing units for low-income families, and to support technical training tailored to job creation.
Likewise, Bahrain signed a $550 million public-private partnership for housing, 75% of which will be allocated to construction of units for low-income people.
Still, according to the Bertelsmann Transformation Index – which aims to measure various aspects of economic development in non-liberal countries, or countries in a democratic transition – the GCC states’ transformation indices range from “limited” to “very limited,” largely owing to corruption and a lack of transparency.
In some countries, such as Saudi Arabia and Oman, perceptions of corruption are linked to the absence of meritocracy.
Moreover, the overriding importance of personal networks helps to maintain – or even increases – socio-economic inequality and hinders inclusive growth, as do weak intellectual-property laws and cumbersome bureaucracies.
If Gulf leaders are serious about avoiding social unrest, they should take advantage of gains from today’s high oil prices to finance labor-market and intellectual-property reforms, thereby encouraging private-sector growth and providing greater opportunity for all.
International institutions could help by offering technical assistance.
For example, there could be scope for cooperation within the European Union-GCC Joint Action Program, which already includes a section on “Exchange of expertise and information…in economic integration.”
New private-sector jobs could generate a wave of dynamism in the Gulf region, helping it to move away from overreliance on energy exports and forge a new path towards sustainable long-term growth.
A successful transition would give real opportunities to a generation of unemployed young people, thus enabling them to take responsibility for their futures – and the future of the region.
Prizes, Not Patents
Part of modern medicine’s success is built on new drugs, in which pharmaceutical companies invest billions of dollars on research.
The companies can recover their expenses thanks to patents, which give them a temporary monopoly and thus allow them to charge prices well above the cost of producing the drugs.
We cannot expect innovation without paying for it.
But are the incentives provided by the patent system appropriate, so that all this money is well spent and contributes to treatments for diseases of the greatest concern?
Sadly, the answer is a resounding “no.”
The fundamental problem with the patent system is simple: it is based on restricting the use of knowledge.
Because there is no extra cost associated with an additional individual enjoying the benefits of any piece of knowledge, restricting knowledge is inefficient.
But the patent system not only restricts the use of knowledge; by granting (temporary) monopoly power, it often makes medications unaffordable for people who don’t have insurance.
In the Third World, this can be a matter of life and death for people who cannot afford new brand-name drugs but might be able to afford generics.
For example, generic drugs for first-line AIDS defenses have brought down the cost of treatment by almost 99% since 2000 alone, from $10,000 to $130.
But, despite the high price they pay, developing countries get little in return.
Drug companies spend far more money on advertising and marketing than they do on research, far more on research for lifestyle drugs (for conditions like impotence and hair loss) than for lifesaving drugs, and almost no money on diseases that afflict hundreds of millions of poor people, such as malaria.
It is a matter of simple economics: companies direct their research where the money is, regardless of the relative value to society.
The poor can’t pay for drugs, so there is little research on their diseases, no matter what the overall costs.
A “me-too” drug, for example, which nets its manufacturer some portion of the income that otherwise accrues only to the company that dominates a niche, may be highly profitable, even if its value to society is quite limited.
Similarly, companies raced to beat the human genome project in order to patent genes such as that associated with breast cancer.
The value of these efforts was minimal: the knowledge was produced just a little sooner than it would have been otherwise.
But the cost to society was enormous: the high price that Myriad, the patent holder, places on genetic tests (between $3,000 and $4,000) may well mean that thousands of women who would otherwise have been tested, discovered that they were at risk, and taken appropriate remediation, will die instead.
There is an alternative way of financing and incentivizing research that, at least in some instances, could do a far better job than patents, both in directing innovation and ensuring that the benefits of that knowledge are enjoyed as widely as possible: a medical prize fund that would reward those who discover cures and vaccines.
Since governments already pay the cost of much drug research directly or indirectly, through prescription benefits, they could finance the prize fund, which would award the biggest prizes for developers of treatments or preventions for costly diseases affecting hundreds of millions of people.
Especially when it comes to diseases in developing countries, it would make sense for some of the prize money to come from foreign assistance budgets, as few contributions could do more to improve the quality of life, and even productivity, than attacking the debilitating diseases that are so prevalent in many developing countries.
A scientific panel could establish a set of priorities by assessing the number of people affected and the impact on mortality, morbidity, and productivity.
Once the discovery is made, it would be licensed.
Of course, the patent system is itself a prize system, albeit a peculiar one: the prize is temporary monopoly power, implying high prices and restricted access to the benefits that can be derived from the new knowledge.
By contrast, the type of prize system I have in mind would rely on competitive markets to lower prices and make the fruits of the knowledge available as widely as possible.
With better-directed incentives (more research dollars spent on more important diseases, less money spent on wasteful and distorted marketing), we could have better health at lower cost.
That said, the prize fund would not replace patents.
It would be part of the portfolio of methods for encouraging and supporting research.
A prize fund would work well in areas in which needs are well known – the case for many diseases afflicting the poor – allowing clear goals to be set in advance.
For innovations that solve problems or meet needs that have not previously been widely recognized, the patent system would still play a role.
The market economy and the profit motive have led to extremely high living standards in many places.
But the health care market is not an ordinary market.
Most people do not pay for what they consume; they rely on others to judge what they should consume, and prices do not influence these judgments as they do with conventional commodities.
The market is thus rife with distortions. It is accordingly not surprising that in the area of health, the patent system, with all of its distortions, has failed in so many ways.
A medical prize fund would not provide a panacea, but it would be a step in the right direction, redirecting our scarce research resources toward more efficient uses and ensuring that the benefits of that research reach the many people who are currently denied them.
The Coming Productivity Revolution
NEW YORK – “Red warnings lights are once again flashing on the dashboard of the global economy,” British Prime Minister David Cameron declared after the G-20’s summit in November.
He is right.
But the real worry is not the risk associated with near-term challenges, like Japan’s return to recession in 2014 or the eurozone’s enduring sluggishness; it is the gale-force headwinds that the entire world will face over the next half-century.
Despite nerve-wracking ups and downs, the last 50 years delivered an unprecedented global growth dividend.
Measured according to GDP (admittedly a flawed metric), the world economy expanded sixfold.
Income per capita almost tripled.
In the developing world, sustained wealth creation and public-health advances have increased average life expectancy by 20 years since the mid-1970s, and adult illiteracy has been nearly halved in the last 30 years.
Inequality among countries has decreased, with more than one billion people lifted out of extreme poverty in the last two decades alone.
But if we pursue business as usual, the odds of making similarly impressive progress over the next 50 years are not very promising.
Even if productivity continues to rise at the same rate, global GDP growth could slow to just over 2% annually, on average – a 40% drop from the last 50 years.
The good news is that this trajectory can be raised.
But to do so requires a shift in focus from reducing inequality to delivering growth that benefits the poor and middle class as well.
The historian Ben Friedman has observed that the “central question” in US history is not “the poverty of the most disadvantaged” or “the success of the most privileged”; it is “the economic well-being of the broad majority” of the population.
The same is true on a global level, as billions of aspiring consumers rise up to join the middle class.
On the labor-market side, the most powerful lever to bolster the majority’s wellbeing would be to increase the employment of women, whose workforce-participation rate still lags behind that of men by as much as 40% globally.
Including more women presupposes better childcare and other social support in many countries, as well as further progress on pay equality, including the more equal taxation of second earners.
Moreover, MGI estimates that addressing barriers like mandatory retirement ages and perverse tax incentives could add about 200 million workers over the age of 65 to the world’s labor pool.
Efforts to reduce youth unemployment would also help.
These changes, while important, would have a limited impact, lifting labor’s contribution to future growth from one-fifth to only one-third of post-war levels.
What the world really needs to do is accelerate productivity – not at a modest pace, but at the economic equivalent of warp speed.
Fortunately, today’s private-sector labs are bursting with innovations that could spark major productivity-enhancing technological and operational improvements.
Advanced materials like nanolaminates (edible lipids) can, when sprayed on food, provide protection from air or moisture and reduce spoilage.
Carbon-fiber composites are making cars and airplanes both more resistant and lighter, reducing their fuel consumption.
And the “Internet of things” will rationalize production processes by detecting potential failures early, boost crop yields by measuring the moisture of fields, and dramatically reduce the cost of remotely monitoring patients’ health.
Just a little further out on the productivity frontier are commercially viable self-driving cars and trucks.
Likewise, synthetic biology will be possible before too long, with scientists using the huge amount of increasingly available and inexpensive genetic data to design DNA from scratch – a practice that has applications in medicine, agriculture, and even biofuel production.
But the private sector cannot realize this potential alone.
Most countries need increased public-sector investment to support essential long-term research and development, and smarter, more innovation-friendly regulation to facilitate future gains.
Because the biggest opportunities lie in spurring faster productivity catch-up by adopting and diffusing today’s best practices, politicians must keep pushing to reduce trade and regulatory barriers to market integration and competition.
Perhaps most important, labor markets must be made as flexible as possible, with well-trained workers secured by strong social-safety nets.
This would enable workers to weather the transition to the jobs of the future and allow the economy to benefit from new waves of wealth and value-generating creative destruction.
It is worth recalling that more than one-third of employment growth in the US since 1990 has come from jobs that did not exist, or barely existed, 25 years ago.
Some countries may even want to consider appointing a “growth czar” to connect all of these policy dots.
In the end, however, the actual growth figures are not the point.
What matters is ensuring that the wellbeing of as many citizens as possible is improving – and that requires concerted action by business leaders, governments, and civil society.
Mengkaji Paradoks Produktivitas
WASHINGTON, DC – Selama lebih dari sepuluh tahun, productivity growth (pertumbuhan produktivitas) mengalami penurunan drastis di sebagian besar negara maju, meski banyak kemajuan telah diraih di sejumlah bidang seperti teknologi komputer, telepon seluler, dan robotika.
Semua kemajuan tersebut seharusnya membangkitkan produktivitas; akan tetapi di Amerika Serikat, negara yang memimpin inovasi teknologi, rata-rata kenaikan produktivitas buruh di sektor bisnis pada kurun waktu 2004-2014 justru kurang dari setengah laju pertumbuhan di dekade sebelumnya.
Apa yang sebetulnya terjadi?
Salah satu teori yang menonjol akhir-akhir ini adalah paradoks produktivitas yang sering disebut-sebut itu diklaim tidak ada.
Pertumbuhan produktivitas hanya tampak menurun, sebab statistik yang digunakan untuk mengukurnya telah gagal menangkap keseluruhan prestasi-prestasi terbaru, terutama yang diperoleh berkat teknologi informasi dan komunikasi yang modern dan berkualitas tinggi.
Jika harga tidak mencerminkan perbaikan mutu pada produk baru, estimasi price deflator berlebih dan real output terlampau rendah.
Selain itu, sebagaimana diutarakan kelompok skeptis, ukuran standar produktivitas didasarkan pada PDB, yang menurut definisinya hanya mencakup output yang dihasilkan.
Consumer surplus – satu hal yang tumbuh cepat seiring dengan kemampuan layanan berbasis internet, seperti mesin pencari Google dan Facebook membuat konsumen menikmati kepuasan baru, dengan market price mendekati nol – justru diabaikan.
Argumen di atas mengandung logika.
Sesungguhnya, kajian terkini mengenai riset tentang produktivitas oleh Brookings Institution dan Chumir Foundation membenarkan bahwa kemajuan dari teknologi baru kurang diberi bobot yang layak, karena perhitungan hanya terkait dengan product quality dan consumer surplus.
Namun dua jenis standar tersebut, menurut hasil laporan, hanya menjelaskan segelintir porsi dari melemahnya kemajuan ekonomi.
Lebih lanjutnya, kesenjangan tersebut sudah muncul sejak lama dan tampaknya tidak bertambah di tahun-tahun terakhir.
Kesimpulannya jelas: melemahnya pertumbuhan produktivitas nyata terjadi.
Barangkali kita perlu menelaah komponen lain di tengah paradoks ini: inovasi teknologi.
Banyak pihak menyatakan bahwa persoalan utamanya adalah inovasi-inovasi teknologi sekarang dinilai kurang signifikan dibandingkan pendahulunya.
Teknologi informasi dan komunikasi (ICT) baru, menurut klaim para “techno-pessimists”, tidak menghasilkan manfaat ekonomi luas sebagaimana yang berhasil diciptakan dari mesin pembakaran dalam dan elektrifikasi.
Di sisi lain, para “techno-optimists,” meyakini bahwa kemajuan ICT berpotensi menggerakkan pertumbuhan produktivitas; walaupun potensi tersebut memang lamban dan muncul secara bertahap.
Apa makna di balik angka yang ada?
Data di tingkat perusahaan menunjukkan pertumbuhan produktivitas relatif stabil pada perusahaan-perusahaan yang berada di garis depan teknologi.
Tetapi memang sejumlah bisnis yang kurang maju secara teknologi, umumnya bisnis lebih kecil, mengalami pertumbuhan yang sangat rendah.
Hal ini menggambarkan bahwa permasalahan sesungguhnya bukan pada teknologi itu sendiri tapi lambatnya penyebaran teknologi.
Terdapat juga unsur makroekonomi dari penurunan laju produktivitas, diakibatkan oleh rendahnya aggregate demand.
Menurut mantan menteri keuangan Amerika Serikat Larry Summers, ketika tingkat investasi yang diperkirakan lebih rendah dari tingkat tabungan meskipun tingkat suku bunganya nol, merosotnya pertumbuhan akan menurunkan PDB dan pertumbuhan produktivitas, lalu menyebabkan apa yang disebut “secular stagnation.”
Namun tentu saja argumen supply and demand sangat berkaitan erat.
Benar bahwa ekspektasi techno-pessimist, yang mungkin menurunkan profit yang diperkirakan, dapat menekan investasi.
Sementara itu, penumpukan pendapatan berlebih di atas – sebuah kondisi yang mungkin diperparah dengan kurang meratanya penyebaran teknologi – menyebabkan kelebihan tabungan.
Strategi apapun untuk mengatasi masalah-masalah yang melandasi rendahnya pertumbuhan produktivitas – mulai dari kurang meratanya penyebaran teknologi hingga ketimpangan pendapatan – harus memecahkan isu keterbatasan keahlian dan ketidaksesuaian yang mempengaruhi kemampuan pasar tenaga kerja untuk memperbaikinya.
Kini, pekerja, terutama dari kelompok berpendapatan rendah, lambat merespon permintaan pekerjaan yang menuntut keahlian lebih tinggi, karena keterbatasan pendidikan dan pelatihan, kekakuan pasar tenaga kerja, dan mungkin juga faktor geografis.
Faktor-faktor tersebut, ditambah dengan rent capture dan winner-take-all markets, akan mengkukuhkan ketidaksetaraan dan meredam daya saing pasar.
Merangsang investasi juga penting.
Di negara-negara maju dan emerging, tingkat investasi merosot pada awal krisis keuangan global tahun 2008 dan belum kembali ke tingkat normal sebelum krisis.
Namun inovasi biasanya melekat pada kepemilikan modal dan memerlukan investasi untuk menyebarkannya di pasar.
Untungnya para pemimpin dunia sadar atas kewajiban yang harus mereka penuhi.
Pada pertemuan G20 summit di Hangzhou, Cina, kepala negara dan pemerintahan menekankan pentingnya peningkatan investasi dan percepatan perubahan-perubahan struktural untuk menambah produktivitas dan merangsang potensi pertumbuhan.
Ini merupakan langkah awal menuju pendekatan terintegrasi yang memecahkan segala benturan yang menghambat penyebaran teknologi, melemahkan daya saing, dan memperburuk ketimpangan.
Kita tidak tahu persis bagaimana teknologi-teknologi baru ini akan berdampak pada perekonomian dunia di jangka panjang.
Namun satu hal yang pasti: paradoks produktivitas itu nyata dan berpengaruh pada memburuknya ketidaksetaraan di tengah masyarakat.
Gunakan momentum yang tercipta sekarang untuk mengatasinya.
Today’s Productivity Paradox
NEW YORK – Recent trends in productivity growth make it hard to be optimistic about the future.
In 2014, the global growth of total factor productivity, or TFP, which measures the combined productivity of capital and labor, was essentially zero for the third consecutive year. This was down from 1% in 1996-2006 and 0.5% in the crisis years of 2007-2012.
And, by every indication, 2015 has been no less dismal.
In the US, revised data released at the beginning of December show productivity up only 0.6% year on year in the third quarter.
If the underlying rate of TFP growth has in fact fallen from its historical norm of 1.5% per year to near zero in countries like the United States, then the living standards of today’s young adults will rise much more slowly than those of their parents.
Any increase will depend entirely on improvements in education and training, which are absent from the data, and from investment in equipment and structures, which is depressed relative to historical levels.
Economists such as Robert Gordon of Northwestern University argue that this slump in productivity growth reflects the stagnation of technology.
Gordon argues that all of the epochal advances, from running water and electricity to the internal combustion and jet engines, have been made.
The positive effect of instant messaging and video gaming on productivity and living standards pales in comparison.
This conclusion will strike many people – especially those of us who live on the fringes of Silicon Valley – as implausible.
We see radical technological advances in robotics, artificial intelligence, biotechnology, and materials design going on all around us.
One view, popular among economic historians, is that it takes time for the productivity-enhancing effects of new technologies to show up.
Indeed, when radical innovations are first rolled out, their immediate effect is to reduce, not raise, productivity.
Electricity, the new technology studied by the eminent Stanford University economic historian Paul David, is a classic case in point.
As David explains, before electric motors were installed in factories, machines were arranged around centralized steam engines, to which they were connected by belts and pulleys.
Self-standing electrical motors allowed machines, the workers operating them, and their activities all to be reorganized in more efficient ways.
But this reorganization took time.
Meanwhile, established modes of production were “disrupted,” in twenty-first-century business-school parlance, causing productivity to fall.
But this slump in productivity was actually a harbinger of better times.
Another prominent economist, Harvard’s Lawrence Summers, has objected that this story is incompatible with a second recent trend, namely declining employment of men aged 25-54.
If productivity has fallen temporarily because everyone is hard at work at the twenty-first-century equivalent of reorganizing the factory floor, then the employment rate should be going up, not down, as firms continue to operate their old “steam-powered machinery” at the same time they are adding new “electrical capacity.”
Employment of prime-age males should be rising, not falling.
But this will be true only if new twenty-first-century technologies require significant amounts of labor to develop and install, compared to the jobs they disrupt and eliminate.
This is not obviously the case.
My favorite example is electronic medical records (my wife is a doctor), which have tremendous potential to enhance the efficiency of health-care delivery in the US.
Even today, most information on patient care is transmitted between clinics and hospitals, and between generalists and specialists, by fax and telephone.
A less efficient system is hard to imagine – other, that is, than attempting to coordinate patient care in the traditional way while undertaking the transition to electronic record keeping.
New systems are being adopted and serially abandoned as their deficiencies are discovered.
Different medical clinics and hospitals are installing systems that are incompatible and unable to communicate with one another.
In the long run, doctors will look back on all of this as healthy experimentation.
For the moment, however, they are tearing their hair out.
They are delivering less patient care as they spend more time hunched over their laptops, inputting data that add nothing, currently, to their productivity.
Moreover, the number of people working at developing electronic medical systems is small relative to the number of medical professionals suffering the effects of this imperfect transitional technology.
Indeed, the number of such people may be even smaller than that of medical professionals who have dropped out of the field in frustration over being unable to deliver care at the standard they were trained to provide.
I am happy to refer those seeking further particulars to one such former practicing physician: my wife.
The Profitability of Trust
GENEVA – The effects of the most devastating financial crisis in decades have begun to fade. But debate about the fundamentals of the global economy is far from over.
Indeed, there has been a new wave of heated discussion about whether companies should put profits or the common good first.
Milton Friedman, a leading proponent of the profit-oriented approach to corporate management, famously declared that “the business of business is business.”
Indeed, from this standpoint, there is no contradiction between profit maximization and the common good.
The pursuit of profit itself is a socially beneficial goal.
A conceptual basis for the opposing perspective, to which I adhere, lies in the Harvard economist Michael Porter’s theory of shared value creation.
In fact, my own publications promote the stakeholder concept as the framework for a modern understanding of socially responsible corporate management.
The theoretical debate could continue indefinitely.
But, in terms of practical company management, such ideological polarization is not particularly useful.
If managers had to choose between fulfilling the expectations of shareholders and meeting their social and ethical responsibilities, their companies would probably collapse.
Instead, successful managers recognize that any company is both an economic and social entity, and thus that no stakeholder can be neglected.
As I wrote more than four decades ago, a company, “like an organism&hellip;depends on several arteries,” all of which it must nurture if it hopes to survive and grow.
That sounds straightforward. But it can be very difficult when the demands of, say, the company’s shareholders conflict with the interests of its employees, customers, or local communities.
The good news is that, in any such conflict, there is one clear, unifying goal: ensuring the company’s long-term success.
This requires, first and foremost, that the company is profitable. But profitability should not be an end in itself; it is a tool to help managers determine the most effective use of their resources and gauge the company’s competitiveness and vitality.
So instead of just paying out dividends, companies should use their profits to bolster their long-term viability.
Profitability, growth, and safeguards against existential risks are crucial to strengthening a company’s long-term prospects.
But if these three factors constitute a company’s “hard power,” firms also need “soft power”: public trust and acceptance, won by fulfilling a company’s social responsibility.
Only when a company has gained the public’s confidence – its “license to operate” – can its management create long-term value for all stakeholders, including shareholders.
In short, the real conflict is not between profit maximization and social responsibility, but rather between short- and long-term thinking.
This, in a sense, is an easier conflict to resolve.
After all, a short-sighted approach not only undermines companies’ prospects; it also threatens the entire economy.
Indeed, managers’ irresponsible focus on advancing shareholders’ immediate interests, thereby maximizing their own bonuses, contributed significantly to bringing the global financial system to the brink of collapse in 2008.
In order to enable a company’s management to accommodate the long-term interests of all stakeholders, corporate decision-making must account for the four prerequisites of a company’s survival: profitability,&nbsp;growth, risk protection, and public trust.
Given that satisfying one of these prerequisites often comes at the cost of the others, such a system would entail continuous adjustment and compromise.
We are emerging from a period when companies, under pressure to meet shareholder expectations, favored profitability and growth, even if it meant taking undue risks and losing public confidence.
Companies now need to work on minimizing risk and building trust by meeting the legitimate expectations of all their stakeholders, including reducing their activities’ adverse impact on the environment and creating high-quality employment opportunities.
But corporate social responsibility is not limited to how a company does business.
Firms should use their core competencies to help find solutions to today’s most pressing social problems.
In other words, beyond serving its own stakeholders, a company should accept its own role as a stakeholder in our collective future – a sort of quid pro quo for its license to operate.
Fortunately, companies are increasingly acting with a sense of social responsibility.
By working with governments, international organizations, and civil society, companies are addressing major challenges like social integration, and creating the necessary systems to provide education and health care to those who need it most.
These companies are implementing the stakeholder concept on a micro and macro level, answering to the demands of their employees, customers, and communities, and thus strengthening their brands.
In doing so, such companies offer a powerful response to the question of what their role in society should be.
More important, they are showing the rest of the corporate sector that the business of advancing the common good is a worthy one.
Putting Profits in Perspective
BERKELEY – High profits are usually viewed as a sign of a company’s economic prowess, the result of innovation and efficiency forged by healthy competition.
But, as a recent report by the US Council of Economic Advisers shows, high profits can have another cause: market concentration.
The report lists several indicators of decreasing competition in the US economy, including a long-term decline in new business formation and the accrual of enormous profits to a small number of firms.
Acting on its recommendations, President Barack Obama recently issued an executive order calling on all US government agencies to use their authority to promote competition.
It is an important moment to assess the state of competition in various sectors.
Many US industries, including some of the most innovative, are dominated by a handful of large companies, some of which enjoy very large market shares and generate returns that greatly exceed historical averages.
And some companies are stockpiling cash or acquiring competitors rather than using their returns to build productive capacity.
Nonetheless, it would be a mistake to conclude that weakening competition is driving these unusual economic trends.
They are taking place in a context of swiftly changing sectoral dynamics and rapid digitization.
Corporate profits may be near all-time highs, but their variance among firms and industries has also increased significantly.
The most profitable firms in the US are no longer in heavy industry; they are in sectors that capitalize on research and development, brands, software, and algorithms.
Companies in sectors like pharmaceuticals, media, finance, information technology, and business services have the highest profit margins.
Even excluding finance, these sectors’ share of US corporate profits has increased significantly, from 25% in 1999 to 35% in 2013.
Corporate profitability is increasingly driven by digital capabilities.
In the most digitally advanced sectors of the economy, margins have grown 2-3 times faster than average.
And even within these sectors, there are enormous spreads between the top-performing companies and the rest of the pack.
The “winner-take-most” dynamic of the digital economy is not only producing record profits for leading firms; it may be accelerating the pace of innovation and broadening the areas in which companies can enter and quickly establish market power.
There are also many reasons why some firms appear to have decided to stockpile their returns.
For starters, while gross business investment as a share of GDP has yet to recover from the 2008 financial crisis, growth in investment has been in line with its historical relationship to output growth.
At the macroeconomic level, investment growth has been weak, because economic growth has been anemic.
At the same time, investment growth has been strong in sectors like technology and – until recently – energy, where demand has been expected to rise.
And while awaiting stronger demand at home, some US companies have been investing in foreign markets, attracted by their size and projected growth.
Second, measurement issues may be clouding investment figures.
The price of capital equipment, particularly ICT equipment and software, has declined sharply since the 1980s, even as quality has improved.
Thus, real price- and quality-adjusted investment may be considerably stronger than official statistics imply.
Third, asset-light, heavily digitized firms have a much larger presence in the US than they did even a decade ago.
By their nature, these firms do not need much in the way of factories, equipment, and fleets of vehicles.
Focusing on their investment in physical capital ignores their ability to generate returns from intellectual property and other intangible assets.
And it overlooks their investment in R&D and intellectual property assets.
In fact, R&D investment has hit a record high, driven by ideas-intensive companies that compete through innovation.
Meanwhile, many leading firms in ideas-intensive sectors are using their substantial cash holdings to grow through mergers and acquisitions.
The bigger and more profitable these firms become, the more they tend to use M&A as one of the few available avenues for continued growth.
To be sure, this could accelerate market concentration.
But it is important to note that the effects of market concentration are changing.
Indeed, in a growing number of digital markets where a few giant firms hold commanding shares, there is little evidence that market power is leading to higher prices.
On the contrary, consumers have gained an array of free services and conveniences.
More relevant concerns about market concentration may turn out to be privacy and data ownership, not pricing power.
Indeed, some have begun to ask whether the collection and control of large amounts of data by a few huge firms with commanding market shares can be an anticompetitive force, creating insurmountable entry barriers for would-be innovators.
At the same time, however, some of the largest digital platforms, by their very nature, may promote competition, as they improve transparency in markets and enable millions of small enterprises to reach customers and suppliers around the world.
A recent study found that digital platforms can help small businesses increase their export rates dramatically.
It is possible that the era of “peak profits” that has sparked concerns about market power is coming to a close.
US corporations have had a remarkable three-decade run, but profits have already slipped from 11.5% of national income in 2012 to 9.5% last year.
Today, wages are rising, borrowing costs have nowhere to go but up, and corporate tax policies are under scrutiny.
On top of those shifts, the digitization of American business is still in its early stages.
Recent research has estimated that the US economy has realized only about 18% of its digital potential.
As the economic transformation continues to play out, the corporate world may become even more Darwinian.
Indeed, many digital behemoths did not exist a decade ago, and it is possible that they will no longer exist a decade from now.
Today’s market leaders may look invincible.
But they can always be toppled by the next new thing.
The Profit-Sharing Economy
BERKELEY – Over the last 35 years, real wages in the United States failed to keep pace with productivity gains; for the typical non-farm worker, the latter grew twice as fast as the former.
Instead, an increasing share of the gains went to a tiny fraction of workers at the very top – typically high-level managers and CEOs – and to shareholders and other capital owners.
In fact, while real wages fell by about 6% for the bottom 10% of the income distribution and grew by a paltry 5-6% for the median worker, they soared by more than 150% for the top 1%.
How can this troubling trend be ameliorated?
One potential solution is broad-based profit-sharing programs.
Together with job training and opportunities for workers to participate in problem-solving and decision-making, such programs have been shown to foster employee engagement and loyalty, reduce turnover, and boost productivity and profitability.
Profit sharing also benefits workers.
Indeed, workers in companies with inclusive profit-sharing and employee-ownership programs typically receive significantly higher wages than workers in comparable companies without such arrangements.
About half of Fortune’s list of the 100 best companies to work for have some kind of profit-sharing or stock-ownership program that extends beyond executives to include regular workers.
Despite the demonstrated benefits of broad-based profit-sharing programs, only about one-third of US private-sector workers participate in them, and about 20% own stock in their companies.
If these programs work so well, why are they not more widespread?
First, executives for whom shared profits already account for a significant portion of income may resist programs that distribute profits to more workers, fearing that their own income would decline.
Even when such programs increase overall profitability, they could reduce the profits going to top management and shareholders.
Second, workers are concerned that profit-sharing may come at the expense of wages, with the substitution of uncertain profits for certain wages resulting in lower overall compensation.
Effective profit-sharing schemes must be structured to prevent this outcome, and strong collective bargaining rights can help provide the necessary safeguards.
Third, if inclusive profit-sharing programs are to have the desired effect on productivity, they should be combined with other initiatives to empower workers.
One way to achieve this is by establishing “works councils,” elected groups of employees with rights to information and consultation, including on working conditions.
Works councils and strong collective bargaining rights, both features of high-productivity workplaces, are common in developed economies.
But they are lacking in the US, where federal law makes it difficult for companies to establish works councils and prohibits negotiations between employers and employees over working conditions outside of collective bargaining, even though most workers lack collective bargaining rights.
Promisingly, the United Automobile Workers union recently announced that, as it continues to push for collective bargaining rights, it is also cooperating with management to form a works council in the German-owned Volkswagen plant in Tennessee.
The fourth impediment to the establishment of profit-sharing programs is that they require a fundamental shift in corporate culture.
Though most companies emphasize the importance of their human capital, top executives and shareholders still tend to view labor primarily as a cost driver, rather than a revenue driver – a view embedded in traditional and costly-to-change human-resources practices.
Unlike the financial benefits of reducing labor costs, the financial benefits of profit sharing, realized gradually through greater employee engagement and reduced turnover, are difficult to measure, uncertain, and unlikely to have an immediate effect on earnings per share, a major determinant of executive compensation.
It is unsurprising, therefore, that the advantages of profit-sharing are undervalued by many companies, especially those that focus on short-term success metrics.
Moreover, even when they do recognize the advantages of profit sharing, companies may lack the technical knowledge needed to design a program that suits their needs.
Some states have established technical-assistance offices primarily to help small and medium-size companies overcome this gap.
The federal government should create its own technical-assistance program to build on states’ efforts and reach a larger number of companies.
From a policy perspective, much more can be done to encourage firms to create broad-based profit-sharing arrangements.
Current US law allows businesses to deduct from their taxable income the wages of all employees, except the top five executives, for whom deductions are limited to $1 million of annual pay, unless the excess compensation is “performance-related.”
Spurred partly by this tax incentive, corporations have shifted top executives’ compensation toward shares, options, and other forms of profit sharing and stock ownership, largely leaving out regular workers.
Some have proposed limiting the tax deduction for performance-based pay to firms with broad-based profit-sharing programs.
But, although this approach might encourage profit sharing with more workers, it would continue to provide companies with significant tax breaks for huge compensation packages for top executives.
US presidential candidate Hillary Clinton has a more targeted proposal: a 15% tax credit for profits that companies distribute to workers over two years.
By providing temporary tax relief, the scheme would help companies offset the administrative costs of establishing a profit-sharing program.
In order to limit costs and prevent abuse, profits totaling more than 10% on top of an employee’s wage would be excluded; the overall amount offered to individual firms would be capped; and safeguards against the substitution of profit sharing for wages, raises, and other benefits would be established.
The tax credit could also foster changes in corporate culture, by spurring board-level discussions not only of the benefits of profit sharing, but also of sharing information and decision-making authority with employees.
The stagnant incomes of the majority of US workers are undermining economic growth on the demand side (by discouraging household consumption) and on the supply side (through adverse effects on educational opportunity, human-capital development, and innovation).
It is time to take action to promote stronger and more equitable growth.
Clinton’s profit-sharing proposal is a promising step in the right direction.
Making Higher Education Pay
BERKELEY – Higher education is a great investment, with each additional year of post-secondary education yielding a 10-15% return, on average.
For university graduates, that means hundreds of thousands of dollars over a lifetime.
Unfortunately, students aspiring to a higher education, especially those from low-income families and underperforming secondary schools, lack the information they need to make wise choices about where to go and what to study to maximize the return on their investment.
In the United States, President Barack Obama’s administration is trying to close that information gap with the College ScoreCard, a free, easily searchable database that offers unbiased information about the performance and costs of US public and private institutions providing post-secondary education.
Instead of proposing an overall ranking of institutions based on some composite measure of key indicators, the database offers detailed data covering five broad categories: costs, student debt and repayment, degree completion rates, post-enrollment earnings, and access for disadvantaged students.
Making federal data readily available to the private sector and encouraging open innovation platforms to address social challenges are hallmarks of Obama’s government.
Journalists are already crunching the numbers in the College ScoreCard to propose rankings and recommendations.
Ideas for new business opportunities are sure to follow.
The College ScoreCard is a big step forward for transparency.
It will not only help students and their families make better choices; it will also spur a dialogue that encourages research and innovation by educators and state policymakers, and puts pressure on underperforming institutions to improve.
For students, this information can prove to be invaluable.
As Isabel Sawhill and Stephanie Owen of the Brookings Institution found, there are large variations in returns by institution and major.
While the average four-year college degree delivers $570,000 in additional lifetime earnings, the returns on investment are actually negative for one in five of the institutions in their 853-institution sample.
Likewise, the University of Pennsylvania’s Peter Cappelli estimates that as many as one in four college programs yield negative returns for their students.
There is also large variation in the returns among programs offering associate degrees (generally two years of post-secondary education) and vocational training.
At the same time, tuition costs are climbing much faster than median family incomes across the board.
Student loan debt has quadrupled since 2010, now totaling more than $1 trillion.
Worse yet, many of the more expensive colleges – especially private, for-profit institutions – have low graduation rates.
Researchers at the US Treasury Department and the Brookings Institution recently found that 70% of students who defaulted after leaving college in 2011 came from “non-traditional” institutions – mostly for-profit universities.
These problems raise the imperative of developing new models of education delivery.
In that effort, “progressive” federalism – whereby the federal government sets goals for performance, affordability, and access; demands accountability by providers; and spurs private and public institutions at the state and local levels to innovate – can play a critical role.
Conservative skeptics argue that higher education is a matter for the states, not the federal government.
But the federal government already plays a major financial role in higher education.
Indeed, while states account for the bulk of public spending on higher education, the federal government finances a big share of that spending via guaranteed loans and grants to students.
The problem is that the institutions of higher education – both public and private – that have been receiving significant levels of federal support have not been subject to much accountability.
Meanwhile, many states have slashed public spending on higher education and tried to make up the difference by raising tuition and forcing students to take on more federally financed debt.
A well-designed progressive federalist policy for higher education would set goals for key performance indicators – based on the measures highlighted in the College ScoreCard – and reward states that advance toward those goals.
It would encourage and finance state efforts to test new approaches to expand access, increase graduation rates, and improve students’ lifetime outcomes.
Presidential candidate Hillary Clinton’s higher-education reform proposals embody such a progressive federalist approach.
Her “College Compact” would grant federal subsidies to states if they commit to – and succeed in – containing the costs of higher education, including by providing free enrollment at two-year community colleges.
Many institutions of higher education are already testing new models.
Arizona State University has deployed an array of online technologies, as well as mentoring programs, to keep students on track.
Since 2008, ASU’s cost per graduate (which includes both state spending and tuition) has fallen from $68,000 to $56,000.
Last year, ASU teamed up with Starbucks to allow the company’s employees to complete their college degrees for free online.
Meanwhile, the school’s overall graduation rate has climbed from 33% to 49%.
Another promising innovator is Western Governors University, a private nonprofit online institution founded by 19 state governors that serves about 58,000 students spread across the US.
WGU offers accredited college-degree programs in fields from teaching and nursing to business.
By focusing on the attainment of specific competencies, rather than on the amount of time spent in a classroom, WGU has been able to offer flexibility at bargain rates; a full-time program, including textbooks and a mentor, costs about $6,000 a year.
Progressive federalism can also build on state and local innovations to expand access.
Tennessee, a Republican-led state, has attracted nationwide attention with a program to offer all high school graduates free tuition at any community college.
The program is funded by the state’s lottery, and brings Tennessee closer than any other state to making community college as universal as high school.
Indeed, Obama cited Tennessee as inspiration for his proposal to make community college tuition-free nationwide.
Progressive federalism offers a way to tap into and build on these innovations.
The federal government can and should set the strategic direction, establish measurable goals, and foster new models wherever they might arise to build an educational system fit for the twenty-first century.
A Progressive Logic of Trade
CAMBRIDGE – The global trade regime has never been very popular in the United States.
Neither the World Trade Organization nor the multitudes of regional trade deals such as the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) and the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) have had strong support among the general public. But opposition, while broad, was diffuse.
The difference today is that international trade has moved to the center of the political debate.
The US presidential candidates Bernie Sanders and Donald Trump have both made opposition to trade agreements a key plank of their campaigns.
And, judging from the tone of the other candidates, standing up for globalization constitutes electoral suicide in the current political climate.
The populist rhetoric on trade may be excessive, but few deny any longer that the underlying grievances are real.