Ketika pertumbuhan sedang kuat-kuatnya, warga menuntut pemerintah agar tidak menghentikan pendapatan yang diperoleh dengan mudah tanpa usaha.
(Warga cenderung mengabaikan bahwa sedikit sekali bukti yang menunjukkan penerapan pajak karbon secara progresif akan berdampak buruk pada pembangunan.)  Ketika pertumbuhan melemah, warga mempertanyakan betapa dukungan terhadap kebijakan iklim justru akan memperburuk keadaan.
Sepertinya tidak pernah ada momentum yang sempurna untuk memperkenalkan kebijakan-kebijakan iklim baru.
Permasalahan jangka panjang membutuhkan kebijakan yang menunjukkan komitmen jangka panjang dan kebijakan semacam ini tidak bisa terus-menerus diperbaiki sesuai naik-turunnya keadaan.
Kecenderungan ini hanya akan memicu ketidakstabilan lebih parah (yang justru melemahkan pembangunan).
Sebetulnya tidak akan pernah ada waktu yang tepat, lebih baik bertindak sekarang atau menanggung akibatnya nanti.
Akan tetapi kita jangan berkhayal bahwa hasil perubahan ini akan diwujudkan melalui proses yang mudah dan bertahap.
Perubahan teknologi akan merangsang creative destruction.
Akan ada – dan pasti ada – pihak yang kalah, tapi juga akan banyak muncul pemenang ketika teknologi baru menciptakan peluang bisnis.
Pemerintah yang berusaha mempertahankan status quo tidak hanya akan gagal menghadapi perubahan iklim; pada akhirnya ini akan menyebabkan biaya-biaya sosial yang lebih tinggi, meskipun mereka gagal memanfaatkan peluang ekonomi yang dihasilkan dari reformasi.
Kebijakan perubahan iklim harus bersifat konsisten dan stabil.
Setiap tindakan harus memudahkan perubahan, bukan menghentikannya.
Ketika investor melihat bahwa keunggulan bahan bakar fosil sudah habis, pemerintah harus membiarkan dampak-dampak capital reallocation bermunculan.
Jalan ini mungkin berliku-liku namun tidak ada pilihan lain.
Upaya memperbaiki jalur penyesuaian ekonomi dan teknis akan sama sia-sianya dengan upaya mengendalikan harga minyak bumi.
Privacy for Refugees
LONDON – With people living so much of their lives online nowadays, it is easier than ever for governments and companies to collect large amounts of personal information.
Not surprisingly, data privacy is a hot topic.
But there are plenty of people being left out of the debates.
And, unfortunately, those are the people who need the most attention.
As much as Internet companies like Facebook or Google want to collect data about their users, there are limits to their power to do so.
Most of the time, there is a way to opt out of providing personal data, even if it is sometimes buried deep in a complex set of privacy settings.
If those opt-outs are not convincing enough, there are privacy-focused search engines or email providers.
But some vulnerable populations – such as the nearly five million Syrians who have been forced from their home country – cannot opt out, unless they want to be sent right back to a warzone.
If they hope to be granted refugee status – not to mention food, clothing, shelter, and other basic necessities – they have to give whatever information the NGOs, IGOs, aid agencies, and humanitarian workers request.
In other words, for refugees, whether to provide personal information, from religious beliefs to biometric data, can be a matter of life and death.
But what if those data fell into the wrong hands?
With the organizations responsible for data security operating in low-resource, high-pressure circumstances, it is not an unreasonable question.
The exposed refugees might be in serious danger.
Sensitive information is being circulated among an increasingly wide array of actors, such as third-party financial institutions, technology developers, cloud computing service providers, and other humanitarian agencies.
Every time that information is shared – whether it is entered into a new database or a new actor gains access to a single aggregated database – the risk of privacy breaches grows.
There is no shortage of groups that would love to get their hands on the data.
Over the last few years, the Syrian Electronic Army, which supports the brutal regime of President Bashar al-Assad, has successfully hacked into a number of secure databases.
Of course, this is not to say that collecting data on refugees is fundamentally wrong.
The reality is that many governments could not justify accepting refugees without a thorough vetting process – and that demands data.
Moreover, using biometric data like iris scans, rather than bankcards, offers some advantages for aid-delivery – namely, ensuring that assistance is delivered to its intended recipient.
But there is a need to assess whether all of the kinds of data that are currently collected are really needed.
Does collecting them genuinely advance the objectives of providing support to refugees?
Are the benefits of using biometric data significant enough that refugees should have no alternative?
(According to a 2013 report, many refugees are indeed concerned about providing biometric data.)
For the data that are deemed useful and necessary, there is a need to review collection, storage, and sharing processes, in order to ensure that sensitive information is never compromised.
Exchanges of personal data among companies, humanitarian groups, and government agencies should be allowed only when they are truly necessary, and should be conducted as securely as possible.
Privacy is not a privilege – a comfort that desperate people should have to give up.
It is a fundamental human right, enshrined in the United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
International law obliges data controllers and processors to protect data sets containing personal data, particularly in the context of large-scale monitoring of individuals.
Though some IGOs are exempt from these requirements, such organizations must strive to implement best practices with regard to privacy, ethics, and data protection.
After all, it makes little sense to collect data for the sake of protecting vulnerable populations, only to leave those data vulnerable to breaches by dangerous actors.
The first step is to carry out a privacy impact assessment (PIA).
A PIA is a tool used to identify, analyze, and mitigate privacy risks arising from technological systems or processes.
While there is no single established approach to undertaking a PIA, experience has produced some best practices, comprising a set of privacy principles and criteria, according to which systems for collecting, storing, and share refugees’ data should be assessed.
For a PIA to work, it must weigh privacy against other imperatives, such as efficient aid provision.
Given the lack of experience with this type of assessment, the framework and those applying it should be flexible.
In settings that are continually changing, in response to the needs and capabilities of a range of actors, an iterative approach with qualitative elements is imperative.
There is no perfect methodology, and practice will always differ from theory.
But a high-quality PIA can help an organization assess and mitigate the privacy risks associated with the use of information and communications technology, biometric technologies, geo-location tracking devices, and so on.
It is not a solution to the privacy challenge faced by refugees and their advocates, but it is an important step in the right direction.
Rio’s Unsustainable Nonsense
NEW YORK – If George Orwell were alive today, he would be irritated, and then shocked, by the cynical way in which every lobby with an axe to grind and money to burn has hitched its wagon to the alluring phrase “sustainable development.”
In fact, the United Nations’ Rio+20 Conference on Sustainable Development is about pet projects of all and sundry – many of them tangential to the major environmental issues, such as climate change, that were the principal legacy of the original Rio Earth Summit.
Thus, the International Labor Organization and trade-union lobbies have managed to insert “Decent Jobs” into the seven priority areas at the Rio conference.
I would love for everyone, everywhere, to have a decent job.
But what does that have to do with either the environment or “sustainability?”
No one should pretend that we can magically offer decent jobs to the huge numbers of impoverished but aspiring workers in the informal sector.
Such jobs can only be created by adopting appropriate economic policies.
Indeed, the really pressing task facing many developing economies is to pursue policies that promote economic opportunities by accelerating growth.
The flavor of the week in Rio is “sustainability indexing” for corporations, by way of corporate social responsibility (CSR).
Such indexing is being compared to accounting standards.
But the latter are “technical” and gain from standardization; the former are not and must reflect variety instead.
Corporations can, of course, be asked to conform to a “don’t” list – don’t dump mercury into rivers, don’t employ children for hazardous tasks, etc.
But what they practice as “do’s” by way of altruism is surely a matter of what they consider virtuous to spend their money on.
The notion that a self-appointed set of activists, in conjunction with some governments and international agencies, can determine what a corporation should do by way of CSR contradicts the liberal notion that we should ask for virtue to be pursued, but not in a particular way.
At a time when the world is emphasizing the importance of diversity and tolerance, it is effrontery to suggest that corporations should standardize their notion of how they wish to promote good in the world.
Even when the Rio+20 agenda includes something more properly “environmental” – say, the supply of water – platitudes predominate.
Thus, the availability of safe drinking water is now to be enshrined as a “right.”
We have traditionally distinguished in human-rights conventions between (mandatory) civil and political rights, such as the right to habeas corpus, from (aspirational) economic rights, because the latter require resources.
Blurring that distinction – thereby disregarding the problem of scarcity – is no solution.
After all, “availability” can be interpreted according to many criteria and thus in myriad ways: How much water?
At what distance from different households (or by pipe into each house)?
At what cost?
These decisions have different implications for the availability of water, and they must compete, in any event, against other “rights” and resource uses.
In the end, therefore, water availability cannot properly be called a “right.”
Rather, it is a “priority,” and countries will inevitably differ in the sequence with which they pursue it relative to others.
While these are “sins of commission,” the “sins of omission” at Rio+20 are even more glaring.
For a conference that is supposedly addressing “sustainability,” it is worth lamenting the absence of a heroic effort to agree on a successor treaty to the Kyoto Accord.
If the cataclysmic scenarios implied by neglect of climate change are valid – and extreme estimates, it must be said, could backfire politically by looking implausible or, worse, by producing a “Nero effect” (if Rome is burning, let’s party) – Rio+20’s lack of action should be regarded as an historic failure.
But a matching omission is that prompted by our societies’ increasing political unsustainability, not because of the immediate financial problems like those afflicting Europe and threatening the world, but because the modern media have made visible to all the disparities in the fortunes of the rich and the poor.
The rich should be urged not to flaunt their wealth: extravagance amid much poverty arouses wrath.
The poor, meanwhile, need a fair shot at raising their incomes.
That can only come through access to education and economic opportunity, both in poor and rich countries.
“Less Excess and More Access”: only a policy mix based on this credo will guarantee that our societies remain viable and achieve genuine “sustainability.”
The Dangerous Rise of Buddhist Chauvinism
TOKYO – The Buddha, Siddhartha Gautama, composed no sutta to religious hatred or racial animus.
And yet Buddhist chauvinism now threatens the democratic process in both Myanmar (Burma) and Sri Lanka.
Some of the same Buddhist monks who braved Myanmar’s military junta in the “Saffron Revolution” of 2007 today incite violence against members of the country’s Muslim Rohingya minority.
In Sri Lanka, the ethnic chauvinism of the Buddhist Sinhalese, stirred by a former president determined to reclaim power, mocks the supposed goal of reconciliation with the vanquished Hindu Tamils.
In Myanmar, Buddhist racism is at the root of a virtual civil war in the state of Rakhine and is fueling a humanitarian crisis in which hundreds of thousands of Muslim Rohingya have fled their country by land and sea.
Most ominous for Myanmar’s future, given that all genocides are linked to official action, this racial and religious antagonism is in no way spontaneous.
The Rohingya have already been stripped of their Myanmar citizenship, and a raft of new and proposed legislation that would further marginalize Islam seems certain to provoke further violence.
A new marriage law, for example, requires interfaith couples to register their intent to marry with local authorities, who will display a public notice of the engagement; only if no citizen objects to the union – highly unlikely in the present tense climate – is the couple permitted to wed.
Another bill in the pipeline would forbid anyone under the age of 18 from converting to another religion, and would require even an adult seeking to convert to gain the permission – subject to repeated interrogation – of local officials.
Perhaps most disturbing, a third recent bill would allow for the imposition of Chinese-style population control on any group with a growth rate that is higher than the national average.
Women could be ordered to wait, say, three years after the birth of a child before having another.
Here, too, local governments, which are the most susceptible to popular prejudices, will be empowered to implement a law that seems specifically targeted at the Rohingyas, with their large families.
These laws do not yet amount to an updated version of the Nuremberg laws (the anti-Jewish legislation enacted by the Nazis in 1935).
But they do reflect the agenda of those seeking to fan Buddhist resentment in order to thwart Myanmar’s democratic transition.
That dark ambition has gained urgency, because the country is due to hold its first democratic presidential election since the transition began in 2011.
The Rohingyas are, of course, the main target of this strategy.
But there is another target as well: Aung San Suu Kyi, the Nobel Peace Prize laureate and opposition leader.
For now, Suu Kyi is precluded from running for President by a cynical constitutional provision that excludes anyone whose spouse or child has a foreign passport (Suu Kyi’s two sons by her late English husband hold British passports).
Nonetheless, the regime, still fearing her popularity, is playing the race and religion card in order to discredit her and her party, the National League for Democracy, which won all but one of the parliamentary seats contested in the recent general election (and swept the annulled 1990 election).
By stoking Buddhist violence against the Rohingya, the regime aims to damage Suu Kyi and the NLD’s chances of victory in two ways.
If she speaks out for the Rohingya, her appeal among Buddhists, the vast majority of Myanmar’s citizens, may be dented enough to preserve the army’s grip on power.
If she does not defend the Rohingya, her aura of moral leadership may be dimmed among her own supporters, both at home and abroad.
So far, Suu Kyi has circumvented this booby trap with the verbal evasiveness that one would expect of an ordinary politician, rather than someone of her courage and standing.
But, as the violence grows and the election nears, her room for maneuver will undoubtedly narrow.
Instead of highlighting the country’s real needs – serious land reform, an anti-corruption drive, and freeing the economy from oligarchic control – she may instead be drawn into defending an unpopular minority.
A similar political imperative is at the heart of the Sinhalese chauvinism that has made a sudden return to public life in Sri Lanka.
The religious and ethnic passions of the Sinhalese were encouraged during the final, bloody push that ended Sri Lanka’s quarter-century of civil war with the Tamil Tigers in 2009.
But instead of seeking reconciliation with the Tamils following their defeat, then-President Mahinda Rajapaksa continued to play on ethnic hatred as he subverted Sri Lanka’s democracy.
Rajapaksa’s unexpected defeat by a coalition of Sri Lanka’s democrats and Tamil political parties in last January’s presidential election – a result that he then sought to annul – should have ended both his career and the politics of race-baiting.
But the former president is now mounting a furious comeback bid and might well win the parliamentary election scheduled for August 17.
One reason for Rajapaksa’s potential victory is his deep pockets; another is that he can probably count on support from China, having allowed the construction of ports and other facilities for the People’s Liberation Army during his presidency.
But the key to his fortunes has been his effort to stoke the fears of the majority Sinhalese.
Rajapaksa is thus placing Prime Minister Ranil Wickremesinghe in the same difficult position faced in Myanmar by Suu Kyi.
So far, Wickremesinghe has succeeded in suggesting that the Sinhalese have more to fear from the return of Rajapaksa than they do from the country’s ethnic minorities.
But no one should ever underestimate the power of hatred to undermine a democracy from within.
The Evolving Independent Economy
BERKELEY – Working full-time for a single employer is no longer the norm in advanced economies.
Instead, millions of “independent workers” – self-employed, freelance, or temporary employees – sell their labor, services, and products through digital platforms to numerous employers or clients.
The growing share of independent work, which typically entails flexible hours, promises to bring significant aggregate economic gains, by raising labor-force participation rates, increasing the overall number of hours worked, and reducing unemployment.
But the “gig economy” also creates complex new policy challenges in taxation, regulation, and access to social benefits and protections that traditionally have been provided through standard employer-employee relationships.
According to a McKinsey Global Institute study, up to 162 million people throughout the United States and the EU-15 are currently engaged in some form of independent work.
Based on a representative online survey of 8,000 workers in six countries (including the US), McKinsey found that 10-15% of the working-age population relies on independent work for their primary income.
Another 10-15% – including students, retirees, household caregivers, and those with traditional jobs – take on such work to supplement their income.
McKinsey’s findings challenge several common beliefs about independent work.
First, the independent workforce is not dominated by young people: people under age 25 represent just 25% of independent workers.
The independent workforce is also diverse in terms of income level, education, gender, occupation, and industry.
Moreover, 70-75% of those engaged in independent work do so by choice, rather than out of necessity – a finding that is consistent with the results of other recent studies.
Indeed, although 40-55% of low-income workers (earning $25,000 or less per year) engage in some independent work, they comprise less than 25% percent of all independent earners.
Only about one-third of survey respondents said they rely on independent work because they cannot find conventional jobs or need supplemental income to make ends meet.
That minority, however, still amounts to a large number of people.
It is estimated that more than 50 million Americans and Europeans are engaged in independent work out of necessity, and more than 20 million rely on independent work as their primary source of income.
Many are low-income workers who would otherwise be unemployed.
This suggests that stronger economic – and, thus, employment – growth would reduce the number of workers engaged in independent work.
But, regardless of macroeconomic conditions, independent work is likely to account for a rising share of work in the long run, owing to technological advances and individual preferences.
While digital platforms for independent work are still in the early stages of their development, and are being used by only 15% of independent workers, they are proliferating and expanding rapidly.
McKinsey estimates that 30-45% of the working-age population would prefer to earn an income, whether primary or secondary, from independent work.
That trend poses challenges and opportunities for policymakers, workers, and employers.
Policymakers need to collect better data on the independent workforce through regular surveys.
They must also update how independent workers are categorized, in order to adapt taxation, regulation, and benefits and protections (including anti-discrimination laws and minimum wages) accordingly.
The policy issues for high-skill professionals acting as independent agents are not the same as those for low-skill workers selling their services through large digital platforms like Uber.
Updating the provision and delivery of benefits may be particularly challenging.
Some European countries are tackling the issue by creating new classifications of work, with new benefit systems.
British law distinguishes between traditional employees and “workers,” who are entitled to only some employee rights.
In the US, there is a growing interest in a system of portable, pro-rated benefits – such as unemployment and disability insurance and pensions – tied to workers, rather than employers.
Another option in the US would be new unions or collective organizations (guilds) of workers, both to negotiate the terms of independent-work contracts and to track and organize benefits for workers who serve many clients and employers.
Similar systems are already in place for the construction and entertainment industries.
Entrepreneurs also have opportunities to create new products and services tailored to the needs of the independent workforce.
These could include shared office spaces, financial solutions that smooth out income between work assignments, training programs, and the creation of widely recognized credentials to enable independent workers to advance their work and income opportunities.
Employers, for their part, will need to learn when to rely on internal talent and when to turn to independent workers.
Many factors will influence that decision, including cost, quality, productivity, and the security of proprietary information.
Finally, there is the responsibility of workers themselves to assert more control over their own careers, seeking opportunities and developing differentiated skills to avoid being relegated to a low-wage generalist talent pool or displaced by intelligent machines.
This may prove to be the most important element of the emerging labor-market transformation: workers are a driving force behind it.
Of course, digital technologies have also played a vital role in facilitating the rise of independent work.
Digital platforms like Airbnb, Etsy, and Uber have been critical in reducing the friction and increasing the transparency of the markets that support independent work.
And innovation in this area remains robust.
But it is these platforms’ users who are really reshaping the labor market.
Aided by digital technologies, they are advancing their own interest in earning more, while benefiting from more flexible working arrangements.
The likely result of this trend will be a shift from the old model of business organization – in which most workers carry out specialized functions for a single employer within a rigid hierarchy – to one centered on lean core organizations that rely on a loose network of external providers for many tasks.
Whether this new system is actually good for workers, employers, and economies, however, will depend on how all of the relevant actors address the challenges inherent in the transition.
Rise Up and Walk
In July 2005, millions of people filled stadiums for the Live 8 concerts in support of Africa’s people.
It was also for ordinary citizens that African leaders traveled to Scotland to meet the G-8 heads of state that summer.
It was for these same people that the Jubilee 2000 campaign for debt relief was carried out by many individuals and organizations all over the world.
And in St. Petersberg in July 2006, the G-8 leaders reaffirmed their commitment to the ambitious goals they had set the year before, although they did not go further.
Nearly a year and a half on, there are signs of progress toward fulfilling the commitments to Africa’s development made by world leaders and committed campaigners.
But it is fair to ask when a sustainable solution to Africa’s dehumanizing poverty will be found, not only by the G8 and the organizers of Live 8, but also by Africa’s leaders and people.
Africa is a paradox.
It is one of the richest continents on the planet, endowed with oil, precious stones, forests, water, wildlife, soil, land, agricultural products, and millions of women and men.
Yet most of Africa’s people remain impoverished.
I continue to ask myself, “Why?”
One reason is that many Africans lack the knowledge, skills, tools, and the political will to create wealth from their resources.
They are unable to add value to raw materials in order to sell processed goods in local and international markets and negotiate better prices and favorable trade rules.
Another reason is that ordinary citizens suffer when debts are not cancelled, when financial assistance is not forthcoming, or when trade barriers are raised.
I have also seen the need for ordinary Africans to embrace a set of values, like service for the common good, and commitment, persistence, and patience until a goal is realized.
We also need Africans who love Africa so much that they want to protect their countries – their land – from environmentally destructive processes.
The transformation of grasslands into deserts due to deforestation, encroachment into forests for subsistence farming, overgrazing, and loss of biodiversity and soil threaten the entire continent.
Another value Africans must adopt is love and concern for young people.
One of the most devastating experiences is to see youth wasting away because they are unemployed, even after they have completed secondary and tertiary education, or because their health has deteriorated.
African governments should give priority to investments in technical education and HIV/AIDS prevention, treatment, care, and support programs.
Without skills, people find themselves locked out of productive, rewarding economic activities, leaving them unable to meet their needs for housing, healthcare and nutrition.
They get trapped in a vicious cycle of poverty and, sometimes, crime.
Africa needs to prepare for the opportunities and challenges to come by deliberately working for peace and security.
Much of Africa’s poverty is fueled by conflicts.
In the course of my work over the past 30 years, I have observed that whether it is at the national or regional level, most conflicts are over resources.
Who will control and utilize them?
Who will be included or excluded?
When resources are scarce, or so degraded that they can no longer sustain livelihoods, or inequitably distributed, conflict invariably ensues.
In Africa, we need to manage our resources sustainably, accountably, and responsibly.
And we need to share those resources equitably.
Otherwise, we will continue to invest in wars and conflicts, or in fighting crime and domestic instability, rather than in promoting development and thereby eliminating poverty.
African leaders should govern and serve for the benefit of the people, not themselves.
But perhaps the most unrecognized problem in Africa, especially at the grassroots level, is the disempowerment of ordinary people.
This is one of the main reasons why so many people are unable to take advantage of the many opportunities available in Africa.
Africa’s people must be allowed to gain confidence, dignity, and a sense of self-worth.
They must also be empowered with knowledge, skills, and tools to take action.
This is why debt relief is so important.
It provides governments additional resources to invest in initiatives that can empower their people.
Despite the many challenges that remain, there has been much recent progress in Africa.
There are indications of good governance in many countries.
In many others, civil society continues to grow, supported by national governments, the African Union, and the international community.
Many countries are resolving their conflicts and working for peace and stability.
We must appreciate and encourage those who are making bold decisions.
But much must still be accomplished, by Africans and with Africa’s many friends around the world.
As in the Bible story, when Peter and John said to a beggar, “rise up and walk,” Africans are called upon to walk away from ignorance, inertia, apathy, and fatalism.
To walk towards economic and political freedom.
To walk to an Africa free of poverty.
How Much Debt Is Too Much?
LONDON – Is there a “safe” debt/income ratio for households or debt/GDP ratio for governments?
In both cases, the answer is yes.
And in both cases, it is impossible to say exactly what that ratio is.
Nonetheless, this has become the most urgent macroeconomic question of the moment, owing not just to spiraling household and government debt since 2000, but also – and more important – to the excess concern that government debt is now eliciting.
According to a 2015 report by the McKinsey Global Institute, household debt in many advanced countries doubled, to more than 200% of income, between 2000 and 2007.
Since then, households in the countries hardest hit in the 2008-2009 economic crisis have deleveraged somewhat, but the household debt ratio in most advanced countries has continued to grow.
The big upsurge in government debt followed the 2008-2009 collapse.
For example, British government debt rose from just over 40% of GDP in 2007 to 92% today.
Persistent efforts by heavily indebted governments to eliminate their deficits have caused debt ratios to rise, by shrinking GDP, as in Greece, or by delaying recovery, as in the UK.
Before modern finance made it easy to live on borrowed money, getting into debt was considered immoral.
“Neither a borrower nor a lender be,” Shakespeare’s Polonius admonishes his son Laertes.
The expectation of uninterrupted economic growth brought a new perspective.
Mortgage debt, unknown a century ago, now accounts for 74% of household debt in developed countries (43% in developing ones).
Banks have been lending, and households borrowing, as if tomorrow was sure to be better than today.
Likewise, governments used to be expected to balance their budgets, except during wartime.
But they, too, came to expect continually rising revenues at unchanged, or even falling, tax rates.
So it seemed prudent to borrow against the future.
Today, with many households and governments facing severe financing problems, that no longer appears to be true.
But the only certainty is that the “safe” debt ratio depends on the context.
Consider Denmark and the United States.
In 2007, Denmark’s household debt/income ratio reached 269%, while the US peak was 125%.
But household default rates have been negligible in Denmark, unlike in the US, where, in the depths of the recession, almost a quarter of mortgages were “under water” and some homeowners chose strategic default – fueling further downward pressure on housing prices and harming other indebted households.
This can be attributed to the distribution of borrowers.
In Denmark, high-income households borrowed the most, relative to their income, and standards for mortgage lending remained high (mortgages were capped at 80% of the value of the property).
In the US, households with the lowest income (the bottom quintile) had a higher debt/income ratio than the top 10%, and mortgages were dispensed like gumballs.
In the US, as well as in Spain and Ireland, banks and households became what the Financial Times columnist Martin Wolf called “highly leveraged speculators in a fixed asset.”
As for government debt, Japan’s debt/GDP ratio is 230%, compared to Greece’s 177%.
But the consequences have been much more dire in Greece than in Japan.
The distribution of the creditors is crucial.
Most of Japan’s bondholders are nationals (if not the central bank) and have an interest in political stability.
Most Greek bondholders are foreign banks.
Yet, while crises of confidence come much sooner if debt is mainly owned by foreigners, no steps have been taken to restrict government borrowing to domestic sources.
We now know that the expectation of uninterrupted growth was a delusion.
But governments have been slow to rearm against the next crisis.
Macro-prudential tools like counter-cyclical capital and reserve requirements on banks have been emasculated by vested interests in the financial industry.
And, while governments have been trying (albeit ineffectually) to reduce their net liabilities, they have been encouraging households to increase their debt, in order to support the restoration of “healthy” growth.
The McKinsey report uses consensus data from the International Monetary Fund and the OECD to forecast that, with the notable exceptions of Germany, Greece, and Ireland, the debt/GDP ratio in advanced economies is set to rise.
This seems alarming.
But a great deal of the alarm is based on the oft-repeated canard that government spending is unproductive and a burden on future generations.
In fact, future generations will benefit more than the current one from government infrastructure investment, so it is reasonable that they should pay for most for it.
The purpose for which the debt is incurred is important.
Debt crises are likelier if debt is being used to cover current spending.
But now, when real interest rates are almost zero or negative, is the ideal time for governments to borrow for capital spending.
Bondholders shouldn’t worry about debt if it gives rise to a productive asset.
All governments nowadays aim for a fiscal surplus to pay down debt.
This is sensible, but how it is done matters.
In conditions of incomplete recovery and stagnating growth, raising taxes or cutting welfare spending is the wrong approach; fiscal consolidation requires taking active steps to increase GDP growth.
In the long run, this can be achieved only by raising productivity.
But governments can help make the long run shorter.
They have been relying on printing money to offset their fiscal policies’ deflationary effects.
But as McKinsey puts it, “Liquidity...cannot translate into inflation when demand is depressed, the propensity to save is high, and banks are still de-leveraging.”
Expansionary fiscal policy is taboo, because it threatens to increase national debt further.
But much depends on how governments present their accounts.
In 2014, the Bank of England held 24% of UK government debt.
If we discount this, the UK’s debt/GDP ratio was 63%, not 92%.
So it makes more sense to focus on debt net of government borrowing from the central bank.
Governments should be ready to say that they have no intention of repaying the debt they owe their own bank.
Monetary financing of government spending is one of those taboo ideas that is sure to gain support, if, as is likely, economic recovery grinds to a halt.
Egypt’s Security Harvest
LONDON – “I have a request for all Egyptians,” General Abdel Fattah El-Sisi, Egypt’s president, declared in 2013.
Just three weeks after staging the most brutal military coup in Egypt’s history, he wanted “all honorable, decent Egyptians” to take to the streets to march for the military, thereby giving him and his army “a mandate and an order to fight potential violence and terrorism.”
Tens of thousands of Egyptians heeded his call.
Yet, three years later, the violence and terrorism Sisi pledged to prevent remain a potent reality.
In fact, the military itself has been a leading perpetrator – and instigator – of violence.
Its assertion of leadership included cracking down on anyone who protested the overthrow of Egypt’s first-ever freely elected president, Mohammed Morsi.
The crackdown culminated on August 14, 2013, when the military stormed sit-ins in Cairo’s Raba‘a Square and Giza’s al-Nahda Square, and carried out what Human Rights Watch called the “worst mass unlawful killings in Egypt’s modern history” and “a likely crime against humanity.”
More than 1,000 demonstrators died in less than ten hours.
The Egyptian Center for Social and Economic Rights recorded 932 fully documented bodies, 294 partly documented bodies, and 29 undocumented bodies, including 17 women and 30 teenage girls and boys.
The message was clear: those in power were clearly convinced that eradicating their opponents was a better strategy than including them.
Young political activists who wanted change quickly realized that ballots, strikes, and sit-ins would not change a corrupt regime – and might well get them killed.
Unsurprisingly, the coup and subsequent crackdown on opponents triggered a spike in an enduring insurgency.
Almost immediately, in response to an already restive North Sinai, elite brigades from the Second and Third Field Armies, assisted by the air force, launched operation “Desert Storm” to quell the burgeoning rebellion.
Afterward, the military spokesperson declared that 78 “terrorists” had been killed and 207 arrested, effectively ending terrorism in the Sinai.
But the insurgency seemed to have more motivation than ever.
A few months later, Sinai insurgents shot down a Mi-17 helicopter that belonged to the Second Field Army, an unprecedented display of military capacity.
By November 2014, local rebels were swearing their loyalty to the so-called Islamic State (ISIS) – another unprecedented move.
(No jihadist organization in Egypt had ever before offered its loyalty to a foreign entity.)
Like other ISIS-affiliated groups, the so-called Sinai Province publishes its military metrics and reports both monthly and annually.
Those data indicate that, last year, SP killed about 800 soldiers and 130 civilians (alleged informants or collaborators).
It also claims to have captured heavy mortars, two ZU-23 anti-aircraft autocannons, five DShK heavy machine guns, and dozens of AK assault rifles.
In October 2015, SP operatives infiltrated Sharm al-Sheikh Airport and planted a bomb on a Russian Airbus, killing all 224 of its passengers and crew.
It was the worst terrorist operation in the history of Egypt and Russia.
In the first two months of this year, SP reported that it had destroyed 25 armored vehicles (including tanks, minesweepers, and bulldozers) and killed 100 soldiers (the military acknowledged 37).
Clearly, violence and terrorism are thriving, despite Sisi’s pledge.
And, though the insurgency has remained largely limited to Egypt’s periphery, primarily Northeastern Sinai and parts of the Western Desert, with occasional strikes in the Nile Valley, it has also reared its head in Cairo.
Most recently, gunmen attacked an undercover security minibus in Cairo's Helwan suburb last May, killed all eight armed security agents, and vanished into the working-class cement jungle.
Meanwhile, the relative moderates who have remained committed to contesting official policies by democratic means are sidelined and mocked.
One prominent example is Essam Derbala, the head of the Consultative Council of the Islamic Group (IG), a post-jihadist organization that led a terror campaign in the early 1990s, before abandoning political violence in 1997 and engaging in mainstream politics.
From 2002 to 2009, Derbala and other IG leaders produced around 30 books to counter al-Qaeda’s ideology.
After ISIS announced its intention to declare a “province” in Upper Egypt in April 2015, Derbala toured the Upper-Egyptian IG strongholds, giving public lectures countering ISIS ideology.
A few months later, he was arrested and died in prison.
Among his last messages to his supporters was “not to give up on democracy and peaceful resistance.”
Derbala’s death reinforced the view that, in today’s Egypt, relative moderation gets you nowhere – a view that drives radicalization.
Consider Ahmed El-Darawy, a former police officer and a popular pro-democracy activist who ran in Egypt’s first free and fair parliamentary election in 2012.
After the Raba‘a Square massacre, however, he joined ISIS, under whose flag he was ultimately killed.
One of the main motivations behind the 2013 military coup was to counter potential violence and terrorism. Yet one of its main upshots is a surge in violence and terrorism, committed by both state and non-state actors – and there is no sign of de-escalation, much less reconciliation, in sight.
Risky Advice
BRIGHTON – Why do we seem to be witnessing an increasing number of nasty technological surprises?
Indeed, this year’s Fukushima nuclear disaster in Japan and last year’s BP oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico have taken their place alongside older problems, such as ozone depletion.
We believe that the way in which scientific advice is developed and communicated lies at the heart of the question.
Science is increasingly used to support what are essentially public-policy decisions, particularly concerning new and complex technologies like genetically modified (GM) foods, novel chemicals, and contending energy infrastructures.
Decisions about options and how to implement them are difficult, owing to uncertainties over hazards, benefits, and potential side effects.
Doubts surround not just likelihoods, but extend to the outcomes themselves, and what they might mean.
Powerful economic interests are often at stake, raising the pressures even more.
Too often, expert opinion is thought most useful to policymakers when presented as a single “definitive” interpretation.
As a result, experts typically understate uncertainty.
And, to the extent that they acknowledge uncertainty, they tend to reduce unknowns to measurable “risk.”
Yet risk is just one – relatively tractable – aspect of uncertainty.
Beyond familiar notions of risk lie deeper predicaments of ambiguity and ignorance.
Such insights are not new, but they are often neglected in policymaking.
They can be traced back to the economist Frank Knight’s 1921 book Risk, Uncertainty, and Profit.
Knight recognized that a significant distinction should be drawn between outcomes whose probabilities are well characterized (“risks”) and those where this is not possible (“uncertainties”).
Examples of risk arise when individuals or groups are confident in their accumulated knowledge or experience.
This is the case with many established consumer products, routine transport safety, or the incidence of familiar diseases.
Where we face uncertainty, though, we are confident in our knowledge of possible outcomes, but not of their likelihood – owing either to difficulties in prediction or to lack of information.
And yet scientific advisers face strong temptations and pressures to treat every uncertainty as a risk.
Unfortunately, there are two further and even more problematic aspects of uncertainty.
These arise where we are unsure not just about how likely different outcomes are, but also about which outcomes are relevant.
What options should be considered?
What might these mean given differing views and interests?
How should we classify and prioritize costs and benefits?
Examples of such ambiguity arise in fields as diverse as nuclear power, GM food, and the Iraq War.
Each is definitely happening (so “probability” is not the problem), but what do they mean?
Do they leave the world better or worse?
In what senses?
What are the alternatives, if any?
Different experts, studies, and organizations adopt contrasting but often equally legitimate and scientifically-founded perspectives on these questions.
To try to enforce a single definitive interpretation is deeply misleading, and thus unhelpful – and potentially dangerous – in policymaking.
Indeed, there can be no guarantee under ambiguity that even the best scientific analysis will lead to a definitive policy answer.
Consequently, fully “science-based decisions” are not just difficult to achieve; they are a contradiction in terms.
The final, most intractable aspect of incomplete knowledge is ignorance.
Here, our understanding of both likelihoods and the possibilities themselves is problematic.
Of course, no one can reliably foresee the unpredictable, but we can learn from past mistakes.
One example is the belated recognition that seemingly inert and benign halogenated hydrocarbons were interfering with the ozone layer.
Another is the slowness to acknowledge the possibility of novel transmission mechanisms for spongiform encephalopathies (“mad cow disease”).
In their early stages, these sources of harm were not formally recognized, even as possibilities.
Instead, they were “early warnings” offered by dissenting voices.
Policy recommendations that miss such warnings court over-confidence and error.
The key question is how to move from the narrow focus on risk toward broader and deeper understandings of incomplete knowledge – and thus to better scientific policy advice.
One high-stakes – and thus particularly politicized – context for expert policy advice is the setting of financial interest rates.
In the United Kingdom, the Bank of England’s Monetary Policy Committee describes its expert advisory process as a “two-way dialogue” – with a priority placed on public accountability.
Great care is taken by officials to inform the Committee not just of the results of formal analysis by the sponsoring bodies, but also of complex real-world conditions and perspectives.
Reports detail contrasting recommendations by individual members and explain reasons for differences.
Why is this kind of thing not normal in scientific advising?
When faced with immeasurable uncertainties, it is much more common for a scientific committee to spend hours negotiating a single interpretation of the risks, even when faced with a range of contending but equally well-founded analyses and judgments, often from different (but equally scientific) fields and disciplines.
As we know from the work of Thomas Kuhn and other philosophers of science, dominant paradigms do not always turn out to be the most accurate.
Knowledge is constantly evolving, and it thrives on skepticism and diversity.
Experience with standard-setting for toxic substances, and policy processes concerning the safety of various GM and energy technologies, shows that it would often be more accurate and useful to accept divergent expert interpretations, and focus instead on documenting the reasons underlying disagreement.
Concrete policy decisions could still be made – possibly more efficiently.
Moreover, the decision’s relationship with the available science would be clearer, and the inherently political dimensions more transparent.
Instead of seeking definitive global judgments about the risks of particular choices, it is wiser to consider the assumptions behind such advice – since these are central in determining the conditions under which the advice is relevant.
Above all, there is a constant need for humility about “science-based decisions.”
A Year on the Brink
NEW YORK – The year 2012 turned out to be as bad as I thought.
By contrast, China has the instruments, resources, incentives, and knowledge to avoid an economic hard landing – and, unlike Western countries, lacks any significant constituency wedded to lethal ideas like “expansionary austerity.”
The Chinese rightly understand that they must focus more on the “quality” of growth –rebalancing their economy away from exports and toward domestic consumption – than on sheer output.
But, even with China’s change in focus, and despite adverse global economic conditions, growth of around 7% should sustain commodity prices, thereby benefiting exports from Africa and Latin America.
A third round of quantitative easing by the US Federal Reserve could help commodity exporters as well, even if it does little to promote US domestic growth.
The US, with Obama re-elected, is likely to muddle on, much as it has for the past four years.&#160; Inklings of recovery in the real-estate market will be enough to discourage dramatic policy measures, like a write-down of principal on “underwater” mortgages (where the outstanding loan exceeds the market value of the house).
But, with real (inflation-adjusted) house prices still 40% below the previous peak, a strong recovery for real estate (and the closely related construction industry) seems unlikely.
Meanwhile, even if Obama’s Republican opponents do not push the country over the fiscal cliff of automatic tax increases and spending cuts on January 1, they will ensure that America’s own form of mild austerity will continue.
Public-sector employment is now roughly 600,000 below its pre-crisis level, while normal expansion would have meant 1.2 million additional jobs, implying a public-sector jobs deficit of almost two million.
But the real risk for the global economy is in Europe.
Spain and Greece are in depression, with no hope of recovery in sight.
The eurozone’s “fiscal compact” is no solution, and the European Central Bank’s purchases of sovereign debt are at most a temporary palliative.
If the ECB imposes further austerity conditions (as it seems to be demanding of Greece and Spain) in exchange for financing, the cure will only worsen the patient’s condition.
Likewise, common European banking supervision will not suffice to prevent the continuing exodus of funds from the afflicted countries.
That requires an adequate common deposit-insurance scheme, which the northern European countries have said is not in the cards anytime soon.
While European leaders have repeatedly done what previously seemed unthinkable, their responses have been out of synch with markets.
They have consistently underestimated their austerity programs’ adverse effects and overestimated the benefits of their institutional adjustments.
The impact of the ECB’s €1 trillion ($1.3 trillion) long-term refinancing operation (LTRO), which loaned money to commercial banks to buy sovereign bonds (a bootstrap operation that seemed as peculiar as the ECB’s financing of sovereigns to shore up the banks), was impressively short-lived.
Europe’s leaders have recognized that the debt crisis in the periphery will only worsen in the absence of growth, and they have even (sometimes) recognized that austerity will not help on that front; nonetheless, they have failed to deliver an effective growth package.
The depression that European authorities have imposed on Spain and Greece already is having political consequences.
In Spain, independence movements, especially in Catalonia, have revived, while neo-Nazism is on the march in Greece.
The euro, created for the avowed purpose of fostering the integration of a democratic Europe, is having precisely the opposite effect.
The lesson is that politics and economics are inseparable.
Markets on their own may be neither efficient nor stable, but the politics of deregulation gave scope to unprecedented excesses that led to asset bubbles and the rolling crisis that has followed their collapse.
And the politics of crisis has led to responses that are far from adequate.
Banks have been saved, but the underlying problems were left to fester – no surprise there, given that, in both Europe and America, the task of fixing them was assigned to the policymakers who had caused them.
In Europe, it was politics, not economics, that drove the creation of the euro; and it was politics that led to a fundamentally flawed structure that created ample room for bubbles, but little scope for dealing with the aftermath.
To forecast 2013 is to predict how divided government in the US and a divided Europe respond to their respective crises.
Economists’ crystal balls are always cloudy, but those of political scientists are even cloudier.
That said, the US will probably muddle through another year, neither pushed over the cliff nor put on the road to robust recovery.
But, on both sides of the Atlantic, the polarized politics of bravado and brinkmanship will be much in evidence.
The problem with brinkmanship is that, sometimes, one does go over the brink.
Europe’s Secret Bailout
But it does not have a symmetrical effect, because government debt from southern European countries, where the debt binges and current-account deficits of the past occurred, are mostly repurchased abroad.
For example, the Banco de España repurchases Spanish government bonds from all over the world, thereby deleveraging the country vis-à-vis private creditors.
To this end, it asks other eurozone members’ central banks, particularly the German Bundesbank and, in some cases, the Dutch central bank, to credit the payment orders to the German and Dutch bond sellers.
Frequently, if the sellers of Spanish government bonds are outside the eurozone, it will ask the ECB to credit the payment orders.
In the latter case, this often results in triangular transactions, with the sellers transferring the money to Germany or the Netherlands to invest it in fixed-interest securities, companies, or company shares.
Thus, the German Bundesbank and the Dutch central bank must credit not only the direct payment orders from Spain, but also the indirect orders resulting from the Banca de España’s repurchases in third countries.
The payment order credits granted by the Bundesbank and the Dutch central bank are recorded as Target claims against the euro system.
At the end of September, these claims amounted to €819.4 billion, with the Bundesbank accounting for €715.7 billion, which was 46% of Germany’s net external assets at midyear.
Since the beginning of the year, both countries’ combined claims have increased by €180.4 billion, or €20 billion per month, on average.
Conversely, the Target debt of the Southern European countries – Greece, Italy, Portugal, and Spain (GIPS) – amounted to €816.5 billion.
For the GIPS countries, these transactions are a splendid deal.
They can exchange interest-bearing government debt with fixed maturities held by private investors for the (currently) non-interest-bearing and never-payable Target book debt of their central banks – institutions that the Maastricht Treaty defines as limited liability companies, because member states do not have to recapitalize them when they are over-indebted.
If a crash occurs and those countries leave the euro, their national central banks are likely to go bankrupt because much of their debt is denominated in euro, whereas their claims against the respective states and the banks will be converted to the new depreciating currency.
The Target claims of the remaining euro system will then vanish into thin air, and the Bundesbank and the Dutch central bank will only be able to hope that other surviving central banks participate in their losses.
At that time, German and Dutch asset sellers who now hold central bank money will notice that their stocks are claims against their central banks that are no longer covered.
One should not assume that anyone is actively striving for a crash.
But, in view of the negotiations – set to begin in 2018 – on a European fiscal union (implying systematic transfers from the EU’s north to its south), it wouldn’t hurt if Germany and the Netherlands knew what would happen if they did not sign a possible treaty.
As it stands, they will presumably agree to a fiscal union, if only because it will enable them to hide the expected write-off losses in a European transfer union, rather than disclosing those losses now.
Will Americans Become Poorer?
CAMBRIDGE – Robert Gordon of Northwestern University has launched a lively and important debate about the future rate of economic growth in the United States.
Although his book The Rise and Fall of American Growth will not be published until January 2016, his thesis has already garnered coverage in the Economist and Foreign Affairs.
Clearly, Gordon’s gloomy assessment of America’s growth prospects deserves to be taken seriously.
But is it right?
Gordon argues that the major technological changes that raised the standard of living in the past are much more important than anything that can happen in the future.
He points to examples such as indoor plumbing, automobiles, electricity, telephones, and central heating, and argues that all of them were much more important for living standards than recent innovations like the internet and mobile phones.
I agree with Gordon that I would rather give up my mobile phone and even the Internet than go without indoor plumbing and electricity.
But that just means that we are lucky to be living now rather than a century ago (and even luckier to be living now than two centuries ago or in the middle ages).
The fact that these major innovations happened in the past is not a reason to be pessimistic about the future.
Moreover, because the US government does not count anything in GDP unless it is sold in the market, the vast expansion of television entertainment and the introduction of services like Google and Facebook have been completely excluded from the national account.
This means that the true rise in real incomes was actually faster than the official statistics imply – possibly much faster.
That is true of the data for the first half of the twentieth century, and it continues to be true today.
It is not clear whether the measurement problem was bigger in the more distant past than it has been recently; but it is irrelevant when we think about the future.
Whether growth in per capita income that is officially estimated at 1.5% is in reality more like 3%, we are enjoying the higher level of real incomes inherited from the past.
So will future generations.
Indeed, there is simply no reason for the view, often expressed in surveys and appearing in Gordon’s book, that the children of today’s generation will not enjoy a standard of living as high as their parents’.
That may be true for some people, especially those with relatively high incomes, but it is definitely not true for most people.
Think about a 30-year-old new parent at the middle of the income distribution.
Thirty years from now, the child will be as old as her median-income parent is now.
If real incomes grow at just 1.5% a year, the median income 30 years from now will be nearly 60% higher than the income of today’s median-income individual.
Even if the child earns 30% less than the median at that time, her income would still be higher than today’s median income.
And if product innovations and improvements imply that per capita real incomes grow at 3% a year, the median income of someone 30 years from now would be more than twice today’s median income.
So Americans are lucky that they have inherited the innovations of the past, and that real incomes will continue to grow in the future.
But that is not a reason for complacency.
The US can increase its future growth rate by improving its education system, raising its rates of saving and investment to where they were in the past, and fixing the features of its tax and transfer systems that reduce employment and earnings.
Gordon focuses on the effect of technological innovation on Americans’ real incomes.
But an important limitation of his argument is that it gives short shrift to policy innovation.
America’s economy – and those of many other countries – could grow faster in the future if policymakers adopt the appropriate reforms.
The Financial Fire Next Time
NEW HAVEN – If we have learned anything since the global financial crisis peaked in 2008, it is that preventing another one is a tougher job than most people anticipated.
Not only does effective crisis prevention require overhauling our financial institutions through creative application of the principles of good finance; it also requires that politicians and their constituents have a shared understanding of these principles.
Today, unfortunately, such an understanding is missing.
The solutions are too technical for most news reporting aimed at the general public.
And, while people love to hear about “reining in” or “punishing” financial leaders, they are far less enthusiastic about asking these people to expand or improve financial-risk management.
But, because special-interest groups have developed around existing institutions and practices, we are basically stuck with them, subject to minor tweaking.
The financial crisis, which is still ongoing, resulted largely from the boom and bust in home prices that preceded it for several years (home prices peaked in the United States in 2006).
During the pre-crisis boom, homebuyers were encouraged to borrow heavily to finance undiversified investments in a single home, while governments provided guarantees to mortgage investors.
In the US, this occurred through implicit guarantees of assets held by the Federal Housing Administration (FHA) and the mortgage agencies Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac.
At a session that I chaired at the American Economic Association’s recent meeting in Philadelphia, the participants discussed the difficulty of getting any sensible reform out of governments around the world.
In a paper presented at the session, Andrew Caplin of New York University spoke of the public’s lack of interest or comprehension of the rising risks associated with the FHA, which has been guaranteeing privately-issued mortgages since its creation during the housing crisis of the 1930’s.
Caplin’s discussant, Joseph Gyourko of the Wharton School, concurred.
Gyourko’s own 2013 study concludes that the FHA, now effectively leveraged 30 to one on guarantees of home mortgages that are themselves leveraged 30 to one, is underwater to the tune of tens of billions of dollars.
He wants the FHA shut down and replaced with a subsidized saving program that does not attempt to compete with the private sector in evaluating mortgage risk.
Similarly, Caplin testified in 2010 before the US House Committee on Financial Services that the FHA was at serious risk, a year after FHA Commissioner David Stevens told the same committee that “We will not need a bailout.”
Caplin’s research evidently did not sit well with FHA officials, who were hostile to Caplin and refused to give him the data he wanted.
The FHA has underestimated its losses every year since, while proclaiming itself in good health.
Finally, in September, it was forced to seek a government bailout.
At the session, I asked Caplin about his effort, starting with his co-authored 1997 book Housing Partnerships, which proposed allowing homebuyers to buy only a fraction of a house, thereby reducing their risk exposure without putting taxpayers at risk.
If implemented, his innovative idea would reduce homeowners’ leverage.
But, while it was a highly leveraged mortgage market that fueled the financial crisis 11 years later, the idea, he said, has not made headway anywhere in the world.
Why not, I asked?
Why can’t creative people with their lawyers simply create such partnerships for themselves?
The answer, he replied, is complicated; but, at least in the US, one serious problem looms large: the US Internal Revenue Service’s refusal to issue an advance ruling on how such risk-managing arrangements would be taxed.
Given the resulting uncertainty, no one is in a mood to be creative.
Meanwhile, there is strong public demand – angry and urgent – for a government response aimed at preventing another crisis and ending the problem of “too big to fail” financial institutions.
But the political reality is that government officials lack sufficient knowledge and incentive to impose reforms that are effective but highly technical.
For example, one reform adopted in the US to help prevent the “too big to fail” problem is the risk retention rule stipulated by the 2010 Dodd Frank Act.
In order to ensure that mortgage securitizers have some “skin in the game,” they are required to retain an interest in 5% of the mortgage securities that they create (unless they qualify for an exemption).
But, in another paper presented at our session, Paul Willen of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston argued that creating such a restriction is hardly the best way for a government to improve the functioning of financial markets.
Investors already know that people have a stronger incentive to manage risks better if they retain some interest in the risk.
But investors also know that other factors may offset the advantages of risk retention in specific cases.
In trying to balance such considerations, the government is in over its head.
The most fundamental reform of housing markets remains something that reduces homeowners’ overleverage and lack of diversification.
In my own paper for the session, I returned to the idea of the government encouraging privately-issued mortgages with preplanned workouts, thereby insuring them against the calamity of ending up underwater after home prices fall.
Like housing partnerships, this would be a fundamental reform, for it would address the core problem that underlay the financial crisis.
But there is no impetus for such a reform from existing interest groups or the news media.
One of our discussants, Joseph Tracy of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (and co-author of Housing Partnerships), put the problem succinctly: “Firefighting is more glamorous than fire prevention.”
Just as most people are more interested in stories about fires than they are in the chemistry of fire retardants, they are more interested in stories about financial crashes than they are in the measures needed to prevent them.
That is not a recipe for a happy ending.
The Global Economy’s Tale Risks
TOKYO – Fluctuations in the world’s economies are largely due to the stories we hear and tell about them.
These popular, emotionally relevant narratives sometimes inspire us to go out and spend, start businesses, build new factories and office buildings, and hire employees; at other times, they put fear in our hearts and impel us to sit tight, save our resources, curtail spending, and reduce risk.
They either stimulate our “animal spirits” or muffle them.
Visiting Japan on a speaking tour, I am struck by the positive impact of the economy-related stories on people’s thinking and behavior, and also by how fragile that change is.
We seem to be at the mercy of our narratives.
Ever since 2009, most of us have just been waiting for some story to turn our hearts aglow with hope and confidence – and to reinvigorate our economies.
Think of the story of the real-estate boom in the United States and other countries in the first half of the 2000’s.