But it is only part of a growing global movement by young people for civil rights.
The American civil-rights struggle that reached its height in the 1960s fought racial prejudice and discrimination at home and opposed colonialism abroad.
But there is a war of liberation that remains to be won worldwide – against child labor, child marriage, child trafficking, and discrimination against girls.
None of these evils will end until basic education is made compulsory for all – just as was done in the West more than a century ago.
The campaign for the 219 Nigerian girls – kidnapped simply because they wanted to go to school – is an iconic battle of this freedom struggle.
That struggle will be won some day.
No injustice can last forever.
But for the missing girls and their loved ones, it is a struggle that cannot be won soon enough.
Closing America’s Jobs Deficit
BERKELEY – The latest data on employment in the United States confirm that the American economy continues to recover from the Great Recession of 2008-2009, despite the slowdown engulfing the other G-20 nations.
Indeed, the pace of private-sector job growth has actually been much stronger during this recovery than during the recovery from the 2001 recession, and is comparable to the recovery from the 1990-1991 recession.
During the last 31 months, private-sector employment has increased by 5.2 million and the unemployment rate has now fallen below 8% for the first time in nearly four years.
But the unemployment rate is still more than two percentage points above the long-run value that most economists view as normal when the economy is operating near its potential.
Moreover, the number of long-term unemployed (27 weeks or longer) is about 40% of the total – thelowest share since 2009, but still far higher than in the previous recessions since the Great Depression, and about double what it would be in a normal labor market.
So the US labor market, while healing, is still far from where it should be.
That is partly because the job losses during the Great Recessionwere so large – twice as large as those of previous recessions since the Great Depression.
In terms of US economic history, what is abnormal is not the pace of private-sector job growth since the 2008-2009 recession ended, but rather the length and depth of the recession itself.
The downturn was a distinctive balance-sheet recession that caused sizeable declines in household wealth and necessitated painful deleveraging.
Consistent with recoveries from such recessions, demand has grown slowly, despite unprecedented fiscal and monetary stimulus, and that explains why the unemployment rate remains high.
Indeed, businesses cite uncertainty about the strength of demand, not uncertainty about regulation or taxation, as the main factor holding back job creation.
Public-sector demand has also contracted, owing to state and local governments’ deteriorating budgets.
As a result, public employment, which usually rises during recoveries, has been a major contributor to high unemployment during the last three years.
But there is scant evidence to support this view.
The relationship between the unemployment rate and the job vacancy rate is consistent with patterns in previous recoveries.
Nor is there anything unusual about the size of mismatches between job openings and worker availability by industry.
Such industrial mismatches become larger during recessions, reflecting greater churn in the labor market as workers move between shrinking and expanding sectors; but they decline as the economy recovers.
This pattern also characterizes the current recovery, and recent data suggest that mismatches between the demand and supply of labor by industry are back to pre-recession levels.
But, as the US economy recovers, technological change is accelerating, fueling demand for more skills at a time when the workforce’s educational-attainment levels have plateaued.
This is the real skills gap that existed before the Great Recession, and it is getting worse over time.
The gap manifests itself in much higher unemployment rates for high-school educated workers than for college-educated workers at every stage of the business cycle.
The gap also shows up in significant – andrising – inequality between the earnings of high-school educated workers and those with a college degree or higher.
Earnings gains have been especially strong for those with tertiary degrees, while the real wages of high-school educated workers, especially men, have fallen sharply.
It is becoming increasingly difficult for workers with low levels of educational attainment to find high-paying jobs in any sector, even when the economy is operating near full capacity.
The US was the world leader in high school and college graduation rates for much of the twentieth century.
Today it ranks in the middle of the OECD countries.
A major factor behind that relative decline has been the US school system’s failure to ensure high-quality education for disadvantaged Americans, particularly children from poor, minority, and immigrant households.
According to the most recent census, about one-quarter of children under the age of six live in poverty.
They are less likely to have access to early-childhood programs that prepare them for school, and are more likely to attend schools that have high student/teacher ratios and that cannot attract and retain skilled teachers.
As a result of these and other problems, the average American secondary-school student receives inadequate preparation in core subjects such as writing, mathematics, and analytical reasoning, which in turn reduces college enrollment and completion rates.
The US experience is consistent with OECD evidence that students from countries with greater income inequality score lower on academic achievement tests.
And a recent study by McKinsey suggests that the gaps in educational opportunity and attainment by income impose the equivalent of a permanent recession of 3-5% of GDP on the US economy.
To address the skills gap, the US must boost the educational attainment of current and future workers.
That means investing more in education at all levels –&#160;in early-childhood education programs, elementary and secondary schools, community colleges, trade-school programs for specific jobs in specific sectors, and financial aid for higher education.
Above all, it means addressing the income disparities in educational opportunity and attainment.
A Scientific Outlook for a Post-Factual World
VIENNA – We have entered a disturbing new era.
The sheer volume of false utterances and outright lies spewed during the United States’ presidential election campaign implies a growing disdain for factual knowledge, as does the proliferation of fake news disseminated without journalistic filters on social-media platforms such as Facebook and Twitter.
By the time of the United Kingdom’s Brexit referendum in June, experts had already been deemed dispensable.
With elites everywhere being accused of neglecting “real” people, frustration and anger are now trumping fact-based deliberation.
In a climate of anxiety, confusion, and nostalgia for a fantastical past, raw emotion prevails.
The rules of public discourse become obsolete, and the open horizon of possible futures is narrowed to a single escape route that fear-mongers portray as the only way forward.
This is a poor way to cope with uncertainty, and it stands in striking contrast to the methods of science and free inquiry.
In science, uncertainty is a powerful incentive for acquiring knowledge; indeed, it is the primary motivation for research, which is inherently uncertain.
New discoveries often occur during open-ended explorations of the unknown.
Scientists conducting fundamental research cannot predict what they will find or when they will find it.
Many important discoveries are a result of serendipity: researchers find something unexpected that they were not looking for, but which they quickly recognize as significant.
The scientific community rigorously seeks consensus about knowledge produced so far, but it knows that there is still much more to be discovered.
All scientific knowledge is therefore preliminary, and will be extended, complemented, or replaced by new knowledge.
At the same time, science and technology have enabled us to anticipate risks and identify additional unknowns.
So, the more we know, the more we comprehend what we do not know.
But, whereas the scientific community embraces uncertainty, remains ever curious, and is confident about the power of science and technology to create new opportunities for mankind’s collective future, other segments of society do not necessarily share this outlook.
And it behooves scientists to understand why.
There can be a fine line between experts’ prerogative to make technical judgments and non-experts’ prerogative to assess the consequences of those judgments.
But between these positions lies a vast range of unintended consequences.
When people translate knowledge into action, they initiate new interactions within complex systems, without necessarily knowing what the final consequences of those actions will be.
Humans have evolved to understand simple cause-and-effect relationships.
What we need now are more refined mathematical tools and simulation models to understand the hidden uncertainties that can emerge from interactions in complex social and natural systems.
Likewise, humans have evolved to crave certainty.
Past civilizations adopted divinatory practices in an effort to know the future.
But, since then, humanity has made impressive strides away from believing in a predetermined destiny, and toward actively shaping the human condition.
Science and technology were crucial to this progress, but they were not sufficient.
We also needed new ideas about the scope of human agency.
Encouraged by the achievements of modern science, we came to perceive the future as being radically open.
Even though path dependencies, incomplete information, and cognitive biases can still frustrate human actions, we need no longer assume that past experiences must determine future outcomes.
The future is inherently uncertain, which means that the present always could have turned out different than it has.
Uncertainty is a cunning force in nature and lived experience.
Its logic is always at work as we encounter constantly changing circumstances.
It evolves and manifests itself in different ways: sometimes it challenges our assumptions and subverts our expectations; often, it takes us by surprise.
Because of uncertainty, our achievements are not always what we intended them to be, and our lives are never simply routine.
Uncertainty reveals opportunities to us that otherwise would have been wasted.
Our lives are probabilistic, not determined, and the more we realize this, the less we need to feel threatened by uncertainty.
Still, there is widespread disaffection today, and clever politicians are eager to exploit citizens’ anger.
If people feel engulfed by crises, and view the future as fragile and precarious, they will be reluctant to embrace uncertainty.
But this is where science has something to offer.
Science makes visible that which would otherwise remain hidden.
It alerts us to randomness in the physical and social world, and to the role that uncertainty plays in our communities and personal lives.
By revealing the messiness of the world that we have created – intentionally and unintentionally – it allows us to imagine how we can create that world anew, even as we accept that the future will remain open and uncertain.
Building a Caring Economy
DAVOS – Today’s mainstream economic models are based on two fundamental assumptions: first, humans are essentially selfish actors who act rationally to advance their own utility – so-called homo economicus; but, second, as Adam Smith’s metaphor of an “invisible hand” was intended to suggest, self-regarding behavior can inadvertently advance the common good.
Both assumptions are patently false.
In order to address pressing global problems like climate change and inequality, the predominant economic models must be rethought, incorporating other motivational systems that can induce different human behaviors.
Such realistic models, based on empirical research in psychology and the neurosciences, would allow societies to cultivate their sense of compassion and build a new kind of “caring economics” that reflects more fully what it is to be human.
Neuroscientific studies have shown that humans can be motivated by care and systems of affiliation just as easily as they can be by power and achievement or consumption and desire.
After all, we have evolved to be able to form stable relationships, build trust, and care for children, all of which requires a capacity for compassion and empathy.
Once we recognize that these caring motivational systems are common to all humans – indeed, most are shared with other animals – the world begins to look very different.
It is important, however, to distinguish between basic empathic responses and a more universal capacity for compassion.
Empathy alone does not necessarily prompt pro-social behavior; empathizing with the suffering of another may not drive you to help that person.
In fact, empathy can result in distress, which may even lead to withdrawal or burnout.
Compassion, by contrast, is concern for another person that is linked to a strong motivation to alleviate their suffering.
If, say, a mother sees her child crying after a fall, she may first empathize with the child, feeling its pain and sadness.
But, rather than succumbing to feelings of distress, she will take the child in her arms to soothe and comfort it.
Both empathy and compassion seem to come naturally to humans.
But both responses are fragile, and can be quelled or reversed by a large number of factors – including the degree to which we identify with the person who is suffering.
Humans tend to find it easy to empathize with and care about members of their “in-group” – people with whom they share features, whether real or socially constructed, like race, gender, age, or religious affiliation.
Empathy and care toward out-group members does not come quite as easily.
Such universal or global compassion – caring about people who are very different from us – probably requires the involvement of higher cognitive functions, and thus may be unique to humans.
It may also require some training.
After all, living in a world that assumes we are homo economicus can encourage selfish habits.
Fortunately, research suggests that such habits can be broken.
The largest such study is the recently completed ReSource project, in which my colleagues and I subjected almost 300 people, over 11 months, to an intense mental-training program, developed by a team of experienced mediation teachers, scientists, and psychotherapists.
The goal was to cultivate a broad range of mental capacities and social skills, including attention, mindfulness, self-awareness, perspective-taking on others, empathy, compassion, and the ability to cope with difficult emotions like anger or stress.
Progress was assessed by measuring changes in participants’ brains, hormones, health, behavior, and subjective sense of wellbeing.
The project’s preliminary results reinforce a key finding of previous, smaller studies: just as we can strengthen and transform a muscle through physical exercise, we can develop our brain and behavioral capacities – from attention and emotional regulation to trust and donation behavior – through regular mental training.
Of course, mental exercises must be honed to develop particular skills and behaviors; mindfulness practice alone is not adequate to improve, say, socio-cognitive skills.
And lasting changes occur only after a prolonged period of regular training.
But, with the right approach, it may well be possible to foster the kind of altruistic and pro-social behaviors that are needed to improve global cooperation.
On the basis of these findings and those from other psychological, neuroscientific, and economic studies, my colleagues and I are now working with the president of the Kiel Institute for the World Economy, Dennis Snower, to formulate new motivation-based computational models of economic decision-making.
These models will enable us to make clear, testable predictions about expected monetary-exchange behavior in an economic context, including in addressing common-good problems.
In fact, several of these experiments are already underway.
The secular, ethical mental-training exercises used in the ReSource project could be applied in businesses, political institutions, schools (for both teachers and students), and health-care settings – in short, in all areas where people experience high levels of stress and related phenomena.
Young children, in particular, could benefit considerably from such training programs, which could enable them to use mental skills and compassion to regulate stress and emotions.
Policymakers should take the lead in promoting this science-based approach to learning and working, such as by redesigning institutions to emphasize collaboration.
Several governments – including that of the United Kingdom – have developed so-called “nudge units,” which seek to encourage people to make better choices for themselves and society by providing subtle hints, cues, and other suggestions.
A lack of compassion is arguably the cause of many of humankind’s most devastating failures.
Our success in tackling the enormous challenges we face will depend not only on our willingness to work actively and cooperatively to advance the common good, but also on our ability to foster the attributes needed to do so.
The “Impact” Illusion in Science
STANFORD – Government-funded scientific research runs the gamut from studies of basic physical and biological processes to the development of applications to meet immediate needs.
Given limited resources, grant-making authorities are always tempted to channel a higher proportion of funds toward the latter.
And, faced with today’s tight budget constraints, the inclination to favor projects that have demonstrable short-term returns is arguably stronger now than in the past.
But to succumb to it is a mistake.
Some of science’s most useful breakthroughs have come as a result of sustained investment in basic research or as by-products of unrelated efforts.
Indeed, evaluating the impact of any research project is difficult.
As Marc Kirschner, a professor at Harvard Medical School, pointed out in a thoughtful editorial in the journal Science: “One may be able to recognize good science as it happens, but significant science can only be viewed in the rear-view mirror.”
Even preeminent researchers may underestimate the significance of their findings at the time they obtain them.
When Salvador Luria, my university microbiology professor, received the 1969 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine, he made the point eloquently, sending a humorous cartoon to all who had congratulated him on the award.
It depicted an elderly couple at the breakfast table.
The husband, reading the morning newspaper, exclaims, “Great Scott!
I’ve been awarded the Nobel Prize for something I seem to have said, or done, or thought, in 1934!”
Discoveries can come from unforeseen directions, as seemingly unrelated and obscure research areas intersect unexpectedly.
In a 2011 editorial, the French biologist François Jacob described the research that led to his 1965 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine.
His lab had been working on the mechanism that under certain circumstances causes the bacterium E. coli suddenly to produce bacterial viruses.
At the same time, another research group was analyzing, also in E. coli, how the synthesis of a certain enzyme is induced in the presence of a specific sugar.
As Jacob put it, “The two systems appeared mechanistically miles apart.
But their juxtaposition would produce a critical breakthrough for our understanding of life.”
Thus was born the concept of an “operon,” a cluster of genes whose expression is regulated by an adjacent regulatory gene.
Another quintessential example of both the synergy and serendipity of basic research is the origin of recombinant DNA technology, the prototypical technique of modern genetic engineering (sometimes called “genetic modification,” or GM).
It resulted from a combination of findings in several esoteric, largely unrelated areas of basic research in the early 1970s.
Research in enzymology and nucleic acid chemistry led to techniques for cutting and rejoining segments of DNA.
Advances in fractionation procedures permitted the rapid detection, identification, and separation of DNA and proteins.
And the accumulated knowledge of microbial physiology and genetics allowed foreign DNA to be introduced into a cell and made to function there.
The result was the birth of modern biotechnology.
Over the last 40 years, recombinant DNA technology has revolutionized numerous industrial sectors, including agriculture and pharmaceuticals.
It has enabled the development of vaccines against infectious diseases and drugs that treat non-infectious illnesses like diabetes, cancer, cystic fibrosis, psoriasis, rheumatoid arthritis, and some genetic disorders.
Another example is the creation of hybridomas, hybrid cells created in the laboratory by fusing normal white blood cells that produce antibodies with a cancer cell.
Researchers wanted to combine the cancer cells’ rapid growth and the normal cells’ ability to dictate the production of a single specific “monoclonal” antibody.
Their goal was to learn more about the rates of cellular mutation and the generation of antibody diversity.
But, as it turned out, these immortal, antibody-producing cells were useful not only for scientific inquiry, but also as a novel technological instrument for a variety of medical and industrial applications.
Indeed, the technology has led to the development of highly specific diagnostic tests; blockbuster anti-cancer drugs such as Rituxan (rituximab), Erbitux (cetuximab), and Herceptin (trastuzumab); and Avastin (bevacizumab), which is widely used to treat both cancer and diseases of the retina that commonly cause blindness.
In his editorial, Kirschner bemoaned the “tendency to equate significance to any form of medical relevance,” noting that it caused research into non-mammalian systems to be treated “as intrinsically less valuable than studies on human cells.”
As a result, simple but informative model systems can be overlooked, and an important link between basic science and human medicine can be lost.
The past century of research on various non-mammalian model systems makes this point persuasively.
For example, studies of Caenorhabditis elegans, a tiny roundworm, have provided a wealth of information on cellular differentiation, neural networks, meiosis, and programmed cell death.
Studies of the fruit fly, Drosophila melanogaster, have significantly advanced our understanding of the mechanisms underlying Mendelian genetics.
The amount of money funneled by governments into research is large.
In the United States, the National Institutes of Health spends roughly $30 billion a year, and the National Science Foundation adds another $7 billion.
As officials decide how that money is to be spent, they would be wise to glance in the rear-view mirror and fund the basic research that keeps science moving forward.
Revolusi Data demi Pembangunan Berkelanjutan
NEW YORK – Kini terdapat semakin tinggi keyakinan bahwa keberhasilan Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), yang akan diadopsi tanggal 25 September pada pertemuan puncak khusus PBB, akan bergantung pada kemampuan pemerintah, sektor bisnis, dan masyarakat sipil untuk memanfaatkan data dalam pengambilan keputusan.
Kuncinya, sebagaimana saya soroti sebelumnya, adalah berinvestasi dalam pengembangan sistem data inovatif yang menggunakan sumber-sumber data baru yang bersifat real-time untuk pembangunan berkelanjutan.
Kita hidup di dunia yang didorong oleh data (data-driven).
Pengiklan, perusahaan asuransi, badan keamanan nasional, dan penasihat politik telah memanfaatkan data besar (big data), terkadang mengecewakan; demikian juga, banyak ilmuwan dan peneliti, sehingga mempercepat kemajuan penemuan baru.
Tetapi pengembangan masyarakat global dinilai lamban untuk mendapatkan keuntungan – terutama karena sebagian besar data pembangunan masih dikumpulkan menggunakan pendekatan rumit yang tertinggal dibandingkan kemampuan teknologi saat ini.
Salah satu cara untuk memperbaiki pengumpulan data serta penggunaannya demi pembangunan berkelanjutan adalah menciptakan hubungan aktif antara penyediaan layanan dan pengumpulan dan pengolahan data dalam pengambilan keputusan.
Contohnya layanan kesehatan.
Setiap hari, di desa-desa terpencil di negara berkembang, kader kesehatan masyarakat membantu pasien melawan penyakit (seperti malaria), menuju klinik untuk menjalani pemeriksaan, mendapat imunisasi penting, menerima diagnosa (melalui telemedicine), dan memperoleh bantuan darurat untuk bayi dan anak-anak (seperti malnutrisi kronis).
Namun informasi dari kunjungan seperti ini biasanya tidak dikumpulkan, dan meskipun informasi tersebut dituliskan di kertas, nantinya tidak akan dipergunakan kembali.
Sekarang kita memiliki cara yang lebih cerdik untuk terus maju.
Kader kesehatan masyarakat semakin didukung oleh aplikasi ponsel pintar yang bisa digunakan untuk mencatat informasi pasien pada setiap kunjungan.
Informasi yang bisa dimuat langsung ke dashboard kesehatan masyarakat, sehingga petugas kesehatan dapat menggunakannya untuk mengenali wabah penyakit, kegagalan dalam rantai pasokan, atau kebutuhan untuk penambahan staf teknis.
Sistem tersebut dapat memberikan catatan yang bersifat real-time atas peristiwa-peristiwa penting, termasuk kelahiran dan kematian, dan bahkan menggunakan apa yang disebut otopsi verbal untuk membantu identifikasi penyebab kematian.
Dan, sebagai bagian dari rekam medis elektronik, informasi tersebut dapat digunakan pada kunjungan ke dokter berikutnya atau sebagai pengingat bagi pasien atas kebutuhan adanya kunjungan tindak lanjut atau intervensi medis.
Pendidikan menyediakan perluasan kesempatan yang sama.
Saat ini, angka penerimaan sekolah cenderung dihitung berdasarkan pendaftaran siswa pada awal tahun ajaran, meskipun kehadiran sebenarnya mungkin jauh di bawah angka pendaftaran.
Selain itu, pejabat yang melaporkan tingkat penerimaan yang lebih tinggi terkadang memanipulasi data pendaftaran, sehingga kita tidak pernah mendapatkan gambaran yang akurat tentang siswa-siswa yang masuk sekolah.
Dengan aplikasi mobile, sekolah dan petugas pendidikan masyarakat dapat mencatat kehadiran siswa dan guru secara transparan, real-time, dan menindaklanjuti dengan mudah terhadap siswa-siswa yang putus sekolah, terutama karena alasan yang dapat diatasi melalui informed intervention oleh petugas pendidikan masyarakat.
Informasi ini dapat dimasukkan secara otomatis ke dalam dashboard administrator pendidikan yang dapat digunakan untuk melacak kemajuan di bidang-bidang utama.
Pengumpulan data tersebut dapat mempercepat pembangunan berkelanjutan dengan memperbaiki pengambilan keputusan.
Tetapi itu hanya langkah pertama.
Teknik yang sama juga harus digunakan untuk mengumpulkan beberapa indikator kunci yang mengukur kemajuan SDGs.
Bahkan, mengukur kemajuan pada interval waktu yang sering, dan mempublikasikan keberhasilan dan kekurangan, sangat penting untuk menjaga dunia berada di jalur yang tepat untuk memenuhi target jangka panjang yang ambisius.
Tindakan ini tidak hanya akan memungkinkan kita bisa menghargai pemerintah yang mendorong kemajuan; ini juga akan membuat pemerintah yang lamban mau bertanggung jawab atas kinerja mereka yang lemah dan, semoga saja akan memotivasi mereka untuk memperkuat upayanya.
Kebutuhan adanya pengukuran real-time menjadi nyata selama 15 tahun terakhir, ketika dunia sedang mengejar Millennium Development Goals (MDGs).
Mengingat bahwa banyak indikator utama belum dikumpulkan secara real time, tetapi hanya melalui survei rumah tangga retrospektif yang melelahkan, indikator utama untuk tujuan pengentasan kemiskinan sudah kadaluarsa selama lima tahun bagi banyak negara.
Dunia ini bertujuan untuk mewujudkan target kemiskinan, kesehatan, dan pendidikan di tahun 2015, namun di beberapa kasus, hanya dengan data kunci yang tersedia sampai tahun 2010.
Untungnya, revolusi teknologi informasi dan komunikasi serta penyebaran cakupan jaringan pita lebar yang terjadi hampir di semua tempat dengan cepat membuat waktu seperti hilang.
Jaringan Solusi Pembangunan Berkelanjutan PBB (the UN Sustainable Development Solutions Network) akan mendukung Kemitraan Global baru dengan membentuk jaringan tematis baru yakni Thematic Network on Data for Sustainable Development, yang mempertemukan para ilmuwan terkemuka data, pemikir, dan akademisi dari berbagai sektor dan disiplin ilmu untuk membentuk pusat keunggulan data.
Kami senang bisa memimpin jaringan ini, suatu jaringan yang memiliki komitmen besar untuk mengubah fakta dan angka menjadi kemajuan pembangunan yang nyata.
Kami yakin revolusi data dapat menjadi revolusi untuk pembangunan berkelanjutan, dan kami menyambut mitra dari seluruh dunia untuk bergabung dengan kami.
How to Finance Global Reflation
HONG KONG – There is a growing awareness that, in today’s globalized world, financial markets are beyond the control of national policymakers.
While a few economies do have the scale to shape interconnected global markets, they face serious constraints, political and economic.
As a result, the global economy is stuck in a pro-cyclical financial cycle, with few options for escape.
As Claudio Borio pointed out years ago, the global financial cycle is longer and larger than real economic cycles, and is closely associated with the fluctuating value of the dominant reserve currency, the US dollar.
When the dollar is weak, capital flows from the United States to other countries, where it spurs growth through increased credit.
Unfortunately for these countries, typically in the emerging world, the inflows also spur inflation, asset bubbles, and currency appreciation.
The result is growing financial and geopolitical risk, which makes the US dollar more appealing for investors.
As capital flows back to the US, the dollar gains strength, while emerging economies are left to face the consequences of bursting asset bubbles and currency devaluation.
In a zero-interest-rate world, a strong dollar plays the same deflationary role in global markets as the gold standard did during the 1930s.
The US is thus the economy that is best equipped to pull the world out of secular deflation.
But that requires a willingness to resolve the so-called Triffin dilemma – the conflict between long-term international interests and short-term domestic interests that issuers of reserve currencies confront – by running increasingly large current-account deficits that enable the US to meet global demand for liquidity.
This seems unlikely not only for the US, but also for its reserve-issuing counterparts in the rest of the advanced world.
Stagnant economic growth and high debt burdens in Europe and Japan have destroyed politicians’ will to raise taxes or borrow more to create space for fiscal expansion.
As a result, monetary policy throughout the developed world has become severely overburdened.
From 2007 to 2014, the central banks of the four reserve-issuing economies (the US, the eurozone, the United Kingdom, and Japan) expanded their balance sheets by $7.2 trillion.
While this increased the broad money supply by $9 trillion, private-sector credit increased by only $1.8 trillion, revealing a serious flaw in the transmission of unconventional monetary policy to the real economy.
In fact, although near-zero interest rates have reduced debt-service costs, the real burden of debt has actually increased in recent years, owing to declining inflation.
As long as households and companies continue to focus on deleveraging, these countries will continue to face balance-sheet recessions.
As for the developing world, China is the only candidate for issuing liquidity.
But its once-spectacular growth is decelerating, with no end to the slowdown in sight.
This is generating enough uncertainty to keep Chinese policymakers preoccupied with domestic challenges.
The problem today is a lack of will, not a lack of opportunities, to do what it takes to boost demand.
In fact, investment in global public goods – namely, the infrastructure needed to meet the needs of the developing world and to mitigate climate change – could spur global reflation.
An estimated $6 trillion in infrastructure investment will be needed annually over the next 15 years just to address global warming.
Moreover, the G30 has estimated that an additional $7.1 trillion in annual investment by the nine top economies – which account for 60% of world output – will be needed to sustain moderate global growth.
With the US, the issuer of the world’s preeminent reserve currency, unwilling or unable to provide the liquidity needed to close the infrastructure investment gap, a new supplementary reserve currency should be instituted – one whose issuer does not have to confront the Triffin dilemma.
This leaves one option: the International Monetary Fund’s Special Drawing Right.
Of course, the road to becoming a reserve currency is long, especially for the SDR, which currently functions only as a reserve asset, with an issuance size ($285 billion) that is small relative to global official reserves of $10.5 trillion (excluding gold).
But an incremental expansion of the SDR’s role in the new global financial architecture, aimed at making the monetary-policy transmission mechanism more effective, can be achieved without major disagreement.
This is because, conceptually, an increase in SDRs is equivalent to an increase in the global central bank balance sheet (quantitative easing).
Here’s how it would work.
Central banks, in order to generate resources, would expand their balance sheets by investing through the IMF in the form of increased SDRs.
Because SDRs comprise voting rights, they function as equity, meaning that they can be invested as such in the World Bank and other multilateral development banks, which can decide which global public goods deserve the resources.
The drawdown of SDR allocations can be fine-tuned to avoid causing too much inflation.
Consider a scenario in which member central banks increase their SDR allocation in the IMF by, say, $1 trillion.
A five-times leverage would enable the IMF to increase either lending to member countries or investments in infrastructure via multilateral development banks by at least $5 trillion.
Moreover, multilateral development banks could leverage their equity by borrowing in capital markets.
Depending on the quality of the projects, in terms of governance and cash flows, they could subsequently be sold back to investors as asset-backed securities to fund new projects.
In the past, the financial resources available for investment were constrained by national savings.
In recent years, however, unconventional monetary policy has shown that liquidity and credit can be created against global savings, with relatively little impact on inflation, provided there is excess capacity in production and insufficient effective aggregate demand.
The IMF and the major central banks should take advantage of this newfound knowledge, and provide equity and liquidity against long-term lending for infrastructure investments.
In this way, global public goods can be not only funded; they can also propel global recovery.
Crowdfunding or Crowdphishing?
NEW HAVEN – If one were seeking a perfect example of why it’s so hard to make financial markets work well, one would not have to look further than the difficulties and controversies surrounding crowdfunding in the United States.
After deliberating for more than three years, the US Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) last month issued a final rule that will allow true crowdfunding; and yet the new regulatory framework still falls far short of what’s needed to boost crowdfunding worldwide.
True crowdfunding, or equity crowdfunding, refers to the activities of online platforms that sell shares of startup companies directly to large numbers of small investors, bypassing traditional venture capital or investment banking.
The concept is analogous to that of online auctions.
But, unlike allowing individuals to offer their furniture to the whole world, crowdfunding is supposed to raise money fast, from those in the know, for businesses that bankers might not understand.
It certainly sounds exciting.
Regulators outside the US have often been more accommodating, and some crowdfunding platforms are already operating.
For example, Symbid in the Netherlands and Crowdcube in the United Kingdom were both founded in 2011.
But crowdfunding is still not a major factor in world markets.
And that will not change without adequate – and innovative – financial regulation.
There is a conceptual barrier to understanding the problems that officials might face in regulating crowdfunding, owing to the failure of prevailing economic models to account for the manipulative and devious aspects of human behavior.
Economists typically describe people’s rational, honest side, but ignore their duplicity.
As a result, they underestimate the downside risks of crowdsourcing.
The risks consist not so much in outright fraud – big lies that would be jailable offenses – as in more subtle forms of deception.
It may well be open deception, with promoters steering gullible amateurs around a business plan’s fatal flaw, or disclosing it only grudgingly or in the fine print.
It is not that people are completely dishonest.
On the contrary, they typically pride themselves on integrity.
It’s just that their integrity suffers little lapses here and there – and not always so little in aggregate.
In my new book with George Akerlof, Phishing for Phools: The Economics of Manipulation and Deception, we argue that unscrupulous behavior has to be factored into economic theory in a fundamental way.
The economic equilibrium we live should be regarded, above all, as a phishing equilibrium, in which small-time individual dishonesty can morph into something more systemically important when it is carried on by business organizations under intense competitive pressure.
Yes, competition rewards the sharp and hardworking. But it also often compels them to keep the frontiers of subtle deception in view.
The SEC’s new rules for crowdfunding are complex, because they address a complicated problem.
The concept underlying crowdfunding is the dispersal of information across millions of people.
Most people, even the cleverest, cannot grasp the next breakthrough business opportunity.
Those who can are dispersed.
The economist Friedrich Hayek put it well in 1945:
“[T]here is beyond question a body of very important but unorganized knowledge which cannot possibly be called scientific in the sense of knowledge of general rules: the knowledge of particular circumstances and place.
It is with respect to this that practically every individual has some advantage over all others in that he possesses unique information of which beneficial use might be made, but of which use can be made only if the decisions depending on it are left to him or are made with his active cooperation.”
The problem is that the promise of genuine “unique information” comes with the reality of vulnerability to deception.
That’s why channeling dispersed knowledge into new businesses requires a regulatory framework that favors the genuinely enlightened and honest.
Unfortunately, the SEC’s new crowdsourcing rules don’t go as far as they should.
The 2012 US legislation that tasked the SEC with rulemaking for crowdfunding platforms specified that no startup can use them to raise more than $1 million a year.
This is practically worthless in terms of limiting the scope for deception.
In fact, including this provision was a serious mistake, and needs to be corrected with new legislation.
A million dollars is not enough, and the cap will tend to limit crowdfunding to small ideas.
Some of the SEC rules do work against deception.
Notably, crowdfunding platforms must provide communication channels “through which investors can communicate with one another and with representatives of the issuer about offerings made available.”
That is a good rule, fundamental to the entire idea of crowdfunding.
But the SEC could do more than just avow its belief in “uncensored and transparent crowd discussions.”
It should require that the intermediary sponsoring a platform install a surveillance system to guard against interference and shills offering phony comments.
The SEC and other regulators could go even further.
They could nudge intermediaries to create a platform that summarizes commenters’ record and reputation.
Indeed, why not pay commenters who accumulate “likes” or whose comments on issuers turn out to be valuable in light of evidence of those enterprises’ subsequent success?
For the financial system as a whole, success ultimately depends on trust and confidence, both of which, like suspicion and fear, are highly contagious.
That’s why, if crowdfunding is to reach its global potential, crowdphishing must be prevented from the outset.
Regulators need to get the rules right (and it would help if they hurried up about it).
Secondary Schools’ Primary Importance
DHAKA – The world has made remarkable progress in providing primary education to children worldwide.
In the 1960s, fewer than half of the developing world’s children were enrolled in primary school.
Today, more than 90% are.
In many regions, a higher proportion of girls than boys enroll in primary school.
To be sure, too many children remain out of school in countries like Nigeria and Pakistan, but the real problem lies in what happens after the primary years are over.
Without opportunities for secondary education, children have little chance to improve their livelihoods, and the progress the world has made could be jeopardized.
In September, speaking at the Clinton Global Initiative, former US Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton recognized that “lack of secondary education holds back the aspirations of so many girls and their families.
It undermines prosperity and stability around the world.”
Clinton announced a major initiative in cooperation with more than 30 organizations, including the MasterCard Foundation, Intel, and Microsoft.
This group has pledged more than $600 million over five years to enable 14 million girls to “attend and complete primary and secondary school.”
It is a wise investment.
In addition to the obvious benefits that education can deliver, increased enrollment in secondary schools offers advantages to all levels of society.
For example, requiring girls to continue their education reduces child marriage.
In the developing world, one girl in seven is married by the age of 15; nearly half become mothers by the age of 18.
Girls attending secondary school, by contrast, are much less likely to marry and bear children before reaching adulthood.
Providing girls with secondary education also reduces family sizes, and, when they do become mothers, it improves their children’s health and chances of survival.
One study found that in developing countries where one girl in five received a secondary education, women had, on average, more than five children.
Where half of the girls received secondary education, the average was just three children, and child and infant mortality were much lower.
Access to secondary schools can also boost enrollment in primary schools, reducing the likelihood that parents will keep their children at home to work or, as is often the case with girls, to help with domestic chores.
If children have no choice but to return from primary school to the farm, why send them to school at all?
Providing secondary education need not cost a fortune.
Poor countries can move swiftly to expand opportunities for education at a much lower cost than is commonly imagined.
Most village primary schools are used for education only a small fraction of the time.
Appropriate modifications could turn these into secondary schools for part of each day, bringing secondary education closer to children’s homes.
For girls, secondary education closer to home would have the added benefit of reducing the risks of sexual abuse and violence.
Every year, roughly 60 million girls are sexually assaulted at or on their way to school.
Using facilities that are more familiar and more conveniently located could reduce this barrier to attendance.
Likewise police stations, post offices, and other existing public facilities might, with modest adjustments, provide space for secondary schools for at least part of the day.
Modular classrooms, which can be built quickly and inexpensively, could provide local employment and supplement existing school facilities.
Programs in the United States like “Teach for America” and “Teach for All” can serve as powerful new models for recruiting the teachers that will be needed for new secondary schools.
Life expectancy is rising, but retirement ages often remain in the late 50s, implying that pensioners could be encouraged to become teachers.
Teachers will always remain essential for students’ growth and maturity, but new digital technologies can enhance secondary education.
Online resources, such as the Khan Academy, hold great promise for delivering broad, inexpensive results in education.
The world stands at a crossroads.
American corporations donate about $7 billion annually to global health, but only $500 million to education in developing countries.
Yet young people are the fastest-growing segment of the population in the developing world.
Uneducated, they could become an unprecedented burden as their societies age.
But if they are provided with secondary education, they will be able to transform their future – and ours – for the better.
The Secret Success of Abenomics
TOKYO – Tokyo is in the midst of a construction boom, with old high-rise office and apartment buildings being rebuilt in more modern and elegant forms, all while maintaining stringent environmental standards.
So bright is Tokyo’s gleam – which is sure to impress visitors at the 2020 Olympic Games – that the city might seem like an anomaly, given gloomy reports that, after decades of stagnation, Japan’s GDP growth remains anemic.
In fact, even the small cities of Kushiro and Nemuro in Hokkaido, located near the disputed islands between Russia and Japan, are being rebuilt and modernized at a brisk pace, as is apparent to any tourist (as I was this summer).
What explains this divergence between disappointing national economic data and visible progress in Japanese cities?
It may be a problem of calculation.
According to official data, Japan’s economic growth slowed by one percentage point, in real terms, in the 2014 fiscal year.
Yet, according to Bank of Japan researchers, tax data suggest that growth was more than three percentage points higher than the official figure, implying that GDP was some ¥30 trillion (about $300 billion dollars) larger than officially reported.
There is good reason to believe that it was.
Tax data account for distributed GDP and cover a broader swath of economic activity than traditional measures of output.
And, because few taxpayers have incentives to inflate their reported income, the resultant figures are unlikely to be overestimates.
Given this, gross national income (GNI) might be a more accurate representation of Japan’s economic circumstances.
In fact, the gradual economic growth spurred by so-called Abenomics, together with the low exchange rate that has prevailed until recently, has helped to spur the tourism that has enabled cities like Kushiro and Nemuro to fund their reconstruction.
Taken together, the growth of Japan’s GNI and the implications of tax data and 2008 SNA suggest that Japan’s economy has been doing significantly better lately than the national statistics seem to suggest.
Though each new calculation focuses on a different year, we can use them heuristically to estimate unaccounted-for economic progress in Japan.
The result is substantial: a ¥30 trillion annual adjustment for distributed income and ¥19.8 trillion adjustment for R&D and intellectual property.
Add the GNI adjustment of over ¥8.5 trillion, and Japan’s economy is nearly ¥70 trillion, or 14%, larger than official data suggest.
While this is only a rough calculation, it is impossible to deny the potential differences that more comprehensive calculations can make.
This has important policy implications.
According to official statistics, which place Japan’s GDP at ¥500 trillion, Japan is still ¥100 trillion away from achieving a key goal of the second iteration of Abenomics: to achieve a ¥600 trillion economy.
The revised reading of the statistics would reduce that shortfall by 70%.
Simply put, Abenomics is not getting enough credit.
The incompleteness of the official view can be frustrating, especially as Japanese stocks suffer setbacks, even as Chinese stocks increase, despite the fact that, unlike Japan, China faces considerable hidden economic risks.
A more comprehensive and accurate representation of Japan’s economic progress is vital to give investors the confidence that Japan’s economy merits.
That, in turn, would bolster the impact of Abenomics even further.
Iraqi Hope Dies Last
BAGHDAD – Ten years have passed since Saddam Hussein was removed from power, following more than three decades of tyrannical rule.
The dream of Iraqis after Saddam’s fall was to build a new, prosperous, and democratic Iraq.
A country at peace with itself and its neighbors, with a constitution upholding basic human rights and the rule of law, was the desire of almost everyone.
But the United States and its allies, lacking a coherent vision of Iraq’s future, much less a sound policy for the post-Saddam era, declared Iraq an occupied country, with a US-appointed administrator to run the country, who soon decided to dismantle all existing security, military, and media institutions.
He also introduced a de-Baathification law, which evicted members of the Baath Party from official positions without legal recourse, paving the way for sectarianism and, ultimately, communal violence and unrest.
These unfortunate – and ultimately disastrous – events established an unstable foundation in a strategic country at the core of a highly troubled yet vital region of the world.
As Iraq moved through progressive phases of mismanagement over the subsequent ten agonizing years, the country fractured, shattering the dreams of Iraqis who saw their beloved homeland once again sliding toward authoritarianism, with almost daily violations of the constitution.
The world watched, seemingly helpless to do anything.
Iraq’s last general election, in 2010, brought hope of recovery in the form of a power-sharing agreement among Sunni, Shia, and Kurds, which was supposed to ensure that the country did not revert to dictatorship.
Iraqiya, which I lead, was the largest electoral bloc to emerge from that vote. But, despite our status, we agreed to give up the leadership position afforded by the Constitution in the belief that power-sharing and respect for the rights of all Iraqis is the only formula for governing the country democratically.
These hopes, however, soon vanished, as Iraq’s two-term prime minister, Nouri al-Maliki, subsequently reneged on the agreement.
Today, the very human rights that were guaranteed by the constitution are being violated, with a politicized judiciary routinely abused and manipulated in order to justify the prime minister’s actions.
Instead of keeping the Maliki government in check, the courts facilitate its quest for ever-greater power.
Making matters worse for ordinary Iraqis, public services have deteriorated to a dismal level, and unemployment is rising sharply, despite public expenditure in excess of $500 billion over the seven years of Maliki’s rule.
Sectarianism and racism have become a regular feature of the political landscape.
Corruption is rampant, and Baghdad is now considered one of the world’s worst places to live.
If Iraq continues along its current disastrous path, mayhem and civil war will be the inevitable outcome, with dire consequences for the entire region.
Yet Iraqis continue to hope for a better future.
The advent of a new electoral cycle, which begins with local elections in April, may provide another opportunity to put Iraq on the right path.
But that can happen only if the voting is free and the counting is fair.
The current government, however, is unable to supervise free and fair elections.
Significant measures must be taken, including the active involvement of neutral international agencies and observers to keep the government in check and ensure that voters can have their say.
We are hopeful that Iraqis, who have had their fill of sectarian political parties, will be allowed freely to choose candidates who embrace a non-sectarian and non-racist agenda.
Given a new law limiting senior officials to two terms in office, we also hope to see new and accountable leaders in positions of power.
I am certain that power-sharing, reconciliation, and accountability are the only way forward for Iraq.
Let us hope that this spring – ten years after the US invasion and Saddam’s downfall – brings Iraq a new and constructive beginning.
Securing a More Secure World
Committee reports are usually deadly dull, and UN committee reports are among the dullest.
But the recent report of the UN Secretary General’s High Level Panel on Threats, Challenges, and Change broke that rule.
Sixteen political leaders and former diplomats combined principle with political realism to produce the most comprehensive proposals for change since the UN was created in 1945.
Secretary General Kofi Annan is to present the report in March. Then it will be up to governments to act.
Many early comments focus on the Panel’s recommendations for enlarging the UN Security Council from 15 to 24 members.
The report proposes two alternatives. One would add six new permanent members – such as India, Brazil, Egypt, South Africa, Japan, and Germany – as well as three two-year members.
The other alternative would create eight semi-permanent members with renewable four-year terms and one additional member chosen for a two-year term.
Either proposal would entail amending the UN Charter, which requires marshaling the support of a two-thirds majority of the 191 member states, including the five veto-wielding members of the current Security Council.
Skeptics doubt that this is feasible.
But focusing on enlargement of the Security Council risks diverting attention from the rest of the Panel’s analyses and 101 recommendations for reform, many of which do not require amending the Charter.
According to the report, the General Assembly has lost vitality, the Security Council must be more proactive, the Commission on Human Rights suffers from a legitimacy deficit, the Secretariat should be more professional and better organized, and major institutional gaps hinder responses to economic and social threats to international security.
The report is critical of the organization’s performance on genocide in Bosnia, Rwanda, and Darfur, as well as the late response to HIV/AIDS.
In the panel’s words, the UN was created above all “to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war,” but today the biggest security threats we face “go far beyond states waging aggressive war.
The preoccupation of the UN founders was with state security.
When they spoke of creating a new system of collective security they meant it in the traditional military sense.”
Today the threats are from non-state actors as well as states, and they jeopardize human security as well as that of states.
Collective security nowadays means a broader sharing of responsibility for each other’s security.
The Panel deals forthrightly with the new transnational threats posed by terrorists and the spread of weapons of mass destruction.
Its members agreed that there could be “nightmare scenarios” that combine the two and might require the preventive use of force.
They urge strengthening the non-proliferation regime through more intrusive inspections, and negotiation of arrangements for internationally guaranteed access to nuclear enrichment and reprocessing services, rather than allowing countries to construct them for themselves.
They back President George W. Bush’s Proliferation Security Initiative aimed at stopping traffic in weapons of mass destruction.
On terrorism, they break the long UN impasse over finding a definition, condemning all attacks against civilians, and propose a number of measures that member states should take.
Regarding preventive use of force, traditional interpretations of Article 51 of the UN Charter (which provides a right of self-defense) allow a threatened state to take pre-emptive action in the face of imminent attack, but not to use force preventively against longer term threats.
The Panel would broaden that interpretation to allow the preventive use of force in some instances, but only if approved by the Security Council.
The Security Council would judge the legitimacy of such action by whether it met the age-old criteria of just war: the seriousness of the threat, the purpose of the response, whether force is a last resort, whether it is used in a proportionate way, and whether there is a reasonable balance of good and bad consequences.
In that sense, President Bush won half his argument: preventive force can be justified, but not unilaterally.
Afghanistan would fit; Iraq would not.
Critics complain that this approach places too much trust in a Security Council that can be paralyzed by politics and the veto.
Enlarging the Council could make maters worse.
A state threatened by terrorist attacks originating in another state might feel less patient than a majority of the Council about what is the “last resort.”
In Rwanda and Kosovo, the Security Council failed to act in time to save thousands of lives.
Is there an alternative to waiting for the Security Council and acting unilaterally?
Kosovo and Iraq provide instructive examples.
In the former, the prospect of a Security Council veto prevented action, and a regional organization (NATO) acted without UN authorization.
Although this called the legality of the action into question, the intervention benefited from a widespread sense of political legitimacy that limited its negative effects on international order.
In the case of the Iraq War, President Bush never established a broad consensus that might have provided legitimacy in the face of a veto.
Countries such as France and Germany that opposed action in Iraq were willing to use force in Kosovo despite the absence of Security Council authorization.
If states feel compelled to act in the case of Council stalemate, they should know that they would do less damage to their reputations if they act within the Panel’s guidelines for legitimacy, even if they fail to satisfy its criterion for legality.
No single report can create a more secure world, but those who support that goal must hope that governments and their publics will consider seriously the Panel’s recommendations.
Securing Europe’s Energy Future
Most Europeans agree that reliable, affordable, and sustainable energy is crucial to Europe’s security and prosperity; that energy can be used as a political weapon, as when Russia shut off gas to Ukraine in January 2006; and that Europe is far too dependent on energy supplies from undemocratic and unstable countries or regions.
Yet, despite wide agreement on these matters, there is little consensus about how to address them.
Both boldness and consensus are urgently needed, and those who doubt that Europe is capable of either can take heart from two recent European Commission decisions: a politically ambitious proposal to force the complete separation of networks of pipelines and wires from the companies that supply gas and electricity; and a proposal that Gazprom and other non-EU businesses can control Union energy assets only if they meet tough new conditions, including reciprocal access to, say, Russia’s market for EU energy companies.
But the fundamental problem remains Europe’s vulnerability over energy: an emerging divide and rule strategy over the supply of gas that must be confronted head on.
Today’s preference by individual EU members to act unilaterally on energy must be replaced by a common energy policy based on solidarity among member states and unity in defending EU interests vis-à-vis external partners. After all, such solidarity is what allowed Europe to prosper and integrate over the past 50 years.
So why not stick to a winning formula where energy is concerned?
Specifically, the EU must develop a diplomatic strategy aimed at strengthening cooperation with all major energy producing, transit, and consumer countries, while creating within the Union a mutually beneficial, open, transparent, and stable energy sector based on reciprocity.
Until now, the geopolitical dimension of European energy security has been so neglected as to endanger the Union’s future.
With China seeking to secure exclusive access to energy resources in Africa and the Russian energy giant Gazprom seeking de facto control of Western companies by investing billions of euros in them, Europe can no longer afford to take a wait-and-see approach.
The EU must become more active, more determined and united in securing its energy interests and those of its member states.
Indeed, the internal and external aspects of energy policy are interrelated.
Europe cannot build an efficient external policy without achieving a minimum of harmonization of member state policies regarding energy flows, interconnections, infrastructure, investment, and greater progress toward a single energy market.
Concrete provisions must be included in the new treaty to reform the EU’s institutions in order to ensure the capacity to negotiate an energy security framework with third countries.
For example, all the Union’s future energy agreements should include an “energy security clause” that explicitly outlines a code of conduct and measures to be taken in the event of a supply disruption.
We should replace today’s energy unilateralism by member states with a new common energy policy based on solidarity.
A fundamental part of this must be serious consultation among member states on strategic decisions that may affect an EU partner.
This principle of solidarity was missing when the decision to build a Baltic Sea pipeline to directly link Russia and Germany was taken.
The possible negative environmental consequences of that pipeline are of serious concern to all the citizens of the Baltic region and should be given due attention.
Of course, a common EU security strategy is not meant to undermine the rights of individual member states to choose their internal energy policies.
But collective energy security requires increasing the EU’s ability to face – and face down – external energy challenges.
To achieve this, viable instruments are needed.
I suggest the creation of a new institutional post of Special Representative on foreign energy policy, which would facilitate the coordination of all policies related to the external aspects of energy security.
Working under the authority of the High Representative on Foreign Policy, who under the terms of the new reform treaty will also become a Vice-President of the European Commission, this post would reinforce synergies within the EU.
I also propose that a precise “road map” toward a common foreign policy on energy be created, which would indicate short-, medium-, and long-term objectives, together with a specific timeframe for their implementation.
The existing Energy Charter Treaty – including the Transit Protocol – must remain a cornerstone of Europe’s energy security policy.
The EU must continue to insist that Russia ratify it, stipulating that Russia is already bound by its terms.
The EU should also negotiate a framework document in the context of the next Partnership and Cooperation Agreement negotiations in order to clarify the obligations contained in the Treaty, in particular its Transit Protocol.
Common threats to Europe’s energy security demand a common response.
In building the means to secure Europe’s energy future, we will also renew the spirit of European integration and give new strength to the EU as a global actor.
The energy challenge that confronts Europe calls for an ambitious and courageous approach.
Today’s EU was built on concrete achievements, combining vision and the instruments needed to implement it.
In the interests of our common security, we must not forsake that legacy.
Securing the Future of Energy
PALO ALTO – Today’s huge global energy problems in no small measure reflect the essentially nineteenth-century business plans that three of the world’s largest industries are still pursuing.
Electric utilities still largely burn fossil fuels and sell the power to homes and businesses.
Oil companies still drill for and refine petroleum, and principally sell gasoline and diesel fuel.
Automobile manufacturers still bend steel into vehicles that generally must be powered by petroleum-based fuels.
Until recently, each of these giant industries was comfortable continuing on its familiar and comfortable nineteenth-century path into the twenty-first century.
Each had also succeeded in getting government to insulate it against any need to make fundamental changes.
But recent developments are beginning to create increasingly heavy seas for these industries.
Indeed, many observers detect approaching storms of epic proportions.
What has happened?
First, evidence of climate change has begun to convince almost all climatologists and many other informed observers that our current approach to producing and using energy is very dangerous to the biosphere.
Because changes in carbon dioxide emissions, unlike pollutants such as sulfur dioxide and nitrogen dioxide, cannot be easily detected, and because of the multi-century persistence of CO2 in the atmosphere, the problem of reducing its level in the atmosphere is much harder to solve than are other environmental problems.
Nor are we accustomed to dealing with potential exponential climate change, as phenomena such as warming lead to the release of carbon from the tundra, thereby accelerating warming.
Public debate is also confused by an “all-or-nothing” mind-set, with skeptics contending that if any portion of climate change is naturally caused (say, by the earth’s axis tilting over a period of millennia) then none of it can be anthropogenic.  
Yet there is every reason for us to try to mitigate at least the anthropogenic portion of the climate change caused by CO 2 emissions and other dangerous practices, such as deforestation.
Moreover, there is deepening concern about two types of energy-related security problems: the increasing risk of violence stemming from the nature of our energy use, and the high cost of that energy.
The main risk of violence created by the nature of the electricity system itself is the danger of serious power outages due to physical or cyber-attacks on the increasingly fragile transmission and distribution grid.
Regarding oil, which dominates transportation, the high concentration of deposits in the Middle East, especially those that can be most cheaply exploited, makes oil-importing countries hostage both to terrorist attacks on the oil infrastructure and to monopoly-determined prices.
OPEC uses output cuts whenever possible to keep prices at levels that are at least an order of magnitude above the cost of production plus a reasonable return.
As Paul Collier of Oxford University has pointed out, the preponderance of dictatorships and autocratic kingdoms in the ranks of the largest oil exporters indicates that where these huge economic rents exist, pressures are created against economic diversification and democratization.
Most terrorism, ultimately, is oil-funded.
What Collier calls the “Bottom Billion,” the poorest one-sixth of the world, suffers the most from high oil prices.
Heavy national debt and expensive power are problems for relatively wealthy countries, but they are disasters for sub-Saharan Africa and the rest of the world’s poor.
So what may be the solutions?
First, as the energy campaigner Anne Korin puts it, we need to do to oil what was done to salt just over a century ago.
Salt had been a strategic commodity for millennia – countries fought wars over salt mines – because it was the only way to preserve meat.
But the advent of electricity, refrigeration, and freezing ended salt’s monopoly relatively quickly.
It is still a useful commodity, but no one regards salt mines any more as instruments of national power and influence.
Oil urgently needs to suffer a similar fate.
Oil’s monopoly over transportation can in part be destroyed by electrification (via plug-in hybrid electric vehicles, for example), and also by second-generation biofuels, such as butanol from cellulosic feedstocks, and by algae- and waste-based biofuels.
Studies show clearly that, with time-of-day pricing, electrification of vehicles creates little need for new electricity-generating plants, and also that even with today’s coal-heavy electric grids, electrified vehicles emit less CO2 than gasoline- and diesel-powered vehicles.
And, as the grid’s CO2 emissions are cleaned up, the vehicles’ role as a source of emissions will decline.
It is crucial to improve the efficiency of electricity use, especially in lighting, which accounts for a very large share of demand.
LED’s are beginning to lead the way.
Many nations can also learn a great deal from Denmark’s creative use of waste heat for cogeneration.
Solar power is beginning to gain substantially greater prominence, especially for smaller factories and rooftops.
Germany, with its feed-in tariff, has led the way in encouraging such solar deployments, and this approach is beginning to be adopted at the state level in America.
Reductions in the cost of solar power, efficiency improvements, and sharply improved batteries and other means of electricity storage are helping to make possible a world of increasingly distributed energy generation, based on renewable sources.
That, in turn, promises increasing freedom from the dangers created by our vulnerable electric grids and our reliance on oil.  
Limiting the Security Council Veto
PARIS – Back in 2001, France floated a proposal that the five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council (P5) should voluntarily refrain from using their veto power when dealing with mass-atrocity crimes.
And now, in the lead-up to the commemoration of this year’s 70th anniversary of the UN, French President François Hollande’s government is actively pursuing the idea again.
Could such an arrangement really work?
The predictable initial response is to dismiss the possibility out of hand.
As Australia’s wartime prime minister, Ben Chifley, once famously remarked, “The trouble with gentleman’s agreements is that there aren’t enough bloody gentlemen.”
It is indeed hard to believe that Russia and China, in particular, would be accommodating.
Russia, for example, has exercised vetoes more than 100 times since 1946, most recently – and unhappily – four times since 2011 to block resolutions intended to halt the carnage in Syria.
Nor has the United States, which has used its veto some 80 times (most frequently, in recent years, on Israel-related issues), shown much enthusiasm, notwithstanding its generally strong stand on genocide and related cases.