Developing countries have begun sharing in these gains: responsible for next-to-none of the world’s fertilizer consumption in 1960, by 2000 they used more than industrialized countries.
The World Bank has found that productivity growth in agriculture can be up to four times more effective in reducing poverty than growth from other sectors.
So how do we keep up this progress?
Investment in research and development is vital.
According to research conducted for Copenhagen Consensus, which I direct, investing an extra $88 billion in agricultural R&D over the next 15 years would increase yields by an additional 0.4 percentage points each year, which could save 79 million people from hunger and prevent five million cases of child malnourishment.
Achieving these targets would be worth nearly $3 trillion in social good, implying an enormous return of $34 for every dollar spent.
Scientific breakthroughs also play a key role in fighting specific nutritional challenges such as vitamin A deficiency, the leading cause of preventable childhood blindness.
Robert Mwanga was awarded this year’s World Food Prize for inspiring work that resulted in the large-scale replacement of white sweet potato (with scant Vitamin A content) by a vitamin A-rich alternative in the diets of Uganda’s rural poor.
Another way to increase agricultural productivity is through labor.
When Copenhagen Consensus researchers examined responses to global warming in Bangladesh, they found that increasing agricultural labor productivity “is the only way to increase the resilience of Bangladesh to climate change and to meet long-term development goals.”
Investing around $9,000 per worker over two decades could boost agricultural productivity by 10%.
Bangladesh is an instructive case, because it is susceptible to flooding and the effects of climate change, and its agricultural productivity lags behind other developing and middle-income countries.
Unsurprisingly, the Bangladeshi prime minister’s office is striving to lead in global innovation, sustaining an agriculture innovation lab that shares best practices and ideas.
Copenhagen Consensus has worked with the world’s largest NGO, BRAC, to find out the policy wishes of people living in rural Bangladesh, including the “ultra-poor” with whom BRAC works closely.
These laborers, housewives, and others, some of whom live on the equivalent of $0.60-0.70 or less a day, are seldom given a place at the table to discuss policy.
Across nine rural forums in far-flung parts of the country, the participants overwhelmingly spoke with one voice, calling for the same policy priority: increased agricultural productivity.
“Everyone knows Rangpur has a Monga problem,” said a local from Chandpara in the Rangpur division, using the Bengali term for the annual cyclical phenomenon of seasonal hunger.
“We cannot feed our people two times a day – we need to increase our agricultural productivity.”
A Mukimabad villager had the same vision for Bangladesh: “We need crops and seeds which are not vulnerable to salinity and flood so that we do not have to die from food shortages.”
Humanity’s fight against hunger can be won.
Great progress has been made, but the world needs more agricultural R&D and higher productivity.
As a rural villager from Deukhola, near the Brahmaputra River in remote northern Bangladesh, starkly put it: “Our survival depends on it.”
We would do well to listen.
An Arab Marshall Plan
OXFORD – The wave of revolts that swept across the Arab world two years ago were fueled by demands for freedom, bread, and social justice.
But, although the revolutions toppled dictators and transformed societies, these core objectives remain as distant as ever.
In fact, the economic challenges facing the Arab Spring countries have become even more pressing, weighing heavily on these countries’ political prospects.
Unemployment has nearly doubled in Tunisia and Egypt, and foreign direct investment has dried up across the Arab world.
Tourism revenues, while resilient, are declining, and fiscal challenges remain considerable.
But the economic urgency is not reflected in the policy response, which has been painfully slow or non-existent.
For example, Egypt’s fiscal deficit will exceed 11% of GDP this year.
But the country’s leaders have been stalling on the terms of a much-needed International Monetary Fund loan.
The government’s reduction of fuel subsidies last year was not followed by additional reforms, and the required tax increase was delayed soon after President Mohamed Morsi announced it.
Almost all political stakeholders in Egypt, as in the other Arab countries in transition, recognize the need for economic reform.
But neither citizens nor policymakers appear willing to bear its social and political costs.
In a charged and uncertain political climate, in which new crises erupt on a daily basis, it is unsurprising that economic reform has been postponed repeatedly.
Politicians know that macroeconomic stabilization and social cohesion can be irreconcilable in the short run.
Slashing food and energy subsidies in order to reduce fiscal strain is unlikely to win favor in a country like Egypt, where 40% of per capita income is allocated to food.
Politics is thus constraining efforts to strengthen public finances.
At the same time, narrow IMF prescriptions threaten to exacerbate political instability, with citizens no longer afraid to take to the streets to demonstrate their dissatisfaction.
The current impasse on economic reform highlights a larger point: subsidy and tax regimes cannot be reformed without first redefining the underlying social contract, which has long exchanged welfare distribution for political acquiescence.
But such a move is far too risky for an individual politician, or even a single country, at a time of economic uncertainty and high unemployment.
In order to create the political space needed for economic reform, Arab leaders must underwrite a regional growth pact – a Marshall Plan of sorts – that would facilitate major new investments aimed at reviving economic activity.
It is much easier to reform subsidy programs when the economy is expanding.
Moreover, building competitive markets is essential to ensuring sustainable GDP growth.
To this end, regional trade barriers, which are more pervasive in the Arab world than even in Sub-Saharan Africa, must be dismantled.
By agreeing to the pact, Arab countries would commit to reforming their subsidy systems and to reducing restrictions on cross-border economic exchange.
The regional dimension of prosperity has long been ignored in the Arab world.
But weak regional linkages limit small firms’ growth potential, forcing them to depend on state patronage.
Although Arab leaders often cite Turkey as a beacon of hope, they rarely acknowledge that the country’s recent transformation from the “sick man of Europe” to one of the world’s fastest-growing emerging markets would not have been possible had it not pursued regional synergies.
Such linkages are particularly important for Egypt and Tunisia, which will struggle to reduce unemployment unless Libya’s labor market – which has historically absorbed migrants from its North African neighbors – is reopened.
And, while Tunisia’s situation seems to be the most promising, a crippling investment shortfall is threatening to derail reform efforts there.
With Europe mired in crisis, capital flows from Tunisia’s resource-rich Arab neighbors are its best hope.
Furthermore, Arab countries must ratchet up development spending.
Given that existing development banks in the region have largely failed to act as vehicles of coordination and commitment, a new institution – resembling the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development – would have to be established to oversee a regional aid push and underwrite the costs of economic transition.
New investment vehicles, such as sovereign wealth funds and Islamic finance, can contribute financing to credit-starved firms.
At the same time, Arab countries must streamline current aid efforts.
For too long, Arab governments have simply thrown money at problems, with the rich Gulf countries effectively subsidizing their troubled neighbors’ public services.
Over the last two years, Saudi Arabia has provided more than $3 billion to Yemen.
Qatar has provided &#160;$5 billion to Egypt since 2011, with a promise of $3 billion more.
And the United Arab Emirates recently pledged $2.5 billion to Bahrain.
But unconditional aid only delays reforms, because it weakens budget constraints, which reduces pressure on policymakers and creates moral hazard.
The Arab Spring has exposed fault lines that run not just through individual countries, but also through the entire region.
This calls for redefining relationships not only between citizens and states, but also among Arab countries.
Above all, it is no longer prudent to divide Arab countries between donors and recipients, or between resource-rich and resource-poor countries.
It is in the interest of the entire region – including those countries that do not seem to face an imminent threat of revolt – to contribute to their neighbors’ economic revival and facilitate their political transitions.
A History Lesson for Koizumi
Once again, protests against Japanese Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi’s annual visit to the Yasukuni shrine are breaking out in China as well as South Korea.
Koizumi’s insistence on paying homage to the war dead interred at Yasukuni, where convicted war criminals from World War II are among the buried, has been damaging relations with Japan’s neighbors for years.
Indeed, Chinese President Hu Jintao continually affirms that he will not hold a summit with a Japanese prime minister who goes to Yasukuni, which most Chinese regard as a glorification of past Japanese aggression and colonialism.
Even some in Japan are becoming critical of Koizumi.
While the public remains negative about Chinese outbursts against Japan, a recent survey indicates that more than 70% of Japanese view the current state of Japan-China relations as unacceptable.
More people are not supporting Koizumi’s annual pilgrimage to Yasukuni, with seven former prime ministers jointly demanding that he refrain from the visits.
Yet Koizumi remains defiant.
Moreover, Chief Cabinet Secretary Shinzu Abe, the front-runner to succeed him, has openly declared that he will continue to visit the shrine as prime minister.
Foreign Minister Taro Aso, another possible successor to Koizumi, has called for the Japanese Emperor to pray at Yasukuni.
So pessimism appears to be settling in, and the deadlock over Yasukuni appears to be deepening.
But the past can bring us more than just troubles of this kind.
Even on the issue of Yasukuni, there are positive lessons to be learned.
Consider Yasuhiro Nakasone, Koizumi’s predecessor in the 1980’s.
Both are master politicians who remained popular and served long terms in office.
Both are conservative and nationalistic, advocating the revision of the constitution and an assertive political and military role for Japan abroad.
Finally, both are pro-American, with Nakasone declaring Japan to be America’s “unsinkable aircraft carrier” in East Asia and Koizumi sending troops to Iraq in support of the United States-led war effort.
But a crucial difference between Nakasone and Koizumi is often overlooked: their handling of the Yasukuni controversy and relations with China.
Nakasone broke the taboo by being the first prime minister to worship at the Yasukuni shrine in his official capacity on August 15, 1985, the fortieth anniversary of the end of World War II.
The decision triggered a severe response from China, where students held demonstrations against his visit.
Bilateral relations were frozen.
But, instead of capitalizing on domestic resentment over China’s criticisms, Nakasone decided not to visit Yasukuni again.
He chose to mend relations with China by focusing on the positive aspects of bilateral ties.
In 1986, Nakasone went to Beijing at the personal invitation of Chinese Communist Party General Secretary Hu Yaobang and laid the cornerstone for a Sino-Japanese Youth Exchange Center, promising to forge future friendships with China.
This genuine embrace of reconciliation provided much-needed support to Chinese leaders, who were eager to control anti-Japanese sentiments.
Hu praised Nakasone’s courage and warned Chinese youth publicly that if they “think merely of the well-being of their own country… they are not sober-minded patriots.”
Nakasone emerged from the crisis and was recognized as a capable statesman in managing Japan’s diplomacy with China.
There was no accusation that Nakasone was “selling out” to Beijing.
Nor were his conservative, nationalist, and pro-American credentials damaged.
This episode suggests that Koizumi’s hardline position isn’t the only option.
A Japanese prime minister can be strong without exploiting domestic resentment against the country’s neighbors, and conservative, patriotic, and pro-American while forging a healthy working relationship with China.
Indeed, the cessation of Yasukuni visits would likely open the door to the long-overdue Sino-Japanese summit, which in turn might strengthen moderate voices in China seeking a future-oriented relationship with Japan.
Unfortunately, Koizumi and his allies are not prepared to move forward on the Yasukuni issue.
As Foreign Minister Aso recently put it: “The more China voices [opposition], the more one feels like going there.
It’s just like when you’re told ‘Don't smoke cigarettes,’ it actually makes you want to smoke.”
No one expects the current Japanese and Chinese leaders to embrace, as Nakasone and Hu did two decades ago, but it is a sad state of affairs when the leaders of neighboring giants pretend not to see each other at international forums.
If Nakasone, who now urges Koizumi to stop the Yasukuni pilgrimage, were to respond to Aso, he might simply extend the analogy: it is not in Japan’s national interest to continue to inhale Koizumi’s second-hand smoke.
Israel versus America versus Iran
TEL AVIV – Israel’s concern about the specter of a nuclear Iran has now degenerated into a crisis of confidence concerning the United States.
Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu has embarked on a campaign to force President Barack Obama to set a red line that Iran must not cross, lest it risk unleashing an American military response.
Implicit threats of a unilateral Israeli attack, together with conspicuous meddling in the US presidential election campaign, have compounded Netanyahu’s effort to twist Obama’s arm.
The controversy between the two allies partly reflects their divergent timelines: for Israel, the red line is Iran’s imminent burial deep underground of its uranium-enrichment facilities; for the US, it is the start of a dedicated weapons program.
Indeed, they probably contemplate land incursions into Iran, and possibly a decisive –&#160;and, from their perspective, long overdue – showdown with Hamas in Gaza and Hezbollah in Lebanon.
Though determined to prevent Iran from acquiring nuclear weapons, even if doing so requires military action, the US weighs the consequences of a military showdown in very different terms.
A superpower that has earned only frustration in its abortive efforts – whether war or regional diplomacy – in the dysfunctional Middle East, the US faces the Iran crisis in the midst of its epochal strategic shift to Asia and the Pacific.
The fallout from a war in Iran would pin down the US in the Middle East for years to come, undermining its new strategic priorities.
As a result, the US, though certainly better equipped than Israel for a war to ensure that Iran forever abandons its nuclear ambitions, could nonetheless conclude that that objective is simply too costly.
The recent report by The Iran Project, whose signatories include the former US national security advisers Brent Scowcroft and Zbigniew Brzezinski, concluded that an American military attack on Iran could only delay its nuclear program for up to four years.
To guarantee that Iran never acquires a nuclear bomb, the US would need to maintain military pressure on Iran for several years.
And, if forced to impose regime change as the ultimate solution to the dilemma, the report assumes that this would require military occupation, which would entail a commitment of resources and personnel greater than what the US invested in the Iraq and Afghanistan wars combined.
Moreover, the conventional assumption that the region’s Sunni Arab regimes would give tacit approval to a military attack on Iran’s nuclear installations must be revisited in the wake of the Arab Spring – particularly in the aftermath of the recent, sudden upsurge in anti-American violence throughout the Muslim world.
The pre-Arab Spring paradigm that framed the Middle East as being divided between “moderates” and “extremists” has become obsolete.
The Islamist governments that have emerged from the downfall of America’s puppet regimes are no friends of an Iranian nuclear empire.
But, in their struggle to survive, they must channel popular anti-Americanism.
For Egyptian President Mohamed Morsi, that imperative meant placating the angry mob that recently attacked the US embassy rather than merely condemning the violence.
An attack on Iran, especially if it develops into a longer war involving regional proxies, is bound to become the trigger for mass anti-Israel and anti-US hysteria, which might draw the Islamist regimes in the region into a dynamic of escalation.
It would be impossible to rule out a regional war.
The main problem facing a military operation in Iran is the need to ensure its legitimacy.
China and Russia would never allow the US to secure a United Nations mandate for an attack.
Moreover, while Iranian provocations that clearly reveal the regime’s intentions to develop a nuclear-weapons capability might help build support for American military action, it is far from certain that Europeans, or others, would rush to join another US-led “coalition of the willing.”
The dire legacy of Iraq and Afghanistan weighs heavily on the Western democracies.
The saddest part of the story is Israel’s utter indifference to the need to build international legitimacy for its drive to stop Iran’s nuclear program.
Netanyahu thinks in bold military terms, not in terms of geopolitical strategy.
His careless Palestine policy has left Israel with few friends in the international community, let alone in the Arab Middle East.
Indeed, many regard Netanyahu’s Iran obsession as nothing more than a successful ploy to divert attention from the Palestinian issue.
Only a generous, bold peace initiative that would genuinely revive the two-state solution, accompanied by a freeze on construction and enlargement of West Bank settlements, would help to recover the good will of the Palestinians and their brethren throughout the Arab world.
And only that outcome can secure the international goodwill that both Israel and the US will need for a showdown with Iran.
A Human Rights Crime In Gaza
Israeli bombs and missiles periodically strike the encapsulated area, causing high casualties among both militants and innocent women and children.
Prior to the highly publicized killing of a woman and her four little children last week, this pattern was illustrated by a previous report from B’Tselem, the leading Israeli human rights organization: 106 Palestinians were killed between February 27 and March 3. Fifty-four of them were civilians who didn't take part in the fighting, and 25 were under 18 years of age.
On a recent trip through the Middle East, I attempted to gain a better understanding of the crisis.
One of my visits was to Sderot, a community of about 20,000 in southern Israel that is frequently struck by rudimentary rockets fired from nearby Gaza.
I condemned these attacks as abominable and an act of terrorism, since most of the thirteen victims during the past seven years have been non-combatants.
Subsequently, I met with leaders of Hamas, both a delegation from Gaza and the top officials in Damascus, Syria.
I made the same condemnation to them, and urged that they declare a unilateral ceasefire or orchestrate with Israel a mutual agreement to terminate all military action in and around Gaza for an extended period.
They responded that such previous action by them had not been reciprocated, and they reminded me that Hamas had previously insisted on a ceasefire throughout Palestine including both Gaza and the West Bank, which Israel had refused.
Hamas then made a public proposal of a mutual ceasefire restricted to Gaza, which the Israelis considered and also rejected.
There are fervent arguments heard on both sides concerning blame for a lack of peace in the Holy Land.
Israel has occupied and colonized the Palestinian West Bank, which is approximately one-fourth (28.5%) the size of the nation of Israel as recognized by the international community.
Some Israeli religious factions claim a right to the land on both sides of the Jordan River, and others aver that their 205 settlements with some 500,000 people are necessary for “security.”
All Arab nations have agreed to full recognition of Israel if it will comply with key United Nations resolutions.
Hamas has agreed to accept any negotiated peace settlement between Palestinian Authority President Mahmoud Abbas and Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Olmert, provided it is approved in a referendum among the Palestinian people.
This holds promise of progress, but despite the brief fanfare and positive statements at the peace conference last November in Annapolis, Maryland, a retrogression has occurred in the process.
Nine thousand new Israeli settlement housing units have been announced in Palestine, the number of roadblocks within the West bank has increased, and the stranglehold on Gaza has been tightened.
It is one thing for other leaders to defer to the US on the crucial peace negotiations, but the world must not stand idle while innocent people are treated cruelly.
It is time for strong voices in Europe, the US, Israel, and elsewhere to speak out and condemn this human rights tragedy among the Palestinian people. 
A Hundred Years of Superconductivity
CHICAGO – The world’s first “quantum” computer – a machine that harnesses the magic of quantum phenomena to perform memory and processing tasks incredibly faster than today’s silicon-based computer chips – was recently sold by D-Wave Systems of Canada to Lockheed-Martin.
And, while some question whether the machine is truly a quantum computer, its designers have published articles in peer-reviewed journals demonstrating that the basic elements of this novel computer are indeed superconducting quantum bits.
This spring marked the 100th anniversary of the discovery of superconductivity – the ability of materials to carry electrical current with no loss.
Currents set up in superconducting wires can exist for years without any measurable decay.
Because of this property, superconductors have unique features that can be exploited in many ways.
They can carry enormous amounts of current, making them ideal for urban power grids. And, when wound into coils, they can produce extremely strong magnetic fields.
Such superconducting magnets have been applied in a variety of technologies.
The best-known examples are the magnets that drive the magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) machines found in most hospitals.
Perhaps the most exotic are the huge magnets used to accelerate particles in the Large Hadron Collider, which seeks to discover the fundamental principles of matter.
Despite their great promise, however, superconductors have limits, the primary one being that most superconduct at very low temperatures – indeed, near absolute zero (-273 ºC).
Such temperatures can be achieved only through liquid-helium cooling.
Thus, Swiss researchers caused excitement in 1986 by announcing the discovery of superconductivity in an oxide of copper at twice the temperature of the previous record holder.
Shortly thereafter, researchers in the United States found a related material that superconducts above the temperature at which air liquefies.
As Time magazine proclaimed in May 1987, with the discovery of these so-called “cuprates,” the superconducting revolution had begun.
Alas, the revolution soon bogged down.
Cuprates are notoriously difficult materials to work with, because they are very brittle.
This is exacerbated by their strong anisotropy – the materials have a quasi-two-dimensional structure consisting of a weakly coupled stack of conducting sheets. As such, they are a challenge for industry, though applications are beginning to appear.
Since the cuprates first appeared, a variety of other “high temperature” superconductors have been discovered – one is a simple compound of magnesium and boron, and another involves a mixture of iron and arsenic.
Although none of them superconduct at temperatures as high as liquid air, they may ultimately be better materials with which to work.
Given the vast number of combinations of elements that can form compounds, there is a good chance that better superconductors await our discovery.
In the coming years, superconductors are expected to play a growing role in technology.
Already, “second generation” cuprate wires are being used to make high-capacity cables for electric-power transmission, and lighter-weight generators for wind turbines.
Stronger superconducting magnets are leading to the development of MRIs with more sophisticated diagnostic capabilities.
Superconductors are being used for levitated trains in high-speed rail transport, and as microwave filters for improved signal bandwidth in cellular base stations.
The discovery of a new superconductor with enhanced properties could lead to even greater technological innovation.
This brings us to the intellectual challenge of superconductors.
It took 46 years from the discovery of superconductivity to the 1957 Bardeen, Cooper, and Schrieffer (BCS) theory of how the phenomenon occurs.
Along the way, a number of famous physicists tried and failed to get the answer – Albert Einstein, Werner Heisenberg, and Richard Feynman being notable examples.
Discovering the solution required the development of advanced theoretical techniques.
What had been difficult to figure out was how to get electrons to superconduct.
The basic discovery of BCS was that if the electrons pair up, those couples could indeed superconduct.
Fortunately, the mechanism for such coupling was known.
Although electrons are negatively charged, and therefore repel one another, the positive ions that they leave behind when they flow through a metal can mediate an effective attraction between two electrons under restrictive conditions (for example, the metal must be very cold).
The suspicion, though, is that this is not the case in the new superconductors.
Cuprates superconduct at much higher temperatures, but, more importantly, they possess some exotic properties: they are formed by doping electrical carriers into a host material that is a magnetic insulator – the last place one would look for a conventional superconductor.
And, unlike BCS theory, in which the pairs are isotropic – with identical properties in all directions in space – the pairs in cuprates are strongly anisotropic, resembling a cloverleaf.
How can one pair electrons without ions holding them together, thereby enabling higher-temperature superconductors?
While ideas about this abound, new theoretical breakthroughs most likely will be needed to develop the machinery required to solve such electron-electron theories, perhaps even involving black holes.
Whatever the theory turns out to be, it is certain to revolutionize physics.
A Better Global Framework to End AIDS
STOCKHOLM, GENEVA – This week, we celebrate the tremendous progress that has been made in the struggle against HIV and AIDS.
In many countries with strong health systems, HIV is no longer a death sentence, but a chronic condition.
And Africa has reached a critical milestone: each year, there are now more Africans starting HIV treatment than being infected.
Still, even as we celebrate, we must also mourn the 1.1 million people who lost their lives to the disease this year.
HIV still infects 6,000 people every day, and AIDS remains a leading cause of death among children, adolescents, and women in Africa.
The movement against AIDS has inspired all of us to help the people who continue to be left behind, and to commit to ending AIDS once and for all.
Fortunately, we already have the know-how, resources, and, crucially, the political momentum to do this; and at the High-Level Meeting on Ending AIDS this year, United Nations member states made ambitious commitments that will put us on the fast track toward our goal.
What’s more, in September, Canada hosted a successful financing conference for the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis, and Malaria, which brought in almost $13 billion, replenishing the Global Fund for 2017-2019.
Meanwhile, individual countries have increased their domestic investments, and international partners – big and small – have maintained their support, which is how we will reach the $26 billion needed for the global AIDS response in 2020.
But funding parts of the global health system is not enough.
The international community must take a more holistic view and reinforce a global-response architecture that features a clear division of labor and seamless cooperation among various stakeholders.
Providing the necessary support will require donors to coordinate with one another, so that all parts of the existing architecture for managing global health issues are adequately funded.
This will then ensure that all countries – and, more importantly, all people – receive the support they need.
UNAIDS is setting a powerful example for international collaboration, by organizing partners around a common 2016-2021 Strategy to end AIDS.
This unique and innovative partnership brings together 11 co-sponsoring UN agencies, each with diverse sector-specific expertise, and mobilizes various government stakeholders.
Partners include business, community, and faith leaders, as well as teachers, judges, members of law enforcement, parliamentarians, and many others outside the health sector whose actions nonetheless affect health outcomes.
One of UNAIDS’ tasks is to encourage national governments to keep AIDS high on their public-health agendas, and to invest in joint efforts to end the disease.
It is also the only organization with a mandate to set norms and standards for the global response to AIDS, which means that it plays a key role in the current international framework.
UNAIDS maintains a close partnership with the Global Fund.
It has a presence in more than 80 countries, and its regional teams provide technical support and strategic information, which helps the Global Fund direct its grants to the right programs, locations, and populations at sufficient scale.
Moreover, it helps to create the social, legal, and political conditions for people to use health services, not least by promoting gender equality and ensuring that populations at higher risk of contracting HIV do not face adverse discrimination.
UNAIDS engages with civil society at all levels, by leveraging the international AIDS response to promote equality, dignity, and human rights around the world.
As such, UNAIDS works to expand the political space for – and investment in – civil society.
Yet, despite its broad mandate and many functions, UNAIDS lacks adequate resources, which threatens past achievements and future programs alike, and poses a danger to people and communities that depend on the lifesaving support the organization helps facilitate.
Sweden and UNAIDS will work together to ensure that the international AIDS response continues to transform – and save – lives.
We will safeguard and empower women and girls, and make sure that vulnerable populations’ voices are heard.
But, at the same time, the international community must strengthen the existing framework for managing global-health issues.
As Swedish Prime Minister Stefan Löfven said in Montreal in September: “Today we are focusing on the Global Fund, but tomorrow let’s not forget to provide sufficient funding for the entire global health architecture.”
It is time for the international community to meet that challenge, by pledging to support our global health infrastructure, so that no agency – and no country or person – is left out.
Aid Works
NEW YORK – The critics of foreign aid are wrong.
A growing flood of data shows that death rates in many poor countries are falling sharply, and that aid-supported programs for health-care delivery have played a key role.
Aid works; it saves lives.
One of the newest studies, by Gabriel Demombynes and Sofia Trommlerova, shows that Kenya’s infant mortality (deaths under the age of one year) has plummeted in recent years, and attributes a significant part of the gain to the massive uptake of anti-malaria bed nets.
These findings are consistent with an important study of malaria death rates by Chris Murray and others, which similarly found a significant and rapid decline in malaria-caused deaths after 2004 in sub-Saharan Africa resulting from aid-supported malaria-control measures.
Let’s turn back the clock a dozen years.
In 2000, Africa was struggling with three major epidemics.
AIDS was killing more than two million people each year, and spreading rapidly.
Malaria was surging, owing to the parasite’s growing resistance to the standard medicine at the time.
Tuberculosis was also soaring, partly as a result of the AIDS epidemic and partly because of the emergence of drug-resistant TB.
In addition, hundreds of thousands of women were dying in childbirth each year, because they had no access to safe deliveries in a clinic or hospital, or to emergency help when needed.
These interconnected crises prompted action.
The United Nations’ member states adopted the Millennium Development Goals in September 2000.
Three of the eight MDGs – reductions in children’s deaths, maternal deaths, and epidemic diseases – focus directly on health.
Likewise, the World Health Organization issued a major call to scale up development assistance for health.
And African leaders, led by Nigeria’s president at the time, Olusegun Obasanjo, took on the challenge of battling the continent’s epidemics.
Nigeria hosted two landmark summits, on malaria in 2000 and on AIDS in 2001, which were a crucial spur to action.
At the second of these summits, then-UN Secretary-General Kofi Annan called for the creation of the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, TB, and Malaria.
The Global Fund began operations in 2002, financing prevention, treatment, and care programs for the three diseases.
High-income countries also finally agreed to reduce the debt owed by heavily indebted poor countries, allowing them to spend more on health care and less on crippling payments to creditors.
The United States also took action, adopting two major programs, one to fight AIDS and the other to fight malaria.
In 2005, the UN Millennium Project recommended specific ways to scale up primary health care in the poorest countries, with the high-income countries helping to cover the costs that the poorest could not pay by themselves.
The UN General Assembly backed many of the project’s recommendations, which were then implemented in numerous low-income countries.
Donor aid did start to rise sharply as a result of all of these efforts.
In 1995, total aid for health care was around $7.9 billion.
This inadequate level then crept up slowly, to $10.5 billion by 2000.
By 2005, however, annual aid for health had jumped another $5.9 billion, and by 2010, the total had grown by another $10.5 billion, to reach $26.9 billion for the year.
The expanded funding allowed major campaigns against AIDS, TB, and malaria; a major scaling up of safe childbirth; and increased vaccine coverage, including the near-eradication of polio.
Many innovative public-health techniques were developed and adopted.
With one billion people living in high-income countries, total aid in 2010 amounted to around $27 per person in the donor countries – a modest sum for them, but a life-saving one for the world’s poorest people.
The public-health successes can now be seen on many fronts.
Around 12 million children under five years old died in 1990.
By 2010, this number had declined to around 7.6 million – still far too high, but definitely an historic improvement.
Malaria deaths in children in Africa were cut from a peak of around one million in 2004 to around 700,000 by 2010, and, worldwide, deaths of pregnant women declined by almost half between 1990 and 2010, from an estimated 543,000 to 287,000.
Another $10-15 billion in annual aid (that is, roughly $10-15 more per person in the high-income world), bringing total aid to around $40 billion per year, would enable still greater progress to be made in the coming years.
The opponents of aid are not merely wrong.
Their vocal antagonism still threatens the funding that is needed to get the job done, to cut child and maternal deaths by enough to meet the MDGs by 2015 in the poorest countries, and to continue after that to ensure that all people everywhere finally have access to basic health services.
A decade of significant progress in health outcomes has proved the skeptics wrong.
Aid for health care works – and works magnificently – to save and improve lives.
Let us continue to support these life-saving programs, which uphold the dignity and well-being of all people on the planet.
The AIIB and Global Governance
HONG KONG – Despite official American and Japanese opposition, 57 countries have opted to be among the founding members of the China-led Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB).
Regardless of what naysayers believe, this remarkable turn of events can only benefit global economic governance.
According to former US Treasury Secretary Larry Summers, the AIIB’s establishment “may be remembered as the moment the United States lost its role as the underwriter of the global economic system.”
Asia Development Bank (ADB) President Takehiko Nakao, by contrast, does not believe that there will be a “major change to the world of development finance,” though he conceded that “there can be interpretations as to the symbolic meaning of this.”
Who is right will depend largely on the decisions that the AIIB’s top shareholders make regarding its operating structure.
So far, the AIIB has not sought to amend the principle that the largest contributor to a multilateral organization gets the largest say in running it.
Just as the US dominates the World Bank and Europe leads the International Monetary Fund, China will head the AIIB.
This implies a larger global leadership role for China – which the world, including its traditional powers, should welcome.
After all, global leadership is not just a matter of might; it also reflects the provision of global public goods.
When World War II ended, the US, aside from being the world’s leading military and economic power, was the largest provider of such goods, through the Marshall Plan, support for the United Nations, and contributions to the Bretton Woods institutions (the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank).
But massive debts have lately undermined the ability of the US – not to mention Europe and Japan – to continue making such large contributions.
Fortunately, China is willing and able to fill the gap.
In fact, China might have done so within the Bretton Woods institutions, were the distribution of voting rights within them not skewed so heavily toward the incumbents, who still enjoy veto power.
For example, China has a 3.8% voting share in the IMF and World Bank, even though it accounts for more than 12% of world GDP.
The United Kingdom and France – which are one-third the size of China – each have a 4.3% share.
With the incumbents unwilling to bring China’s voting share in line with its economic might, China had little choice but to launch its own institution.
But the AIIB has its own objectives, which do not align precisely with those of, say, the World Bank.
Specifically, the bank is a critical element of China’s “one belt, one road” strategy, which encompasses two initiatives: the overland Silk Road Economic Belt, connecting China to Europe, and the 21st Century Maritime Silk Road, linking China to Southeast Asia, the Middle East, and Europe.
While the US “pivots” to the east, China is pirouetting west, applying the lessons of its development to its trading partners across Eurasia and beyond.
Perhaps the most important of these lessons is that connectivity is vital to economic growth.
Over the last three decades, the construction of roads, railways, ports, airports, and telecommunications systems in China has fostered trade, attracted investment, and, by linking the country’s land-locked western and southern provinces to its more prosperous coastal areas, helped to reduce regional disparities.
China’s Silk Road initiative, which aims to boost prosperity among China’s trading partners largely through infrastructure investment, is a logical next step – one on which China is spending significantly.
In addition to its initial contribution of up to $50 billion to the AIIB, China has committed $40 billion to its Silk Road Fund, $32 billion to the China Development Bank, and $30 billion to the Export-Import Bank of China.
According to estimates by HSBC, the “one belt, one road” initiative could end up costing as much as $232 billion – just under two-thirds of the World Bank’s balance sheet in 2014.
The $100 billion AIIB will play a central role in this effort.
Given massive global demand for infrastructure finance – which, according to ADB estimates, will amount to $8 trillion in Asia alone over the next decade – the AIIB should not be considered a threat to the World Bank, the ADB, or other multilateral lenders.
Nonetheless, it will compete with them, owing to its distinctive – and probably more efficient – approach to lending.
In fact, the AIIB’s operations will most likely resemble those of the World Bank in the 1960s, when engineers with hands-on development experience dominated the staff and could design lending conditions that worked for borrowers.
In the late 1980s, the World Bank began to implement the Washington Consensus, pushing for economic and political liberalization, without sufficient regard for local political or economic realities.
The result was conditional lending, with terms – created mostly by policy wonks – that many developing-country borrowers could not meet (at least not without hiring consultants to adjust their official reporting).
The acid test of the AIIB’s effectiveness will be its governance model.
One failing of the Bretton Wood institutions is their full-time shareholder boards of directors, which tend to undermine effectiveness by micro-managing and often requesting conflicting lending conditions.
The World Bank has wasted far too much time re-organizing itself under various presidents, without recognizing the fundamental problem with its own governance structure.
Even if the AIIB does not deliver as promised, its establishment is an important reminder that in a fast-changing world, economic governance cannot remain stagnant.
If Western leaders really do believe in innovation, competition, and meritocracy, they should welcome the AIIB.
AIPAC in Decline
MADRID – The American Israel Public Affairs Committee’s lobbying power in the United States is undeniable.
But AIPAC’s supposed ability to control US policy decisions is a Potemkin village myth, cultivated by friends and rivals alike.
In fact, thanks to Israeli Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu, AIPAC’s influence is under threat – though Netanyahu himself will be just fine.
Claims about AIPAC’s clout have long shaped analysis of US foreign policy.
For example, Steve Walt and John Mearsheimer, in their notorious essay “The Israel Lobby,” asserted that AIPAC manufactured the Iraq War.
But the reality is far less sinister: in that case, AIPAC merely surfed on the pro-invasion wave unleashed by President George W. Bush, with his Messianic urges, and Vice President Dick Cheney, a one-man war lobby.
The truth about AIPAC – that it is influential, but far from invulnerable – has recently been revealed, both to the public and to the group itself.
Having been pushed by Netanyahu into an unwinnable fight against US President Barack Obama’s administration over its nuclear deal with Iran, AIPAC is now crumbling under the weight of its own hubris.
In fact, AIPAC has never overcome resolute opposition from an American president, particularly in a matter of US national security.
It failed to stop Jimmy Carter from selling F-15 Eagle fighters to Saudi Arabia in 1978, or to prevent Ronald Reagan from supplying AWACS reconnaissance planes to the Saudis three years later.
And its 1991 battle with President George H.W. Bush over the linkage of US loan guarantees for Israel with Prime Minister Yitzak Shamir’s support of the 1991 Madrid peace conference – one of Bush’s key legacies – ended in defeat.
Against this background, AIPAC should have known that its attempt, in close cooperation with Obama’s Republican opponents, to block the Iran nuclear deal (one of Obama’s most important achievements) would fail.
Indeed, Obama even used a tactic similar to that of George H.W. Bush to win the day.
Just as Bush openly denounced the “thousand lobbyists” working the halls of the US Congress against a vital national interest, Obama said in a conference call that his critics “would be opposed to any deal with Iran,” and called out AIPAC’s $20 million advertising campaign against the agreement.
He also put AIPAC in the same category as the Republicans who “were responsible” for leading the US into the Iraq war.
For AIPAC – which has traditionally relied on a broad coalition of social and political forces in the US that view Israel’s security as both a moral cause and a vital national interest – this is not any old defeat.
The Republican-backed crusade against a key agreement negotiated by a Democratic president, with his party’s overwhelming support, has threatened the bipartisan foundations of Israel’s cause in America.
Of course, the nuclear deal involved more than just the US and Iran.
AIPAC was opposing an international agreement that six major world powers – China, France, Germany, Russia, the United Kingdom, and the US – had already signed and that the United Nations had approved.
Even some of Israel’s staunchest supporters in Congress were unlikely to deal a potentially devastating blow to America’s international credibility, and the idea that the negotiating countries would all agree to reopen the talks to produce a “better deal” was sheer fantasy.
Yet that is the objective that Netanyahu set for AIPAC.
The row over the Iran deal is bound to be a watershed moment for American Jews, among whom sharp divisions have formed.
Indeed, the American Jewish Committee 2015 Survey of American Jewish Opinion reports the emergence of “two diverging Jewish sub-communities,” with a growing number of Jews feeling alienated by the organizations that claim to represent them.
AIPAC represents a striking anomaly in the life of American Jews.
It is increasingly identified with the Republican agenda and Israel’s evangelical Christian supporters, even though polls have repeatedly shown that Jews are America’s most liberal ethnic group.
The truth is that American Jews largely opposed the Iraq war.
They overwhelmingly vote for the Democratic Party.
They define their religion as moderate and liberal, with many upholding gay rights and abortion, both anathema to evangelical Christians.
The majority of American Jews even support the creation of a Palestinian state.
And, although they are far from united on the Iran deal, the agreement’s supporters outnumber its opponents.
Much of the blame for the damage that has been done – to AIPAC, American Jewish communities, and even the US political process – falls on Netanyahu.
But he is unlikely to face retribution for any of it.
On the contrary, the Obama administration has already begun the discussions it promised on upgrading Israel’s strategic capabilities.
As Arab countries throughout the Middle East melt down – with increasingly significant spillover effects in the West – Israel continues to represent a stable regional partner for the US.
More dangerous, Netanyahu could achieve his next goal: preventing a strategic détente between the US and Iran that would enable cooperation in resolving major regional conflicts, from Yemen to Syria.
After all, Obama’s victory on the nuclear deal may have been inevitable, but it was far from easy.
An odd coalition of Iranian radicals, AIPAC, the Saudi-led Sunni alliance, the Israeli government, and US politicians from both parties have already compelled Obama to promise additional sanctions on Iran for its sponsorship of terrorism.
As a result, America’s cold war with Iran is likely to persist.
Lahirnya Transportasi Udara yang Ramah Iklim
MONTREAL – Seiring meningkatnya konektivitas global, kebutuhan atas transportasi udara terus bertambah, diperkirakan lebih dari 30.000 pesawat berukuran besar akan mengudara dalam beberapa tahun ke depan.
Tetapi, jika kita ingin mempertahankan perkembangan ini tanpa memperburuk perubahan iklim, kita harus dengan cepat mengurangi emisi CO2 terkait penerbangan, sebuah hal mendesak dan tidak termuat dalam Perjanjian Paris mengenai perubahan iklim yang ditandatangani lebih dari 190 negara pada bulan Desember lalu.
Untungnya, sekarang merupakan waktu yang tepat untuk memisahkan emisi penerbangan dari pertumbuhan perjalanan udara.
Perwakilan dari 191 negara bertemu di Montreal pekan ini untuk menghadiri Sesi ke-39 Pertemuan Organisasi Penerbangan Sipil Dunia (ICAO) di bawah naungan PBB; setelah melalui perselisihan selama puluhan tahun, akhirnya mereka menyepakati perjanjian iklim khusus industri penerbangan.
Kerangka ICAO yang baru bertujuan mencapai “pertumbuhan netral karbon” (carbon-neutral growth) dalam sektor penerbangan dunia dimulai tahun 2020 dan seterusnya, juga memuat aturan pokok yaitu upaya global berbasis pasar (GMBM atau global market-based measure) untuk membantu maskapai memangkas emisi karbon sesuai target pada tahun 2020, tanpa mengeluarkan banyak biaya.
Saat diterapkan nanti, kerangka tersebut menjadi skema pembatas emisi karbon pertama untuk industri skala global yang tidak akan berdampak pada kenaikan biaya secara besar-besaran untuk konsumen.
Maskapai bisa membeli penurunan emisi dari sektor perekonomian lainnya, sehingga akan menyalurkan miliaran dolar untuk pembangunan rendah karbon di seluruh dunia.
Selama enam tahun pertama, kerangka baru ini hanya akan diberlakukan untuk penerbangan antar negara yang sudah mengadopsinya secara sukarela, berarti ICAO harus mendorong partisipasi yang cukup agar program tersebut bisa efektif.
Pendekatan opsional tersebut mendapat banyak kritik, tapi pertanyaan apakah sebuah program harus dibuat “wajib” atau “sukarela” tidak penting disini, sebab perjanjian internasional umumnya hanya berlaku terhadap negara-negara berdaulat yang setuju menjadi pihak.
Sekitar 64 negara telah mengisyaratkan kesediaan untuk menandatangani perjanjian ICAO dan jumlahnya setara dengan 80% perkiraan kenaikan emisi CO2 di atas tingkat emisi rujukan tahun 2020.
Memang ini tidak sempurna tapi mencerminkan awal yang cukup baik, dan diharapkan negara-negara lain akan berpartisipasi ketika menyaksikan manfaat yang dipetik dari pembangunan rendah karbon.
Maskapai pun akan menyambut kerangka global yang koheren yang menetapkan metric kepatuhan yang jelas dan dapat diprediksi, bukan sekadar peraturan tambal sulam yang berbeda antar negara dan menyulitkan operasi internasional.
Untuk meminimalisasi biaya kepatuhan – juga karena kelestarian lingkungan kini menjadi indikasi kompetitif utama bagi konsumen dan investor – maskapai akan mendorong negara yang menjadi mitra bisnisnya untuk ikut serta dalam program ICAO.
Perjanjian baru ini memberi peluang besar untuk mencegah pelepasan emisi sebanyak 2.5 miliar ton CO2  dalam 15 tahun pertama – setara dengan menghapuskan 35 juta mobil dari jalan setiap tahun pelaksanaan program ini.
Perjanjian tersebut juga merangsang produsen-produsen besar seperti Boeing, Airbus, Bombardier, dan Embraer – yang tengah berinvestasi pada pengembangan pesawat terbang yang lebih hemat bahan bakar dan peningkatan efisiensi pada model yang sudah ada – untuk mengembangkan teknologi bersih yang memungkinkan pembelian offset emisi yang lebih sedikit.
Meskipun demikian, kerangka yang diputuskan di Montreal belum lengkap dan segala rincian pentingnya harus diselesaikan dengan cepat agar maskapai bisa mulai merencanakan bagaimana perusahaannya akan memenuhi target lingkungan yang baru.
Negara-negara maju sudah menawarkan bantuan pelaksanaan GMBM, yang diharapkan akan membuka jalan bagi investasi di negara-negara berkembang yang merupakan pusat keunggulan penerbangan baru.
Apabila negara-negara tersebut bisa melampaui teknologi-teknologi lama, mereka akan menjadi pemimpin baru di sektor penerbangan yang bersifat smart-carbon.
Negara harus meraih peluang di hadapannya dan mengikuti kerangka ICAO agar setiap produsennya mempunyai pedoman arah yang jelas dan dapat diprediksi.
Pada pertemuan di Paris tahun lalu yang membahas perubahan iklim, kita menyaksikan kekuatan dari aksi kolektif global untuk melawan perubahan iklim.
Sekitar 187 negara – besar dan kecil, maju dan berkembang – mengumumkan target penurunan emisi nasional beberapa bulan sebelum konferensi diselenggarakan, sehingga sukses menciptakan momentum untuk meraih perjanjian yang bersejarah.
Melalui progres perjanjian Paris saat ini yang segera diberlakukan dalam hitungan bulan – lebih cepat daripada perkiraan banyak orang – kita masih memiliki momentum.
Perjanjian ICAO ialah gelombang lanjutan dalam perjuangan internasional melawan perubahan iklim.
Bersama, kedua perjanjian tersebut akan menaikkan peluang kita merealisasikan pertumbuhan ekonomi yang berkelanjutan dan tetap menjaga kelestarian lingkungan.
Melalui aksi membersihkan jejak karbon kita sejak hari ini, generasi para pelancong masa depan yang terbang di udara akan bisa menoleh ke luar jendela pesawatnya dan melihat bumi yang sehat.
Airpocalypse di Eropa
SINGAPURA – Para pembuat kebijakan di Eropa memang senang menceramahi negara lain tentang polusi udara.
Negara-negara di Asia, khususnya Tiongkok, menjadi target favorit penerima kritik mereka.
Bahkan rasa-rasanya konferensi berskala besar apapun yang membahas tentang lingkungan hidup belum lengkap jika tidak disertai presentasi oleh pembuat kebijakan dari Eropa tentang “praktik-praktik terbaik” di Eropa yang harus ditiru negara-negara lain.
Akan tetapi, bicara mengenai polusi udara, mungkin ada baiknya negara-negara Eropa lebih sedikit bicara dan lebih banyak mendengar.
Polusi udara menjadi semakin parah di kawasan Eropa.
Organisasi Kesehatan Dunia (WHO) menyebutnya “satu-satunya risiko kesehatan lingkungan hidup yang terbesar” dan memperkirakan 90% penduduk Eropa terpapar dengan polusi outdoor yang melebihi batas kualitas utama berdasarkan pedoman WHO.
Pada tahun 2010, sekitar 600.000 penduduk Eropa meninggal di usia muda karena polusi dalam ruangan (indoor) dan di luar ruangan (outdoor) dan kerugian ekonomi ditaksir mencapai $1.6 triliun, yakni sekitar 9% PDB Uni Eropa.
London dan Paris mengalami masalah kualitas udara buruk.
Tingkat nitrogen dioksida di sejumlah wilayah di London seringkali mencapai 2-3 kali di atas batas wajar yang disarankan.
Di UK saja, polusi udara membunuh sekitar 29,000 orang dalam setahun dan menempati peringkat kedua penyebab kematian di usia muda.
Paris bahkan mungkin lebih menderita; pada bulan Maret, setelah tingkat polusi udaranya melebihi Shanghai, pemerintah setempat lalu menetapkan larangan mengemudi secara parsial dan menggratiskan layanan transportasi publik.
Sayangnya, pembuat kebijakan di Eropa tidak terdorong untuk melakukan gerakan yang sama.
George Osborne, selaku Chancellor of the Exchequer pemerintah UK, menolak kepemimpinan Inggris dalam perjuangan melawan perubahan iklim.
“Kita tidak akan menyelamatkan bumi dengan menutup pabrik baja, fasilitas smelter aluminium, atau pabrik kertas,” jelasnya dalam pernyataan yang dibuat di tahun 2011.
George Osborne tidak sendirian.
Di saat para politisi Eropa berpendapat perlindungan lingkungan hidup akan melemahkan perekonomian Eropa yang sudah memburuk, tentu tidak mengejutkan bila upaya mengurangi polusi udara tidak berhasil.
Standar-standar yang mengatur emisi beracun dari pabrik batubara yang diperkenalkan Uni Eropa bahkan kalah ketat bila dibandingkan Tiongkok, menurut laporan Greenpeace.
Namun sejumlah politisi Eropa menyerukan kebijakan yang lebih longgar, sementara Hongaria menyarankan agar standar tersebut dihapuskan seluruhnya.
Memang benar bahwa tingkat polusi udara di Asia sangat mengkhawatirkan.
Di Benua Asia terdapat sembilan dari sepuluh negara dengan polusi terburuk, berdasarkan Peringkat Kualitas Udara yang diterbitkan Yale University pada tahun 2014 lalu.
New Delhi menempati posisi pertama kota dengan tingkat polusi tertinggi di dunia, dimana polusi udara mencapai 60 kali di atas batas aman.
Berkat udara yang tidak sehat di Beijing, perusahaan-perusahaan asing membayarkan “hardship bonus” kepada 30% karyawan yang bekerja di kota tersebut.
Namun setidaknya pembuat kebijakan di Asia sudah mengakuinya sebagai masalah dan mengambil tindakan untuk mengatasinya.
Tiongkok, misalnya menyerukan “perang melawan polusi.”
Hingga tahun  2017, Beijing – pernah disebut “Greyjing” oleh media internasional – akan mengeluarkan sekitar CN¥760 miliar ($121 miliar) guna melawan polusi udara.
Inti dari upaya Tiongkok adalah meningkatnya penggunaan transportasi publik, perdagangan hijau (green trade), dan penyempurnaan campuran energi (energy mix).
Pemerintah sudah menetapkan pendirian halte bus setiap 500 meter di pusat-pusat kota, menurunkan tarif hingga 5% atau lebih rendah bagi 54 produk ramah lingkungan, dan menonaktifkan pabrik-pabrik batubara yang sudah tua dan tidak efisien.
Porsi bahan bakar non-fosil dalam pemakaian energi primer diperkirakan bertambah menjadi 20% pada tahun 2030.
Besar kemungkinan semua target ini diterapkan dengan ketat, mengingat kuatnya dukungan politik dari pimpinan tertinggi.
Sementara itu di India, pemerintah negara bagian di Gujarat, Maharashtra, danTamil Nadu mencanangkan peresmian skema cap-and-trade untuk materi partikulat yang pertama di dunia.
Mahkamah Agung India bahkan mengusulkan pembebanan biaya ekstra terhadap kendaraan pribadi bermesin diesel di New Delhi.
Negara-negara lain di kawasan Asia juga mengambil tindakan untuk meningkatkan kualitas udara.
Vietnam berencana membangun delapan jalur kereta api perkotaan dalam beberapa tahun ke depan.
Kota Bangkok, yang sudah memerangi polusi udara sejak 1990an, menanam 400,000 pohon.
Jepang memberikan subsidi bagi mobil hidrogen dan membangun  beberapa kawasan baru yang khusus diperuntukkan bagi pejalan kaki.
Eropa, sebagai salah satu wilayah terkaya di dunia, selayaknya berada di baris terdepan dalam upaya menggalakkan keberlanjutan lingkungan hidup.
Namun begitu persoalannya menyangkut polusi udara, para pembuat kebijakan di Eropa harus berhenti menguliahi negara lain dan fokus menyelesaikan permasalahan mereka sendiri.
A Japanese Metamorphosis?
OSAKA – Yesterday’s landslide general-election victory by the Democratic Party of Japan (DPJ) terminated the one-party-dominated system that the catch-all Liberal Democratic Party (LDP) has controlled almost without interruption since 1955.
For most of the last decade, the DPJ was not seen as a viable alternative to the LDP, although they appeared to form a pseudo-two-party system.
Twenty years after the Cold War’s end, Japan will at last have a post-Cold War system of government.
The Japanese public, even now, remains uncertain about the DPJ’s ability to govern and is skeptical of its rosy programs of wealth redistribution, which lack solid funding.
The public is also fully aware that the ideologically fragmented DPJ lacks a pragmatic, coherent foreign and security policy
Yet the DPJ will form the next government because of public disgust with the LDP.
For the last four years, the LDP had shown itself to be utterly unresponsive to the key issues of popular concern: pensions, unemployment, and the fraying social safety net.
Moreover, the LDP was plagued by a string of minor scandals and consistent bungling.
The LDP’s need for three different prime ministers in the space of little more than a year made plain that the party’s power nucleus had melted down.
Once in power, the DPJ will immediately confront the massive bureaucracy and entrenched mandarins, which usually sabotage any efforts at administrative reform that threatens their power and vested interests.
Indeed, immediately after the election, the budget estimates for the next fiscal year are due.
The figures that will be presented are the result of a lengthy process, in which the bureaucracy closely consulted with LDP.
So, without breaking the regular budget cycle, the DPJ will be forced to implement not only the supplementary budget drawn up by the LDP, but will also be stuck with next year’s budget, which embodies LDP policies that the DPJ has denounced.
As a result, the DPJ has announced plans to revoke the LDP’s guidelines for a ceiling on budget requests so as to formulate its own budget from scratch.  It will also revise the supplementary budget as well.
But time is short, and few of new DPJ lawmakers possess the legislative experience and budgetary expertise to make that happen.
To gain control of the mandarins, the DPJ plans to place 100 lawmakers in the ministries’ top leadership, as well as three dozen political appointees to policy staffs in the office of the prime minister.
Unfortunately, the DPJ scrapped an LDP-sponsored civil-service reform bill, which would have allowed the DPJ to replace mandarins with an army of political appointees.
The DPJ, despite its manifesto, seems unprepared to tame the mandarins, and so may be forced to rely on them.
The ascendency of the mandarins is a legacy of Japan’s unique historical development dating back to its early modern period.
Unlike in Europe, Japan developed its state before building a strong civil society.
Indeed, full-fledged “society”-building started only after the 1868 Meiji Restoration, which tipped the balance of power definitively in favor of the state.
As a result, the mandarins survived WWII and the postwar American occupation relatively undamaged, and they will strive to survive the DPJ government as well.
They will most likely succeed.
LDP lawmakers and mandarins developed a routine in which mandarins drafted cabinet-sponsored bills, LDP lawmakers checked the bills, and the two together finalized legislative drafts before they were introduced to the Diet (parliament).
Since the LDP, recently with a coalition partner, controlled the Diet, the legislative process was simply the interaction between LDP lawmakers and mandarins, centered in the LDP’s headquarters.
The Diet’s role was merely pro forma.
Indeed, under the LDP-led one-party-dominant system, this extra-constitutional mechanism became an integral part of Japan’s government polity.
The DPJ government will collide head-on with the mandarins, partly because the party will find it hard to recruit sufficiently qualified policymakers.
The mandarins have maintained their privileged position in this regard, owing partly to the tax system, which prevents the emergence of non-profit institutions, especially think tanks, where independent policy expertise can be forged.
Moreover, perhaps in anticipation of a change in power, the mandarins have moved forward the annual personnel changes in the major ministries’ top administrative positions.
And what of the LDP?
Having fallen from power, it will lose its control of the redistribution of government funds.
Unable to pay off its constituencies, disintegration looms, for the LDP has never been a party with entrenched grass-roots support, but instead operates as a machine of power and redistribution through a web of insiders across the country’s industrial sectors, occupational associations, and local communities.
Only by recruiting new blood and reorganizing itself with a solid ideological platform will an LDP comeback be possible.
The DPJ has even weaker grass-roots support, so the mandarins will most likely use their standard techniques of divide and rule to cajole the party by teaching it to mimic the LDP in using state money and contracts to underwrite its major constituencies, such as labor unions and other interest groups.
The birth of the DPJ government can yet be a turning point.
A major power shift in favor of “society” has taken place.
If the DPJ can break free of mandarin control by centralizing policy formation in the office of the prime minister, as it intends, Japan can emerge as a more resilient democracy with a full-fledged two-party system and greater willingness to assume an international leadership role.
A Jobless Recovery?
CAMBRIDGE – Who will suffer the longest and the most from the implosion in 2008-2009 of Wall Street and the ensuing world recession?
Not the bankers and financiers who created the disaster.
Some financiers, like Bernard Madoff, will go to prison for fraud.
But, although Madoff was only the tip of the iceberg of rampant financial malfeasance, most suspect financiers need not fear arrest, either because their behavior merely skirted the law, or because financial impropriety more subtle than outright fraud is often difficult to prove.
Some bank bosses will retire in shame, but with huge payments to ease their pain – such as the $55 million golden parachute handed to Bank of America’s Ken Lewis, with his, and the £25 million pension bestowed on Royal Bank of Scotland’s Fred Godwin.
But, buoyed by government bailout money, guarantees, and low interest rates, many banks have again begun to pay their top managers huge bonuses while fighting vigorously against reforms designed to restrain their risk-taking and compensation.
The big losers from this economic disaster are workers in the advanced countries that bought into the laissez-faire flexibility of American-style capitalism.
From 2007 to October 2009, the United States lost nearly eight million jobs, which reduced the employment-population ratio from 63% to 58.5%.
The unemployment rate at the end of 2009 was above 10%, duration of joblessness was the longest since the Great Depression, millions had had their working hours cut, and millions more were too discouraged by a lack of jobs to seek work.
Advanced Europe, Canada, and Japan also suffered major job losses that will last for a long time.
Spain, which allows for widespread temporary contracts, has had the biggest increase in unemployment, because Spanish workers can be fired as quickly as those in the US.
Some countries – for example, Germany, Sweden, and South Korea – have “hidden” their joblessness by paying firms to keep workers on the payroll.
This can work in the short term, but it cannot be sustained over time.
From the 1980’s through the mid-2000’s, employment has increasingly lagged GDP in economic recoveries.
In the US, there was a jobless recovery under President Bill Clinton until the dot.com boom in the latter part of the 1990’s, and there was a jobless recovery under George W. Bush in the wake of the 2001 slowdown.
In the early 1990’s, Sweden suffered a huge recession precipitated by a housing bubble and a banking crisis.
Its unemployment rate rose from 1.8% in 1990 to 9.6% in 1994, before bottoming out at 5% in 2001.
Sixteen years after the crisis, the unemployment rate was 6.2% – more than triple the rate in 1990.
In 1997, Korea suffered not only from the Asian financial crisis, but also from insistence by the US and the International Monetary Fund that it raise interest rates and undertake “Washington Consensus”-style reforms to receive aid.
Employment recovered, but primarily in “non-regular” jobs with limited benefits, low wages, and little job security.
Inequality in Korea rose from moderate levels to second highest (behind the US) among advanced OECD countries.
Weakness in the job market takes a huge toll on economic and personal well-being.
Young people seeking their first jobs and experienced workers who lose jobs in a weak job market suffer economic losses that will last their entire lives.
Studies of happiness show that unemployment reduces happiness by as much as the loss of a family member.
It is difficult to see the US re-attaining full employment anytime soon.
From 1993 to 1998, the US created millions of jobs, which raised the employment rate by 5.4 percentage points.
If employment began rising at this rate in 2010, it would take until 2015 before it reached its pre-recession level.
And slow recovery in the US will drag down recovery in other advanced countries, reducing their employment as well.
A long, painful period of high unemployment runs counter to what most experts believed the flexible US economic model would ever produce.
From the early 1990’s on, many analysts viewed America’s weak unionization, at-will employment, limited legal job protection, and high job turnover as major factors in achieving a lower unemployment rate than most EU countries.
Many OECD countries initiated various kinds of flexibility reforms in the hope of improving their economies along US lines.
The view that flexibility is the key factor in employment is no longer tenable.
In its 2009 Employment Outlook , the OECD took a hard look at its favored policy reforms and found them deficient in helping countries adjust to a finance-driven recession.
According to the OECD, “there does not appear to be any strong reason to expect that recent structural reforms mean that OECD labor markets are now substantially less sensitive to severe economic downturns.”
So the lesson from the recession is clear.
The weak reed in capitalism is not the labor market, but the financial market.
At worst, labor-market failures impose modest inefficiency costs on society, whereas capital-market failures harm society greatly, with workers, rather than the perpetrators of financial disaster, suffering the most.
Moreover, globalization means that the US capital market’s failure spreads misery around the world.
We owe it to workers victimized by this recession to reinvent finance so that it works to enrich the real economy, instead of enriching only the financiers.
This means changing the incentives and rules that govern the financial sector.
Since other countries’ economies and jobs are also at stake, they owe it to their citizens to press the US to deliver meaningful financial reforms.
France’s Midsummer Night’s Dream
PARIS – Bastille Day, the French national holiday, was glorious this year.
The military parade, dominated by the celebration of “victory” in Mali and the joint participation of African and United Nations troops, had the perfection of a gracious, albeit muscular, ballet.
The classical concert that preceded the magisterial fireworks that ended the day was the closest thing to a French version of the Proms in London, mixing light classical and popular songs.
The Eiffel Tower imbued the evening with its magic.
Paris, in case anyone had any lingering doubts, remains the capital of the world – or so it seemed for a night.
The melancholia that began to seize France many years ago was all but forgotten.
The celebration of the glory of the past, mixed with popular English songs of the present, seemed to indicate renewed national confidence.
What was the meaning of this moment of grace?
Was it purely the product of a collective delusion, an emotional Potemkin village of sorts, encouraged, if not conceived, by the authorities to restore some level of self-assurance among France’s depressed citizens?
Even if the positive emotions remain only fleeting (as seems most likely), they were real and palpable.
The French seemed to be in the mood to celebrate.
Of course, it could simply have been the weather; a gorgeous summer has finally settled in after a miserable spring.
But it might also have been one of those natural turning points, a collective and spontaneous decision to say: “Enough of depression, let’s move on.”
We French may not be what we used to be, the celebrants seemed to be saying, but we are still much more than people think we are.
We have a great revolutionary past that still conveys universal values – liberty, equality, fraternity – and an army that, as in Mali, continues to make a difference in the world.
One can draw two lessons from this collective form of escapism.