This renders them dependent on interest rate hikes to attract – via the market and on swap lines from the ECB – the euro liquidity that their banks desperately need.
So far, those swaps have been forthcoming, but with delay and political baggage attached.
The implication is clear.
National banking systems need a lender of last resort.
In small countries, where a significant share of bank liabilities is in someone else’s currency, the national central bank lacks this capacity.
The only options are then to slap draconian controls on the banking system or join the euro area.
Given the difficulty of rolling back the financial clock and the constraints of the Single Market, it is clear which way European countries will move.
But it will also heighten the will to succeed.
The implication, then, is a larger euro area, not a smaller one, as more countries see the writing on the wall.
Indeed, there are already signs of countries not even in the European Union, notably Iceland and Switzerland, contemplating accession as a step toward adopting the euro and resolving their financial dilemma.
The one exception is probably Britain, whose currency is used internationally as a legacy of its history.
In any case, Britain has always had one foot in Europe and one foot out.
It is conceivable, therefore, that Europe will have two currencies, the euro and sterling, in the long run.
But having three currencies, much less three dozen, is out of the question.amp#160; 
The Non-Smoking Gun
MEXICO CITY – Everyone these days, it seems, has their own favorite American diplomatic cable – or will soon – given that the 250,000 documents obtained by WikiLeaks include references to almost every country in the world.
For Latin America, Wikileaks has so far provided enticing tidbits of both gossip and substance about Brazil and Argentina; interesting, first-rate analysis regarding Honduras, Bolivia, and Mexico; and a few intriguing notes about regional politics and international relations.
Nothing extraordinary has been revealed, but the cables now available allow readers and analysts to draw some preliminary conclusions about the Obama administration’s views of the region; about Latin American leaders’ attitudes toward the United States; and about the quality of US diplomatic and intelligence-gathering activities in the hemisphere.
Nothing to write home about, but a lot to write about.
There have been some notable documents, though not many.
One is clearly the note written by Hugo Llorens, US Ambassador to Honduras, on July 24, 2009, immediately after the coup d’état that exiled President Manuel Zelaya.
The American envoy got right what happened, its implications, and how to enable Barack Obama’s incoming administration to deal intelligently – and differently from the past – with one of its first crises in Latin America.
A coup was a coup, could not be accepted, and, however provocative Zelaya had been, the only possible US position was his unconditional return to power.
Another impressive cable was sent on November 17, 2009, by Charles H. Rivkin, US Ambassador to France, regarding the competition between French companies and Boeing for a contract worth tens of billions of dollars to provide advanced fighter planes to Brazil.
The authors got it right: French President Nicolas Sarkozy was pulling out all the stops to close the deal, including support for Brazilian President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva on issues of interest to him, and acceptance of technological, legal, and military conditions imposed by Brazil on French firms, mainly the armaments manufacturer Dassault.
Perhaps the reports were somewhat naïve in omitting any reference to the many rumors in Brazil regarding widespread corruption in relation to the contract (of course, US diplomats may have mentioned these issues elsewhere).
Nevertheless, it seems safe to say that Dassault and France will probably win the contract, and that this will be seen as a milestone on the road to US irrelevance in South America.
Another good example of interesting and competent reporting lies in the cable sent from La Paz, Bolivia on March 30, 2006, by Ambassador David Greenlee, highlighting the tensions between the Cuban and Venezuelan advisers and security personnel surrounding President Evo Morales, as well as the circles of elites around him.
While not terribly new, Greenlee put his finger on one of the ongoing challenges facing Morales – ensuring the loyalty of the Bolivian Armed Forces to his “revolution” – and his main tool for addressing it: Cuban and Venezuelan security backing to deter a military coup.
Then there are cases of stridency or severe irritation.
Cables from Managua between 2006 and 2009 rehash old stories about Nicaraguan President Daniel Ortega’s ties to drug traffickers like Colombian cocaine kingpin Pablo Escobar, including mention of a video purportedly showing Sandinistas off-loading cocaine from planes in 1984, and dwell on Venezuelan President Hugo Chávez’s off-the-books financial backing for Ortega.
There is also a quaint anecdote regarding Nicaraguan prizefighter Ricardo Mayorga, who was caught by Sandinista security while raping or harassing a young woman in his hotel; according to the cables, Ortega blackmailed Mayorga into sharing his boxing proceeds with him and supporting him in the elections that year.
None of this is especially earth-shattering or original, except insofar as it seems to suggest the persistence of a Cold War mentality in US foreign-policy thinking about Latin America.
Similarly, a cable concerning a Mexican-sponsored attempt earlier this year to create something like the Organization of American States, but without the US and Canada, is chockfull of largely accurate but excessive rhetoric blasting Mexican diplomacy.
Backing the creation of a “Community of Latin American and Caribbean States,” according to the cable, is logical for a would-be regional hegemon like Brazil, but somewhat absurd for Mexico, which does 90% of everything (trade, investment, tourism, immigration) with the US and Canada, and depends on US support in fighting the country’s drug cartels.
Obama plunged into Mexico’s drug war at the outset of his administration, and now faces perils that are barely touched upon in Washington, except in cables originating in Mexico.
Regarding the execution of Arturo Beltran Leyva, a leading drug kingpin, late last year, US Ambassador Carlos Pascual wrote that the “refusal” by SEDENA (the national defense secretariat) “to move quickly reflected a risk-aversion that cost the institution a major counter-narcotics victory.”
He then describes the utter lack of cooperation between intelligence agencies and the military, because many US and Mexican officials fear that whatever information they share with the army will be handed over to the cartels.
The logical conclusion of all this is evident: since Mexican President Felipe Calderón himself cannot be both president and drug czar, and is rightly unwilling and logically unable to carry out the necessary day-to-day interagency coordination in Mexico, the void will be filled by someone else.
Increasingly, it is being filled by the US Embassy in Mexico City, staffed by first-rate diplomats who may be biting off more than they can chew.
There is no smoking gun in WikiLeaks’ releases about US policy toward Latin America (not yet, at least).
But there is a rich lode of information, confirmations, reflections, and teachings that the region will be mining for insight for years to come.
The Normalization of Fatah
RAMALLAH – Fatah, the leading guerrilla movement within the Palestine Liberation Organization, has moved one step closer to becoming a normal political party.
Its just concluded sixth congress was held for the first time in the occupied territories, which meant that former guerrillas from Lebanon and Jordan were allowed entry by Israel.
The conference, it appears, succeeded in reuniting and reinvigorating the movement, which has suffered since the death of its founder and long-time leader, Yasser Arafat.
More than 2,000 delegates, representing former Fatah fedayyin (guerrillas) and intifada activists, voted to continue all forms of resistance for the liberation of Palestine. Yet the term “armed resistance” was missing from all the documents approved at the conference.
Mahmoud Abbas – unanimously elected as Fatah’s leader and commander-in-chief – made clear that while all options remain available for ending the occupation, the preference is still negotiations.
While some (such as Israeli Defense Minister Ehud Barak) took the resistance rhetoric of some delegates seriously, Fatah spokesman Nabil Amr officially assured all concerned that Fatah is committed to “peaceful resolution of the Palestinian-Israeli conflict.”
Any organization that has not provided democratic mechanisms for change and renewal tends to age and become monotonous and ineffective.
This aging and dullness became most evident in the past few years, as Fatah first lost the 2006 legislative elections to Hamas, and then its presence in the Gaza Strip.
Signs that Fatah is moving towards becoming a normal political party were ample.
Gone were the khaki suits and militaristic paraphernalia, replaced by business suits and proper conference IDs for delegates.
Backroom decisions and top-down guidance was replaced by a democratic free-for-all that saw many of Fatah’s historic leaders fall to the wayside, making room for younger, locally popular leaders.
Prisoners held in Israeli jails were granted 20 seats in the enlarged 100-member revolutionary council.
A jailed intifada leader, Marwan Barghouti, was among the highest elected new leaders to the central committee, the movement’s executive body.
Naturally, the 20-year hiatus since the last congress created a huge gap that was quickly filled by intifada veterans rather than old-style guerrillas, who had dominated the movement since its establishment.
Fourteen of the 19 elected members of the central committee are first-time members, most of whom represent the leadership of the 1987 uprising in the occupied territories.
The shifting age and geographic location of the Fatah membership was the reason for the failure of some of Fatah’s historic leaders, such as Ahmad Qureia and Intisar Wazir, the widow of the late Abu Jihad.
Moreover, holding the congress in Palestine ended the role of many Fatah leaders who had opposed the Oslo accords, such as Farouk Qaddoumi and Mahmoud Jihad.
Sidelining men like Qaddoumi, whose accusation, on the eve of the congress, that Abbas and Mohammad Dahlan had helped Israel poison Arafat, also distances Fatah from its one-time alliance with hard-line Arab countries such as Syria and Libya.
While the old guard had to strike a balance between the different Arab countries that backed the PLO, the new guard will have to find a workable solution with their rivals in Hamas if a viable compromise agreement with Israel is to be found.
Opinions vary, with some calling for a tough position towards Hamas and others advocating a softer approach.
Another major challenge facing the new Fatah leadership will be how it deals with the duality of holding party posts while also holding ministerial positions within the Palestinian Authority.
Some are calling for Fatah leaders to abstain from ministerial roles, whereas others see no reason why one can’t be a leader of a party and the government simultaneously.
In his acceptance speech, Abbas referred to the leaders of the first Intifada, telling the congress that they drew the guidelines that have become the movement’s political platform. Leaders like Barghouti, former preventative security chief Jibril Rajoub, and Gaza’s Dahlan are now in the driver’s seat of the Fatah movement.
Dahlan, accused by some of being responsible for the loss of Gaza to Hamas, gave a strong speech accusing the previous Fatah leadership of having lost Gaza long before it actually fell to Hamas in June 2007.
Dahlan detailed how the former Fatah leadership repeatedly ignored his warnings and his pleadings with the central committee members to come to Gaza and see for themselves the situation on the ground.
The Fatah congress also dealt a blow to the abuse and corruption that have plagued the movement in recent years, especially since the establishment of the Palestinian Authority.
Speaker after speaker insisted that the movement’s weakness was brought about by the fact that its leaders succumbed to the temptations that come with government positions.
Thus, for example, Ahmad Qurei (Abu Ala’a), a former prime minister and senior negotiator who is accused of owning shares in a Palestinian company that supplied cement for Israel’s construction of the hated wall that cuts through Palestinian territory, lost his position within Fatah’s leadership.
The Fatah movement has a long way to go before it becomes a full-fledged political party.
The delegates overwhelmingly agreed that the movement must keep open the option of returning underground if negotiations for statehood fail, while being ready to become a political party if a Palestinian state is born.
Nevertheless, the results of the Sixth Fatah Congress reflect a clear bias in favor of becoming a party rather than an armed resistance movement.
The North Korean Enigma
CAMBRIDGE – What is going on in North Korea?
On November 23, its army fired nearly 200 artillery rounds onto the South Korean island of Yeonpyeong, near the two countries’ disputed maritime border, killing four – including two civilians – and demolishing scores of houses and other structures.
The presence of civilians, many of whom had to be evacuated, made North Korea’s attack even more provocative than its sinking in March of the South Korean warship Cheonan, which killed 46 sailors.
And, just a few weeks before the shelling of Yeonpyeong, North Korea showed a delegation of American scientists a new and previously undisclosed uranium-enrichment plant, which will increase the regime’s capacity to make nuclear weapons.
North Korea’s nuclear weapons program has been a matter of concern for two decades.
Pyongyang violated its obligations under the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty by secretly reprocessing enough plutonium to produce two nuclear weapons in the early 1990’s.
After it withdrew from a restraining agreement negotiated by the Clinton administration in 1994, it expelled International Atomic Energy Agency inspectors and began reprocessing spent fuel that could produce another six bombs’ worth of plutonium.
Now, with its new enrichment plant, North Korea’s access to fissile materials will greatly increase.
Its leaders have a reputation for selling dangerous items such as missiles, narcotics, and counterfeit currency, and many worry that they might transfer nuclear materials to other countries or to terrorist groups.
The recent WikiLeaks disclosures of classified American diplomatic documents, for example, suggest that North Korea has been helping Iran with its advanced missile program.
George W. Bush’s administration initially hoped that it could solve the North Korean nuclear problem through regime change.
The idea was that isolation and sanctions would topple Kim Jong-il’s dictatorship.
But the regime proved resistant, and the Bush administration finally agreed to enter into six-party talks with China, Russia, Japan, and the two Koreas.
In September 2005, it fleetingly appeared that the talks had led North Korea to agree to forgo its nuclear program in exchange for security guarantees and removal of sanctions.
But the agreement soon collapsed, and North Korea refused to return to the talks until the United States stopped shutting down bank accounts suspected of counterfeiting and laundering money for Kim’s regime.
Then, with diplomacy stalled, North Korea launched a series of missiles into the Sea of Japan.
All five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council agreed on a resolution condemning North Korea’s actions, and China warned North Korea to moderate its behavior.
Instead, in 2006, North Korea detonated a nuclear device, and did so again in 2009.
Ostensibly, North Korea is a weak country with a disastrous economic system.
Starting from similar levels a half-century ago, South Korea has grown to become one of the world’s most prosperous economies, with nearly 50 million people enjoying a per capita income of $30,000 (at purchasing price parity). North Korea has half the population and per capita income of less than $2,000.
In the 1990’s, North Korea suffered extreme famine, which probably killed 1-2 million people, and even today North Korea depends on China for food and fuel.
How, then, can North Korea manage to defy its neighbor?
For one thing, North Korea has “the power of weakness.”
In certain situations, weakness – and the threat that a partner will collapse – can be a source of bargaining power.
A bankrupt debtor who owes $1,000 has little power, but if it owes $1 billion, it may have considerable bargaining power – witness the fate of institutions judged “too big to fail” in the 2008 financial crisis.
As the Financial Times observed, “North Korea’s Kim Jong-il is probably the only world leader who can make Beijing look powerless.
Diplomats say Kim brazenly plays on Chinese fears.
If the Chinese do not pump aid into his crumbling economy, he argues, they will face refugees pouring across the border and possible unrest.”
China does not want a nuclear or belligerent North Korea, but it is even more concerned about a failed state collapsing on its border.
China has tried to persuade Kim’s regime to follow its market-oriented example, but Kim is afraid that an economic opening would lead to a political opening and loss of dictatorial control.
So, while China is trying to moderate the current crisis, its influence is limited.
The other source of North Korea’s power is its audacity in playing a weak hand.
Yes, a full-scale military invasion would meet with a devastating defeat by superior South Korean and US military forces, whose current naval exercises in the Yellow Sea are designed to remind North Korea of this disparity.
But, with 15,000 artillery tubes embedded in the Demilitarized Zone, just 30 miles north of Seoul, North Korea knows that firing just a few shells could wreak havoc on the South Korean stock market and economy, while it has less to lose in comparison.
By flaunting its willingness to take greater risks, the North hopes to further enhance its bargaining power.
Most observers attribute the recent provocations to the anticipated succession of power in Pyongyang.
Kim Jong-il had years to prepare as an understudy to his father, Kim Il-sung , but many reports suggest that he is nearing  the end of his life.
This autumn, he promoted his hitherto little-seen son, Kim Jong-un, to the rank of general, and introduced him at a Communist Party conference.
Demonstration of military success in “protecting” the regime may indeed be designed to strengthen the 28-year-old general’s claim to power.
If so, the risky behavior we have seen recently is part of the process of solidifying a unique political system: a hereditary Communist monarchy.
The North Pole in Peril
PARIS – Ever since mankind began to map the world, the north and south poles have fascinated us, both poetically and scientifically.
But, save for a few whalers and explorers, not many people ever went to have a closer look.
The serene stillness of the Arctic and Antarctic was a perfect match for human indifference.
The onset of global warming, however, has changed everything.
Of course, that old indifference was not universal.
In a rare spurt of collective political intelligence, and in order to prevent any risk of international conflict, an international treaty was signed in 1959 to govern Antarctica.
This treaty dedicated Antarctica to exclusively peaceful aims. It recognized the existing territorial claims, declared them “frozen,” and forbade all physical assertions of sovereignty on the land of Antarctica.
The nature and content of that treaty were purely diplomatic.
Only after its ratification did the first environmental issues arise.
These were added to a revised treaty in 1972 by a convention on seal protection, followed, in 1980, by a convention on wildlife preservation.
Most importantly, a protocol signed in Madrid in 1991, dealt with protecting the Antarctic environment.
As French Prime Minister, together with Australia’s then Prime Minister Robert Hawke, I was responsible for proposing the Madrid protocol, which transformed the Antarctic into a natural reserve dedicated to peace and science for 50 years, renewable by tacit agreement.
It was not an easy success.
We had to reject first a convention on the exploitation of mineral resources that had already been negotiated and signed in Wellington in 1988, thus risking reopening very uncertain negotiations.
We were bluffing, but our bluff worked.
The Antarctic environment is now effectively protected by the international community, which is the de facto owner of this continent, without any national differentiations.
It is the only such case in the world.
Indeed, international lawyers who are seeking to define the legal status of outer space – Who will own the moon?
Who will own the resources that may one day be extracted there? – often look to the “Antarctic treaty system” for precedents and analogies.
But Antarctica had one great advantage, as compared to the Arctic, which is now in peril: there were only penguins in Antarctica, not voters, especially voters of different nationalities.
Antarctica, though a huge continental archipelago, measuring 24 million square kilometers, and covered in ice that is 4-5 kilometers thick, is far from any inhabited continent.
The Arctic is only water, with the North Pole itself 4,200 meters under the surface.
But five countries are very close: Norway, Russia, the United States, Canada, and Denmark (via Greenland, which will become independent in the coming years).
Throughout most of human history, ice almost completely barred all navigation in the seas surrounding the North Pole, and the Arctic was asleep in a silent indifference.
Everything has changed radically during the last three years.
The International Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) has established that global warming is not uniform: whereas temperatures rose, on average, by 0.6°C in the twentieth century, the increase in the Arctic region was 2°.
Some estimates suggest that about 20% of the world’s total oil reserves lie under the Arctic.
In 2008, for the first time in human history, two navigation channels through the polar ice field – in the East along Siberia, and in the West along the Canadian islands – were open for a few months, allowing boats to go from Europe to Japan or California via the Bering Straits, rather than the Panama Canal or the Horn of Africa, thereby saving some 4,000 or 5,000 kilometers.
Given global warming, this may now become a regular occurrence: thousands of ships will pass through the Arctic passages, emptying their fuel tanks and causing oil slicks and other forms of pollution.
This poses a real threat to the Eskimo and Inuit populations, as well as to polar bears.
Moreover, according to the Convention on the Law of the Sea, countries’ enjoy absolute sovereignty in the first 12 nautical miles (about 20 kilometers) of their coastal waters sea, and almost absolute sovereignty, limited by a few conventions, within 200 nautical miles (360 kilometers) of their coasts.
Any country that can prove that the seabed beyond 200 nautical miles is an extension of the continental shelf on which it is sovereign can claim sovereignty over it as well.
Russia, which three years ago used a submarine to plant a platinum copy of its national flag at the North Pole, claims sovereignty over 37% of the surface of the Arctic Ocean.
The territories claimed by Russia include the North Pole and a huge oil field.
If this oil is exploited, the pollution risks will be far higher than anywhere else.
And could Russia, given its rearmament policy, be planning to set up underwater missile launch sites?
It is therefore urgently necessary to negotiate a treaty that guarantees peace and environmental protection in the Arctic region.
It will probably be very difficult to achieve, but the effort should be viewed as a great cause for humankind.
The Not So United Nations
The good news for Ban Ki-moon is that he has become Secretary General of the United Nations at a time when the prospects for conflict between or among the world’s great powers – the United States, China, Japan, Russia, Europe, and India – are remote.
The bad news is that the prospects for just about every other sort of conflict are high and the international agenda is both crowded and demanding.
Ban needs to begin with a cold, hard assessment of his new position.
A Secretary General of the UN is more secretary than general.
He cannot command. It is not the same as being a president or a CEO.
He possesses more influence than power.
Moreover, power at the UN is divided, not simply between the Security Council and the General Assembly, but more fundamentally between the 192 members and the UN itself.
The UN is comprised of sovereign states, but it is not sovereign itself and cannot act as if it were.
More than anything else, the UN reflects the ability of the major powers (above all, the US, China, Russia, France, and the United Kingdom, the five permanent, veto-wielding members of the Security Council) to agree – and to back up their agreements with resources.
When they are willing and able to do so, the UN can make a difference; when they are not, the UN can act in only the most limited way, if at all, regardless of what the Secretary General wants.
Consider Darfur.
The world has largely stood by in the face of genocide.
This is not a failure of the UN or the Secretary General so much as a reflection of the reality that the major powers are divided.
China clings to a notion of sovereignty that allows governments freedom of action within their borders.
In today’s world, such an unconditional definition of sovereignty is inadequate.
But the reality is that no amount of time spent negotiating in New York will turn things around.
What matters are the instructions sent to China’s UN ambassador from Beijing.
In this case, Ban needs to spend time in China’s capital, making the case for the notion that governments have a responsibility to protect their citizens, and that when they fail to do so (as Sudan’s government clearly is), they forfeit some of the advantages that normally are associated with sovereignty.
Ban cannot simply reform the Security Council to reflect better the realities of this era.
But he can make the case that countries such as Japan, India, Germany, and others deserve an enhanced position in the UN’s most important body, one more commensurate with their power and status.
Again, what is holding the UN back is not the UN itself, but its leading members, who cannot agree on what change is needed.
Ban can also make the case that there is no justification in today’s world for terror – defined here as the intentional harming of civilians for political purposes.
Not just governments, but religious and other leaders need to be persuaded to denounce terror, shaming and de-legitimizing those who carry it out.
The Secretary General is positioned to make this point loudly and repeatedly.
Two other areas exist where practical changes are both achievable and desirable.
Ban should support the creation of an international facility that would provide governments access to (but not physical control of) enriched uranium and plutonium for the generation of electrical power.
Such an innovation would help stem the spread of nuclear materials and weapons, while also contributing to a shift away from use of oil and gas, thereby reducing global warming in the process.
The other area is peacekeeping.
Establishing a large, standing international force under the UN’s control is not feasible and may not be optimal.
But providing incentives for governments to maintain such forces at a high level of alert and setting standards for equipment, training, and professionalism is something the UN can and should do.
All these suggestions highlight what might be any secretary general’s most important asset: his voice.
What Ban chooses to say, and how and where he says it, can enhance his influence.
Over time, enhanced influence will enable him to get more things done.
All this will be especially important now given the status of the US, the most powerful country in the world, but one with an often uneasy relationship with the UN.
Opinion polls indicate a good deal of support among the American public for the UN.
But there is also intense distrust of the UN among segments of the public and with certain elites.
Here again, Ban would be well advised to leave New York and spend more time in the capital and around the country.
The US needs and benefits from effective multilateralism in a global world, one in which challenges cannot be met by any single country acting by itself.
The US has a particular need for effective international cooperation now, when it is stretched militarily, economically, and politically owing to its policies toward Iraq and Afghanistan.
Contributing to the emergence of a more productive relationship between the world’s most important international organization and its most powerful member would be no small feat.
Syria’s Chemical Genie
LOS ANGELES – Since Syria’s civil war erupted, its large chemical-weapons arsenal has haunted the conflict zone and beyond.
Now Israel says that chemical weapons have been used by the Syrian regime.
Escalating fears have driven US President Barack Obama to declare repeatedly that any Syrian use or transfer of chemical weapons would cross a “red line,” for which President Bashar al-Assad’s regime would be “held accountable.”
But the practical implications of this warning remain vague.
As dangerous as Syria’s chemical-weapons stockpile is, it pales in comparison with another risk that became evident in late February, when Syrian rebels overran a Scud-missile base in Al-Kibar, in the country’s remote northeastern desert.
Beneath the installation lay the buried remnants of the North Korean-engineered nuclear reactor that Israel’s air force had destroyed on September 6, 2007.
Had Israel not learned of the secret plant, which was on the verge of launching operations to produce material for an atomic arsenal, the rebels effectively would have been in possession of a radiological weapon.
The mere threat could have held the Syrian government hostage.
Far more worrying, had Syrian engineers built a lab at the site, or in other rebel-held territory, to extract plutonium from the reactor’s spent fuel, the insurgents might even have found themselves with the ingredients of an atomic bomb.
Fortunately, Syria does not face these threats today.
But Pakistan, North Korea, and Iran – all potentially unstable countries with growing nuclear enterprises – may in the future.
How concerned should the world be?
History provides grounds for optimism.
After all, host countries have been able to contain nuclear risks in the most challenging circumstances.
During Yugoslavia’s violent collapse, adversaries never struck or invaded Serbia’s research reactor, powered by weaponizable enriched uranium.
When Serbian fighter jets flew threateningly low over Slovenia’s nuclear power plant, they spared the reactor.
Likewise, during China’s Cultural Revolution, the imposition of martial law prevented attempts by rival factions to seize nuclear facilities in Xinjiang and Qinghai.
In 1961, as a group of former French generals revolted in French Algeria, an atomic-bomb test in the Sahara went off without a hitch.
And, most significant, during the collapse of the Soviet Union, the vast nuclear arsenal remained intact.
However, concern that the Syrian government could intensify &#160;its use of chemical weapons against rebel-held areas, or that rebels could initiate attacks or respond with captured chemical weapons, raises questions about the pattern’s durability and the international community’s reaction.
The United States, which has become the world’s leader in containing the chemical-weapons risk, seems befuddled.
Early last year, the US Department of Defense let it be known that 75,000 troops would be needed to secure Syria’s chemical facilities.
After the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq, it is not surprising that this estimate did not exactly generate a groundswell of public support for military intervention in Syria.
Recent statements from US officials have not been reassuring.
In January, then-Secretary of Defense Leon Panetta said that the US was not pursuing options that involve “boots on the ground” to secure Assad’s arsenal during the conflict.
At the same news conference, Martin E. Dempsey, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, conceded that preventing the Syrian government’s use of chemical weapons would require such clear, comprehensive intelligence that obtaining it is “almost unachievable.”
Appearing before the Senate Armed Services Committee on April 17, Dempsey added that he had no confidence that US forces could secure the arsenal given the number of sites.
Such remarks from senior military authorities suggest that Obama’s warnings may be hollow.
Worse, they inspire little confidence that the US can deal with future cases in which countries with nuclear assets find themselves in revolt, civil war, or political collapse – and with compromised domestic atomic safeguards risking the spread of nuclear havoc to other regions.
Such risks demand examination and planning.
But, to rely on the US government alone to plot the most effective strategy in the shadow of possible internal group-think is asking too much.
Outside vetting – including published reviews by congressional investigative bodies, think tanks, and scholars – could add important insights.
In the aftermath of America’s poorly executed recent wars and confounded planning with respect to Syria’s chemical weapons, such vetting is the least that Americans and their allies should expect in order to prevent the realization of the sum of all our fears: the first nuclear attack or intentional major radiological event of the twenty-first century.
The Obama Doctrine and Africa
MADRID – President Barack Obama’s much discussed Cairo speech represented not only the demise of George W. Bush’s ideological drive to reconstruct the Muslim world through a democratic revolution; it marked the end of American liberalism’s quest to remake the world in its own image.
Instead, Obama’s administration is guided by a relativist political realism that assumes respect for cultural and religious distinctions.
His secretary of state, Hillary Clinton, underscored this tendency during her first visit to China, where her unmistakeable message was that order and stability take priority over liberty and human rights.
But what about Africa, the forgotten continent that has been conspicuously absent from Obama’s hectic agenda?
There, both the resilience of the local political culture and strategic imperatives are converging to define the limits of the West’s capacity to impose its values.
A fortnight before Obama’s Cairo speech, a delegation of the United Nations Security Council visited four African countries to express concern about the resurgence of unconstitutional change on the continent.
Africa does indeed present a gloomy picture, with countries virtually crumbling to dust as a result of autocracy and stagnation.
But the emerging Obama doctrine suggests that “elections alone do not make true democracy,” and that, as has been the case in the Arab world, any abrupt move to democracy is bound to produce chaos.
Moreover, in Africa post-authoritarian rulers are not necessarily respectful of human rights and decent governance.
The West’s attitude toward democracy in the Third World has always been erratic.
It applauded the military takeover in Algeria in the early 1990’s aimed at curtailing the democratic emergence of an Islamist regime, and is happy to conduct business with authoritarian regimes throughout the Arab world.
Yet, public infatuation with the external trappings of democracy is usually the norm.   
Take Guinea Conakry.
After years of turmoil, lower-ranking officers headed by Captain Moussa Dadis Camara took power in December 2008 in what was a widely supported and peaceful takeover.
Both the European Union and the United States immediately reacted by threatening the ruling junta with a total cut-off of aid unless constitutional rule and elections were restored.
Though President Camara eventually succumbed to pressure and declared elections for the coming fall, he has a valid point in insisting that he first must secure stability so that elections do not become a mere prelude to civil strife.
The case of neighbouring Guinea-Bissau, where a blood-bath has just taken place ahead of general elections, should serve as a warning.
Why should the West insist on elections in a country that since 1984 was ruled by a Western-backed dictator, Lansana Conté, who himself came to power in a military coup?
He maintained a constitution, and held elections, but this did not make him a democratic ruler, nor was he able to extricate his country from appalling backwardness despite its tremendous potential for economic development.
The problem in Africa is one of effective government, not of elections and high-minded constitutions.
Rulers should be encouraged instead to engage in bottom-up democracy building, create an honest police force and judicial system, and allow civic organizations to flourish.
Training police forces to secure law and order without resorting to bloodshed is no less important than elections.
Elections and constitutions in Africa – Zimbabwe and Gabon’s dictatorship have both – have never been a safeguard against tyranny and human rights violations.
Camara’s test – indeed, the test for most African rulers – consists in protecting civilians and their property, in establishing law and order without oppressive measures, and in fighting corruption.
Highly responsive to international pressure, he was recently praised by Human Rights Watch for his “very important effort” in recognizing the destructive role of corruption and drug trafficking, and for launching an official crackdown on both.
Order and stability, even in the absence of constitutional rights, is what makes countries like Libya and Tunisia legitimate in the eyes of the international community.
To recover the confidence of the international business community and the world’s mining giants, who were enraged in recent years by forced renegotiations of existing deals by governments in Congo, Mongolia and Guinea, Camara was also wise to retreat from his threat to renegotiate existing mining concessions.
The West is right to insist on norms of decent government, but it risks losing its capacity to influence events in Africa when it automatically links aid to elections.
For as it does, China is using its colossal financial firepower to expand its strategic position on the continent, without linking aid and investment to pesky demands for good governance.
China’s drive to retain a significant say in the pricing of iron and bauxite, of which Guinea is the world’s major producer, means that it can always receive a warm welcome from officials tired of being lectured to by Westerners.
It is not good news for Western human rights champions if China ends up training policemen in countries like Guinea.
Not much imagination is required to discern what norms the Chinese might inculcate into the 1,000 Central Asian policemen and judicial officials they are currently training.
As Obama understands, such authoritarian aid is a serious challenge to the West’s geo-strategic interests, including the fight against drug traffic (Guinea has become a transit point on the route from South America to Europe).
It is also undermining the opportunity to lay the basis for true democratic reform throughout the continent.
The Obama Doctrine’s First Term
ASPEN – Public-opinion polls in the United States indicate a close presidential election in November.
While President Barack Obama outpolls the Republican challenger, Mitt Romney, on foreign policy, slow economic growth and high unemployment – issues that are far more salient in US elections – favor Romney.
And, even on foreign policy, Obama’s critics complain that he has failed to implement the transformational initiatives that he promised four years ago.
Are they right?
Obama came to power when both the US and the world economy were in the midst of the worst financial crisis since the Great Depression.
Indeed, some of Obama’s economic advisers counseled him that unless urgent steps were taken to stimulate the economy, there was a one-in-three chance of entering a full-scale depression.
Thus, although Obama also inherited two ongoing wars, nuclear-proliferation threats from Iran and North Korea, and the continuing problem of Al Qaeda’s terrorism, his early months in office were devoted to addressing the economic crisis at home and abroad.
His efforts were not a complete success, but he managed to stave off the worst outcome.
Obama’s rhetoric during his 2008 campaign and the first months of his presidency was both inspirational in style and transformational in objective.
His first year in office included a speech in Prague in which he established the goal of a nuclear-free world; a speech in Cairo promising a new approach to the Muslim world; and his Nobel Peace Prize speech, which promised to “bend history in the direction of justice.”
In part, this series of speeches was tactical.
Obama needed to meet his promise to set a new direction in foreign policy while simultaneously managing to juggle the issues left to him by George W. Bush, any of which, if dropped, could still cause a crisis for his presidency.
Nonetheless, there is no reason to believe that Obama was being disingenuous about his objectives.
“Seemingly intractable circumstances turned him from the would-be architect of a new global order into a leader focused more on repairing relationships and reacting to crises – most notably the global economic crisis,” the report continued.
And while he eliminated Osama bin Laden and weakened Al Qaeda, some counterterrorism policies ended up undercutting his appeal in places like the Middle East and Pakistan.
Some of the half-empty glasses were the result of intractable events; some were the product of early naiveté, such as the initial approaches to Israel, China, and Afghanistan.
But Obama was quick to recover from mistakes in a practical way.
As one of his supporters put it, he is a “pragmatic idealist.”
In this sense, though Obama did not back away from rhetorical expressions of transformational goals regarding such issues as climate change or nuclear weapons, in practice his pragmatism was reminiscent of more incremental presidential leaders like Dwight Eisenhower or George H. W. Bush.
With respect to Iran, Obama struggled to implement United Nations-approved sanctions and avoid a premature war.
In the former case, Obama personally managed a unilateral use of force, which involved a raid on Pakistani territory.
In the latter case, where national interests were not as clear, he waited until the Arab League and the UN had adopted resolutions that provided the legitimacy needed to ensure the right soft-power narrative, and then shared the leadership of the hard-power operation with NATO allies.
The long-term effect of the Obama Doctrine will require more time to assess, but, as he approaches the November election, Obama appears to have an edge over his opponent in foreign policy.
Obama has not bent the arc of history in the transformational way to which he aspired in his campaign four years ago, but his shift to a pragmatic approach may turn out to be a good thing, particularly if voters continue to have doubts about the economy.
The Obama Effect
LONDON – In the last two months, I have been in eight American cities – Boston, New York, Washington, Houston, Chicago, Los Angeles, San Francisco, and Seattle.
Phew! I am left with several sentiments.
First, if you have to travel from city to city in the United States, you would do yourself a favor if you could find a way of journeying by train.
American airlines are pretty awful.
They are lucky that hostility to competition in what purports to be the homeland of free-market capitalism has kept Asian airlines out of their domestic marketplace.
Do American air travelers know just how bad the service that they get really is?
American airports are as dire as British ones, maybe worse.
Los Angeles gets the Oscar, with Soviet-style queues through security.
How is it that America gives us Silicon Valley wizardry and Third World infrastructure?
But, for all the misery of air travel in America, when you get to your destination it can still blow your socks off.
The lakeside architecture of Chicago.
The sight of Puget Sound in Seattle (one of my favorite cities).
The view across San Francisco’s bay from Nob Hill. Park Avenue in New York on a fine late spring morning.
They are all, to borrow from Frank Sinatra, “my kind of town.”
What is surprising for a European – at least for this European – at the moment is the relative optimism in all these cities.
Yes, the economic news has been and remains grim.
Much of the automobile industry is bust.
Car dealerships are being closed.
House prices remain pretty flat.
Unemployment and the budget deficit are soaring.
But there is not the same sense of gloom that envelops you in Britain and much of Europe.
My guess is that much of this is the result of traditional American ebullience: the view that what goes down will sooner or later bounce back up.
This is one of the reasons why America has represented a quarter or more of the world’s output for the best part of 150 years.
But there is another factor at work.
We often talk – a good Marxist point – about the impact of economics on politics.
And we have seen this recently in Britain. Down goes the economy and down goes the Labour government’s standing.
Britain’s Labour government is just about as unpopular as it is possible to be. It performed disastrously in recent elections for local councils and the European parliament.
Prime Minister Gordon Brown is sustained in office primarily by the calculation of his ministers that getting rid of him would trigger an early election that they would lose heavily.
But what about the impact of politics on economics?
That is what I believe you see today in the US.
The economy may look bad, but the president looks great.
Despite the ubiquitous efforts of Fox News, President Barack Obama dominates, enthralls, and enthuses the audience of American voters – consumers, workers, investors, one and all.
He is, as one American commentator calls him, The One.
Obama seems to have every political talent, and he passes the character test too.
Moreover, his wife is a star in her own formidable right.
Turn on any TV channel and there they are: glamorous, decent, and smart.
So, while the economic numbers may look bad, the country’s political leadership looks great.
And if you’re an American, you observe other countries around the world (especially in Europe) where people say, “If only he was ours.”
I am a fan myself: a fan with two worries. First, what happens if politics does not trump economics, and Obama’s policies don’t start to produce a recovery?
That is when the old political calculus may take its grim toll.
If there are no signs of economic recovery by the end of the year, the polls may start to turn.
Obama is smart enough to understand this.
So why – my second worry – does he take quite so much on his own shoulders?
Every day, on every news bulletin, he is out there swinging.
He might argue that he has to be. There are so many issues, from health-care reform to the Middle East, that need his attention.
I just worry about the boredom factor. If you assume that governing is like campaigning – that you have to be on top of the debate 24 hours a day, seven days a week – can you really anticipate a long shelf life?
Don’t you risk becoming, even if you are smart as hell, too much of a good thing?
I hope I am wrong.
Barack Obama is a star. The world needs one.
But it needs one who continues to shine brightly for several years to come.
The Obama Surprise
NEW YORK – The high hopes surrounding Barack Obama’s presidency are mostly a good thing, as they remind us that much of the anti-American sentiment that is so apparent around the world is not and need not be permanent.
But this anticipation is also a problem for Obama, as it will be difficult – and in some instances impossible – for him to meet expectations.
There will be no Palestinian state this spring; nor will there be a global climate change pact or a new trade accord or an end to poverty or genocide or disease anytime soon.
The reasons go beyond the reality that big accomplishments require time and effort.
The incoming president faces extraordinary constraints – constraints that will make it essential for other countries to do more if stability and prosperity are to be the norm rather than the exception.
The most obvious limitation stems from the state of the American economy.
Two million jobs disappeared in the last four months alone.
The housing market continues to deteriorate.  America’s GDP is contracting at an almost unprecedented rate.
As a result, Obama will have no choice but to devote the lion’s share of his time and attention to reviving the economy.
More than anything else, his success in this domain will determine the perception of his administration.
Even he acknowledges that this will require him to delay fulfilling several other campaign promises.   
A second constraint stems from all the crises that will greet the new president.  Israelis and Palestinians are fighting a low-level war.
The situation in Iraq is improving but is by no means assured.
Obama may have to choose between attacking Iran’s nuclear installations and living with an Iran that has the capacity to build a nuclear weapon in a matter of weeks.
Afghanistan’s government is losing ground in its struggle against a revived Taliban.
Pakistan, which possesses dozens of nuclear weapons and is host to the world’s most dangerous terrorists, could become a failed state, as could nuclear-armed North Korea.
Many of these challenges are less problems to be solved than conditions to be managed.
A third constraint stems from trends in the international system.
The era of American unipolarity is over.
Obama will inherit a world in which power in all of its forms – military, economic, diplomatic, and cultural – is more widely distributed than ever before.
This means that he will have to deal with a large number of threats, vulnerabilities, and independent actors who may resist bending to America’s will.
All of this will make it more difficult for the United States to get things done in the world – and for Obama to have any chance of meeting the expectations being set for him – without the active assistance of others.
And since Obama will want to meet some of those expectations, other countries had better be prepared for American requests – and pressure – that they act with the US rather than act against it or sit on their hands.
China will come under pressure to revalue its currency (now being held at artificially low levels) so that Chinese exports are more expensive and imports from others (including the US) cheaper.
And China and other developing countries will be expected to do their share to reduce carbon emissions and slow the pace of global climate change.
European countries should be prepared for US calls to do more to meet the increasing security challenge in Afghanistan.
At stake is the relevance of NATO in a world in which the principal security challenges facing Europe are to be found outside the NATO treaty area.
Countries of every sort will face requests to do their part to overcome hurdles to a new global trade accord.
Tariff and non-tariff barriers will need to come down.
Rich countries will be asked to reduce subsidies; poor countries to open up their markets.
Arab leaders that criticize the US for the perceived shortcomings of its policies toward the Middle East will be asked in turn how much more they are prepared to do to bolster the government in Iraq.
Once the fighting between Israel and Hamas subsides, the question of what the Arab states will do to strengthen Palestinian moderates and to make peace with Israel is sure to arise.
Russia and China should expect enormous pressure from Obama to do more to discourage Iran from proceeding with uranium enrichment. This will include calls for greater political and economic sanctions, and conceivably even support for limited uses of military force to buttress sanctions.
This list is a long one, but it could easily be much longer.
The rest of the world was often unhappy with George W. Bush, for both the content and style of his foreign policy.
Now others will find that the alternative to America going it alone or withdrawing from the global scene is real multilateralism, which requires their willingness and ability to commit resources to deal with pressing challenges.
Obama is likely to be more diplomatic than his predecessor, but he is also likely to be more demanding.
The Official Pursuit of Happiness
CAMBRIDGE – In a time of tight budgets and financial crisis, politicians nowadays look to economic growth as the centerpiece of their domestic policy programs. Gross domestic product is taken to be the leading indicator of national well-being.
But, as we look ahead to 2011 and beyond, we should ask ourselves: is it really wise to accord such importance to growth?
Granted, many studies have confirmed that wealthier nations tend to be happier than poor ones, and that rich people are generally more satisfied than their less affluent fellow citizens.
Yet other findings from several relatively well-to-do countries, such as South Korea and the United States, suggest that people there are essentially no happier today than they were 50 years ago, despite a doubling or quadrupling of average per capita income.
Moreover, in a recent Canadian study, the happiest people turned out to reside in the poorest provinces, such as Newfoundland and Nova Scotia, while citizens in the richest provinces, notably Ontario and British Columbia, were among the least happy.
Since happiness is ultimately what people want the most, while wealth is only a means to that end, the primacy now accorded to economic growth would appear to be a mistake.
What seems clear from such research is that people do quite poorly at predicting what will make them happy or sad.
They focus too much on their initial responses to changes in their lives and overlook how quickly the pleasure of a new car, a pay increase, or a move to sunnier climes will fade, leaving them no happier than before.
But such people are frequently underserved by health-care systems.
The natural response to all this is to ask whether happiness research is really reliable enough to be used by policymakers.
Researchers have paid close attention to this issue, and, after much testing, have found that the answers people give to questions about their well-being seem to correspond fairly well to more objective evidence.
People who claim to be happy tend to live longer, commit suicide and abuse drugs and alcohol less often, get promoted more frequently by their employers, and enjoy more good friends and lasting marriages.
Their assessments of their own well-being also align quite closely with the opinions of friends and family members.
So, overall, statistics about happiness seem to be as accurate as many of the statistics regularly used by politicians, such as public-opinion polls, poverty rates, or, for that matter, GDP growth – all of which are riddled with imperfections.
Of course, happiness research is still new.
Many questions remain unexplored, some studies lack sufficient confirmatory evidence, and still others, like those involving the effects of economic growth, have yielded conflicting results.
Thus, it would be premature to base bold new policies on happiness research alone, or to follow the example of tiny Bhutan by adopting Gross National Happiness as the nation’s principal goal.
Yet the findings may be useful to lawmakers even today – for example, in assigning priorities among several plausible initiatives, or in identifying new possibilities for policy interventions that deserve further study.
At the very least, governments should follow Great Britain and France and consider publishing regular statistics on trends in the well-being of their citizens.
Such findings will surely stimulate useful public discussion while yielding valuable data for investigators to use.
Beyond that, who knows?
Further research will doubtless provide more detailed and reliable information about the kinds of policies that add to people’s happiness.
Someday, perhaps, public officials may even use the research to inform their decisions.
After all, what could matter more to their constituents than happiness?
In a democracy, at least, that should surely count for something.
The Old Economies Strike Back
TOKYO – The impact of Abenomics on Japan’s economy is gradually beginning to be felt.
Annual GDP growth in the first quarter has been revised upward, to 4.1%, exceeding market expectations and providing a strong indication that the Japanese economy is finally recovering, after two decades of stagnation.
Consumer spending is particularly robust, as wages show signs of upward movement.
Moreover, the currency depreciation in the wake of the Bank of Japan’s efforts to increase the annual inflation rate to 2% is expected to benefit exporters, though a substantial effect on the trade balance is yet to be seen, probably owing to higher import costs.
In particular, thermal electricity plants have replaced the country’s nuclear plants – offline since the Great East Japan Earthquake in 2011 – and the weak yen has hit the import bill for oil and gas hard.
Japan’s growth revival comes at a time of increasing economic uncertainty in much of the developing world.
For example, Japan’s trade statistics for May indicate that exports to the United States increased at a double-digit pace year on year, to around ¥5.1 trillion, while exports to China were sluggish, reaching ¥4.8 trillion.
Indeed, the US has overtaken China as Japan’s main export market, as America’s economy, too, recovers from half-a-decade of sluggishness.
In fact, the Chinese economy’s true condition had long been obscured, but has now been exposed by more stringent regulation of activities such as speculative trading of the renminbi masquerading as trade payments.
In particular, China’s “two systems in one country” enabled exports to bonded warehouses in Hong Kong to be used to pad trade statistics.
Moreover, Chinese exports sometimes would increase in the face of a slump in the volume of cargo being shipped from ports.
The reason was simple: businesses benefit from tax exemptions or reductions for products that are exported.
So, when companies from the mainland dealt with each other, they would export to Hong Kong first and then import back to the mainland, resulting in the transaction being treated as an export.
For example, trade in Guangdong Province and Hong Kong in the first quarter of 2013 increased by 91.6% year on year.
In particular, there was a sudden increase in exports via the free-trade zone in Guangdong.
After the regulatory authorities intervened in May, annual exports to Hong Kong rose by only 7.7%, down sharply from the 57% increase reported in April.
Economic conditions in China appear set to worsen further.
The enormous investments launched in China’s interior as part of the government’s stimulus program following the 2008 global financial crisis have now become a burden and are increasingly showing up as bad debt on the balance sheets of the country’s banks.
China is not alone in finding its economy stumbling.
More broadly, as the US and Japan recover, cracks are starting to appear in emerging countries that, relative to the advanced countries, had enjoyed enviable rates of economic growth since 2008.
Growth in India has slowed significantly in the last two years, and large-scale street protests in Turkey and Brazil could herald hard times ahead in both of those countries.
For most of the twenty-first century, emerging markets’ rising importance –&#160;and, with it, a reordering of the global economy and international relations – has been conventional wisdom.
But, today, it is the two largest “old” economies – Japan and the US – that are showing signs of increasing vitality.
Japan is seeking to revive its economy through Abenomics.
The US economy’s road to recovery is being built on the shale-gas revolution, a revived manufacturing sector, and a decline in the US budget deficit in GDP terms.
The “old” economies appear to be returning to the spotlight.
If current trends continue, they may well become the next new thing.
Commodities on the Rise
SEOUL – The commodity super-cycle – in which commodity prices reach ever-higher highs, and fall only to higher lows – is not over.
Despite the euphoria around shale gas – indeed, despite weak global growth – commodity prices have risen by as much as 150% in the aftermath of the financial crisis.
In the medium term, this trend will continue to pose an inflation risk and undermine living standards worldwide.
For starters, there is the convergence argument.
As China grows, its increasing size, wealth, and urbanization will continue to stoke demand for energy, grains, minerals, and other resources.
For example, the US consumes more than nine times as much oil as China on a per capita basis.
As more of China’s population converges to Western standards of consumption, demand for commodities – and thus their prices – will remain on an upward trajectory.
Of course, not all commodities are equal.
For example, although the case for copper seems straightforward, given that it is a key input for wiring, electronics, and indoor plumbing, a strong bid for iron is not as obvious, given the Chinese infrastructure boom that already has occurred in the last two decades.
Worst-case estimates have China’s real GDP growing at around 7% per year over the next decade.
Meanwhile, the supply of most commodities is forecast to grow by no more than 2% annually in real terms.
All else being equal, unless China’s commodity intensity, defined as the amount of a commodity consumed to generate a unit of output, falls dramatically, its demand for commodities will be greater this year than it was last year.
As long as China’s commodity demand grows at a higher rate than global supply, prices will rise.
And the rapid economic growth that China’s leaders must sustain in order to lift enormous numbers of people out of poverty – and thus prevent a crisis of legitimacy – places a floor under global food, energy, and mineral prices.
To be sure, intensity of use has fallen for some commodities, like gold and nuclear energy; but for others, such as aluminum and coal, it has risen since 2000 or, as is the case for copper and oil, declines have slowed markedly or stalled at high levels.
As the composition of China’s economy continues to shift from investment to consumption, demand for commodity-intensive consumer durables – cars, mobile phones, indoor plumbing, computers, and televisions – will rise.
There is also the issue of the so-called reserve price (the highest price a buyer is willing to pay for a good or service).
The reserve price places a cap on how high commodity prices will go, as it is the price at which demand destruction occurs (consumers are no longer willing or able to purchase the good or service).
For many commodities, such as oil, the reserve price is higher in emerging countries than in developed economies.
One explanation for the difference is accelerating wage growth across developing regions, which is raising commodity demand, whereas stagnating wages in developed markets are causing the reserve price to decline.
By implication, if nothing else, global energy, food, and mineral prices will continue to be buoyed by seemingly insatiable emerging-market demand, which commands much higher reserve prices.
Ultimately, emerging economies’ absolute size and rate of growth both matter in charting commodity demand and the future trajectory of global commodity prices, with per capita income clearly linked to consumers’ wealth.
If people feel rich and enjoy growing wages and appreciating assets, they are less inclined to cannibalize other spending when commodity consumption becomes more expensive.
They just pay more and carry on.
Of course, upward pressure on commodity prices also stems from supply-side challenges.
It is not just that global supplies of resources are increasingly scarce, but also that supplies are increasingly falling into inefficient hands.
Around the world, governments are taking greater control of resources and imposing policies that hamper global production and ultimately force prices higher.
(Following the recent fracas surrounding Argentina’s nationalization of Yacimientos Petrolíferos Fiscales (YPF), Australia’s 2012 mining tax on iron and coal companies is a stark reminder that such tendencies are not limited to emerging-market politicians.)
Such price increases can prove particularly inflationary in countries that import commodities.
And they can be disastrous to exporting economies, which risk rapid currency appreciation and thus a loss of competitiveness.
Of course, technological advances, like hydraulic fracturing (“fracking”) in the shale-gas industry, could increase supply and therefore lower prices.
But mounting environmental challenges, and the limited availability of commodity substitutes, suggest that a reprieve on commodity prices is not near.
There is a perennial temptation to focus on – even to overemphasize – the short-term, tactical drivers of commodity-price movements, at the expense of giving longer-term, structural factors their due.
While short-term factors – for example, political instability, weather-related disruptions, and speculative activity – are important determinants of prices, they tell only part of the story.
The economic fundamentals of supply and demand remain the key factors in driving the direction of commodity prices and determining whether the commodity super-cycle will persist.
In practical terms, this means that oil prices, for example, are more likely to hover near $120 per barrel over the next decade, rather than $50; and we are unlikely to see a $20 barrel of oil ever again.
A New Greek Test for Europe
PRINCETON – Over the last year, it has been easy to lose sight of the Greek debt crisis.
Brimming with official funds, Greece was apparently on the mend.
Though privatization plans lagged, the Greeks won high marks for doubling down on fiscal austerity.
In Europe’s summer of quiet triumphalism, ever-lower expectations were easy to beat.
But Greece is set to test Europe again, with a vengeance.
Greece’s crisis was spectacularly outsize.
After it was revealed that successive governments had misled their way to mammoth fiscal deficits and macroeconomic imbalances, Greece lost access to international bond markets.
Since 2010, the country has been dependent on unprecedentedly large official bailout funds.
But, because Greece’s creditors – the International Monetary Fund and European governments – misread the challenges facing the country, the rescue merely delayed the inevitable sovereign default and caused the Greek economy to contract sharply, magnifying the pain.
The hope was that the Greeks would ultimately bear their own burden.
That was never realistic.
The Greek crisis was always destined to spill across national borders – the question was who would share the cost.
Today, the leading edge of that dénouement is the impending decision on the next round of Greek aid, which threatens to break the mold on the scale of official debt forgiveness, defy the IMF’s presumed insulation from default, and fundamentally alter the eurozone’s legal framework.
The conclusion that Greece needed official loans to repay its private creditors ensured that Greek debt remained large, compelling eurozone leaders to demand economically debilitating fiscal austerity.
Last year, it became clear that Greece could not repay its official creditors on the agreed terms.
But the European debt-forgiveness plan, though painstakingly crafted, was bogus.
Continued reduction of interest rates and extension of repayment maturities have served only to prolong Greece’s struggles.
Greece has so far repaid almost none of the €282 billion ($372 billion) in loans that it has received since 2010.
And matters may be even worse. Some analysts argue that, given guarantees of debt incurred by public corporations, the Greek government’s obligations are even higher.
To escape from this morass, Greece needs a massive debt write-down.
But there is a twist.
Virtually all of the debt repayments due in the next few years are to the IMF, whose implicit status as “senior” creditor ensures that it is repaid first.
Because Greece is rapidly running out of cash, it will first have to borrow more from either its European neighbors or the IMF itself.
If the IMF were to ease the terms on its Greek loans, it would likely face fierce protests from its less wealthy debtors and risk compromising its status as senior creditor – an outcome that even the Fund’s largely quiescent Board of Governors is unlikely to accept.
The Fund, having swooped in to pluck Greece from the abyss, is ready to step back from the brink.
For that reason, European governments will probably lend new money, despite knowing that they will not be repaid.
For the creditor countries’ leaders, a write-down would mean breaking the promise that their taxpayers would not foot the bill – a pledge that also formed the legal basis for supporting Greece.
The European Court of Justice ruled that loans to protect financial stability would not violate the Lisbon Treaty’s “no bailout” clause, provided that their terms were “reasonable.”
But how reasonable is it if Greece does not have to fulfill its repayment obligations?
Despite domestic opposition, German Chancellor Angela Merkel decided to commit to keeping Greece in the eurozone, because the risk that a Greek exit would precipitate the monetary union’s disintegration was deemed too great.