Fast-forward 150 years to post-World War II America, and to the original Chicago School critique of the New Deal version of social insurance – that it created “notches” that perverted economic incentives.
The government, Milton Friedman and others argued, told the poor: make more money and we will take away your free housing, food stamps, and income support.
People are rational, Friedman said, so they will not work for long if they get nothing or next to nothing for it.
The big difference between the Malthusian conservative critics of social insurance in the early nineteenth century and the Chicago critics of the 1970’s is that the Chicago critics had a point: Providing public support to the “worthy” poor, and then removing it when they began to stand on their own feet, poisoned incentives and was unlikely to lead to good outcomes.
And so, from 1970 to 2000, a broad coalition of conservatives (who wanted to see the government stop encouraging immorality), centrists (who wanted government money spent effectively), and leftists (who wanted poverty alleviated) removed the “notches” from the social-insurance system.
Presidents Jimmy Carter, Ronald Reagan, George H. W. Bush, Bill Clinton, and even George W. Bush and their supporters created the current system, in which tax rates and eligibility thresholds are not punitive disincentives to enterprise.
So what is the problem that America’s new generation of conservative critics of social insurance sees?
It is not that raising poor people’s standard of living above bare subsistence produces Malthusian catastrophe, or that taxes and withdrawal of welfare benefits make people work, at the margin, for nothing.
For Eberstadt, the problem is that dependence on government is emasculating, and that too many people are dependent on government.
For Brooks, it is that knowing that public programs make one’s life easier causes one to vote for non-Republican candidates.
For Murray, it is that social insurance means that behaving badly does not lead to catastrophe – and we need bad behavior to lead to catastrophe in order to keep people from behaving badly.
The crucial point is that America’s conservative elites believe Brooks, Eberstadt, and Murray.
To this day, Mitt Romney is convinced that he lost the presidency in 2012 because Barack Obama unfairly gave Latino-Americans subsidized health insurance; gave women free reproductive health coverage (excluding abortion); and gave other groups similar “gifts.”
He could “never convince them that they should take personal responsibility and care for their lives.”
In fact, it would be a tough sell for any candidate to convince Americans who receive government benefits that they are dependent rather than empowered; that it is bad for people to vote for politicians who make their lives better; and that good public policy seeks to create human catastrophe rather than to avert it.
The problem for American conservatives is not their choice of candidates or the tone of their rhetoric. It is that their ideas are not politically sustainable.
An Unhinged Democracy in America
NEW YORK – Alexis de Tocqueville, a liberal French aristocrat, visited the United States in 1831 ostensibly to write a study of its “enlightened” prison system (locking people up in solitary confinement like penitent monks was the latest modern idea).
Out of this trip came de Tocqueville’s masterpiece, Democracy in America, in which he expressed admiration for American civil liberties and compared the world’s first genuine liberal democracy favorably with Old World institutions.
But de Tocqueville had serious reservations, too.
The biggest danger to US democracy, he believed, was the tyranny of the majority, the suffocating intellectual conformity of American life, the stifling of minority opinion and dissent.
He was convinced that any exercise of unlimited power, be it by an individual despot or a political majority, is bound to end in disaster.
Democracy, in the sense of majority rule, needs restraints, just like any other system of government.
That is why the British have mixed the authority of elected politicians with that of aristocratic privilege.
And it is why Americans still cherish their Constitution’s separation of governmental powers.
By contrast, in the French republican system, the state represents the so-called will of the people.
As a result, its authority is less constrained, which may explain the greater frequency in France of street demonstrations and even of mob violence.
Indeed, these upheavals may act as informal checks on official power.
De Tocqueville identified another source of restraint in the US system: the power of religion.
Human greed, as well as the temptation of going to extremes, was tempered by the moderating influence of a shared Christian faith.
Liberty, in the US, was inextricably entwined with religious belief.
The spectacle of American politics today would seem to cast doubt on de Tocqueville’s observation.
Or, rather, the rhetoric of many Republicans aspiring to be President sounds like a perversion of what he saw in 1831.
Religion and liberty are still mentioned in one breath, but often to promote extreme views.
Religious minorities are denounced.
Apocalyptic fears are stoked.
Intolerance is promoted.
All in the name of God.
Of course, the US is not the only country where fringe demagogues are now poisoning mainstream politics.
Religious language is less often heard in Western Europe, but all the more in parts of Eastern Europe, Turkey, and Israel.
And the message of populism is similar everywhere in the democratic world: Liberal elites are to be blamed for all our ills and anxieties, from Europe’s refugee crisis to the inequities of the global economy, from “multiculturalism” to the rise of radical Islam.
Populism is causing considerable alarm, not least because mainstream politicians seem less and less capable of finding a convincing way to stop its rise.
Those who are rightly worried about the politics of fear like to assume that populism is a threat to democracy itself.
Distrust of the elites fosters distrust of the system, and the longing for great leaders who will deliver us from the selfishness of professional politicians will lead to new forms of tyranny.
That may turn out to be true.
But, in fact, it is not really democracy that is presently under siege.
In some ways, many societies are more democratic than they were before.
If nothing else, the Donald Trump phenomenon shows that old party establishments can be skirted by popular outsiders.
Social media also make it possible to bypass the traditional filters of authority, such as serious newspapers or broadcasters, and publish any point of view directly.
The power of private fortunes to sway public opinion, especially in the US, also upsets the traditional order.
Anti-elitism can be fanned by vast individual wealth, because elitism is defined less by financial clout than by education.
Angry people swayed by the populist message are angrier at liberal professors, clever bankers, or skeptical journalists than they are at multi-billionaires.
(It is both President Barack Obama’s elite education and the color of his skin – or, rather, the combination of the two – that has attracted so much rage.)
At the same time, people have more power to elect power-hungry crooks than they did before.
Like the wild and woolly views swirling around the Internet, such figures are no longer kept at bay by traditional party elites.
What is steadily falling away is not democracy, but the restraints that de Tocqueville thought were essential to make liberal politics work.
More and more, populist leaders regard their election by the majority of voters as a license to crush all political and cultural dissent.
De Tocqueville’s nightmare is not yet the reality in the US, but it is close to what we see in Russia, Turkey, Hungary, and perhaps Poland.
Even Israel, which, despite its many obvious problems, has always had a robust democracy, is moving in this direction, with government ministers demanding proof of “state loyalty” from writers, artists, and journalists.
It is hard to see how traditional elites are going to regain any authority.
And yet I think de Tocqueville was right.
Without editors, there can be no serious journalism.
Without parties led by experienced politicians, the borders between show business and politics will disappear.
Without limits placed on the appetites and prejudices of the majority, intolerance will rule.
This is not a question of nostalgia or snobbery.
Nor is it a plea to trust anyone with a plausible air of authority.
Anger at the elites is not always unjust.
Globalization, immigration, and cosmopolitanism have served the interests of a highly educated minority, but sometimes at the expense of less privileged people.
And yet, the problem identified by de Tocqueville in the 1830s is more relevant now than ever.
Liberal democracy cannot be reduced to a popularity contest.
Constraints on majority rule are necessary to protect the rights of minorities, be they ethnic, religious, or intellectual.
When that protection disappears, we will all end up losing the freedoms that democracy was supposed to defend.
The Indispensable American Partner
MADRID – The United States is gearing up for that most intoxicating (and exhausting) of political events: an open-seat race for the presidency.
With US President Barack Obama's eight years in office coming to an end, and Vice President Joe Biden unlikely to run, the race will be without an incumbent.
As a result, the election could be less a referendum on the last eight years than a contest of ideas, with foreign policy emerging as a key topic.
The potential candidates have already sought to stake out their positions on key foreign-policy issues, with early Republican frontrunner Jeb Bush, for example, delivering a speech devoted entirely to the topic.
As for the Democrats, former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton's likely nomination (despite recent revelations that she used her personal email account to conduct government business) reinforces foreign policy's centrality to the election.
Recognizing this trend, the World Economic Forum Global Agenda Council has brought together a group of experts and practitioners to help infuse substance into the foreign-policy discussions leading up to the US election, including by preparing a public discussion paper.
From my perspective as the group's only European member, the overarching message should be that the US must conceive of itself not as “the indispensable power," as it now does, but as “the indispensable partner."
This is not merely a matter of semantics; such a change will require the US to re-conceive its role in the world.
But the payoff, for both the US and the liberal world order that it created, would be substantial.
The key to success will be America's ability to retain the best – and abandon the worst – of that most American of notions: exceptionalism.
The sense in the US that the country is unique, with a special mission to promote prosperity, security, and freedom worldwide, has long shaped American foreign policy.
The idea extends as far back as 1630, when John Winthrop, the Massachusetts Bay Colony's first governor, declared that his community must act as a “city upon a hill," setting an example for the world.
In doing so, he planted the seed of the values-based approach that was adopted by the US as it spearheaded the development of the rules and structures that order today's world.
Those rules and structures have delivered unprecedented economic growth, benefiting all (though the US has reaped the greatest rewards).
But, ironically, the notion of American exceptionalism often has led the US to undermine the international system that it nurtured.
Indeed, US history reveals a persistent isolationist streak, in which the “city upon a hill" is not a beacon, but a fortress.
At times, including over the last six years, the belief that the US is better off going it alone has led to withdrawal from the world.
This tendency was not a serious issue before World War II (though the people of Abyssinia and Manchuria may beg to differ).
But today, US withdrawal from the international system that it built has serious ramifications – namely, the kind of chaos and lawlessness exemplified by Russia's invasion of Ukraine.
Yet isolationism is not America's most destructive impulse.
Worse is its “exemptionalism": its penchant for opting out of the rules that it promotes – and often actively enforces – elsewhere.
The lengthy – and growing – list of major international conventions left unratified by the US includes the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court, the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women, the Mine Ban Convention, the Convention on the Rights of the Child, and the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities.
Beyond the resentment that such an attitude engenders, American exemptionalism directly undermines multilateral institutions' capacity to address challenges that the US is unwilling or unable to resolve on its own.
How can the US expect China to follow rules on maritime delimitation in the East and South China Seas when it refuses to ratify the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea?
US President Barack Obama's administration has tried to create the illusion of a change of course in this regard, pushing “soft" deals that allow the US to participate without submitting to binding rules.
Such was the case with the much-lauded “handshake agreement" between Obama and Chinese President Xi Jinping on carbon-dioxide emissions in November.
But, though such arrangements make for great headlines, they do not provide the stability and predictability necessary for long-term success.
For that, hard rules and strong institutions are essential.
If the US is to serve as the world's “indispensable partner," it must recommit to the rules-based order that has served it – and the world – so well for the last seven decades.
It should begin by strengthening the flagging institutions that have served as the backbone of the liberal international order.
Specifically, the US should finally approve the International Monetary Fund reform package that was agreed in 2010; promote real progress at the Non-Proliferation Treaty Review Conference in May; and ensure that this December's UN Framework Convention on Climate Change Conference in Paris yields formal commitments.
Indispensable partnership is about helping countries help themselves.
It requires vision, commitment, and, most important, leadership.
A frank discussion about America's foreign policy could prove vital to ensuring that this “city upon a hill" remains a beacon of hope – and a catalyst of progress.
American Foreign Policy after Iraq
What comes after Iraq?
If President George W. Bush’s current troop “surge” fails to produce an outcome that can be called “victory,” what lessons will the United States draw for its future foreign policy?
Will it turn inward, as it did after its defeat in Vietnam three decades ago?
Will it turn from promoting democracy to a narrow realist view of its interests?
Even while discussion in Washington is fixated on Iraq, a number of thoughtful foreign observers are asking these longer-term questions.
Analysts and pundits have often been mistaken about America’s position in the world.
For example, two decades ago, the conventional wisdom was that the US was in decline.
A decade later, with the Cold War’s end, the new conventional wisdom was that the world was a unipolar American hegemony.
Some neo-conservative pundits drew the conclusion that the US was so powerful that it could decide what it thought was right, and others would have to follow.
Charles Krauthammer celebrated this view as “the new unilateralism,” and it heavily influenced the Bush administration even before the attacks on September 11, 2001.
But the new unilateralism was based on a profound misunderstanding of the nature of power in world politics.
Power is the ability to get the outcomes one wants.
Whether the possession of resources will produce such outcomes depends upon the context.
For example, a large, modern tank army is a powerful resource if a war is fought in a desert, but not if it is fought in a swamp – as America discovered in Vietnam.
In the past, it was assumed that military power dominated most issues, but in today’s world, the contexts of power differ greatly.
I have likened the distribution of power in politics today as analogous to a three-dimensional chess game.
On the top board – military relations among states – the world is, indeed, unipolar, and likely to remain that way for decades.
But on the middle board of economic relations, the world is already multipolar, and the US cannot obtain the outcomes it wants without the cooperation of Europe, Japan, China, and others.
And, on the bottom board of transnational issues outside the control of governments – including everything from climate change to pandemics to transnational terrorism – power is chaotically distributed, and it makes no sense at all to claim American hegemony.
Yet it is on this bottom board that we find most of the greatest challenges we face today.
The only way to grapple with these problems is through cooperation with others, and that requires the “soft” power of attraction as well as the hard power of coercion. There is no simple military solution that will produce the outcomes we want.
The new unilateralists who dominated Bush’s first administration made the mistake of thinking that the unipolar distribution of power in the military context was sufficient to guide foreign policy.
They were like a young boy with a hammer who thinks that every problem resembles a nail.
The danger of their approach is now obvious.
Whoever plays a three-dimensional game by focusing on only one board is bound to lose in the long run.
Fortunately, the pendulum has begun to swing back toward cooperation.
In Bush’s second term, some of the most extreme unilateralists have departed from the government, and the president has approached difficult problems like North Korea or Iran with a more multilateral approach than during his first term.
Likewise, for all the complaints about the United Nations, the US and others turned to UN peacekeepers to sort out the mess after the Lebanon War last summer.
The Iraq War, in particular, increased public awareness of the mistakes in Bush’s first term, but other issues are changing as well.
Americans now view cooperative action on global climate change more favorably.
Similarly, the threat of pandemics means that Americans may come to recognize the importance of a stronger World Health Organization, just as the problem of nuclear proliferation is increasing awareness of the importance of the International Atomic Energy Agency.
The nature of these problems means that the US does not have the luxury of turning inward no matter what the outcome in Iraq.
These are not problems you can leave overseas.
They follow you home.
It also is unlikely that American foreign policy will return to a narrow realism and drop all emphasis on democracy and human rights.
While the Iraq War discredited the idea of coercive democratization, both Republicans and Democrats have a strong strand of idealism in their foreign policy orientations.
The problem for whoever is elected president in 2008 will be to find appropriate realistic means to advance democratic values and adjust official rhetoric accordingly.
When rhetoric greatly outstrips reality, others view it as hypocrisy.
Americans will need to find ways to assert their narrative of democracy, freedom, and rights in a manner that respects diversity and the views of others.
What Iraq has taught is the importance of developing civil society and the rule of law before trying to hold broad-based elections.
Democracy is more than voting, for it requires large investments in education, institutions, and promotion of non-governmental organizations.
It must be rooted in the indigenous society and bear its characteristics, not be imposed from abroad.
It is highly unlikely that the US will react after Iraq as it did after Vietnam.
The paradox of American power is that the world’s only military superpower cannot protect its citizens by acting alone.
American Foreign Policy After the Mid-Term Elections
NEW YORK – Few Americans cast their ballot in the recent mid-term elections on the basis of foreign policy.
While it may be difficult for people around the world to comprehend this, given the global reach of the United States, it is an undeniable fact.
Most Americans are, after all, preoccupied with the US economy’s sluggish growth and persistent high unemployment.
The world’s challenges seem far removed from their day-to-day lives.
The Cold War ended a generation ago; the terror attacks of September 11, 2001, are nearly a decade in the past.
Most Americans do not feel the sacrifices associated with the large troop presence and ongoing conflicts in Afghanistan and Iraq.
But the fact that foreign policy did not materially affect the November elections does not mean that the results will not affect US foreign policy.
They will, but in ways that are inconsistent and even surprising.
One relationship sure to be influenced by Republican gains will be that between the US and Russia.
Quick or easy Senate approval of the New START arms-control treaty is highly unlikely, given stated concerns about verification and the protection of US missile-defense programs; instead, we can expect delays and, possibly, attempts to amend what the two governments already agreed upon.
Congress may also prove less willing to remove hurdles to Russia’s admission to the World Trade Organization, given what is widely judged to be its leaders’ anti-democratic behavior.
China, too, will feel the results of the new balance in Congress.
Pressure was already growing to introduce trade sanctions in response to China’s refusal to allow its currency to rise to a natural level against the dollar.
Such pressure will likely grow, given concerns over Chinese behavior both at home and abroad.
Moreover, Congress will resist rolling back any of the long-standing economic sanctions against Cuba.
President Barack Obama has the authority to take some small steps on his own to normalize ties, but substantial change to US policy requires Congress to act – and Congress wants to see fundamental change in Cuba before it does so.
There will be other consequences stemming from the election.
What little chance there was of the US backing any global plan to limit or tax carbon emissions has disappeared.
Improvement in US performance on climate change will have to come from innovation and increased energy efficiency.
One can anticipate the Republicans, now in control of the House of Representatives, exploiting their ability to convene hearings to question and review foreign policy.
Depending on how this power is used (or abused), it can be beneficial (exercising needed oversight and increasing the transparency of policy and policy-making) or destructive (if, for example, hearings degenerate into politically motivated attacks on administration officials and policies).
In many other areas, continuity can be expected to trump change.
This comes as little surprise, as America’s Constitution and political system delegate most of the initiative on foreign policy and defense to the president.
Yes, Congress must declare war, approve spending, agree to most senior appointments, and (in the case of the Senate) ratify treaties, but the president has enormous latitude when it comes to carrying out diplomacy and using military force in situations other than war, which tend to be most situations.
One area of probable continuity is the Middle East, where Obama will continue to try to broker a deal between Israelis and Palestinians and press Iran not to develop nuclear weapons.
(Republicans, however will argue for putting less pressure on Israel to compromise and more pressure on Iran.)  But he can expect considerable backing from Republicans if he wants to maintain a sizeable US military presence in Afghanistan beyond this July, or a modest military presence in Iraq beyond the end of 2011.
Questions abound when it comes to foreign economic policy, however.
Three completed trade agreements (with South Korea, Panama, and Colombia) have been languishing for years, mostly because of deep opposition to free trade from labor unions and the Democratic Party.
Republicans have historically been more supportive of such bilateral free-trade agreements.
But will the new generation of Republicans continue this tradition?
There is a fair chance that one or more of these bilateral accords will be approved (in part because the Obama administration seems finally to have recognized that trade can generate good jobs), but it is far less certain that the president will gain the authority needed to negotiate a new global trade deal.
An even bigger question mark hovers over what might be the greatest national security concern of all: the federal budget deficit.
Failure to address the deficit (and the mounting debt) will create pressures to reduce what the US spends on foreign aid, intelligence, and defense – although Republicans are more likely than Democrats to protect such spending (except for foreign aid).
Mounting debt also leaves the US vulnerable to the decisions of those who lend it money – or to the vagaries of the market.
A dollar crisis could weaken the foundations of American power.
But averting such a crisis requires that the White House and Congress, Democrats and Republicans, agree on a plan for moving the US budget toward balance.
The post-Cold War era was not really an “era,” but rather a gradual transition from a bilateral Cold War to a more complex international order that still involves, in the final analysis, two world powers.
In brief, the decisive axis of the new order increasingly involves the United States and the People’s Republic of China.
The Sino-American competition involves two significant realities that distinguish it from the Cold War: neither party is excessively ideological in its orientation; and both parties recognize that they really need mutual accommodation.
America’s supposed “pivot to Asia” took a back seat in 2014 to the crises in Ukraine and the Middle East.
To what extent has uncertainty about the US commitment in Asia stoked tension between China and America’s Asian allies?
I disagree with the premises of the question.
I do think America has made it quite clear that it is in the interest both of America and China to avoid situations in which they will be pushed toward a collision.
The recent indications of some initial dialogue between China and India, and between China and Japan, suggest that China also realizes that escalating old grievances is not in its interest.
The more serious problem with the “pivot to Asia” was its actual wording, which implied a military posture designed to “contain” or “isolate” China.
The Chinese have come to realize more clearly that we were not deliberately attempting to isolate them, but that we had a stake in the avoidance of collisions in the Far East that could produce a wider spillover.
Xi Jinping has used his war on corruption to concentrate more power in his hands than any Chinese leader since Deng Xiaoping, 30 years ago.
How do you see Xi’s presidency evolving?
Power in China is somewhat informally defined, and its limits are set more by political realities than by constitutional arrangements.
That makes it difficult to say whether Xi’s power is greater than any Chinese leader’s since Deng.
He certainly has an authoritative personality and without doubt is more active on the international scene than some of his predecessors.
He has also been very decisive in attacking the growing corruption that has become a major source of internal malaise, reaching even the highest levels of government.
In that respect, it may be argued that his power is more wide-ranging than that of his predecessors, but in fairness it must also be noted that the patterns of corruption that his predecessors faced were not as acute and widespread as they have become in recent years.
At the same time, the increasing emphasis in party journals on the proposition that China’s armed forces must be viewed as servants of the Communist Party, and not simply of the nation, seems to suggest concern that the military may be developing its own view of Chinese domestic affairs, in addition to proclaiming with increasing assertiveness its responsibility for national security.
The Party elite, quite understandably, does not find this reassuring.
Can Russian President Vladimir Putin’s regime withstand a prolonged period of low energy prices and Western sanctions?
What risks do you see emerging should Russia’s economy continue to decline, with Putin increasingly unable to reward his political base?
There is, of course, a danger that at some point Putin may choose to lash out and create a truly massive international crisis, and perhaps precipitate some new form of direct East-West warfare.
But to say that, one must also assume that to some extent he himself is unbalanced and has shifted from a kind of guerilla warfare against the West, always with some possibility of retreat, to all-out combat.
The outcome of that would be inherently unpredictable, but probably in any case very destructive for Russian wellbeing.
If Russia’s economy continues to decline, and if the West succeeds in deterring Putin from further use of force, it is still conceivable that some acceptable resolution (a form of which I recommended publicly by talking about the Finland model) may be contrived.
But that depends in turn on the West’s firmness in supporting Ukraine’s efforts to stabilize itself.
Following the withdrawal of US troops from Afghanistan and Iraq, much of the world now perceives the US as being in a period of “retreat,” similar to the post-Vietnam War era.
Is the US embracing a form of neo-isolationism?
Or will America’s apparent inward turn be as brief as it was following Vietnam?
I do not believe that the US is in a “period of retreat.”
The fact of the matter is that the redistribution of global power has produced a situation in which the US is no longer the sole hegemon.
The US has to acknowledge the fact that the world is now much more complex.
The spread of conflict throughout the Middle East is currently precipitated more by the rise of religious sectarianism than by American interventionism.
In these volatile circumstances, greater attention must be given to the national interests of countries such as Turkey, Iran, Saudi Arabia, Egypt, and Israel.
By the same token, the interests of any one of them must not be allowed to become the total interest of the US.
What may surprise the world most in 2015?
Perhaps the gradual reappearance in Russia of a more politically assertive liberal middle class.
That middle class was beginning to play a more significant role in shaping domestic and international Russian policy under Dmitri Medvedev.
With Putin’s return to power and his recent adventurism, it has been pushed aside by deliberately awakened and intensely stimulated national chauvinism.
Waving a chauvinist banner, however, may not be the best solution for dealing with international problems, especially if the West is intelligent and united. The Russian middle class, quite naturally, wishes to live in a society like that of Western Europe.
A Russia that gradually begins to gravitate toward the West will also be a Russia that ceases to disrupt the international system.
America’s Enemy Within
NEW YORK – Barring any unexpected new revelations, there is not much to be learned from the Tsarnaev brothers, better known as “the Boston bombers.”
We can dig into their family histories in strife-torn Dagestan, or examine, once again, the lethal appeal of Islamist radicalism.
But I doubt that this would be enlightening.
The elder brother, Tamerlan, who died in a gun battle with the police, appears to fit perfectly the profile of what the German writer Hans Magnus Enzensberger calls “the radical loser.”
And his younger brother, Dzhokhar, recovering from gunshot wounds in a Boston hospital while waiting to be put on trial for his life, seems to have been a pathetic follower who acted less out of deep conviction than out of fraternal love.
The radical loser is the kind of young man who feels victimized by an unfeeling, uncaring world.
That sour sense of rejection, felt by many confused youths, turns for some into a fierce desire for vengeance.
Like Samson in the temple of Gaza, he wishes to destroy himself in a public act of violence, taking as many people as possible with him.
Anything can trigger this final act: a lover’s rejection, a job application denied.
In the case of Tamerlan, a talented boxer, he was denied the chance to become a champion because he was not yet a United States citizen.
Radical Islamism offered him a ready-made cause to die for.
More interesting, and in a way far more disturbing, has been the reaction in the US to the Boston bombings, which killed three people and injured 264.
Even after Tamerlan had died, and Dzhokhar, already wounded, was the only known fugitive, the Boston authorities decided to close down the entire city.
Public transport was halted, trains to and from the city were stopped, shops and business closed, and citizens were told to stay home.
Until the surviving bomber was found, Boston was reduced to a ghost town.
If two troubled young men with homemade bombs cobbled together from fertilizer and pressure cookers can have this effect on a major American city, one can imagine how tempting their example must now be to other radical losers, not to mention radical groups.
It shows how vulnerable a modern city can be when its leaders lose their nerve.
The authorities’ overblown reaction – and that of much of the press – was all the odder for having occurred just as the US Senate was voting down a bill that would have made it harder for known killers and mentally disturbed people to buy guns, or for private individuals to acquire weapons normally used only in warfare.
It seems as though Americans can tolerate a society in which schoolchildren and other innocents are regularly murdered by deranged men with weapons bought on the open market, but erupt in collective hysteria when the killings are committed by people labeled as “terrorists.”
This may reflect what people are accustomed to.
The Spanish had grown so inured to acts of violence from Basque separatists that the murder of 191 people in Madrid by Islamist extremists in 2004 was met with remarkable sang-froid.
When 52 people were killed in a suicide bombing on the London Underground the following year, the British, too, reacted with relative calm, having lived through years of Irish terrorist violence in the 1970’s.
Like the Spanish, they were used to it.
Americans, despite the attacks of September 11, 2001, are not.
Worse than that, a number of Republican senators, including such luminaries as John McCain, called for stripping Dzhokhar Tsarnaev, who is a US citizen, of his legal rights and placing him before a military tribunal as an “enemy combatant,” as though the 19-year-old college student were a soldier in a war against America.
Exaggerated fear of outside enemies has always been part of the American political landscape.
The “nation of immigrants” was traditionally regarded as a refuge from danger.
The evil outside world should not be able to touch the Land of the Free.
When it does – Pearl Harbor, September 2001 – all hell breaks loose.
Another factor may be the need for a common enemy in a country whose citizens come from so many different cultures and traditions.
Besieged by Communists or Islamists, people feel a sense of belonging.
Defense of the nation against dangerous outsiders – and their domestic agents, whether real or imagined – provides a powerful bond.
Such bonds can be useful, even necessary, in times of war.
But the politics of fear poses a danger to the US itself.
The aim of political terrorist groups, such as Al Qaeda, is to provoke retaliation and maximize publicity for their cause.
As common criminals, such groups’ members would not achieve this goal.
But by claiming to be soldiers at war with the world’s biggest military power, they gain sympathy, as well as recruits, among the radical losers and the disaffected.
Former President George W. Bush once explained terrorism as the expression of hatred for American freedom.
But when terrorism results in torture of prisoners, ever more police surveillance, and official threats to US citizens’ legal rights – or, for that matter, when a crime committed by two young immigrants causes an entire city to be shut down – Americans’ government is harming their freedom more than any terrorist could ever hope to do.
American Hegemony or American Primacy?
CAMBRIDGE – No country in modern history has possessed as much global military power as the United States.
Yet some analysts now argue that the US is following in the footsteps of the United Kingdom, the last global hegemon to decline.
This historical analogy, though increasingly popular, is misleading.
Britain was never as dominant as the US is today.
To be sure, it maintained a navy equal in size to the next two fleets combined, and its empire, on which the sun never set, ruled over a quarter of humankind.
But there were major differences in the relative power resources of imperial Britain and contemporary America.
By the outbreak of World War I, Britain ranked only fourth among the great powers in terms of military personnel, fourth in terms of GDP, and third in military spending.
The British Empire was ruled in large part through reliance on local troops.
Of the 8.6 million British forces in WWI, nearly a third came from the overseas empire.
That made it increasingly difficult for the government in London to declare war on behalf of the empire when nationalist sentiments began to intensify.
By World War II, protecting the empire had become more of a burden than an asset.
The fact that the UK was situated so close to powers like Germany and Russia made matters even more challenging.
For all the loose talk of an “American empire,” the fact is that the US does not have colonies that it must administer, and thus has more freedom to maneuver than the UK did.
And, surrounded by unthreatening countries and two oceans, it finds it far easier to protect itself.
That brings us to another problem with the global hegemon analogy: the confusion over what “hegemony” actually means.
Some observers conflate the concept with imperialism; but the US is clear evidence that a hegemon does not have to have a formal empire.
Others define hegemony as the ability to set the rules of the international system; but precisely how much influence over this process a hegemon must have, relative to other powers, remains unclear.
Still others consider hegemony to be synonymous with control of the most power resources.
But, by this definition, nineteenth-century Britain – which at the height of its power in 1870 ranked third (behind the US and Russia) in GDP and third (behind Russia and France) in military expenditures – could not be considered hegemonic, despite its naval dominance.
Similarly, those who speak of American hegemony after 1945 fail to note that the Soviet Union balanced US military power for more than four decades.
Though the US had disproportionate economic clout, its room for political and military maneuver was constrained by Soviet power.
Some analysts describe the post-1945 period as a US-led hierarchical order with liberal characteristics, in which the US provided public goods while operating within a loose system of multilateral rules and institutions that gave weaker states a say.
They point out that it may be rational for many countries to preserve this institutional framework, even if American power resources decline.
In this sense, the US-led international order could outlive America’s primacy in power resources, though many others argue that the emergence of new powers portends this order’s demise.
But, when it comes to the era of supposed US hegemony, there has always been a lot of fiction mixed in with the facts.
It was less a global order than a group of like-minded countries, largely in the Americas and Western Europe, which comprised less than half of the world.
And its effects on non-members – including significant powers like China, India, Indonesia, and the Soviet bloc – were not always benign.
Given this, the US position in the world could more accurately be called a “half-hegemony.”
Of course, America did maintain economic dominance after 1945: the devastation of WWII in so many countries meant that the US produced nearly half of global GDP.
That position lasted until 1970, when the US share of global GDP fell to its pre-war level of one-quarter.
But, from a political or military standpoint, the world was bipolar, with the Soviet Union balancing America’s power.
Indeed, during this period, the US often could not defend its interests: the Soviet Union acquired nuclear weapons; communist takeovers occurred in China, Cuba, and half of Vietnam; the Korean War ended in a stalemate; and revolts in Hungary and Czechoslovakia were repressed.
Against this background, “primacy” seems like a more accurate description of a country’s disproportionate (and measurable) share of all three kinds of power resources: military, economic, and soft.
The question now is whether the era of US primacy is coming to an end.
Given the unpredictability of global developments, it is, of course, impossible to answer this question definitively.
The rise of transnational forces and non-state actors, not to mention emerging powers like China, suggests that there are big changes on the horizon.
But there is still reason to believe that, at least in the first half of this century, the US will retain its primacy in power resources and continue to play the central role in the global balance of power.
In short, while the era of US primacy is not over, it is set to change in important ways.
Whether or not these changes will bolster global security and prosperity remains to be seen.
Renewing American Leadership
MADRID – December always provides an opportunity to pause and reflect on what was and what will be.
This year, one of the conclusions that such reflection yields is that the United States remains firmly at the center of the liberal world order.
Another is that the US needs to do more to lead in the way that its international standing demands.
Doubts about America’s continued global leadership have been proliferating for years.
But, though the much-discussed multi-polar world order may well be in the cards, the reality is that, for now, efforts to address global challenges – from climate change to conflict in the Middle East – demand US engagement.
Unfortunately, the narrative of American decline has gained so much traction in recent years that even US officials seem to have started to believe it, pursuing weak and piecemeal policies (or, in some cases, doing nothing at all).
President Barack Obama’s restrained foreign-policy approach appears to be fueling, not reducing, global instability.
The reasons for this lack of strong action are disputed.
Some blame Obama’s own fears about repeating his predecessors’ mistakes; others blame a hostile Congress for tying his hands.
In fact, both factors may be at work.
It may well be true that Obama would rather exercise caution – even when bold action is called for – than act impulsively and potentially cause more damage.
But the negative impact of an obstructionist, highly partisan US Congress should not be underestimated.
For example, by blocking reforms to International Monetary Fund governance that were agreed in 2010, Congress has damaged, perhaps irreparably, the legitimacy and relevance of the Bretton Woods institutions.
Likewise, by refusing to ratify the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, the US Congress has undermined America’s credibility as it attempts to reaffirm international law in the South China Sea, where China is acting with increasing audacity.
And, by opposing the inclusion of legally binding climate commitments, it weakened the global climate agreement that was reached this month in Paris, leaving compliance and implementation uncertain.
Stalemate has become the name of the game in US politics in recent years.
That is why next year’s presidential election is so crucial.
It offers an opportunity for a fresh start, a new approach that produces the type of policy actions that the world needs.
The key is engagement – among branches of the US government, between the US government and the public, and between the US and the rest of the world.
For starters, to avoid the kind of obstructionism that prevailed in the last eight years, the next president must engage Congress directly and actively.
And, in fact, two of the Obama administration’s recent wins – the passage of so-called trade promotion authority (fast-track negotiating authority to conclude the Trans-Pacific Partnership) and the reauthorization of the small but vital Export-Import Bank – were the result of dedicated outreach, education, and, yes, cajoling of lawmakers.
The Iran nuclear agreement, one of Obama’s hallmark achievements, involved similar efforts to engage Congress, from protracted trips to Capitol Hill by Obama administration officials to a creative approach that allowed legislators to display their displeasure for the deal, without blocking its progress.
Even in America’s highly divisive political atmosphere, it seems, where there is a will, there is a way.
America’s next president must also improve engagement with citizens, whose widespread disaffection constrains – or allows – US leaders to pursue a weak foreign policy.
Like many Europeans today, most Americans do not seem to understand – or care to understand – that the crumbling of the liberal world order would have dire consequences for all of them.
It was not always this way.
Immediately after World War II, the memory of war, together with the enduring threat posed by the Soviet Union, made plain the importance of building and maintaining a liberal world order.
Today, though the need for such an order is just as great, the argument is not nearly as comprehensible or emotionally powerful.
Discussion of rules and institutions comes across as bloodless.
It is up to political leaders – and especially the president – to figure out how to make a compelling case about what is at stake.
Only this approach can secure the mandate from the public that the next US president will need to engage effectively with other world leaders.
And make no mistake: Such engagement is indispensable.
While the US must play an integral role in addressing global challenges, from ending the Syrian civil war to following through on the promises of the Paris climate agreement, it cannot do it alone.
Real progress will demand real cooperation.
In the second half of the twentieth century, the US showed that committed leadership could help to ensure widespread stability and prosperity.
In the twenty-first century, it has showed how devastating a lack of such leadership can be.
Finger pointing will not fix anything.
Only by pursuing genuine, deep, and sustained engagement, both at home and abroad, can the next administration ensure that the coming years will be better than the last.
American Pie in the Sky
NEW YORK – While the risk of a disorderly crisis in the eurozone is well recognized, a more sanguine view of the United States has prevailed.
For the last three years, the consensus has been that the US economy was on the verge of a robust and self-sustaining recovery that would restore above-potential growth.
That turned out to be wrong, as a painful process of balance-sheet deleveraging – reflecting excessive private-sector debt, and then its carryover to the public sector – implies that the recovery will remain, at best, below-trend for many years to come.
Even this year, the consensus got it wrong, expecting a recovery to above-trend &nbsp;annual GDP growth – faster than 3%.
But the first-half growth rate looks set to come in closer to 1.5% at best, even below 2011’s dismal 1.7%.
And now, after getting the first half of 2012 wrong, many are repeating the fairy tale that a combination of lower oil prices, rising auto sales, recovering house prices, and a resurgence of US manufacturing will boost growth in the second half of the year and fuel above-potential growth by 2013.
The reality is the opposite: for several reasons, growth will slow further in the second half of 2012 and be even lower in 2013 – close to stall speed.
First, growth in the second quarter has decelerated from a mediocre 1.8% in January-March, as job creation – averaging 70,000 a month – fell sharply.
Second, expectations of the “fiscal cliff” – automatic tax increases and spending cuts set for the end of this year – will keep spending and growth lower through the second half of 2012.
So will uncertainty about who will be President in 2013; about tax rates and spending levels; about the threat of another government shutdown over the debt ceiling; and about the risk of another sovereign rating downgrade should political gridlock continue to block a plan for medium-term fiscal consolidation.
In such conditions, most firms and consumers will be cautious about spending – an option value of waiting – thus further weakening the economy.
Third, the fiscal cliff would amount to a 4.5%-of-GDP drag on growth in 2013 if all tax cuts and transfer payments were allowed to expire and draconian spending cuts were triggered.
Of course, the drag will be much smaller, as tax increases and spending cuts will be much milder.
But, even if the fiscal cliff turns out to be a mild growth bump – a mere 0.5% of GDP – and annual growth at the end of the year is just 1.5%, as seems likely, the fiscal drag will suffice to slow the economy to stall speed: a growth rate of barely 1%.
Fourth, private consumption growth in the last few quarters does not reflect growth in real wages (which are actually falling).
Rather, growth in disposable income (and thus in consumption) has been sustained since last year by another $1.4 trillion in tax cuts and extended transfer payments, implying another $1.4 trillion of public debt.
Unlike the eurozone and the United Kingdom, where a double-dip recession is already under way, owing to front-loaded fiscal austerity, the US has prevented some household deleveraging through even more public-sector releveraging –&nbsp;that is, by stealing some growth from the future.
In 2013, as transfer payments are phased out, however gradually, and as some tax cuts are allowed to expire, disposable income growth and consumption growth will slow.
The US will then face not only the direct effects of a fiscal drag, but also its indirect effect on private spending.
Fifth, four external forces will further impede US growth: a worsening eurozone crisis; an increasingly hard landing for China; a generalized slowdown of emerging-market economies, owing to cyclical factors (weak advanced-country growth) and structural causes (a state-capitalist model that reduces potential growth); and the risk of higher oil prices in 2013 as negotiations and sanctions fail to convince Iran to abandon its nuclear program.
Policy responses will have very limited effect in stemming the US economy’s deceleration toward stall speed: even with only a mild fiscal drag on growth, the US dollar is likely to strengthen as the eurozone crisis weakens the euro and as global risk aversion returns.
The US Federal Reserve will carry out more quantitative easing this year, but it will be ineffective: long-term interest rates are already very low, and lowering them further would not boost spending.
Indeed, the credit channel is frozen and velocity has collapsed, with banks hoarding increases in base money in the form of excess reserves.
Moreover, the dollar is unlikely to weaken as other countries also carry out quantitative easing.
Similarly, the gravity of weaker growth will most likely overcome the levitational effect on equity prices from more quantitative easing, particularly given that equity valuations today are not as depressed as they were in 2009 or 2010.
Indeed, growth in earnings and profits is now running out of steam, as the effect of weak demand on top-line revenues takes a toll on bottom-line margins and profitability.
A significant equity-price correction could, in fact, be the force that in 2013 tips the US economy into outright contraction.
And if the US (still the world’s largest economy) starts to sneeze again, the rest of the world – its immunity already weakened by Europe’s malaise and emerging countries’ slowdown – will catch pneumonia.
American Power in the Twenty-First Century
CAMBRIDGE – The United States government’s National Intelligence Council projects that American dominance will be “much diminished” by 2025, and that the one key area of continued American superiority – military power – will be less significant in the increasingly competitive world of the future.
Russian President Dmitri Medvedev has called the 2008 financial crisis a sign that America’s global leadership is coming to an end.
The leader of Canada’s opposition Liberal Party, Michael Ignatieff, suggests that US power has passed its mid-day.
How can we know if these predictions are correct?
One should beware of misleading metaphors of organic decline.
Countries are not like humans with predictable life spans.
For example, after Britain lost its American colonies at the end of the eighteenth century, Horace Walpole lamented Britain’s reduction to “as insignificant a country as Denmark or Sardinia.”
He failed to foresee that the industrial revolution would give Britain a second century of even greater ascendency.
Rome remained dominant for more than three centuries after the apogee of Roman power.
Even then, Rome did not succumb to another state, but suffered a death of a thousand cuts inflicted by various barbarian tribes.
Indeed, for all the fashionable predictions of China, India, or Brazil surpassing the US in the coming decades, the classical transition of power among great states may be less of a problem than the rise of modern barbarians – non-state actors.
In an information-based world of cyber-insecurity, power diffusion may be a greater threat than power transition.
So, what will it mean to wield power in the global information age of the twenty-first century?
What resources will produce power?
In the sixteenth century, control of colonies and gold bullion gave Spain the edge; seventeenth-century Holland profited from trade and finance; eighteenth-century France gained from its larger population and armies; and nineteenth-century British power rested on its industrial primacy and its navy.
Conventional wisdom has always held that the state with the largest military prevails, but in an information age it may be the state (or non-state) with the best story that wins.
Today, it is far from clear how the balance of power is measured, much less how to develop successful survival strategies.
In his inaugural address in 2009, President Barack Obama stated that “our power grows through its prudent use; our security emanates from the justness of our cause, the force of our example, the tempering qualities of humility and restraint.”
Shortly thereafter, Secretary of State Hillary Clinton said, “America cannot solve the most pressing problems on our own, and the world cannot solve them without America.
We must use what has been called ‘smart power,’ the full range of tools at our disposal.”
Smart power means the combination of the hard power of command and the soft power of attraction.
Power always depends on context.
The child who dominates on the playground may become a laggard when the context changes to a disciplined classroom.
In the middle of the twentieth century, Josef Stalin scornfully asked how many divisions the Pope had, but four decades later, the Papacy was still intact while Stalin’s empire had collapsed.
In today’s world, the distribution of power varies with the context.
It is distributed in a pattern that resembles a three-dimensional chess game.
On the top chessboard, military power is largely unipolar, and the US is likely to remain the only superpower for some time.
But on the middle chessboard, economic power has already been multi-polar for more than a decade, with the US, Europe, Japan, and China as the major players, and others gaining in importance.
The bottom chessboard is the realm of cross-border transactions that occur outside of government control.
It includes diverse non-state actors, such as bankers electronically transferring sums larger than most national budgets, and, at the other extreme, terrorists transferring weapons or hackers threatening cyber-security.
It also includes new challenges like pandemics and climate change.
On this bottom board, power is widely dispersed, and it makes no sense to speak of unipolarity, multipolarity, hegemony, or any other cliché.
Even in the aftermath of the financial crisis, the giddy pace of technological change is likely to continue to drive globalization and transnational challenges.
The problem for American power in the twenty-first century is that there are more and more things outside the control of even the most powerful state.
Although the US does well on military measures, there is much going on that those measures fail to capture.
Under the influence of the information revolution and globalization, world politics is changing in a way that prevents America from achieving all its international goals acting alone.
For example, international financial stability is vital to Americans’ prosperity, but the US needs the cooperation of others to ensure it.
Global climate change, too, will affect Americans’ quality of life, but the US cannot manage the problem alone.
In a world where borders are more porous than ever to everything from drugs to infectious diseases to terrorism, America must help build international coalitions and institutions to address shared threats and challenges.
In this sense, power becomes a positive sum game.
It is not enough to think in terms of power over others. One must also think in terms of power to accomplish goals.
On many transnational issues, empowering others can help to accomplish one’s own goals.
In this world, networks and connectedness become an important source of relevant power.
The problem of American power in the twenty-first century is not one of decline, but of recognizing that even the most powerful country cannot achieve its aims without the help of others.
Abusing Churchill
NEW YORK – A bronze bust of Winston Churchill, displayed in the White House since the 1960s, has been the object of a continuing right-wing canard in Washington.
The story goes that when President Barack Obama moved in, he returned the bust to the British Embassy, supposedly signifying his hatred of Britain.
In fact, Obama did no such thing.
The bust still stands in the White House Residence, where it always did, except for a short time under President George W. Bush when it was being repaired.
But Obama might have done well to remove the bust.
The cult of Churchill has not been an altogether beneficial one for the United States.
Too many US presidents fancy themselves Churchill’s true heirs.
Bush had a copy of Churchill’s bust, lent to him by Tony Blair, in the Oval Office.
He liked to portray himself as a “war president,” a “decider,” and a “great leader,” like Churchill.
He had a taste for battle dress.
And he got his country into a very foolish war.
Donald Trump’s British crony, Nigel Farage, the former leader of the UK Independence Party, suggested that Trump should put the bronze bust back in the Oval Office.
Trump thought this was a splendid idea.
Trump is the least appropriate figure to cast himself in Churchill’s mold.
Insofar as he has a coherent position on anything, he is hostile to most of the things that Churchill stood for.
His “America first” posture, standing aloof from Western allies, is exactly the kind of attitude against which Churchill and Franklin D. Roosevelt struggled in order to successfully resist Hitler’s Third Reich.
The summer before the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor, 75 years ago this month, Churchill and Roosevelt met in Placentia Bay, Newfoundland, to set out their ideals for a postwar world.
The resulting Atlantic Charter included everything Trump seems to be against: lower trade barriers, economic cooperation, and the advancement of social welfare.
Once Hitler was defeated, Churchill was also a proponent of European unification, even if he remained ambivalent about Britain’s role in the future union.
Farage’s campaign for Brexit, often pilfering Churchill’s own wartime rhetoric about Britain’s finest hour in defending freedom against tyranny, was aimed at dismantling the very project Churchill favored.
The “special relationship” between the US and Britain, established during WWII, was never as substantial as Churchill and others liked to believe.
The US, as the dominant postwar power, pursued its own interests, whether the British liked it or not.
And British pride in standing alone against Nazi Germany, and the self-aggrandizing notion of being America’s special partner, has prevented the United Kingdom from playing to its full strength as a major power inside the EU.
American leaders sometimes pay lip service to the special relationship, to flatter visiting British prime ministers or get the UK onside in dubious military adventures.
There is talk of giving the relationship a new lease of life in the age of Trump and Brexit.
Whereas Obama warned that Britain outside the EU would be at the back of the queue for special trade deals, House Speaker Paul D. Ryan recently stated that the US should quickly make a new deal with Britain to show “solidarity” with an “indispensable ally.”
A special US tenderness for Brexit Britain – Trump oddly referred to himself as “Mr. Brexit” – rather suggests the solidarity of two countries embarking on their own forms of economic nationalism.
Again, this is precisely the route that Churchill and Roosevelt sought to avoid; after all, economic nationalism was one of the reasons why Europeans almost succeeded in destroying their continent.
Of course, Trump’s love of Brexit may be just a question of words, like so much else about the great showman.
It is hard to imagine the US jeopardizing its economic interests by favoring Britain at the expense of far bigger stakes in the rest of Europe.
But words do matter, as Churchill knew well.
Again, the rhetoric of Trump and his supporters, and of the Brexiteers, could not be further removed from the spirit of the Atlantic Charter.
Talk of sinister international bankers and other “citizens of nowhere” (British Prime Minister Theresa May’s phrase) undermining, in league with rootless liberal elites, “ordinary,” “real,” and “decent” people (Farage) smacks of the anti-Semitic propaganda that swirled around Europe in the 1930s.
And Churchill’s response to the flirtations of Trump and the European far right with Vladimir Putin’s Russia can easily be imagined.
None of this means that Churchill was always right, let alone a figure to emulate.
He was the right man in 1940 to raise British morale, when morale was about the only thing the British had going for them.
But he is not a good model for politicians in less perilous times.
His views of colonial rule were already out of date before the war, and became a racist anachronism after it.
His romantic ideas about the moral superiority of the English-speaking peoples were old-fashioned during his lifetime, and are an arrogant absurdity now.
But Churchill was neither petty nor provincial.
His vision, at least as far as the Western world is concerned, may have been romantic, but it had a certain nobility.
The same cannot be said of the next occupant of the White House.
The idea of Trump, advised by Farage, using Churchill’s bronze head as a totem would have filled the old man with horror.
American Retreats
Los Angeles – As Barack Obama’s incoming administration debates the pace and consequences of withdrawal from Iraq, it would do well to examine the strategic impact of other American exits in the final decades of the twentieth century.
Although American commitments to Lebanon, Somalia, Vietnam, and Cambodia differed mightily, history reveals that despite immediate costs to America’s reputation, disengagement ultimately redounded to America’s advantage. 
In all of these cases, regional stability of sorts emerged after an American military withdrawal, albeit at the cost of a significant loss of life.
America’s former adversaries either became preoccupied with consolidating or sharing power, suffered domestic defeat, or confronted neighboring states.
Ultimately, America’s vital interests prevailed.
The evidence today suggests that this pattern can be repeated when the United States departs Mesopotamia and leaves Iraqis to define their own fate.
Of the four withdrawals, arguably the 1982-1984 American intervention in Lebanon marks the closest parallel to Iraq today.
A country torn by sectarian violence beginning in 1975, Lebanon pitted an even more complex array of contestants against each other than Iraq does today.
Into this fray stepped the US and its Western allies. Their objective was to create a military buffer between the PLO and Israeli forces that were then fighting in Beirut in order to promote the departure of both.
The massacres in Palestinian refugee camps prompted a new commitment to “restore a strong and central government” to Lebanon, to quote President Ronald Reagan.
But the result of intervention was that US forces became just one more target, culminating in the 1983 bombing of a US Marine barracks that killed 241 American soldiers.
A similar suicide bombing two days later claimed the lives of 58 French soldiers.
In February 1984, facing a quagmire, Reagan acceded to Vice President George H.W. Bush’s recommendation to get out of Lebanon.
But the withdrawal of Western forces did not stop the fighting.
The civil war continued for another six years, followed by a bumpy political aftermath: Syrian intervention and expulsion (two decades later), as the Lebanese defined their own fate with the US exercising only background influence.
In 1992, the sirens of Somalia’s political collapse lured the US into another civil war to save a country from itself.
The US humanitarian mission to that benighted country sought to salvage a failed United Nations enterprise to secure and feed Somalia’s ravaged population.
The US committed 28,000 troops, which for a time imposed a modicum of security.
But ill-equipped and poorly led UN replacement forces for the American presence put the remaining US troops in the bull’s eye as they attempted to bring to justice the Somali warlord responsible for the death of Pakistani peacekeepers.
The ensuing bloodbath of US soldiers generated images that the American public could not stomach, prompting the exit of American and then UN forces.
As unrest mounted with these military retreats, offshore US forces monitored and intercepted jihadists who sought to enter Somalia, while Kenya and Ethiopia blocked the unrest from metastasizing across the region.
In 2006, the capture of Somalia’s capital, Mogadishu, by the Islamic Courts raised the specter of a jihadist state.
But Somalia soon demonstrated that quagmires can be a two-way street.
Following Ethiopia’s intervention, the Islamists found themselves out of power.
Today, Somalia remains a dysfunctional state, as rival clans, jihadists, and an interim government with Ethiopian support compete for power.
The US, now out of the quagmire, exercises limited influence from afar.
While Lebanon and Somalia remain damaged and failed states, respectively, regional and domestic factors have cauterized the consequences of America’s retreat from Vietnam and Southeast Asia. The result is the stable region that the world sees today.
But the US saw things very differently in the 1960’s, when the ghosts of Munich hovered over Vietnam’s jungles.
As President George W. Bush argued about the war in Iraq, US President Lyndon Johnson predicted that defeat in Vietnam “would be renewed in one country and then another.”
What Johnson failed to foresee were the domestic and regional constraints that would prevent the dominos from falling in the way he predicted.
Although the US bombed northeastern Cambodia intensely throughout the Vietnam War years, it had no stomach for a ground commitment there.
Still within congressional restraints, the Nixon administration attempted to bolster Cambodia’s military government.