Government efforts to increase productivity in the service sector probably will be particularly important.
For example, Japan is in a good position to exploit synergies between an improved health-care sector and its world-class manufacturing capabilities, in the development of medical instrumentation.
Family policies, together with changes in corporate labor practices, can reinforce changing mores, leading to greater (and more effective) female labor-force participation.
While Japanese students rank high in international comparisons, a widespread lack of command of English, the lingua franca of international commerce and science, puts Japan at a disadvantage in the global marketplace.
Further investments in research and education are likely to pay high dividends.
There is every reason to believe that Japan’s strategy for rejuvenating its economy will succeed:&#160; the country benefits from strong institutions, has a well-educated labor force with superb technical skills and design sensibilities, and is located in the world’s most (only?) dynamic region.
It suffers from less inequality than many advanced industrial countries (though more than Canada and the northern European countries), and it has had a longer-standing commitment to environment preservation.
If the comprehensive agenda that Abe has laid out is executed well, today’s growing confidence will be vindicated.
Indeed, Japan could become one of the few rays of light in an otherwise gloomy advanced-country landscape.
Securing the Rule of Law at Sea
TOKYO – Japan is in a better position than ever before to play a larger and more proactive role in ensuring peace in Asia and the world.
We enjoy the explicit and enthusiastic support of our allies and other friendly countries, including every ASEAN member country and the United States, Australia, India, the United Kingdom, and France, among others.
All of them know that Japan stands for the rule of law – for Asia and for all people.
We are not alone.
In most Asia-Pacific countries, economic growth has nurtured freedom of thought and religion, as well as more accountable and responsive political systems.
Though the pace of such changes varies from country to country, the idea of the rule of law has taken root.
And that means that the region’s political leaders must ensure respect for international law.
Nowhere is that need clearer than in the area of international maritime law.
The Asia-Pacific region has achieved tremendous growth in the span of a single generation.
Regrettably, a large and relatively disproportionate share of the fruits of that growth is going toward military expansion.
The sources of instability include not only the threat of weapons of mass destruction, but also – and more immediately – efforts to alter the territorial status quo through force or coercion.
And those efforts are taking place largely at sea.
Recently, US President Barack Obama and I mutually reaffirmed our countries’ alliance as the cornerstone of regional peace and security.
Moreover, the United States and Japan are strengthening trilateral cooperation with like-minded partners to promote regional and global peace and economic prosperity.
Already, Australian Prime Minister Tony Abbott and I have agreed that we should do exactly that.
The history of international maritime law is long, stretching back to ancient Greece.
By Roman times, the seas were open to all, with personal possession and partitioning prohibited.
Since the dawn of the Age of Exploration, large numbers of people have crossed the seas for myriad reasons, and marine-based commerce has connected the world’s regions.
Freedom on the high seas became a foundational principle for human prosperity.
No particular country or group created international maritime law as it now exists.
It is the product of humankind’s collective wisdom, cultivated over a great many years for the wellbeing of all.
Today, many benefits for humanity depend on the seas from the Pacific to the Indian Oceans remaining fully open.
But what, exactly, does that mean?
If we distill the spirit that we have infused into international law over the ages and reformulate it as three principles, the rule of law at sea becomes a matter of common sense.
First, states should make and clarify their claims based on international law.
Second, states should not use force or coercion in trying to realize their claims.
And, third, states should seek to settle disputes by peaceful means.
All three of these very simple – almost self-evident – principles must be emphasized, because all governments in Asia and the Pacific must uphold them rigorously.
Consider Indonesia and the Philippines, countries whose leaders have peacefully reached agreement on the delimitation of their overlapping exclusive economic zones.
Likewise, my government strongly supports the Philippines’ call for a resolution to the territorial dispute in the South China Sea that is truly consistent with the three principles of international maritime law, just as we support Vietnam’s efforts to resolve conflicting territorial claims through dialogue.
Rather than attempting to consolidate changes to the status quo by piling one fait accompli upon another, the region’s governments should make a firm pledge to return to the spirit and provisions of the 2002 Declaration on the Conduct of Parties in the South China Sea, to which all parties concerned previously agreed.
In today’s world, countries should not fear that coercion and threats will replace rules and laws.
I strongly hope that ASEAN member states and China can swiftly establish a truly effective code of conduct for the South China Sea.
Japan and China have an agreement that then-Premier Wen Jiabao and I concluded in 2007, during my first term as Prime Minister.
We made a commitment to create a maritime and air communication mechanism in order to prevent unforeseen incidents between our countries from generating tensions and miscalculation.
Unfortunately, this commitment has not translated into the implementation of such a mechanism.
We do not welcome dangerous encounters by fighter aircraft and vessels at sea.
What Japan and China must exchange are words.
Should we not meet at the negotiating table, exchange smiles and handshakes, and get down to talking?
I believe that following through on the 2007 agreement would advance the cause of peace and stability in the entire region.
But I also know that ensuring long-term security will require many more agreements, each one a crucial strand in a region-wide web of freedom and prosperity.
Military Transparency and Asian Security
TOKYO – We have all heard the saying, “Sunshine is the best disinfectant.”
That is particularly true where Asian security is concerned.
Indeed, I believe that a framework under which Asian governments publicly disclose their military budgets needs to be established if we are to build trust and avoid a regional arms race.
More broadly, keeping military expansion in check, enlarging the number of countries that conclude the Arms Trade Treaty, and improving mutual understanding among national defense authorities are now the paramount issues facing Asia.
They should be the focus of the East Asia Summit, which in turn should become the premier forum for taking up regional security issues and ensuring that stability is maintained.
Military expansion is inherently incompatible with Asia’s move toward the center of the global economy.
The fruits of prosperity should be reinvested in improving people’s lives, not in weapons that can take them.
And yet safeguarding the rule of law counts most.
For example, Japan will offer its utmost support for efforts by ASEAN member countries to ensure the security and free navigation of the seas and skies.
But let me be transparent about what Japan will actually support, and how.
We have already provided three new patrol vessels to Indonesia through grant aid cooperation and have decided to provide ten more to the Philippine Coast Guard.
Moreover, we are moving forward with the necessary survey to enable us to provide such vessels to Vietnam.
No less important, when Japan sends hardware, experts and training follow, and we convey our sense of pride in committing ourselves to our duties.
By cultivating a high degree of morale and proficiency, we strengthen the bonds between the peoples of Japan and recipient countries.
In the Philippines, Indonesia, and Malaysia alone, Japan has trained more than 250 coast guard personnel.
In 2012, when we invited senior officials responsible for enforcing maritime law in each of the five major ASEAN countries to a month-long training program, three members of the Japan Coast Guard were assigned to each trainee, with all of them living, eating, and sleeping together under the same roof.
Recently, Japan formulated a new framework for transfers of defense equipment and technology to other countries.
On the basis of appropriate controls and strict inspections, we can now offer rescue, transport, surveillance, and minesweeping equipment.
To support ASEAN countries in safeguarding the seas, Japan will combine various options, including official development assistance, capacity building by the Japan Self-Defense Forces (JSDF), and provision of defense equipment and technology.
No country can secure its own peace alone anymore.
That is why it is incumbent upon us in Japan to reconstruct the legal basis for collective self-defense and international cooperation, including participation in United Nations peacekeeping operations – a reform that my administration has begun.
The importance of this reform can hardly be overstated.
The JSDF is now working to foster peace in South Sudan, under the flag of the UN mission there, alongside units from Cambodia, Mongolia, Bangladesh, India, Nepal, the Republic of Korea, and China, as well as many civilian UN staffers and NGO personnel from various countries.
All are partners with us in assisting South Sudan’s nation-building process.
But imagine now that civilian workers there, powerless to defend themselves, came under sudden attack by armed elements.
Under the approach that Japanese governments have taken up to now, the JSDF would be unable to rescue the civilians.
Is this really an appropriate response?
My government is thinking hard about this dilemma, and close consultation is underway within the ruling coalition.
It is precisely because Japan depends so heavily on the international community for the stability of its external environment that we wish to work even more proactively for world peace.
Many generations of Japanese have walked a single path – that of freedom, human rights, and the rule of law – and we will continue to walk this path for generations to come.
But, as we revitalize Japan’s economy, we need “new” Japanese who shoulder global responsibilities commensurate with their country’s size and economic resources.
These new Japanese will lose none of their good qualities.
They will still loathe poverty, embrace universal values, and find joy in hard work.
If anything has changed, it is that women are much more visible among these new Japanese.
For example, all three of the Japanese judges and public prosecutors who helped draft Cambodia’s civil code were young women.
The new Japanese will actively serve the cause of Asian peace.
In August 2011, President Benigno Aquino III of the Philippines and Chairman Murad Ebrahim of the Moro Islamic Liberation Front met in Narita, Japan.
Three months ago, in March, the two sides finally reached a comprehensive peace agreement.
When the new Bangsamoro local government assumes power two years from now, Japanese assistance teams will be there from the start.
Japan is already focusing on giving women in the region the skills they need to earn a living.
In Mindanao, where Japan built a vocational training center for women, the sounds of gunshots and angry cries have been replaced by the whir of sewing machines.
All of this is nothing other than an expression of Japan’s determination to spare no effort for the sake of peace, security, and wider prosperity in the Asia-Pacific region.
By working with our regional allies and partners, including the United States and ASEAN, we will translate that determination into a rock-solid zone of stability.
Mr. Abe Goes to Washington
TOKYO – On April 29, Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe will address a joint session of the United States Congress.
The Japan-US alliance is now 63 years old, but this will be the first time that a Japanese leader will be accorded this high honor from the American government and people.
Abe’s visit to the US comes at a time when friction between the two countries is at an all-time low.
The trade and economic disputes that incited tensions – and a sub-genre of paranoid movies about Japan – in the 1980s, when nine members of Congress even smashed a Toshiba radio with sledgehammers, rarely make an appearance nowadays.
Those past disputes probably explain why former Prime Minister Yasuhiro Nakasone, though a political soul mate of then-President Ronald Reagan, was never invited to address a joint session of Congress.
Today, however, the bilateral relationship is very different.
Japan’s economic interests are more closely aligned with America’s – the country is poised to join the US-initiated Trans-Pacific Partnership, which will create a vast free-trade zone among a dozen Pacific Rim countries – and the two sides’ strategic visions for Asia are in near-harmony.
Moreover, the long-simmering dispute over the US Marine Corps base on Okinawa, which had roiled bilateral relations during the years the Democratic Party of Japan was in power, has been settled amicably, with the US agreeing to move the base to a less populated part of the island.
Of course, some Okinawa residents remain opposed to the US base’s continued presence on their island, but most Japanese recognize the need for this tangible symbol of their alliance with America, which remains the bedrock of Japan’s national-security strategy.
The two sides’ increasingly similar views on international security issues as well, particularly where China is concerned, no doubt also contributed to the decision by the US Congress and President Barack Obama’s administration to honor Abe.
Both Abe and Obama are focused on creating a durable structure of peace for all of Asia, and Abe has been eager for Japan to play a more active role in this regard, and in supporting its allies.
That stance is making the alliance much more a partnership of equals than it has been for the last six decades.
In America’s view, the reinterpretation of Article 9 of Japan’s “peace constitution” that Abe undertook – thereby allowing Japan’s self-defense forces to aid allies under attack and to assist the US and other allies in meeting their commitments to securing Asia’s peace – was long overdue.
That bold policy initiative – in the face of the Japanese public’s deeply ingrained skepticism toward any increased exposure to military risks – has no doubt endeared Abe to US diplomats and military strategists, as well as secured both open and sometimes tacit approval from Japan’s Asian neighbors.
Increased military cooperation with the US is particularly important now, given American worries about many of its other strategic partners’ readiness.
Even the United Kingdom, long seen as America’s closest ally, now seems intent on undermining its ability to work cooperatively with the US in times of crisis, even in meeting its NATO commitments, because of severe cuts to its military budget.
Other allies are also increasingly regarded in the US as free riders on America’s military might.
Abe’s commitment to the rules and institutions of the post-1945 world order, which helped bring Japan out of the ruins of World War II and has allowed China to rise so peacefully, gives the US another reason to honor him.
Like the US, Japan has many concerns about the parallel institutions – including the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank and the BRICS countries’ New Development Bank – that China is creating.
Having benefited so much from the post-war global order, most Japanese share Abe’s view that China’s efforts to replace it with one more to its liking is both unwise and dangerous for Asia.
Indeed, countries that have decided to cooperate with China in creating rival multilateral institutions should ask themselves a simple question: Would a world order designed by China allow for the rise of another power to challenge it in the way the US-led world order allowed for – indeed, encouraged and assisted �� China’s three-decade-long boom?
To answer that question, one can look to the writings of the Chinese strategist Yan Xuetong, whose book Ancient Chinese Thought/Modern Chinese Power argues that all countries must recognize and accept China’s centrality to the world as the Middle Kingdom.
Moreover, China has thus far shown little interest in discussing the standards by which the multilateral institutions it has launched will be governed – or, indeed, the extent to which they will be truly multilateral.
Abe’s visit to the US thus comes at a moment of clarity in bilateral relations.
Both countries seek to create a viable structure of peace for Asia, one that allows China to continue to grow and prosper, but that prevents any one country from claiming hegemony.
And both favor a rules-based Asian trading order that reinforces the global norms that have served the world so well since WWII’s end.
In honoring Abe with an address to Congress, the US is really honoring the values and vision that both countries share.
Japan in Action
TOKYO – Japan’s prolonged political anni horribiles – spanning more than half a decade – has ended.
The Liberal Democratic Party (LDP) won a decisive victory in elections to the upper house of parliament held on July 21, bringing to an end the indecisive politics caused by the lack of an effective majority.
During the previous six years, there were six prime ministers, ten defense ministers, and 14 justice ministers (ten of whom came and went during the 39 months of rule by the Democratic Party of Japan).
These figures indicate just how unstable the country’s political situation had become.
But anxiety about the immature DPJ government, prolonged deflation, and unprecedented challenges posed by neighboring countries created a widespread sense of crisis among Japanese voters.
It was this that motivated them to return the LDP to power, though many voters seemed fed up with the party just a few short years ago.
In the recent election campaign, the LDP continued to criticize the previous DPJ government’s immaturity, but avoided attacks on other parties.
Instead, the LDP highlighted the beneficial effects of Prime Minister Shinzo Abe’s reforms (colloquially known as “Abenomics”), such as increased share prices, faster GDP growth, and higher employment, all of which have created hope for a turnaround in Japan’s prospects.
Since Abe returned last December for a second stint as Prime Minister, Japanese voters have entrusted him with maintaining political stability and ensuring economic revitalization.
But, following monetary easing and fiscal expansion, it is Abenomics’ third “arrow” that will prove most important – and most politically challenging.
The Abe government must implement deregulation and other structural reforms while convincing powerful interest groups to adjust to a new national and global environment in which Japan’s old economic model no longer works.
Fortunately, Abe will not need to worry about elections for the next three years.
With strong majorities in both houses, he should be able to secure whatever reform legislation he needs – that is, provided that he can maintain the LDP’s internal discipline (his enormous popularity will help him).
Abe’s agenda includes reform of social security in response to demographic trends, as well as gaining the agriculture sector’s acceptance of the Trans-Pacific Partnership, the bold regional trade agreement that will unite the United States, Japan, Australia, New Zealand, and much of the rest of Asia, with the exception of China.
The rigors of the TPP are bound to force significant agricultural reforms, and pushing it through will, indeed, test party discipline.
But Abe is also pressing for change in medical research and the technology sector by embracing long-shunned innovations such as iPS cells (artificial stem cells).
He is also emphasizing the development of renewable energy and power-saving innovations, which became an urgent policy objective following the accident at the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power plant two years ago.
Abe is resolved to make steady progress on each of these key issues.
But Abenomics has a strategic corollary as well.
Japanese diplomacy lost its footing in the unstable – and often naive – politics of the DPJ years.
Thus, Abe has been traveling abroad every month since last December in an effort to demonstrate that Japan has returned as a global player, and is particularly keen to play a prominent role in recasting Asia’s security structures in the wake of China’s rise.
Indeed, Abe has visited 13 countries in the last six months alone (a schedule that has helped him to cast aside any lingering memories of his previous tenure as Prime Minister, when ill health forced him from office after barely a year).
Abe has placed particular emphasis on strengthening Japan’s alliance with the Unites States, which had atrophied as a result of the DPJ government’s feckless behavior (relations with China deteriorated as well).
More broadly, Abe envisages Japan’s future as that of a trading country that has assumed its rightful role in ensuring a free and open maritime order.
Abe’s diplomatic whirlwind is aimed at strengthening ties with countries that share this commitment, as well as Japan’s other values, including human rights and democracy.
Of course, given Asia’s size and dynamism, there are many other issues that will need to be addressed in the years ahead, including improvement of the security environment in a currently unstable East Asia and amending the country’s constitution, which the LDP has considered doing for many years.
But the first priority for Abe’s second government is to revive the Japanese economy.
That task has already begun, and the LDP’s recent election victory will strengthen Abe’s ability to complete it.
The Fate of Abe’s Japan
TOKYO – As Shinzo Abe sits down this week in Seoul with South Korean President Park Geun-hye and Chinese Premier Li Keqiang, he does so as the leader of a country that many people around the world now seriously underestimate.
That dynamic certainly will be felt during the three Northeast Asian powers’ first summit since 2012.
Three decades ago, many erred in the opposite direction in their assessments of Japan.
Many Americans feared being overtaken after Japanese per capita income surpassed that of the United States; Japanese manufacturing set the international standard; and some books even predicted an eventual war with a Japanese nuclear superpower.
Such views extrapolated from Japan’s impressive postwar economic growth; today, after more than two decades of malaise, they simply remind us of the danger of linear projections.
That danger remains with us.
In response to China’s rapid rise and the assertiveness of its Communist Party leadership, the current conventional wisdom portrays Japan as a country of secondary importance – which is equally mistaken.
Despite its economic slowdown, Japan retains impressive power resources.
It is a democracy that has been at peace for 70 years, with a stable society and a high standard of living.
Its per capita income is five times that of China, and Beijing residents can only envy Tokyo’s air quality and product safety standards.
Its economy remains the world’s third largest overall, sustained by highly sophisticated industry.
While China has nuclear weapons and more soldiers, Japan’s military is better equipped in some areas (and obviously has the technological capacity to develop nuclear weapons very quickly).
But, whereas Abenomics was enacted quickly, the Diet enacted the defense legislation only recently – and after more than a year of effort.
Many in Abe’s Liberal Democratic Party would have preferred fundamental reform of Japan’s defense doctrine, by removing the constitution’s limits on the country’s armed forces.
But public opinion and Abe’s coalition partner, Komeito, did not allow it.
Nonetheless, Japan’s interlocutors at the Seoul summit, China and South Korea, which suffered enormously from Japanese aggression in the last century, have protested loudly.
Both are suspicious of Abe, who exacerbated tensions with nationalist rhetoric and a visit to the controversial Yasukuni Shrine early in his current administration.
Indeed, Chinese President Xi Jinping has resisted meeting with Abe, as has Park, who will do so for the first time at the Seoul summit.
On the other hand, Abe has repaired the strained relations with the US that Japan had under his predecessors, and President Barack Obama reiterated the strength of the bilateral alliance during Abe’s state visit to the White House last April.
Under the new defense guidelines, US and Japanese forces are able to plan and exercise more effectively, and the alliance is in its best condition in decades.
Abe has thus been relatively successful in terms of foreign and defense policy.
But the situation on the economic front is more mixed.
Inflation and unemployment are low, but growth is largely flat, and few experts I spoke with in Tokyo recently expect it to accelerate significantly.
The first two components (or “arrows”) of Abenomics – loose monetary and fiscal policies – helped to restore demand.
But the third arrow of structural reform has remained in the quiver.
Since his success in the Diet election last year, Abe has talked about liberalizing electricity markets, improving corporate governance, and undertaking tax reform.
In addition, he hopes to use the recently concluded Trans-Pacific Partnership trade agreement to force reform of the inefficient agriculture sector.
One important constraint is labor supply.
Abe has proposed relaxing visa conditions for expatriate workers; but immigration on a scale that would make a major economic difference is unlikely, given the homogeneity and insularity of Japan’s traditional culture.
The difficulty of loosening limits on immigration will require Japan to mobilize its underused female human resources.
But that effort, too, must overcome formidable cultural obstacles.
Abe has spoken frequently (including at the United Nations) about opportunities for women, and has called for women to make up 30% of Japan’s managers.
But today they account for less than 10% of managers and about 1% of senior executives.
The World Economic Forum’s index of gender inequality gives Japan a low rating.
Government measures like family leave and more nurseries for working mothers can help, but traditional attitudes change slowly.
Unless it is addressed, the labor constraint implies that Japan will not reach its full potential economically – and thus in regional and global affairs as well.
Japan is a successful, comfortable society, which has much to contribute to the world.
The danger is that it is so comfortable that it will look inward and prove the conventional wisdom right.
Japanese Foreign Policy in the Trump Era
TOKYO – December will be a month of reconciliation for Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe, as he meets with leaders from two countries that fought Japan in World War II: the United States and Russia.
It might seem promising that Abe is hosting Russian President Vladimir Putin and then being hosted by US President Barack Obama in such short order.
But these events actually presage an uncomfortable, potentially destabilizing time for Japan – and all of East Asia.
On December 26, Abe will shake hands with Obama at Pearl Harbor – weeks after the US marked the 75th anniversary of the Japanese attack there – to reciprocate Obama’s visit to Hiroshima’s atomic bomb sites last May.
The mutual demonstration of forgiveness is meant to emphasize the values that Japan and the US now share.
But this gesture will come just ten days after Abe hosts Putin in his Yamaguchi prefecture hometown; and theirs will be a rather different sort of reconciliation.
Russia is one of the few countries with which Japan never signed a peace treaty after 1945, because in the war’s final days, the Soviet Union occupied four then-Japanese islands just north of Hokkaido, the country’s northernmost main island.
The four islands sit at the southern tip of the Kuril Islands chain that separates the Sea of Okhotsk from the Pacific Ocean.
While they are not of any particular economic value beyond providing some fishing grounds, they do have sentimental significance for Japan – as is often the case with lost territories.
And for Russia, which is never keen to cede territory anyway, the islands are strategically valuable; the Kremlin recently decided to install missile-defense systems on two of them.
While the dispute over the islands has prevented Japan and Russia from ever formalizing a peace agreement, both countries now seem to want to cuddle somewhat closer.
Putin’s trip will be his first official visit to Japan in a decade; and Abe plans to honor him with personalized treatment; their discussions will take place in the manly environment of an onsen (hot spring), rather than in dull offices.
These overtures reflect Russia and Japan’s respective concerns about China.
While Russia has warmed to China in recent years, not least by entering into a big natural gas deal and engaging in joint military exercises, it has largely done so as a gesture of defiance against the US and the European Union.
In the long term, Russia does not want to look as though it is dependent on its increasingly powerful southern neighbor.
Japan, for its part, fears Chinese domination of East Asia, and is more than happy to be Russia’s new Asian friend.
Previously, it would have been difficult, if not impossible, for Japan to invest in Russia’s Far East, owing to its participation in Western sanctions against Russia, imposed in response to Russia’s aggression in Ukraine.
But now that Donald Trump has been elected to the US presidency, those sanctions might be eased or eliminated.
Indeed, this could explain why Abe broke protocol to become the first foreign leader to meet President-elect Trump in New York, on November 17.
Had Hillary Clinton won the election, Abe would have been forced to downplay expectations for his summit with Putin.
Now, Putin and Abe will have more room to negotiate the contested islands’ status, and to develop a future framework for economic cooperation, which will likely include regular bilateral summits.
But this will only be a consolation prize for Abe.
Trump’s victory has sounded a death knell for the 12-country Trans-Pacific Partnership, which Obama had made the centerpiece of his Asia strategy.
Abe supported the TPP, and saw it as a means to prevent China from becoming the rule-setter in Asian trade.
Without the TPP, it is now increasingly likely that China will step into that role.
That will be a big loss for Japan, and the country will lose out even more if Trump follows through on his campaign promise to make allies such as Japan and South Korea pay more for their own defense.
And if Trump continues to provoke China by communicating with Taiwan and questioning America’s “One China” policy, regional tensions will escalate.
This, in turn, will only increase Japan’s defense needs, especially with respect to the Senkaku Islands in the East China Sea, which China claims as its own.
So, Abe faces political danger, but he also has an opportunity.
Trump’s election and escalating regional tensions have created the perfect pretext for Abe to push for his ultimate political goal: to abolish Article 9 – the pacifist clause in Japan’s post-war, US-imposed constitution, which limits the Japanese military to a “self-defense force,” and has generally kept Japanese defense spending at 1% of GDP.
Abe already has enough parliamentary backing to achieve this, and he could garner more with a snap election for the lower house in early 2017.
But, beyond a two-thirds majority in both parliamentary bodies, constitutional reforms also require a simple majority in a national referendum.
Achieving that could be harder, because pacifism runs deep in the only country to have been attacked with atomic bombs.
By shaking Obama’s hand in Hawaii, Abe will give a nod to the country’s modern pacifist creed, and signal that, despite his reputation as a nationalist, he also harbors deep feelings about the dangers of war.
Such peaceful assurances, against the backdrop of growing tensions in East Asia, may or may not be enough to persuade Japanese voters that it is time to expand their country’s armed forces – 75 years after their great but fateful triumph in Pearl Harbor.
This will be one of the central questions in Asian politics over the next few turbulent years.
Abe’s Safe Bet
TOKYO – Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe has thrown out the political playbook.
With two years remaining in his term, and with his Liberal Democratic Party enjoying comfortable majorities in the Diet’s upper and lower houses, Abe has called a snap general election for December.
Political leaders and pundits worldwide are scratching their heads at Abe’s decision to risk his extensive reform agenda with a throw of the electoral dice.
But while Abe may be known for his boldness, he is no reckless gambler.
On the contrary, he would have been reckless to launch the third “arrow” of his so-called Abenomics strategy for reviving Japan’s economy – supply-side structural reforms – without a clear mandate for reform.
Fortunately, Abe is almost certain to receive that mandate – not least because he lacks credible opponents.
The main opposition party, the Democratic Party of Japan (DPJ), essentially imploded following its previous turn in government, which was characterized by economic malaise and foreign-policy blunders.
And Japan’s other political parties have done nothing to convince voters that they deserve to emerge from the political wilderness.
In a sense, Abe is not running against his parliamentary opponents, but against himself.
After the first two arrows of Abenomics – expansionary monetary and fiscal policies – raised expectations that Japan’s economy would finally escape stagnation, the country began slipping back into recession in the second quarter of this year.
As any democratic politician will attest, disappointed expectations may well be the toughest electoral opponent of all.
Just ask former French President Nicolas Sarkozy.
Of course, Abe did not face the kind of sky-high expectations that Sarkozy and, for that matter, US President Barack Obama did.
It is not that Abe’s 2012 campaign lacked ambition; he set out a bold economic-reform agenda and promised to boost Japan’s global influence.
But, after two decades of leaders who – with the exception of Junichiro Koizumi – promised little and achieved less, Japanese voters had little reason to expect that Abe would follow through on his pledges.
Moreover, Japan’s powerful bureaucracy – which has a long history of impeding reform (and has taken too little of the blame for the country’s “lost decades” of stagnation) – was probably not convinced that the election had authorized Abe to push for sweeping change.
Expecting Abe to show the same inertia as the DPJ premiers who preceded him, they behaved in the way they always had – advancing their own interests, instead of faithfully enacting the policies of the elected government.
But Abe was not deterred.
In his first weeks in office, he announced a ¥10.3 trillion ($116 billion) stimulus bill and appointed Haruhiko Kuroda, a determined, dynamic, and bold thinker, to head the Bank of Japan.
Kuroda wasted little time in initiating expansionary monetary policies – following in the footsteps of the US Federal Reserve and the Bank of England – to help reflate the economy.
The first two arrows of Abenomics began to take effect almost immediately.
Japan experienced sustained inflation for the first time since the early 1990s.
The stock market boomed.
The yen fell to a more realistic level against other currencies.
Consumer confidence rose marginally.
But Abe knows that all of this will be for naught unless and until the third arrow is launched.
Beyond his economic strategy, Abe has also delivered in terms of foreign policy.
He has visited almost all of Japan’s Asian neighbors, reinvigorating relationships that the DPJ neglected.
In particular, his personal rapport with Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi has galvanized their countries’ emerging partnership, creating a new strategic center of gravity in Asia.
Moreover, Abe has settled a nettlesome dispute with the United States over its military bases on the island of Okinawa, thereby fortifying Japan’s relationship with its main ally.
And, by reinterpreting Article 9 of the constitution to allow Japan to exercise “collective self-defense” and provide aid to an ally under attack, Abe has made Japan a far more reliable partner for the US and its Asian allies.
Most important, Abe has initiated a realistic and coherent relationship with Chinese President Xi Jinping.
In recent years, rising tensions with China have stripped Japan of the illusion of friendship and goodwill that led it to inject many hundreds of billions of dollars into the country.
With a more pragmatic approach, however, Asia’s two largest economies can find a way to support domestic and regional stability, giving them the space to pursue economic reform at home.
Allowing secondary issues to jeopardize peace and progress would simply be irresponsible.
Unlike in the last election, Japanese voters now know exactly the kind of government Abe intends to lead.
They know that he intends to follow through on his plan to include Japan in the Trans-Pacific Partnership, the US-backed mega-regional free-trade deal currently being negotiated – a move that will require some sacrifices at home.
Abe has proved that reinvigorating the economy is his top priority.
In this sense, his decision to postpone the second round of the consumer-tax hike planned for next year is not fiscally irresponsible; on the contrary, it reflects his recognition that Japan’s economy is not yet strong enough to withstand a sharp tax increase.
Finally, Japan’s voters know that Abe is committed to building a durable and consensual regional peace, without which the rest of his plans could not succeed.
There is no doubt about Abe’s intentions or policy commitments.
If the Japanese public returns him to office, he will have the mandate he needs to complete his ambitious, pragmatic, and forward-thinking agenda.
It is now up to the Japanese people to give him that mandate, effectively choosing to end two decades of economic malaise and geopolitical irrelevance.
The Second Opening of Japan
TOKYO – US President Barack Obama is visiting Tokyo at a unique moment in my country’s history, with Japan’s economy moving onto a stable new growth path that will take full advantage of its geographic position.
Japan no longer considers itself the “Far” East; rather, we are at the very center of the Pacific Rim, and a neighbor to the world’s growth center stretching from Southeast Asia to India.
There can be little doubt that this growth center will continue to propel Japan’s economy for the foreseeable future.
Japanese direct investment is expanding in Vietnam and India, for example, which will boost demand for Japanese machine tools and capital goods.
But, to maximize its opportunities, Japan must open its economy further and become a country that actively incorporates capital, human resources, and wisdom from abroad.
Japan must be a country capable of growing by channeling the vitality of a growing Asia.
To this end, we have sharply accelerated the pace of negotiations on economic partnership agreements, or EPAs, with various partners around the world.
Earlier this month, Australian Prime Minister Tony Abbott and I reached agreement in principle on a Japan-Australia EPA.
Next in line is the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP), which would unite 12 countries in the world’s largest trading area.
Both Japan and the United States attach great importance to rules, uphold the principles of freedom and democracy, and possess the most advanced technologies and industries.
We intend to overcome our differences and together forge, in the form of the TPP, a twenty-first-century economic order for Asia and the Pacific that will serve as an unshakable foundation for growth.
My government is also pushing hard to realize an EPA with the European Union.
Given that the US and the EU already are engaged in trade talks, an EPA between Japan and the EU, coupled with the TPP, will give rise to a truly immense market – a single enormous growth engine that will benefit the entire global economy.
But Japan’s economic frontiers extend well beyond Asia and the Pacific, to Latin America and Africa – more reason to abandon our long-held inward-looking perspective.
A large number of highly motivated and ambitious young people have already come to Japan from around the world, especially from neighboring Asian countries, to study or work.
Japan must remain their hope.
We must not be disrespectful of them, and our arms must always be wide open towards them.
Japan, I believe, is that kind of country.
In the near future, we will designate six National Strategic Economic Growth Areas – Tokyo, Kansai, Okinawa Prefecture, and the cities of Niigata, Yabu, and Fukuoka – to serve as models for the rest of the country.
In health care, education, agriculture, and employment practices, we are identifying policies and practices that have fallen out of step with today’s needs, and we will move quickly to reform them.
The National Strategic Economic Growth Areas will insert the probe of reform down into our regulatory system, which has hardened into bedrock.
Another habit that Japanese must change is our pervasive male-oriented thinking.
We have already resolved to ensure that at least 30% of all personnel hired by the national government are women.
I am also now urging publicly traded companies to add at least one woman as a board member.
Once we reach the point at which it is no longer news to have a woman or a non-Japanese serving as a CEO, Japan will have reinvented itself and recovered its true spirit of risk-taking and innovation.
“Womenomics” tells us that a society in which women are dynamically engaged will also have a higher birth rate.
My government intends to address, urgently, the need to expand day-care facilities and other such infrastructure as the foundation for a society that benefits from all of its members’ skills and talents.
We are fully capable of change; indeed, we relish it, as the world will see in the months and years to come.
But some things about Japan are unchanging, and some must not be changed.
One of these is our track record, which supports our ambition to be a “proactive contributor to peace.”
Japan has made more than its fair share of financial contributions to the United Nations and its organizations, both historically and today.
And our embrace of our global responsibilities extends to Japan’s Self-Defense Forces.
Members of the Self-Defense Forces displayed exemplary cooperation with the US and Australian armed forces in the wake of the Great East Japan Earthquake in 2011, and they have earned deep appreciation and respect everywhere they have been deployed, including Haiti, Indonesia, and most recently, the Philippines.
To make a proactive contribution to peace means that Japan will bear its own share of responsibility for assuring the security that supports global prosperity and stability.
Working alongside countries with which we share common values and interests, we will safeguard and cultivate international public goods, ranging from space and cyberspace to the skies and the seas.
As the world will see during Obama’s visit, Japan is back and thriving.
And its return is indispensable for global stability and prosperity.
The Middle East Crack-Up
JERUSALEM – The horror stories emerging from northern Iraq, as well as the continuing slaughter in Syria’s civil war, point to a tectonic shift in the Middle East.
Almost 100 years after World War I, the regional state system established after the dissolution of the Ottoman Empire is unraveling.
The contemporary map of the Middle East was drawn by the victorious Western imperial powers, Great Britain and France, during and after WWI.
While the war was still raging, they signed an agreement drafted by the diplomats Sir Mark Sykes and François George-Picot, which delineated their respective spheres of influence across the Levant – an agreement that entirely disregarded the region’s history, ethnic and religious traditions and affiliations, and the will of local populations.
The modern states of Iraq, Syria, and Lebanon thus arose as separate, independent entities.
Their borders were arbitrary and artificial, and none had ever existed in such form.
(The case of Palestine was even more complicated, owing to Britain’s conflicting promises to Arabs and Jews.)
Eventually, Iraq, Syria, and Lebanon became independent countries, modeled on the Westphalian idea of the modern nation-state.
Their leaders maintained this system – and its borders – as the best available.
None of these rulers, especially the authoritarian ones who emerged after independence, had an interest in rocking the boat.
That Western-imposed system is now unraveling.
Nation-states cannot be sustained when they do not reflect the wishes of their populations.
The United States-led invasion of Iraq put an end not only to Saddam Hussein’s rule, but also to Sunni-minority control, established by the British generations ago.
The Shia majority, once unleashed, viewed US-backed democratic elections as a vehicle for imposing hegemonic control over the country.
Iraq today is not the unitary Arab nation-state that it was, and it is doubtful whether that state can be restored.
The Kurdish Regional Government in the north is a de facto state, with its own army, border authorities, and control (up to a point) of the natural resources located on its territory.
Foreign consulates in the KRG’s capital, Erbil, effectively function as embassies.
In Syria, what started as peaceful pro-democracy demonstrations deteriorated quickly into an armed insurrection of the Sunni majority against the hegemony of the Alawite sect, led by the Assad family.
As with Iraq, it is difficult to see how Syria can be reconstituted as a unitary Arab nation-state.
The de facto dismemberment of both countries’ central state authorities gave rise to a totally new player – the Islamic State, which has announced the establishment of a caliphate straddling Iraq and Syria, totally disregarding the old Sykes-Picot arrangement.
The Islamic State, an offshoot of Al Qaeda, probably will not succeed in creating a viable, cross-border entity, but its brutal effort and Islamist ideology certainly suggest that the old borders, and the states delineated by them, are on their way out.
Indeed, the group’s recent incursions into Lebanon may also undermine the fragile inter-communal balance there.
The unraveling of the Western-imposed state system is taking place elsewhere in the greater Middle East.
Sudan – a vast, multiethnic, and multi-confessional country, established as a political entity by the British in the 1890s – is continuing to fray.
The emergence, after a prolonged and bloody civil war, of an independent South Sudan in 2011, freed the local Christian and animist population from the Arab/Muslim yoke.
But Darfur is still bleeding, and South Sudan is far from being a stable polity.
Libya, too, is disintegrating.
The two provinces of Tripolitania and Cyrenaica, which Italy wrested from the Ottomans just before WWI, were forced together into an entity called “Libya,” despite their profound historical and cultural differences.
Since Muammar el-Qaddafi’s demise in 2011, Libyans have failed to establish a coherent state structure of any sort, cycling through six prime ministers.
Pious Western sermons about the need to form a unified, democratically elected government sound utterly irrelevant, given the extent of social and political fragmentation.
There is one exception to this regional development: Egypt.
For all of its internal tribulations, there is no doubt that Egypt is a coherent entity, deeply anchored in history and in the consciousness of its population.
For all of the problems confronting the Coptic Christian community, no one doubts that they are as Egyptian as the Muslim majority.
But Egypt, too, has followed a defining regional pattern.
Whereas secularism in the West arose with the emergence of liberal and democratic forces inspired by the Enlightenment, in the Muslim Middle East it has always been imposed by authoritarian rulers: the Shah in Iran, Atatürk in Turkey, Saddam in Iraq, Assad in Syria, and Nasser and Mubarak in Egypt.
This explains why Syria’s Christian and Druze minorities now support Assad, and why the Copts in Egypt support military rule: democratic majoritarian rule means Muslim hegemony.
Europe endured centuries of violent religious and national struggle, culminating in the horrors of the two world wars, before achieving its current stable state system.
The Middle East probably will pay less in terms of time and violence; but the idea that what emerges will necessarily be European-style nation-states may turn out to be a Western conceit.
The late literary theorist and public intellectual Edward Said might even have called it an example of paternalistic Orientalism.
The Great American Losing Streak
JERUSALEM – The interim agreement reached in Geneva between the five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council plus Germany (the P5+1) and Iran is probably the best deal to curtail Iran’s nuclear program that could be reached, given current circumstances.
The United States and its Western allies were unwilling to risk a military option, and not concluding a deal would have allowed Iran to proceed unimpeded toward acquiring nuclear weapons.
In an ideal world, Iran should have been forced to scrap its nuclear program altogether and hand over all of its enriched uranium to an outside power; but, realistically, that was unattainable.
So the outcome of the Geneva talks is that Iran has secured some international legitimation as a nuclear-threshold power, which deeply worries its regional neighbors, from Saudi Arabia and Israel to Turkey, Egypt, and the small and vulnerable Gulf states.
Western statesmen are right to congratulate themselves on averting an immediate major crisis.
But they are wrong to believe that they have resolved the Iranian nuclear threat.
Indeed, it is naïve to imagine that a final agreement with Iran will be achieved in the coming six months: Iran’s seasoned diplomats will make sure that that does not happen.
So, while the interim agreement may not be a replay of the Munich Agreement in 1938, as many critics contend, it may have set the stage for an even more combustible future.
US President Barack Obama may not be in office when the fire ignites, but if things do go terribly wrong, he may be remembered as another statesman who, like Neville Chamberlain, was blind to the consequences of his peaceful intentions.
The main reason for pessimism stems from the interim agreement’s wider geopolitical context, which has been ignored in favor of the regional dimension.
In fact, the agreement, which alleviates much of the economic pressure on the Iranian regime, is a result of Russia’s success in delaying international sanctions against Iran and its stubborn refusal to tighten them further.
For the Kremlin, Iran’s nuclear program is only one chapter in a campaign to reassert Russia’s role as a great power.
Indeed, the interim agreement should be viewed as another in a string of recent Russian diplomatic victories over the US.
The current US administration lacks the type of grand strategy that animates Russian President Vladimir Putin.
Instead, it considers every issue separately, unsure about how to balance its role as a global power with its commitment to liberal values, and led by a president who apparently believes that soaring rhetoric is a substitute for strategic thinking.
There should be no illusion: The interim agreement with Iran is a resounding triumph for Putin, not for Obama and US Secretary of State John Kerry.
That victory was quickly followed by another – Ukraine’s decision to reject an association agreement with the European Union, opting instead to join Putin’s pet project, a Eurasian customs union designed to reconstitute much of the Soviet Union as a single economic zone.
Meanwhile, the Syrian crisis also is going the Kremlin’s way, with President Bashar al-Assad remaining in power, despite Obama’s insistence that he leave.
Obama’s threat last summer to use limited force in Syria was empty rhetoric.
It might have convinced Assad to give up his chemical weapons, but Russia’s threat to veto any muscular Security Council resolution against Syria guaranteed that his murderous regime would retain control.
Even if a Geneva II meeting on Syria is convened in January, Russia will ensure that Assad remains on the throne.
America’s strategic vacuum can also be seen in Egypt in the wake of the military’s overthrow of President Mohamed Morsi’s Muslim Brotherhood government.
Obama’s uncertainty about how to deal with the coup has created an absurd situation in which most Western-oriented groups in Egypt – the military and secular elites who underpinned Mubarak’s alliance with the US – have now turned, in desperation, to Russia as a source of future military supplies.
Decades of American strategic thinking and diplomacy, initiated by Henry Kissinger in the 1970’s, aimed at weaning Egypt from its Russian alliance, now appear in danger of going down the drain because of Obama’s inability to make up his mind about Morsi’s overthrow.
Of course, it is not easy to support a military coup against a democratically elected president (even one who, like Morsi, undermines the democratic values and institutions that brought him to power).
But one wonders how Obama would have reacted in 1933 had the German military toppled Hitler (who, after all, was appointed Chancellor after winning an election).
One does not have to demonize Russia – or Putin – to be worried by these developments.
Russia is entitled to its place as a leading power.
And the US should shun a domineering policy.
But, confronted with a resolute Russian policy of imperial re-assertion, now also visible in the Caucasus, the US seems unable to see how global developments are linked.
Is anyone in Washington asking how the Geneva agreements on Syria and Iran are connected to Ukraine’s refusal to move closer to the EU, much less developing a strategic response?
The choice facing the US is not former President George W. Bush’s megalomaniacal swashbuckling or global withdrawal.
Russia’s resurgence calls for a reasoned American response, combining its preponderant power and recognition of the inherent limits on the use of that power.
The current US administration seems incapable of this, and Tea Party isolationism certainly is not the answer.
A rudderless US foreign policy is no response to a resurgent and neo-authoritarian Russia flexing its geopolitical muscle.
Nostalgia for a Metternich, or a Kissinger, may not be out of order.
A Separated Peace
MADRID – Back in 1996, Binyamin Netanyahu won a general election by mobilizing large constituencies against then-Prime Minister Shimon Peres’s alleged intention to “divide Jerusalem.”
Nearly two decades later, Netanyahu remains committed to old, vacuous slogans about a “united Jerusalem” – a conviction that could, yet again, unravel the Israel-Palestine peace process.
As US Secretary of State John Kerry prepares to present a framework agreement for a conclusive round of Israeli-Palestinian peace negotiations, Netanyahu’s hardline position on Jerusalem is simply a non-starter.
In a last-ditch effort to improve the proposal’s chances of success, US President Barack Obama – who has largely avoided taking a proactive role in the peace process during his second term – met with Netanyahu at the White House to urge him to moderate his position.
But changing Netanyahu’s mind will not be easy – not least because of the domestic political pressure that he faces.
Since Israel captured East Jerusalem in the 1967 Six-Day War, the country’s political class has championed the city as Israel’s “united eternal capital” – a vision that they remain unwilling to abandon.
The problem is that no serious negotiation with the Palestinians could accommodate this position.
Jerusalem’s Arab population – which already accounts for more than 40% of the total – is growing by 3.5% annually, compared to 1.5% among Israelis.
Once this sizeable swath of voters begins participating in municipal elections – which they have so far avoided, lest they be viewed as legitimizing Israeli rule – control of the city council is likely to pass to a Palestinian majority.
Peres understood that a Jerusalem united under exclusively Israeli rule was not feasible, assuring Norway’s foreign minister in a 1993 letter – critical to the conclusion of the Oslo accords – that Israel would respect the autonomy of Palestinian institutions in East Jerusalem.
Likewise, in 2000, Prime Minister Ehud Barak endorsed the Clinton Parameters, which called for Jerusalem’s division into two capitals along ethnic lines.
Prime Minister Ehud Olmert followed suit in his 2008 peace proposal to Palestinian Authority President Mahmoud Abbas; he also recommended internationalizing the Old City’s administration.
Yet Netanyahu and his supporters remain adamant that Jerusalem will not be split.
What they fail to grasp is that the 1980 Jerusalem Law, which declared the city – “united in its entirety” – to be Israel’s capital did not actually result in unity.
The subsequent effort to “Israelize” the city, by building a network of Jewish neighborhoods in Palestinian-dominated East Jerusalem, has failed to secure a solid Jewish majority, largely owing to the unwillingness of middle-class Israelis to settle there.
Indeed, not only has the settlement project turned East Jerusalem into a hub of political and social tension, but the high financial cost – more than $20 billion in total – forced the diversion of limited resources from growth-oriented investment in West Jerusalem.
As a result, Jerusalem has become Israel’s poorest city.
Unsurprisingly, the 200,000 members of Israel’s liberal and prosperous middle class that abandoned the city in the last 20 years find Tel Aviv – Israel’s economic capital, and a center of technology-driven growth – far more appealing.
Complicating the situation further is the division between secular Israelis and the fanatic Orthodox communities whose rejection of the secular state and yearning for a society based on the strictest interpretation of Halacha (Jewish religious law) epitomize a deep-seated fear of Arabs and an uncompromising distrust of gentiles.
Such communities, which comprise 30% of Jerusalem’s population, make the notion of a united, peaceful Jerusalem farfetched, at best.
In 1966, a year before Israeli paratroopers ostensibly united Jerusalem, the composer Naomi Shemer sang of, “the city that sits solitary, and in its heart a wall.”
Today, the wall dividing Jerusalem is not made of concrete or brick – but that does not make it any less real.
This enduring division is exemplified in the contrast between municipal services and infrastructure in the city’s Jewish and Arab neighborhoods.
Of course, to some degree, Jerusalem’s Palestinian residents benefit from Israel’s advanced social-security and health-care systems, the likes of which their brethren in the Palestinian Authority can only imagine.
Nonetheless, they continue to identify themselves as Palestinian, with only 10,000 of Jerusalem’s 300,000 Palestinian residents having agreed to apply for Israeli citizenship.
But the Jerusalem issue is subject to an even more fundamental confusion: What are Jerusalem’s actual boundaries?
In the cavalier spirit that prevailed after 1967, the Israeli government extended the city’s boundaries from 10,875 acres to more than 31,000 acres.
Netanyahu’s claim that this extended Jerusalem is the biblical capital of the Jewish people is a historical travesty.
A Jerusalem controlled by non-productive Orthodox Jewish communities and disenfranchised Palestinians is destined for economic and political collapse.
Kerry’s plan to divide the city along ethnic lines amounts to Israel’s last chance to avoid such an outcome and legitimize the city as its internationally recognized capital.
By agreeing to a divided Jerusalem, Netanyahu would be initiating the long-overdue departure from the hubris and megalomania that has brought the city to its current state of stagnation and isolation.
Giving up on a “united” Jerusalem is the only way to secure the city’s “eternal” status.
The Rise of an Insecure Giant
SEOUL – By the time China overtakes the United States as the world’s largest economy sometime in the next few years, it will have cemented its status as a major military power – one whose drive to assert itself strategically already is inspiring serious anxiety among its neighbors.
But the truth is that China is a solitary, vulnerable rising power – one that faces potentially crippling domestic challenges.
China is currently encircled by US military installations and allies.
While Asian countries are largely willing to maintain and even expand their economic ties with China, none (except North Korea, which depends on Chinese aid) is prepared to accept it as the region’s primary power.
In fact, US allies like Indonesia and India have emerged as global players largely in response to China’s rise.
For its part, the US has shifted substantial military power toward Asia – with high-profile military deployments in Australia and the Philippines, and 60% of America’s naval capabilities now deployed in the region – and has enhanced its defense ties with Japan and South Korea.
Moreover, it is helping to spearhead the Trans-Pacific Partnership, an economic and trade agreement that excludes China but includes many of its regional neighbors.
Against this background, US claims that its strategic rebalancing is not about containing China are not particularly convincing.
Indeed, the US is pursuing a strategy of primacy in Asia, not a partnership between equals, and this, together with China’s own internal tensions, is undermining China’s ability to participate productively in regional and global forums.
As it stands, China lacks the confidence and experience needed to navigate the international arena.
For example, it will not consider resolving in an international forum its dispute with Japan in the East China Sea over the Diaoyu Islands (called the Senkaku Islands in Japan).
International law, China understands, is a double-edged sword that can be used against China in other territorial disputes, or even in its domestic affairs.
Similarly, China’s miserly initial offer of $100,000 in aid following the recent typhoon in the Philippines demonstrates how far the country is from being a mature member of the international community.
As a Chinese official admitted at a recent seminar in Seoul, concepts like “regional order” have never been a part of the country’s political vocabulary.
With regard to Japan, China faces a conundrum.
It is relatively content with Japan being a US security protectorate, because it fears the alternative: a Japan that expands its independent military reach.
But US efforts to avoid precisely such an outcome cannot be good news for the Chinese, either, given that they entail a deepening of the bilateral defense relationship and support for upgrading Japan’s military capabilities.
In short, China’s regional exceptionalism has landed it in a strategic trap.
It is unwilling to accept American leadership in Asia; but it is also reluctant to assume a more prominent role in promoting regional integration, fearing the concomitant pressure for more economic liberalization, adherence to international norms and rules, and a more transparent approach to its military buildup.
Even the proliferation of China’s economic ties in Africa, the Middle East, and South America may reflect vulnerability rather than imperial ambition.
China’s voracious quest for new energy sources has already caused it to overstretch its limited ability to protect its sea lanes.
Despite bold reform plans – outlined at the recent Third Plenum of the 18th Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party – China’s prospects remain compromised by deep-rooted contradictions.
For example, the inherent tension between the social change that development demands and the imperative of political stability required by authoritarian rule makes the current situation unsustainable in the long run.
Likewise, if the reform outline’s promise of a “decisive role” for the market ends up raising wages for poor Chinese, domestic demand might increase, but China will lose its main competitive advantage in international markets.
This kind of dilemma has contributed to the fall of other developing-country dictatorships.
China understands that, for now, US strategic primacy is an immutable reality.
Even so, its leaders’ strategic anxiety was on display at President Xi Jinping’s June meeting with US President Barack Obama, where he demanded, with the vagueness characteristic of Chinese officials, “mutual respect” and recognition of China’s “territorial integrity.”
The ostensibly trivial expression “mutual respect” actually modulates China’s true desire: a return to the Westphalian principle of non-interference in states’ domestic affairs, particularly their human-rights records.
China has staunchly opposed Western efforts, whether in Syria or in North Korea, to circumvent this principle with doctrines like the “Responsibility to Protect.”
Similarly, Xi’s call for the US to respect its “territorial integrity” carries a specific and pointed message.
In China’s view, the US has increasingly been encroaching on its rights with regard to Taiwan, while refusing to recognize China’s many other territorial and maritime claims against US allies in the South China Sea.
Experience demonstrates the dangers that can arise when vulnerable powers act independently.
One need look no further than Israel, with its penchant for overreaction on security matters, or Iran, with its insistence on enriching uranium, to see what can happen when an isolated power bases its actions on a sense of existential vulnerability.
China’s rise is fraught with fear and uncertainty.
Encirclement by a foreign power that threatens to encroach on what it considers to be its inalienable sovereign rights is bound to drive it to become a revolutionary power bent on upending the status quo.
Before China and the US overstep each other’s boundaries, they should abandon the concepts of “primacy” and “containment” in favor of a concert of Asian powers capable of resolving their differences.
The Gaza Trap
TEL AVIV – Israel’s “Operation Protective Edge” against Hamas in Gaza is the kind of asymmetrical warfare that has characterized nearly all Middle East conflicts in recent years.
Victories in such wars are always elusive.
Whatever the achievements of Israel’s superior army and its anti-missile systems, and however appalling the devastation of Gaza, Hamas will survive, if only because Israel wants it to.
The alternative – jihadist anarchy that would turn Gaza into a Palestinian Somalia – is simply too unbearable to contemplate.
Hamas leader Khaled Meshal’s boastful rhetoric cannot hide the fact that Hamas’s military power has been dealt a devastating blow.
But, unless Israel is ready to pay an exceptionally high price in terms of its international standing by occupying Gaza and destroying its entire military hierarchy and arsenal, Hamas can still claim victory, having survived yet another onslaught by Israel’s colossal military machine.
The superior power in an asymmetrical conflict always has a problem defining its objectives.
In this case, Israel aspires to achieve “quiet” with few enough Palestinian civilian casualties to minimize international criticism.
But the failure to achieve this goal is precisely where the superior power is defeated in asymmetrical conflicts.
Moreover, “quiet” is not a strategic goal; nor is Israel’s way of pursuing it – a war every two or three years – particularly convincing.
The real question is this: Assuming that Israel gets the quiet that it wants, what does it intend to do with Gaza in the future?
And what does it intend to do with the Palestinian problem of which Gaza is an integral part?
The question of Palestine is at the root of the asymmetrical wars that Israel has been facing in recent years, not only against Hamas, Qatar’s Palestinian client, but also against Hezbollah, Iran’s proxy in the region.
These wars are creating a new kind of threat to Israel, for they add to the conflicts’ strictly military dimension the domains of diplomacy, regional politics, legitimacy, and international law, in which Israel does not have the upper hand.
As a result, in asymmetrical conflicts, Israel finds its military superiority vitiated.
These are political battles that cannot be won by military means.
The asymmetry between the nature of the threats and Israel’s response ends up putting the superior military power in a position of strategic inferiority.
The spread of violence to the West Bank – and Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas’s support of Hamas’s objectives – means that Israel cannot avoid the conflict’s political consequences.
Hamas, a neglected opponent of Abbas’s diplomatic strategy, is gradually becoming the avant-garde of Palestine’s struggle for liberation.
Contrary to what Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu believes, the main existential threat facing the country is not a nuclear-armed Iran.
The real peril is to be found at home: the corrosive effect of the Palestinian problem on Israel’s international standing.
The devastation caused by Israel’s periodic asymmetrical confrontations, combined with the continuing occupation of Palestinian lands and the ever-growing expansion of settlements, has fueled a growing campaign to undermine Israel’s legitimacy.
For example, the seemingly benign Boycott, Divestment, and Sanctions movement, viewed by many of its supporters as a legitimate form of non-violent resistance, has continued to gain ground.
BDS’s opponents (including me) regard the movement as a political subterfuge intended to bring about the implosion of the Jewish state.
The Palestinian mainstream, represented by Abbas, made a strategic decision to opt for a Palestinian state based on the 1967 borders.
Israel’s strategic response would normally be that it aspires to be a “Jewish democratic state,” which presupposes a Jewish majority.
But if the never-ending peace process continues to fail to produce a two-state solution, how can Israel avoid the reality of a single state in a continuous state of civil war?
There is only one way out of the Gaza tragedy that can provide justice to its many victims: The parties to the conflict and the regional actors now vying to act as mediators must leverage the ongoing calamity into a grand peace agenda.
This would mean launching a Marshall Plan to upgrade Gaza’s infrastructure and improve social conditions.
It would also entail lifting the blockade and opening Gaza to the world.
The price Hamas would have to pay is complete disarmament and demilitarization of Gaza under international supervision, with Abbas’s Palestinian Authority controlling the border crossings into Israel and Egypt.
Simultaneously, negotiations for a two-state solution should resume, with an unequivocal commitment by the United States and the other members of the so-called Middle East Quartet (the United Nations, the European Union, and Russia) to use all possible influence on the parties to prevent another failure.
Israel is devoid of a convincing strategy; what it has is a series of improvisations aimed at securing the nation’s physical survival on as much land as the international community might allow.
But improvisation is simply unsustainable in the long run.
For example, Israel has reached out to those Arab countries that are willing to subordinate the Palestinian problem to discreet bilateral relations, essentially on security matters.
But any such “alliances” that Israel might be able to develop – say, with Saudi Arabia and Egypt – can only be circumstantial and ephemeral.
The challenge for Israel is to tie its military tactics and diplomacy to a clearly defined political goal.
And a credible national strategy must recognize that as long as the Palestinian conflict remains unresolved, Israel’s moral foundations and international standing will be dangerously compromised.
Why Israel?
TEL AVIV – Israel’s latest war in Gaza has echoed through Europe’s capitals in a powerful and destructive way.
In Berlin, London, Paris, Rome, and elsewhere, Israel is being denounced as a “terrorist state.”
Angry demonstrators burned synagogues in France and, of all places, Germany, with some even chanting “Jews to the gas!”