Counting Africa’s Invisible Workers
YAMOUSSOUKRO – The billions of dollars in aid delivered to Africa annually may do the continent much good, but it cannot deliver a solution to poverty.
Only creating more high-quality jobs can do that.
The question is how.
Africa boasts a large and creative labor pool, buttressed by a youth population that is expected to double, to over 830 million, by 2050.
That should be a boon for economies across the continent.
But African policymakers confront a serious problem: they do not know how many people they are dealing with, where they live, or how they earn a living. Simply put, they don’t have enough data.
In 46 of 54 African countries, official tracking of vital statistics such as birth, marriage, and death is limited.
As the Mo Ibrahim Foundation reports, only “a third of all Africans live in a country where a census has been conducted since 2010,” and the census programs that do exist are often underfunded and unreliable.
More than half of all Africans live in countries that have not conducted a labor-force survey in at least a decade.
Meanwhile, young Africans are largely working in the informal economy, where they enter into ad hoc arrangements that lie beyond the purview of government regulation and taxation.
They may be doing productive work, but in economies where informality is effectively institutionalized, owing to a lack of data-collection mechanisms.
Without an accurate picture of the state of the labor market, governments are hamstrung in their ability to respond to the challenges afflicting it.
Initiatives aimed at reducing youth unemployment, while numerous, can only be so effective if we don’t know which types of jobs already exist and which are needed.
With an estimated 122 million people expected to join the African workforce by 2022, keeping up with labor trends – and delivering enough good jobs – will only become more difficult.
Bringing the picture into sharper focus through improved data collection does not mean simply imitating the labor-tracking methods used in OECD countries, where the informal economy does not account for such a high share of employment.
Instead, African governments, with the help of private-sector actors, must develop methods for understanding how the informal economy works and how it can be improved.
Only then will it be possible to address unemployment and poverty effectively and unlock the potential of Africa’s youth.
To be sure, some high-potential approaches are already apparent.
The Alliance for a Green Revolution in Africa reports that, though the continent boasts 60% of the world’s uncultivated land, it spends $60 billion per year on food imports.
Investing in the development of Africa’s agricultural resources is thus a no-brainer.
Young people could play a central role in that effort.
By identifying and investing in those parts of agricultural value chains where young people can contribute, African leaders can create decent formal job opportunities in, say, light manufacturing for relatively low-skill workers.
Only a small amount of skills training would be required to lift workers – such as the 120 now employed at a tomato paste factory in Nigeria – from the bottom of the value chain.
Another promising approach is exemplified by Johannesburg’s Vulindlel’ eJozi program, which aims to eliminate barriers to entry-level employment for young people by providing skills like digital literacy.
Such skills enable young people to move not only out of the informal sector, but also out of undesirable formal jobs, such as in South Africa’s private-security industry, which employs more than 412,000 people.
The industry has faced criticism for poor working conditions; even where that is not the case, it does not develop the types of skills that can support stable and sustainable economic growth.
As more people gain the skills and access the opportunities to fill productive jobs in the formal sector, where they are registered and recognized, governments will get a better sense of the labor market.
But to maximize the effectiveness of efforts to provide those skills and opportunities, not to mention ensuring that those who remain in the informal sector are not invisible, initiatives aimed directly at improving data collection are also needed.
One such initiative is the Africa Programme on Accelerated Improvement of Civil Registration and Vital Statistics, which was formally launched in 2011.
While it may not provide instant results, it begins to lay the groundwork for the development and implementation of programs based on hard data about African populations.
Reducing unemployment and poverty are not the responsibility of governments alone.
Private-sector actors and ordinary citizens can also help.
For example, we can support informal activities, such as waste recycling, that give low-skill young people a chance to earn money.
And we can encourage and facilitate apprenticeships that provide technical skills and opportunities for civic education.
Africa has addressed complex and far-reaching problems before.
For example, the HIV/AIDS epidemic, which once seemed insurmountable, has now largely been brought under control.
The key to tackling that challenge was cooperation among governments, development partners, and local communities in collecting, processing, and using data to adjust strategies.
We should be doing the same to address the job shortage.
If Africa’s economies are to absorb the 122 million young people expected to enter the labor force in the next few years, we must get the accounting right – starting now.
Reshaping the Labor Landscape
DAVOS – As the global economy changes at an ever-quickening pace, the labor market in many countries is not merely struggling to keep up, but seems to have broken down in important ways.
High unemployment coexists with unfilled jobs.
Rising productivity fails to translate into higher wages.
And, for many, upward mobility is beyond reach, even though the economy has begun to recover.
Fortunately, change seems to be underway.
Four global trends are reshaping the world of work, helping to resolve contradictions and overcome dysfunction in the labor market as companies, workers, and governments adapt to a new demographic, technological, and economic environment.
The first trend is demographic.
In much of the world, aging societies and declining birth rates mean that the days of abundant labor are coming to an end.
Some 60% of the world’s population lives in countries with stagnant or shrinking workforces.
China’s working-age population peaked in 2010; by 2050, more than a quarter of its people will be over 65 (today, just 8% are).
In Germany, the labor force is projected to shrink by six million over the next 15 years.
As labor becomes increasingly scarce, employers and policymakers are being forced to think differently about sourcing talent.
In Japan, where a quarter of the population is older than 65, Prime Minister Shinzo Abe has championed a major effort to bring more women and older workers into the labor market.
As a result, even though Japan’s working-age population, traditionally defined, has shrunk 8% over the past decade, the labor force decline totaled just 1%.
Elsewhere, other strategies to fill the labor gap are emerging.
Aerospace companies, faced with graying workforces, have pioneered flexible working hours, phased retirements, “encore careers,” and a slew of knowledge-transfer programs to train the next generation of employees.
Companies that cannot find the talent they need in one country are using remote workplaces to employ people elsewhere.
And firms are making attempts to attract underrepresented groups, including women, young people, minorities, people with disabilities, and migrants.
At the same time, another trend, the rise of individual choice, is providing workers with unprecedented flexibility.
With millions of job postings just a click away, it is easier to shop around for work; most millennials expect to change course several times during their careers.
Rather than attempting to hang on to a job for life, the goal today is to remain employable – to develop the skills, experience, and expertise necessary to move on or up, regardless of the employer.
As a result, wages and opportunities are increasingly being dictated by skills, rather than tenure.
Those with sought-after talents have more bargaining power, are better able to manage their careers, and command higher salaries.
Those without in-demand skills are struggling and feel disposable.
So far, this abundance of choice has discouraged companies from spending resources on training employees, who might, after all, soon decide to join a competitor.
However, as talent shortages loom, the need to retain employees could tip the balance back toward greater investment in professional development.
Employers that provide learning opportunities will become a destination for talent.
The third trend reshaping labor markets is rapid technological change.
Few industries are safe from disruption.
Automation, facilitated by better artificial intelligence, is poised to have a major impact on jobs.
Up to 47% of the jobs that existed in the US in 2010 are highly likely to be computerized out of existence in the next two decades.
If history is a guide, new industries and opportunities will replace those that are lost; nonetheless, the transition will be painful and could last decades.
And yet, there is reason for optimism.
Even as technology sweeps away industries, it is facilitating the emergence of new models that could help solve some of the problems in the labor market.
PricewaterhouseCoopers estimates that the five main sectors of the sharing economy – peer-to-peer finance, online staffing, peer-to-peer accommodation, car sharing, and music video streaming – could grow from around $15 billion in revenue today to $335 billion by 2025.
To be sure, the industry is small.
But it has nonetheless unleashed a torrent of creativity focused on the basic question of how better to align supply and demand for labor in a faster-paced world.
A fourth global trend evident in today’s labor market is the rapid embrace among technologically sophisticated employers of data-based approaches to human resources.
Talent management has gone from being an art to a science, as organizations have applied big data and supply-chain techniques to recruiting and retention.
With the proliferation of so-called people analytics – behavioral and intelligence tests, digital performance scorecards, and better information systems – companies know their workers like never before.
It is easier to see where the best talent resides within a company, or where the gaps might be.
Companies are using these data to think more strategically about how to source talent.
For example, given the difficulty of staying up to speed with changing technology, firms are increasingly outsourcing information-technology management to third-party experts.
This, in turn, creates new efficiencies, allowing cyber-security providers to monitor attacks against a wide range of clients and share strategies and solutions.
Recruitment is another area in which companies are turning to outsourcing in order to obtain expertise and increase efficiency.
In short, I am an optimist.
The churning, difficult period in which we find ourselves will create new opportunities.
The growing realization that labor markets have fundamentally and permanently changed will spur policymakers, employers, and workers to address new challenges in ways that benefit everyone.
Big shifts are never easy, but when they are managed properly, they can make us stronger and better off.
From Welfare State to Innovation State
PRINCETON – A specter is haunting the world economy – the specter of job-killing technology.
How this challenge is met will determine the fate of the world’s market economies and democratic polities, in much the same way that Europe’s response to the rise of the socialist movement during the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries shaped the course of subsequent history.
When the new industrial working class began to organize, governments defused the threat of revolution from below that Karl Marx had prophesied by expanding political and social rights, regulating markets, erecting a welfare state that provided extensive transfers and social insurance, and smoothing the ups and downs of the macroeconomy.
In effect, they reinvented capitalism to make it more inclusive and to give workers a stake in the system.
Today’s technological revolutions call for a similarly comprehensive reinvention.
The potential benefits of discoveries and new applications in robotics, biotechnology, digital technologies and other areas are all around us and easy to see.
Indeed, many believe that the world economy may be on the cusp of another explosion in new technologies.
The trouble is that the bulk of these new technologies are labor-saving.
They entail the replacement of low- and medium-skilled workers with machines operated by a much smaller number of highly skilled workers.
To be sure, some low-skill tasks cannot be easily automated.
Janitors, to cite a common example, cannot be replaced by robots – at least not yet.
But few jobs are really protected from technological innovation.
Consider, for example, that there will be less human-generated trash – and thus less demand for janitors – as the workplace is digitized.
A world in which robots and machines do the work of humans need not be a world of high unemployment.
But it is certainly a world in which the lion’s share of productivity gains accrues to the owners of the new technologies and the machines that embody them.
The bulk of the workforce is condemned either to joblessness or low wages.
Indeed, something like this has been happening in the developed countries for at least four decades.
Skill and capital-intensive technologies are the leading culprit behind the rise in inequality since the late 1970s.
By all indications, this trend is likely to continue, producing historically unprecedented levels of inequality and the threat of widespread social and political conflict.
It doesn’t have to be this way.
With some creative thinking and institutional engineering, we can save capitalism from itself – once again.
The key is to recognize that disruptive new technologies produce large social gains and private losses simultaneously.
These gains and losses can be reconfigured in a manner that benefits everyone.
Just as with the earlier reinvention of capitalism, the state must play a large role.
Consider how new technologies develop.
Each potential innovator faces a large upside, but also a high degree of risk.
If the innovation is successful, its pioneer reaps a large gain, as does society at large.
But if it fails, the innovator is out of luck.
Among all the new ideas that are pursued, only a few eventually become commercially successful.
These risks are especially high at the dawn of a new innovation age.
Achieving the socially desirable level of innovative effort then requires either foolhardy entrepreneurs – who are willing to take high risks – or a sufficient supply of risk capital.
Financial markets in the advanced economies provide risk capital through different sets of arrangements – venture funds, public trading of shares, private equity, etc.
But there is no reason why the state should not be playing this role on an even larger scale, enabling not only greater amounts of technological innovation but also channeling the benefits directly to society at large.
As Mariana Mazzucato has pointed out, the state already plays a significant role in funding new technologies.
The Internet and many of the key technologies used in the iPhone have been spillovers of government subsidized R&amp;D programs and US Department of Defense projects.
But typically the government acquires no stake in the commercialization of such successful technologies, leaving the profits entirely to private investors.
Imagine that a government established a number of professionally managed public venture funds, which would take equity stakes in a large cross-section of new technologies, raising the necessary funds by issuing bonds in financial markets.
These funds would operate on market principles and have to provide periodic accounting to political authorities (especially when their overall rate of return falls below a specified threshold), but would be otherwise autonomous.
Designing the right institutions for public venture capital can be difficult.
But central banks offer a model of how such funds might operate independently of day-to-day political pressure.
Society, through its agent – the government – would then end up as co-owner of the new generation of technologies and machines.
The public venture funds’ share of profits from the commercialization of new technologies would be returned to ordinary citizens in the form of a “social innovation” dividend – an income stream that would supplement workers’ earnings from the labor market.
It would also allow working hours to be reduced – finally approaching Marx’s dream of a society in which technological progress enables individuals to “hunt in the morning, fish in the afternoon, rear cattle in the evening, criticize after dinner.”
The welfare state was the innovation that democratized – and thereby stabilized – capitalism in the twentieth century.
The twenty-first century requires an analogous shift to the “innovation state.”
The welfare state’s Achilles’ heel was that it required a high level of taxation without stimulating a compensating investment in innovative capacity.
An innovation state, established along the lines sketched above, would reconcile equity with the incentives that such investment requires.
Why Press Freedom is Good Business
LONDON – Press freedom and independence, a staple ingredient of democracy worldwide, is declining at an alarming pace, according to the 2015 World Press Freedom Index.
But the transparency and vigilance that a free and independent press provides are critical not only to democracy; they also serve as powerful weapons against forces, ranging from corruption to bad business practices, that undermine economic prosperity.
Simply put, without high-quality journalism, achieving better, stronger, and more robust economies is not possible.
Every day brings examples of the threats, and in some cases attacks, that the press increasingly confronts, whether from authoritarian leaders or as a result of nonviable business models.
Either way, at a time when we need serious investigative journalism and intelligent analysis of economic trends and business activities more than ever, the capacity to deliver them is rapidly being eroded.
One problem is that, with print advertising in terminal decline, media companies are finding it harder to subsidize the long-term research that in-depth reporting typically requires.
Yet, by identifying and bringing to the fore issues that may influence political agendas and public life for years to come, the impact of such reporting can be enormous.
Consider Reuters’ 2012 investigation – requiring months of meticulous research – into Starbucks’ tax-avoidance scheme.
The journalist Tom Bergin analyzed years of complex documentation to discover, expose, and explain the ins and outs of how the company was circumventing local taxation in the countries where it operates.
His investigation triggered an avalanche that continues to reverberate around the world today, as many other multinational companies come under scrutiny.
And research like that does not come cheap.
But a financing model that ensures the provision of this vital public good is of no use in the face of political repression, which is increasing worldwide.
At the beginning of March, for example, Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan’s government shut down the country’s highest-circulation newspaper, Zaman, and security forces fired tear gas and rubber bullets at protesters outside the paper’s headquarters.
European leaders, including German Chancellor Angela Merkel, Italian Prime Minister Matteo Renzi, and French President François Hollande, all made the Zaman case a part of their discussions with Turkish Prime Minister Ahmet Davutoğlu when they met recently to discuss the refugee crisis.
World leaders must continue to speak out – and to be adamant in their support of press freedom in their own countries.
After all, the signal that such official behavior sends is one of a country going backwards – a stunting of innovation and growth.
China, now the world’s second-largest economy and a crucial source of global manufacturing and investment, would seem to belie any link between press freedom and economic success.
And yet a fundamental lesson of the surge in financial volatility that began last summer is that state-controlled information is often bad information.
Investors, it seems, have begun to appreciate the risk of doing business in an economic and business environment that they cannot fully understand.
Chinese media organizations are under constant scrutiny by the authorities, and editors have chafed at (and even attempted to defy) censorship.
Most recently, the South China Morning Post’s Chinese language edition had its social media accounts blocked.
Many foreign news websites, ranging from the BBC to Reuters, are routinely blocked from Chinese readers.
In 2012, the New York Times website was blocked in China after the paper reported that the extended family of China’s then prime minister, Wen Jiabao, controlled assets worth at least $2.7 billion.
Similarly, foreign media organizations often cannot investigate Chinese companies and economic activity freely and accurately.
Ursula Gauthier, the Beijing correspondent for L’Obs (formerly Le Nouvel Observateur), was forced to leave China in 2015 after the authorities refused to renew her visa.
She is far from being the only Western journalist to be “neutralized” in this manner.
Then there are countries that don’t receive as much attention as they should.
The ranking of Andorra, a tax haven, in the World Press Freedom Index fell sharply in 2015, because journalists cannot easily secure access to information about the banks operating there.
The country suffers a “lack of any legal protection for freedom of information, such as the confidentiality of journalists’ sources.”
And what little coverage Andorra’s banks do receive – such as the US Treasury Department’s money-laundering investigation into Banca Privada d’Andorra – has been disturbing.
The list of countries where press freedom is limited or under threat goes on, from Africa and the Middle East to Russia and most of the other ex-Soviet republics.
Even the United States is seeing alarming signs, with the frontrunner for the Republican Party’s presidential nomination, Donald Trump, directing vitriol – and arguably inciting violence – toward journalists during his campaign rallies.
Alarmingly, Trump has said that if elected president, he would change the country’s libel laws in ways that would endanger the free-speech principles enshrined in the First Amendment of the US Constitution.
An active, engaged, and independent press provides a fundamental public good: the transparency that makes political and economic accountability possible.
In an increasingly complex and specialized world, its provision must be supported, protected, and encouraged.
Yes, media organizations must find ways to finance worthwhile reporting, investigation, and analysis.
Unfortunately, too many countries would be happy to have such problems.
Ladies First, Women Last
NEW YORK – Many people still believe that the attacks of September 11, 2001, were not just acts of political terrorism, but part of a cultural war, a clash of civilizations.
The two things that get people most excited in cultural conflicts are religion and sex, specifically the way that men treat women.
They are of course intimately linked: religion is commonly used as a way to regulate sexual behavior and relations between the sexes.
The cultural interpretation of 9/11 as a civilizational clash explains why a number of former leftists have joined conservatives in their hostility to Islam.
In the past, most American leftists would have regarded the war in Afghanistan as a neo-imperialist venture.
But, since 9/11, the tone has changed.
The Taliban subjugated women, stopped them from being educated, and kept them wrapped in burqas.
So a war against the Taliban and their guest, Osama bin Laden, could be construed as a war for female liberation.
It is, in fact, unlikely that feminism played any role in President George W. Bush’s decision to take the United States to war.
But cultural concerns allowed him to recruit quite a few unlikely allies.
The response to 9/11 and to Dominique Strauss-Kahn’s recent encounter with an African chambermaid in a New York hotel have very little in common, except for one thing: once again, cultural conflict was invoked in a misleading way.
Whatever happened between the former managing director of the International Monetary Fund and his accuser, the fact that he was arrested and paraded in front of the press as a criminal suspect has been much criticized in France.
One allegation, made recently by a well-known French publicist, is that the arrest was typical of American puritanism.
The French, he alleged, being from a Latin culture, have a more liberal understanding of sexual behavior.
They are more tolerant of human frailties, and have a more refined appreciation of the art of seduction.
More than that, the arrest of DSK was supposedly revenge for France’s protection of another man accused of sexual crimes, Roman Polanski, and for the French ban on the burqa.
In other words, the DSK case was part of another clash of cultures over sex, and, if only tangentially, religion.
One problem with the cultural argument is that it is often used to defend or excuse the behavior of the powerful against the weak.
Taliban men no doubt believe that the subjugation of women is a cultural privilege, as well as a religious duty.
Authoritarian leaders in Asia routinely claim that their countries are culturally unsuited to democracy.
But even in the more liberal West – let alone in countries with less liberal traditions, such as Japan – culture comes to the rescue of the powerful more often than it protects the weak.
Both Polanski and DSK were engaged in sexual activities with women who were far from being their equals, in age and social status, respectively.
Understanding their “human frailties,” then, comes down to excusing the behavior of powerful men towards women with no power at all.
The rather strict use of law in the US to regulate sexual behavior might reflect a puritanical culture, but it is more likely the result of cultural diversity.
In a society of immigrants, people come from a wide variety of traditions and faiths, with very different views of sex and the treatment of women.
Since Americans can’t rely on homogeneous mores, the law is the only way to regulate behavior.
Old societies have customs and traditions; new ones have courts and legislatures.
But that is not the whole answer, either.
Sweden, a country of limited cultural diversity, has even more stringent laws on sexual behavior than the US.
And France, beneath its veneer of republican equality, is culturally and ethnically diverse.
One cannot expect the law to solve all cultural conflicts.
But it can play a positive role as a tool of emancipation.
At best, the law is a great equalizer.
The end of the Western slave trade did not come because European culture changed, but because the British changed their laws.
In Japan, sexual harassment of women has sometimes been excused (by Japanese males) to foreigners as part of Japanese culture.
And the female victims often put up with it by thinking that this is true.
No doubt many Afghan women in burqas are equally convinced that covering their faces is a cultural command – and therefore a natural duty.
But more and more Japanese women are fighting back against unwelcome male attention, not by denying tradition or culture, but by going to a lawyer and suing.
Their problem is not with sex, or the art of seduction, but with the abuse of power.
Muslim women in strict authoritarian societies do not usually have the option of seeking the law’s protection.
Men who wish to maintain their control over women will no doubt continue to use culture and religious tradition to justify their dominance.
It would no doubt be better, especially for women, if the citizens of countries like Afghanistan were equal before the law.
Likewise, it would be better if powerful Frenchmen were to stop using “Latin culture” as an excuse for abusing their social inferiors.
But the solutions to these problems are political and legal.
That is why DSK was arrested.
As for women in Muslim countries, there may not be much that people in the West can do to improve their lot.
But it is unlikely that much good will come from bombing them.
Africa’s French Roadblock
DAKAR – In recent years, China and Africa have formed one of the modern era’s most successful economic and trade partnerships.
China benefits from Africa’s oil, minerals, and markets, while Africa benefits from increased trade and investment in infrastructure, health, education, small-scale businesses, and low and medium technologies.
Some Western observers – and some Africans – have condemned China’s involvement on the continent as a new form of colonialism.
But such criticism is largely misplaced.
The development model that China is facilitating, which combines productive investment and trade with concessional loans and aid, is helping to break the cycle of under-development in Africa – a goal that Western-led development strategies have failed to achieve.
Moreover, African countries are building on their relationship with China to advance cooperation with other emerging markets, including India, South Korea, Turkey, Brazil, and Malaysia.
Such efforts have bolstered global demand for commodities, while diversifying African economies and enhancing the productive capacity of domestic suppliers.
Today, Africa’s rate of economic growth is second only to Asia’s.
This could just be the beginning.
With Africa’s current market of one billion people set to swell to three billion by 2045 – including 1.1 billion people of working age (more than in China or India) – its long-term economic and commercial prospects are reminiscent of China’s when it opened up more than three decades ago.
These developments are motivating American and European investors to rethink their strategies in Africa, prompting a terms-of-trade revival and generating interest in Africa’s expanding regional markets.
But progress has not been evenly distributed across Africa.
Some countries – for example, Ghana, Nigeria, Kenya, Ethiopia, South Africa, Rwanda, Uganda, Angola, Mozambique, and Zimbabwe – have benefited substantially from Chinese involvement, and now rank among the world’s fastest-growing economies.
But others – including the 14 countries that form the franc zone (12 of which are former French colonies) – lack major Chinese investment, and are missing out on Africa’s economic boom.
The franc zone’s plight is being compounded by distorted and dysfunctional economic and monetary policies.
While GDP growth in the African Financial Community (CFA) largely outpaced the rest of Africa in the 1990’s, it has since stalled.
Furthermore, the CFA has yet to establish a functional common external tariff, and intra-franc-zone trade stands at a mere 12% of its members’ total exports and imports.
In this context, the decision to retain the CFA franc, a freely convertible common currency that is pegged to the euro at a significantly overvalued exchange rate, is dubious.
The current scheme breeds structural fiscal deficits, excessive reliance on imports, endemic corruption, money laundering, narcotics trafficking, and massive capital flight.
Particularly damaging is the $17.7 billion in foreign-exchange reserves that France keeps in a special Treasury account at an interest rate of only 1.5%, thereby guaranteeing the convertibility of the CFA franc, which it underwrites.
In other words, France uses African reserves to finance part of its budget deficit at a concessional interest rate.
But neither France’s near-total control of money and credit, nor its strong influence over politics and security, is wholly responsible for keeping the franc-zone countries mired in poverty and instability.
By misappropriating public funds for personal use, franc-zone leaders serve as accomplices to France’s institutionalized exploitation of CFA countries and citizens.
Côte d’Ivoire, the franc zone’s leading economy, was a net rice exporter in the early 1970’s, until the country’s elite followed the advice of French expatriates to import rice rather than produce it.
With the help of import licensing, then-Finance Minister Konan Bédié earned his first billion CFA francs within a year.
Around the same time, Félix Houphouët-Boigny, the former Ivorian president and a figurehead of African independence movements, publicly warned Africans of the risks of keeping their fortunes in Africa.
More recently, Karim Wade, the son of former Senegalese President Abdoulaye Wade, was arrested on suspicion that he amassed a fortune of roughly $1.5 billion during his father’s presidency, when he held senior ministerial positions.
It is time for franc-zone leaders to break the cycle and chart effective national development strategies for their countries.
They should begin by pursuing complete emancipation from France, abandoning the CFA franc, and building relations with China, and others, who want to pursue mutually beneficial trade and business with Africa.
Cultural Vandalism in America
STONY BROOK – Whenever I hear about Islamic State militants bulldozing archaeological treasures and smashing sculptures and statues, I think about the assault on the scientific process being carried out by US politicians.
Our scientific infrastructure – the principal means by which we understand the world, identify and ward off threats, and pursue a better future – is coming under attack by lawmakers who regard science as an obstacle to achieving their goals, and thus as a target that must be eliminated.
The comparison may seem over the top.
Interfering with ideas, one might argue, is not in the same category as destroying precious objects, and elected officials tinkering with legislation cannot be compared to militants whose other activities include hacking off the hands and heads of innocent people.
Anyone making such comparisons might seem to have fallen victim to the irrational political rhetoric that is already pervading America’s presidential election campaign.
But consider this: In 2010, the North Carolina Coastal Resources Commission’s Science Panel, using advanced methods, estimated a sea-level rise that could threaten certain low-lying communities over the next century.
State legislators responded by passing a bill that prohibited policymakers from using the panel’s findings, thereby undermining officials’ ability to fulfill their fundamental duty to protect their state’s coastline, resources, and citizens.
At the national level, the US House of Representatives recently passed the America COMPETES Reauthorization Act of 2015, which would forbid the use of Department of Energy-funded research in policymaking.
The language, which appears in a section on energy, was apparently inserted to protect oil and gas interests from findings about their activities’ impact on climate change.
But if the bill is passed by the Senate and signed by the president, its implications would likely extend far beyond climate change, with officials unable to use any taxpayer-funded DOE research to protect US citizens.
Meanwhile, Lamar Smith, a Texas Republican who sponsored the COMPETES Act, is continuing his two-year quest to use the House Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, which he chairs, to alter the peer-review and grant-making process at the National Science Foundation, effectively opening it up to congressional review.
These are not cases of politicians disagreeing about whether or how to address threats like sea-level rise and climate change; those would be political issues, and appropriate topics of discussion within a democratic system.
Instead, they are examples of politicians willfully blocking critical information relating to serious threats, for entirely partisan, if not personal, reasons.
They have decided that policy should be based solely on what they have already chosen to believe, rather than empirical evidence obtained through the scientific process.
Herein lies the link between US politicians and the Islamic State: both are engaging in ideologically motivated cultural destruction.
The difference is that the politicians will not admit their ideological impulses.
Instead, they justify their positions by sowing distrust in the scientific infrastructure that produced the findings they dislike and then offering thin arguments about “scientific uncertainty.”
Not only is this disingenuous; it also prevents constructive discussion of important issues and, worse, calls into question the scientific processes and institutions on which modern civilization depends.
To put it another way, suppose that your own personal intuited notion of how to travel obliges you to embark on a long car journey without basic supplies like a jack and a tire iron or any kind of map or navigation system.
Before you leave, you delete the contact information for a roadside service provider from your cell phone, based on the unfounded belief that such providers are deceitful and self-interested.
Finally, you take several others along for the journey, without informing them about how well (or poorly) equipped you are.
According to US law, such actions would amount to “reckless endangerment” or “culpable negligence.”
Yet politicians are taking citizens on precisely such a ride – and facing very little pushback.
Fact-based arguments, such as those in a recent editorial in Science magazine, should be enough to compel US leaders to change their approach.
But facts cannot compete with ideology.
Indeed, any opposition – even when backed by empirical evidence – is portrayed as an attack on politicians’ own (superior) ideology, whether it be libertarian or informed by religious fundamentalism.
Against this background, jarring – and potentially incendiary – comparisons, such as to the Islamic State, seem to be the only hope of exposing the scale of the damage these politicians are doing.
Perhaps at the next debate among presidential candidates, participants should have to distinguish – from a moral standpoint – politicians attacking the scientific process from Islamic State militants destroying ancient artifacts.
That should get the conversation moving.
Lame Ducks in Love
FLORENCE – Fears about sovereign debt and doubts about the euro rescue package have pushed the question of international reserve currencies to the fore.
Until this spring, most observers had assumed that the share of the dollar in international reserves would gradually fall, while that of the euro would rise, and that the world would gradually and smoothly make a transition to a multi-reserve regime.
Up to now, the global financial crisis was historically remarkable in having no major impact on foreign-exchange markets.
The shares of the major reserve currencies were stable, with the dollar accounting for 62% of foreign-exchange reserves in 2009 and the euro 27%.
Any major changes came not from deliberate decisions by central banks to reallocate reserves, but rather from the simple arithmetic of changing exchange rates: a stronger dollar raised the dollar’s share in total global reserves, while a weaker dollar reduced it.
In fact, a sort of balance of terror obstructed any major reallocations by the big holders of reserves.
An effort to diversify by selling a particular asset would have such a large impact on markets that it would produce large losses for any central bank that tried it.
The euro crisis has challenged the view that the transition to a multi-reserve regime will have a smooth dynamic.
Asian and Middle Eastern central banks with large euro reserves have become jittery about the euro’s political underpinnings.
But America’s large fiscal deficit, along with continuing uncertainty about its financial markets, mean that the dollar is also potentially vulnerable.
There are some historical precedents for this situation.
In the 1960’s, the British pound was the world’s second reserve currency.
American policymakers expended considerable effort devising ways to support the pound, because they knew that the same factors that made the pound vulnerable also threatened the dollar.
The pound was thus seen as part of the dollar’s perimeter defense.
Critics saw it as a case of two lame ducks propping each other up.
The recent frenzy of high-level telephone diplomacy, in which US President Barack Obama pressed European leaders to act to rescue the euro, showed this dynamic to be alive and well.
It was an extraordinary demonstration not only of how difficult European leaders found coordinating their response to the crisis to be, but also of the strategic importance of a second reserve currency for the largest reserve currency.
The US economy would be highly vulnerable in the case of a euro collapse, so today’s lame ducks need to embrace each other.
The 1960’s analogy raises the question of whether and when a new major international currency could emerge.
Within the space of a few years, the pound’s reign as a trusted international currency was over.
The yen and the Deutschemark emerged as new potential reserve currencies, although the Japanese and German governments and central banks were profoundly worried about this new role for their currencies and the volatility that it might entail.
In retrospect, many people have cast the shift as inevitable, but at the time it seemed wildly improbable.
The rise of the yen and the Deutschemark occurred only 20 years after the catastrophic devastation of World War II, which had inevitably been accompanied by inflation.
During the immediate postwar occupation, US military planners had to impose new currency regimes and central banking institutions.
Even more extraordinarily, when these new currencies emerged as the new claimants to reserve status, they had only recently become convertible for current-account transactions, and capital flows were still restricted.
Germany had moved to current-account convertibility in 1958, but Japan only in 1964.
More over, Japan in particular was not especially wealthy in an international comparison, and neither country had deep or well-developed capital markets.
Only one fact really mattered: powerful export performance, with both countries maintaining large trade surpluses over several years and through different stages of the economic cycle.
This made them appear a source of greater currency stability than the the US and Britain.
The buildup of assets associated with external surpluses, together with continuing export strength, looked like a guarantee of their currencies.
Unlike the dollar and the pound, the yen and the Deutschemark did not depend on attracting foreign inflows.
Of course, developing as a potential reserve currency created a substantial vulnerability.
Both Japan and Germany were slow in liberalizing their domestic financial systems as they tried to limit capital inflows for a substantial period of time in order to avoid rapid currency appreciation and the consequent erosion of their export competitiveness.
China moved to current-account convertibility in 1996, but retained a substantial number of controls on capital movements, which have served as a shield against financial contagion.
Are these still needed?
The lesson of the 1960’s suggests that a fully convertible renminbi could rapidly become a major international reserve currency.
It would be attractive not simply because the People’s Bank of China and other major Chinese institutions have massive overseas assets, but because China produces goods that the world’s consumers continue to want.
The historical experience of Germany and Japan, and the recent financial turmoil of the big industrialized countries, seems to warn against such a policy shift.
But, as a big country, China would not have the vulnerabilities of smaller strong currencies (the Norwegian krone or the Swiss franc, for example).
And, as a provider of a reserve currency, China would not need to continue its own quest for reserves, which has been a major contributing factor to global financial instability.
The addition of the renminbi as a possible reserve option would free today’s lame ducks from their forced marriage.
La Strada on Wall Street
VIENNA – Apologists for neo-liberalism assume not only that states should be run like companies, but also that, as far as possible, they should not intervene in the economy.
The market, they insist, regulates itself.
But, more than 50 years ago, the Nobel laureate Paul Samuelson contradicted this idealization of markets in graphic terms: absolute freedom for the market will lead to Rockefeller’s dog getting the milk that a poor child needs for healthy development, not because of market failure, but because “goods are placed in the hands of those who pay the most for them.”
This distributional quandary lies at the heart of the capitalist system, which is one of never-ending competition fueled by the drive to maximize profits.
In such a world, there is no room for a social conscience.
It is the state that, to a greater extent in some societies than in others, must fill the gap.
The market economy is unsurpassed as a system for creating wealth, but only social compensation ensures that this wealth is distributed in a just manner.
Europe’s social-market economies, far more than the Anglo-Saxon neo-liberal model, regard mitigating the inequalities created by markets as the state’s duty.
In fact, the market economy can function only if the state does intervene.
The US financial crisis demonstrates what happens when markets are given free rein.
Rather than regulate themselves, market players destroy themselves, however much they might be marveled at as golden calves.
Indeed, investment bankers transformed stock markets into a surreal circus.
For the most part, they resembled high-wire artists juggling borrowed money without a safety net.
They threatened to crash – until the state stepped in.
In Fellini’s film “La Strada,” the circus artists lived on the margins of society; in the “Wall Street Circus,” they lived like gods, making millions.
That’s over for a while.
Wall Street has collapsed.
The present crisis, the fall of Wall Street, is to neo-liberalism what the fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989 was to communism.
The global dimension of this crisis surprisingly also has a positive side.
The international community is now charged with thinking about how to reorganize the financial sector and minimize the risk of similar catastrophe in the future.
Until now, a major part of the problem was countries’ unwillingness to cooperate.
Previous demands for stricter regulations came to nothing because of financial sector opposition.
When should this stance change if not now?
A start needs to be made at the European Council meeting of the heads of state and government in Brussels in mid-October.
It is crucial that the European Union accepts the challenge of the financial crisis at the highest level, draws the appropriate conclusions, and takes the logical next steps.
So what lessons are to be learned from the failure of the neo-liberal economic model?
First, markets need clear rules.
Stronger regulation means legally binding, globally applicable rules and standards.
While important areas of economic policy are subject to rules that allow penal sanctions, the financial sector has a special status that is no longer acceptable.
Those areas of the financial sector that have suffered the most reputational damage are the ones least subject to regulation and supervision: the derivatives market, hedge funds and private equity funds, and the ratings agencies.
Voluntary codes of good conduct have been a dismal failure.
We urgently need globally applicable regulatory minimum standards similar to those, say, within the WTO.
We need a democratically legitimized world finance organization, equipped with the necessary regulatory instruments, which would supervise major global financial institutions.
This organization should also have authority to create conditions for greater transparency, and to implement better early-warning systems and instruments for crisis management.
The newly created regulation need not apply to everyone.
But only those financial institutions that subject themselves to these rules would be able to rely on the support of the public authorities in case of a crisis.
This would ensure both fiscal stability and fiscal innovation – in contrast to the present situation, in which no one obeyed any rules and, when crisis erupted, taxpayers had to come to the rescue.
Second, welfare-state institutions should be strengthened.
The crisis has made clear that the provision of people’s elementary needs must not be made dependent on speculation and stock market curves.
Expansion of public financing for pensions, nursing care, and health insurance is therefore crucial.
Finally, we need a European economic stimulus program – a “Big Bargain” – and we need it now.
The crisis in international financial markets has had a noticeable impact on Europe’s real economy.
Some large EU countries are on the brink of recession.
Japan in the early 1990’s waited too long to act and missed the right opportunity to enact countermeasures, which is why Japan has still not recovered from its long stagnation.
Public investment in infrastructure (such as a massive expansion of the European railroad network), as well as climate protection and environmental technology, will be needed.
To strengthen purchasing power and to stimulate consumption, tax cuts on low- and medium-income households are essential.
Of course, EU member states should determine the concrete form that such economic stabilization programs take for themselves.
But that shouldn’t stop European governments from working together closely.
To be effective, any stimulus program will need Europe’s nations to act in concert.
Latin America After Bush
Once again, America’s president has come up short in Latin America.
Granted, President George W. Bush was well received by all his hosts in the five countries he visited, with traditional Latin American hospitality and cordiality.
There were no major, unfortunate incidents; the constant protests were strident but not especially violent or well-attended; no significant slights or mishaps took place; and President Bush achieved what he probably was most interested in: sending a message back to the United States that he actually is interested in more than Iraq.
He also accomplished, in a somewhat round-about way, another goal: showing the flag, so to speak, in the face of the mounting challenge from Venezuelan president Hugo Chávez, who, thanks to virtually unlimited supplies of oil dollars and Cuban doctors and foot-soldiers, is riding high across Latin America.
Chávez baited Bush at almost every stop along the way, but the US leader evaded the provocations, and indeed, probably bested Chávez in the sense that an unpopular US president managed to dominate the agenda and take the battle of ideas directly to Latin American audiences, with whom the Venezuelans and the Cubans are in contact every day.
Bush was also able to partly change the tone of the US message in the hemisphere: from free trade and fighting terrorism, to combating poverty and strengthening democracy and human rights.
If Bush had made this trip several years ago, things would be different today.
But everyone would also be in better shape today if Bush had been able to actually deliver on the main issues his interlocutors took up with him.
Here, despite the photo-ops and the hugs and the local cuisine, the American president was simply not ready, willing or able, to give satisfaction to his colleagues, from capital to capital.
In Brasil, President Luiz Ignacio da Silva Lula’s main issue, demand and hope was for a reduction or elimination in the US tariff on ethanol imports.
Bush said no, since the tariff is congressionally mandated, and thus greatly diluted the importance of the bio-fuel cooperation agreement the two governments signed.
In Uruguay, President Tabaré Vázquez went out on a limb simply by hosting Bush, given that his problems with his Chávez-friendly neighbor in Argentina, Nestor Kirchner, can only worsen as a result of these “dangerous” acquaintances.
Vázquez needed some cover on the status of Urugayan immigrants in the US, and mainly, increases in quotas for its exports to the American market.
Again, Bush left him hanging.
Alvaro Uribe of Colombia was happy just to have a US Chief of State visit Bogotá; the last one to do so was Ronald Reagan in 1982.
In fact, Bush’s was a brave gesture: despite Uribe’s success in combating drugs, paramilitaries and guerrillas, his capital is not an especially safe place.
Bush also gave him his backing on human rights concerns, which, coming from the gentleman responsible – in the eyes of most of the world &#45;&#45; for Guantánamo and Abu Ghraib, is perhaps damning with faint praise.
But most disappointingly for Uribe, though understandably, the US President was unable to bring with him guaranteed congressional support either for Colombia’s Free Trade Agreement (FTA) with the US, nor funding renewal for the so-called Plan Colombia.
In Guatemala, once again, President Oscar Berger was obviously proud to receive Bush, but failed to obtain a commitment from him to stop the inhuman, hateful Homeland Security raids by US law enforcement officers against undocumented immigrants, exemplified by the detention and attempt at deportation, on the eve of Bush’s visit, of nearly 300 Guatemalans working at a Massachussetts, military vest factory.
Where Bush fared best, perhaps, was in Mérida, Mexico, where Felipe Calderón not only received him as the gracious host Mexican presidents always are – though he rightly slammed his guest on the fence the US is building here and there along the two countries’ border&#45;&#45; but got in return what he needed, and wanted most.
The American made a firm, explicit and apparently sincere commitment to lobby as strongly as possibly for what he calls “comprehensive immigration reform” and what in Mexico is commonly known as “the whole enchilada.”
Whether Bush can deliver the goods is obviously open to question, but since Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid traveled to Mexico City two days later to make the same commitment, it seems that Mexico’s six years of vain efforts might finally prove fruitful.
Needless to say, Calderón was thrilled, particularly because he had begun backing away from the emphasis his predecessor, Vicente Fox, placed on the immigration issue.
Conversely, if Bush cannot come up with enough Republican moderates in the US Senate – they are actually already there, probably &#45;&#45; and in the US House of Representatives, the letdown and resentment in Mexico (as well as everywhere in Central America, the Caribbean, Peru, Ecuador and Colombia) will be immense.
So where do the US and Latin America go from here?
Several crucial decisions lay ahead.
The first is for the US and the rest of the region to wholeheartedly support, and if possible reinforce, the democracy and human rights protection instruments developed over the years, given the precarious nature of democracy and respect for human rights in nations like Ecuador, Venezuela, Bolivia and others.
Second, the White House must not only get the pending free trade agreements ratified by Congress, but should improve them, learning from the NAFTA experience, make them more poverty-sensitive, more environmentally- and labor-oriented, and provide more support for infrastructure and training.
Third, and perhaps most importantly, Bush has to finally achieve the immigration reform he has promised for so long.
Stop building fences – even if they do make good neighbors &#45;&#45; and cease the harassment of undocumented people in the US.
It’s hateful, needless, and futile: as Bush said himself, the US will never, could never, and should never deport twelve million people, illegal or not.
Latin America’s Moment
NEW YORK – Much of the world’s attention is understandably focused on developments in the Middle East, Europe, and Asia.
These regions represent the vast majority of global population and wealth, their geopolitics are the most stressful (and highly consequential), and in recent decades – if not centuries – they have accounted for most of what has constituted world history.
But an unintended consequence of this focus is that many governments, corporations, and people are missing much of what is going on in Latin America.
And much of what is going on in Latin America right now happens to be good.
This may not seem obvious.
Brazil, the region’s largest country, is in the middle of a severe political crisis; the incumbent president, Dilma Rousseff, may well be on trial while the Olympics are being staged in her country later this summer.
Meanwhile, the economy shrank by nearly 4% in 2015 and is projected to contract by a similar margin this year.
The impact of the Zika virus on public health is greater in Brazil than anywhere else.
Corruption is endemic and has compromised nearly everyone in public life.
But what is also extraordinary about Brazil is that all of this has thus far taken place without violence.
Just as important, the political process is being conducted according to constitutional requirements and led by judges acting independently.
Media of every sort are covering what is going on with great intensity.
The ability to self-correct is essential for any country, and having it may be what saves Brazil from past mistakes and mismanagement.
And, yes, Venezuela – a country blessed, or quite possibly cursed, with the largest hydrocarbon reserves in the world – is in far worse shape.
The country’s economy and currency have plummeted along with the price of oil.
Inflation has soared.
Political dysfunction is severe, and civil unrest and large-scale internal violence cannot be ruled out.
Yet even here there is a bit of good news.
The political opposition won a large majority in the December 2015 parliamentary election.
And lower oil prices may trigger further political change, ultimately ushering in a government that begins the process of making Venezuela a country of institutions and laws, not personality cults and abuse of power.
More broadly, many of the most important trends in the region are on balance positive.
Mexico, for decades a one-party state, is now a robust democracy that has experienced several rotations of political leadership through the ballot box.
In addition, its economy is doing relatively well.
To be sure, challenges exist, particularly when it comes to addressing drug-related crime and violence, but these problems can be managed with sustained effort.
Colombia has emerged at long last from a prolonged civil conflict.
Thanks in part to assistance from the United States, the government was strong enough to make it clear to the country’s FARC rebels that they could not shoot their way into power.
The cease-fire is holding, and prospects for a peace agreement are good.
Meanwhile, the economy is growing at a 3% annual rate, lower than in the recent past, but still higher than in many emerging economies.
Argentina provides the most recent good news.
The new government, in its first six months, has taken a number of difficult steps to restore international confidence.
In no way does this minimize what the government must achieve to reduce inflation and restore sustainable growth, but there is a palpable sense that the country, now led by a talented team of technocrats, has turned the corner.
This is good news – and not just for Argentina, because what happens there will affect thinking and behavior elsewhere, particularly in Brazil.
Progress in Argentina would show that those who violate the law can be held accountable, that excessive state intervention in the economy leads to insolvency and promotes corruption, and that democracy and markets represent the future.
Cuba in ten years is more likely to resemble its more politically and economically open neighbors than vice versa.
Again, none of this is to say that Latin America lacks real problems and challenges.
On the contrary, it has plenty of both.
But for the most part, these are matters of political and economic governance, state capacity, and corruption within states.
Missing almost entirely are problems stemming from relations between states – geopolitics – that so dominate and plague other parts of the world.
This is a tremendous advantage, as it means that governments’ attention and resources can be focused on meeting domestic needs.
The Middle East is unraveling.
Asia is challenged by territorial disputes, the rise of Chinese power, and a reckless North Korea.
Europe is all but overwhelmed by refugees, terror, and Russian revanchism.
And Africa is being held back by civil conflicts, terrorism, and poor governance.
Latin America, by contrast, looks pretty good.
Indeed, if current trends persist, it could eventually replace Europe as the world region that others regard with more than a little admiration – or even envy.
Getting Industrial Policy Right
DAVOS – At a time of lackluster global economic growth, developing countries are dusting off some old strategies – particularly the use of industrial policy to drive the development of particular sectors and turn them into engines of growth and employment.
But the history of such policies, particularly in Latin America and the Caribbean, is filled with failure and cautionary tales.
In the 1950s and 1960s, many Latin American and Caribbean countries embraced industrial policy enthusiastically.
By substituting imports with domestic production, relying on government planning to target priority sectors, and implementing selective trade protection (for example, by imposing tariffs, quotas, and import licensing), they attempted to accelerate their transitions from raw-materials suppliers to manufacturing-based economies.
While East Asian countries like South Korea used such policies to enable selected industries to compete on a global scale, Latin American and Caribbean countries rarely got it right.
Despite some notable successes, such as the aircraft manufacturer Embraer in Brazil and salmon farming in Chile, governments largely picked losers – not least because political pressure, not firms’ competitive potential, drove the selection process.
In the 1980s and 1990s, Latin America abandoned such policies in favor of a more cautious approach.
Rather than backing individual sectors, some countries promoted innovation with across-the-board subsidies and tax breaks, while opening their economies to foreign competition and embracing market-oriented reforms.
But these changes, though necessary, were insufficient to deliver growth in productivity and output.
Almost two decades later, with Latin American governments again exploring the potential of activist industrial policy, avoiding the mistakes of the past will require a thorough understanding of why previous attempts failed – and a concrete strategy to guide future efforts.
A recent report by the Inter-American Development Bank (of which I am President) does precisely that.
Beyond assessing what went wrong previously, the report identifies three fundamental questions that policymakers in any emerging economy should answer before pursuing industrial policy:
·&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Is there a clear market failure that justifies government intervention?
·&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Will the proposed policy be effective in remedying the market failure?
·&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Does the country have the institutions necessary to execute the policy?
Consider sectoral policies in Costa Rica and Argentina.
In Costa Rica, the rice industry took the traditional route of lobbying for protection.
Though there was no market failure to remedy, the government obliged, introducing high import tariffs and subsidies for powerful local growers; as a result, productivity declined.
By contrast, farmers in the Argentine province of Entre Ríos requested that the National Institute of Agricultural Technology (INTA) ramp up research into new rice varieties, even agreeing to pay a tax to augment INTA’s research budget (thereby overcoming what economists call private-sector coordination problems).
When a new rice variety was introduced, productivity soared.
Unsurprisingly, the intervention in Argentina passed all three tests: the market suffered a coordination failure that was addressed effectively through public policy carried out by appropriate institutions.
Instead of coddling an entire industry with subsidies or import restrictions, the provincial government and INTA provided a public good that bolstered production in a specific sector.
Other successful examples of this approach include sanitary certifications of agricultural products and training programs for the software industry.
Once governments identify an opportunity that passes these three tests, they are in a much better position to use measures like temporary subsidies or targeted incentives effectively.
In Mexico’s Mayan Riviera, for example, public support for investments in lodging and transportation helped create a world-class tourist destination.
Costa Rica, despite its rice-industry failure, has also had some success with such policies.
When the medical-device industry was blocked from producing lucrative products like heart valves, owing to the lack of specialized firms to provide sterilization services, the government used incentives to attract such companies.
As a result, exports of more sophisticated, higher-value-added medical devices soared.
Ensuring adequate institutional capacity is essential to prevent private and political interests from shaping policy, as occurred in the 1950s and 1960s.
Ireland, often praised for its success in picking winners, relied on the technical competence of its renowned Industrial Development Agency to safeguard the integrity and effectiveness of the selection process.
Chile, despite possessing reasonably strong institutions, turned to a third party, the Boston Consulting Group, to ensure that the most promising sectors were selected objectively.
Fostering industrial development is a complex challenge.
Policymakers must periodically reassess their efforts and promptly abandon failures.
There will be hits and misses, but, if officials consistently ask the right three questions, their chances of success will be much higher.
Why Latin America’s Center is Holding
SANTIAGO – The Viennese writer Stefan Zweig allegedly said, “Brazil is the country of the future – and always will be.”
Likewise, centrist politics in Latin America has perpetually been on the horizon – until now.
To outsiders, the region is virtually synonymous with political polarization.
Fatigue-clad guerrillas, charismatic populists, and reactionary military junta leaders have long cut much larger figures than moderate politicians in boring gray suits.
But Latin America has a long – if not always fruitful – history of centrist liberal reformers.
In the nineteenth century, liberals laboriously separated their nascent states’ institutions from those of the Catholic Church.
In the 1930s, politicians of the moderate left, responding to the havoc wreaked on the region by the Great Depression, built the rudiments of a modern welfare state.
In the 1960s, centrist politicians of different stripes – many of them Christian Democrats – struggled to find an alternative to the threat of armed revolution and the totalitarian politics of Fidel Castro’s Cuba.
But there were two problems: centrist politics did not always take root, and it seldom lasted.
There is truth in the cliché that middle-class citizens tend to be politically moderate; open societies and reformist politics often go together.