America’s Threat to Trans-Pacific Trade
MUMBAI – As if undermining the World Trade Organization’s Doha Round of global free-trade talks was not bad enough (the last ministerial meeting in Geneva produced barely a squeak), the United States has compounded its folly by actively promoting the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP).
President Barack Obama announced this with nine Asian countries during his recent trip to the region.
The TPP is being sold in the US to a compliant media and unsuspecting public as evidence of American leadership on trade.
But the opposite is true, and it is important that those who care about the global trading system know what is happening.
One hopes that this knowledge will trigger what I call the “Dracula effect”: expose that which would prefer to remain hidden to sunlight and it will shrivel up and die.
The TPP is a testament to the ability of US industrial lobbies, Congress, and presidents to obfuscate public policy.
It is widely understood today that free-trade agreements (FTAs), whether bilateral or plurilateral (among more than two countries but fewer than all) are built on discrimination.
That is why economists typically call them preferential-trade agreements (PTAs).
And that is why the US government’s public-relations machine calls what is in fact a discriminatory plurilateral FTA, a “partnership” invoking a false aura of cooperation and cosmopolitanism.
Countries are, in principle, free to join the TPP.
Japan and Canada have said they plan to do so.
But a closer look reveals that China is not a part of this agenda.
The TPP is also a political response to China's new aggressiveness, built therefore in a spirit of confrontation and containment, not of cooperation.
The US has been establishing a template for its PTAs that includes several items unrelated to trade. So it is no surprise that the TPP template includes numerous agendas unrelated to trade, such as labor standards and restraints on the use of capital-account controls, many of which preclude China’s accession.
From the outset, the TPP’s supposed openness has been wholly misleading.
Towards this end, the TPP was negotiated with the weaker countries like Vietnam, Singapore, and New Zealand, which were easily bamboozled into accepting such conditions.
Only then were bigger countries like Japan offered membership on a “take it or leave it” basis.
The PR machine then went into overdrive by calling the inclusion of these extraneous conditions as making the TPP a “high-quality” trade agreement for the twenty-first century, when in fact it was a rip-off by several domestic lobbies.
American regionalism closer to home shows the US now trying to promote the Free Trade Agreement of the Americas (FTAA).
But its preferred template was to expand the North America Free Trade Agreement (Canada, Mexico, and the US) to the Andean countries and include huge doses of non-trade-related issues, which they swallowed.
This was not acceptable to Brazil, the leading force behind the FTAA, which focuses exclusively on trade issues.
Brazil’s former President Luiz Lula Inácio da Silva, one of the world’s great trade-union leaders, rejected the inclusion of labor standards in trade treaties and institutions.
The result of US efforts in South America, therefore, has been to fragment the region into two blocs, and the same is likely to happen in Asia.
Ever since the US realized that it had chosen the wrong region to be regional with, it has been trying to win a seat at the Asian table.
The US finally got it with the TPP, simply because China had become aggressive in asserting its territorial claims in the South China Sea, the South China Sea, and vis-à-vis India and Japan.
Many Asian countries joined the TPP to “keep the US in the region” in the face of Chinese heavy-handedness.
They embraced the US in the same way that East Europeans rushed to join NATO and the European Union in the face of the threat, real or imagined, posed by post-Soviet Russia.
America’s design for Asian trade is inspired by the goal of containing China, and the TPP template effectively excludes it, owing to the non-trade-related conditions imposed by US lobbies.
The only way that a Chinese merger with the TPP could gain credibility would be to make all non-trade-related provisions optional.
Of course, the US lobbies would have none of it.
America’s Three Deficits
BERKELEY – This year began with a series of reports providing tantalizing evidence that economic recovery in the United States is strengthening.
The pace of job creation has increased, indicators for manufacturing and services have improved, and consumption spending has been stronger than anticipated.
But it is too early to celebrate.
Output growth in the US remains anemic, and the economy continues to face three significant deficits: a jobs deficit, an investment deficit, and a long-run fiscal deficit, none of which is likely to be addressed in an election year.
Although output is now higher than it was in the fourth quarter of 2007, it remains far below what could be produced if labor and capacity were fully utilized.
That gap – between actual and potential output – is estimated at more than 7% of GDP (more than $1 trillion).
The output gap reflects a deficit of more than 12 million jobs – the number of jobs needed to return to the economy’s peak 2007 employment level and absorb the 125,000 people who enter the labor force each month.
Even if the economy grows at 2.5% in 2012, as most forecasts anticipate, the jobs deficit will remain – and will not be closed until 2024.
America’s jobs deficit is primarily the result of inadequate aggregate demand.
Consumption, which accounts for about 70% of total spending, is constrained by high unemployment, weak wage gains, and a steep decline in home values and consumer wealth.
The uptick in consumption in the last months of 2011 was financed by a decline in the household saving rate and a large increase in consumer credit.
Neither of these trends is healthy or sustainable.
With an unemployment rate of 8.5%, a labor-force participation rate of only 64%, and stagnant real wages, labor income has fallen to an historic low of 44% of national income.
And labor income is the most important component of household earnings, the major driver of consumption spending.
Even before the Great Recession, American workers and households were in trouble.
The rate of job growth between 2000 and 2007 slowed to only half its level in the three preceding decades.
Productivity growth was strong, but far outpaced wage growth, and workers’ real hourly compensation declined, on average, even for those with a university education.
Indeed, the 2002-2007 period was the only recovery on record during which the median family’s real income declined.
Moreover, job opportunities continued to polarize, with employment growing in high-wage professional, technical, and managerial occupations, as well as in low-wage food-service, personal-care, and protective-service occupations.
By contrast, employment in middle-skill, white-collar, and blue-collar occupations fell, particularly in manufacturing.
Hard-pressed American households slashed their savings rates, borrowed against their home equity, and increased their debt to maintain consumption, contributing to the housing and credit bubbles that burst in 2008, requiring painful deleveraging ever since.
Three forces have driven the US labor market’s adverse structural changes:
·&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Skill-biased technological change, which has automated routine work while boosting demand for highly educated workers with at least a college degree.
·&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Global competition and the integration of labor markets through trade and outsourcing, which have eliminated jobs and depressed wages.
·&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; America’s declining competitiveness as an attractive place to locate production and employment.
Technological change and globalization have created similar labor-market challenges in other developed countries.
But US policy choices are responsible for the erosion of America’s competitiveness.
In particular, the US is underinvesting in three major areas that help countries to create and retain high-wage jobs: skills and training, infrastructure, and research and development.
Spending in these areas accounts for less than 10% of US government spending, and this share has been declining over time.
The federal government can currently borrow at record-low interest rates, and there are many projects in education, infrastructure, and research that would earn a higher return, create jobs now, and bolster US competitiveness in attracting high-wage jobs.
President Barack Obama has offered numerous proposals to invest in the foundations of national competitiveness, but Congressional Republicans have rebuffed them, claiming that the US faces an impending fiscal crisis.
In fact, the federal deficit as a share of GDP will shrink significantly over the next several years, even without further deficit-reduction measures, before rising to unsustainable levels by 2030.
The US does indeed face a long-run fiscal deficit, largely the result of rising health-care costs and an aging population.
But the current fiscal deficit mainly reflects weak tax revenues, owing to slow growth and high unemployment, and temporary stimulus measures that are fading away at a time when aggregate demand remains weak and additional fiscal stimulus is warranted.
At the very least, to keep the economy on course for 2.5% growth this year, the payroll tax cut and unemployment benefits proposed by Obama should be extended through the end of the year.
These measures would provide insurance to the fragile recovery and add nothing to the long-run fiscal gap.
So, how should the US economy’s jobs deficit, investment deficit, and long-run fiscal deficit be addressed?
Policymakers should pair fiscal measures to ameliorate the jobs and investment deficits now with a multi-year plan to reduce the long-run fiscal deficit gradually.
This long-run plan should increase spending on education, infrastructure, and research, while curbing future growth in health-care spending through the cost-containment mechanisms contained in Obama’s health-reform legislation.
Approving a long-run deficit-reduction plan now but deferring its starting date until the economy is near full employment would prevent premature fiscal contraction from tipping the economy back into recession.
Indeed, enactment of such a package could bolster output and employment growth by easing investor concerns about future deficits and strengthening consumer and business confidence.
Painful choices about how to close the long-run fiscal gap should be decided now and implemented promptly once the economy has recovered.
But, for the next few years, the priorities of fiscal policy should be jobs, investment, and growth.
America’s Ungovernable Budget
NEW YORK – The heart of any government is found in its budget.
Politicians can make endless promises, but if the budget doesn’t add up, politics is little more than mere words.
The United States is now caught in such a bind.
In his recent State of the Union address, President Barack Obama painted a convincing picture of modern, twenty-first-century government.
His Republican Party opponents complained that Obama’s proposals would bust the budget.
But the truth is that both parties are hiding from the reality: without more taxes, a modern, competitive US economy is not possible.
Obama rightly emphasized that competitiveness in the world today depends on an educated workforce and modern infrastructure.
That is true for any country, but it is especially relevant for rich countries.
The US and Europe are in direct competition with Brazil, China, India, and other emerging economies, where wage levels are sometimes one-quarter those in high-income countries (if not even lower).
America and Europe will keep their high living standards only by basing their competitiveness on advanced skills, cutting-edge technologies, and modern infrastructure.
That is why Obama called for an increase in US public investment in three areas: education, science and technology, and infrastructure (including broadband Internet, fast rail, and clean energy).
He spelled out a vision of future growth in which public and private investment would be complementary, mutually supportive pillars.
Obama emphasized these themes for good reason.
Unemployment in the US now stands at nearly 10% of the labor force, in part because more new jobs are being created in the emerging economies, and many of the jobs now being created in the US pay less than in the past, owing to greater global competition.
Unless the US steps up its investment in education, science, technology, and infrastructure, these adverse trends will continue.
But Obama’s message lost touch with reality when he turned his attention to the budget deficit.
Acknowledging that recent fiscal policies had put the US on an unsustainable trajectory of rising public debt, Obama said that moving towards budget balance was now essential for fiscal stability.
So he called for a five-year freeze on what the US government calls “discretionary” civilian spending.
The problem is that more than half of such spending is on education, science and technology, and infrastructure – the areas that Obama had just argued should be strengthened.
After telling Americans how important government investment is for modern growth, he promised to freeze that spending for the next five years!
Politicians often change their message from one speech to the next, but rarely contradict it so glaringly in the same speech.
That contradiction highlights the sad and self-defeating nature of US budget policies over the past 25 years, and most likely in the years to come.
On the one hand, the US government must invest more to promote economic competitiveness.
On the other hand, US taxes are chronically too low to support the level of government investment that is needed.
America’s fiscal reality was made painfully clear two days after Obama’s speech, in a new study from the Congressional Budget Office, which revealed that the budget deficit this year will reach nearly $1.5 trillion – a sum almost unimaginable even for an economy the size of the US.
At nearly 10% of GDP, the deficit is resulting in a mountain of debt that threatens America’s future.
The CBO study also made clear that December’s tax-cut agreement between Obama and the Republican opposition willfully and deliberately increased the budget deficit sharply.
Various tax cuts initiated by George W. Bush were set to expire at the end of 2010.
Obama and the Republicans agreed to continue those tax cuts for at least two years (they will now probably continue beyond that), thereby lowering tax revenue by $350 billion this year and again in 2012.
Tax cuts for the richest Americans were part of the package.
The truth of US politics today is simple.
The key policy for the leaders of both political parties is tax cuts, especially for the rich.
Both political parties, and the White House, would rather cut taxes than spend more on education, science and technology, and infrastructure.
And the explanation is straightforward: the richest households fund political campaigns.
Both parties therefore cater to their wishes.
As a result, America’s total tax revenues as a share of national income are among the lowest of all high-income countries, roughly 30%, compared to around 40% in Europe.  But 30% of GDP is not enough to cover the needs of health, education, science and technology, social security, infrastructure, and other vital government responsibilities.
One budget area can and should be cut: military spending.
But even if America’s wildly excessive military budget is cut sharply (and politicians in both parties are resisting that), there will still be a need for new taxes.
The economic and social consequences of a generation of tax cutting are clear.
America is losing its international competitiveness, neglecting its poor – one in five American children is trapped in poverty – and leaving a mountain of debt to its young.
For all of the Obama administration’s lofty rhetoric, his fiscal-policy proposals make no serious attempt to address these problems.
To do so would require calling for higher taxes, and that – as George H. W. Bush learned in 1992 – is no way to get re-elected.
America’s Unhinged “Pivot”
NEW DELHI – President Barack Obama’s first foreign trip since winning a second term highlights Asia’s new centrality to America’s economy and security.
But Obama’s Asian tour also underscores the main question about American policy in the region: Will the United States’ “pivot” to Asia acquire concrete strategic content, or will it remain largely a rhetorical repackaging of old policies?
The United States, quick to capitalize on regional concerns triggered by China’s increasingly muscular self-assertion, has strengthened its military ties with its existing Asian allies and forged security relationships with new friends.
But the heady glow of America’s return to center stage in Asia has obscured key challenges in remaining the region’s principal security anchor in the face of China’s strategic ambitions.
One challenge is the need to arrest the erosion of America’s relative power, which in turn requires comprehensive domestic renewal, including fiscal consolidation.
But the need for spending cuts also raises the prospect that the US might be unable to finance a military shift toward the Asia-Pacific region – or, worse, that it will be forced to retrench there.
The US under Obama has increasingly ceded ground to China, a trend that admittedly began when the Bush administration became preoccupied with the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq.
This has spurred doubts about America’s ability to provide strategic heft to its “pivot” by sustaining a higher level of commitment in the Asia-Pacific region, where it already maintains 320,000 troops.
The proposed deployment of an additional 2,500 Marines in Australia is largely symbolic.
In fact, after raising Asians’ expectations of a more robust US response to China’s growing assertiveness, the Obama administration has started to tamp down the military aspects of its “pivot,” emphasizing instead greater US economic engagement.
That change has come as a relief to those in the region who fear being forced to choose between the US and China.
But, for the countries bearing the brunt of China’s recalcitrant approach to territorial and maritime disputes, this emphasis raises new doubts about America’s commitment.
In fact, the economic reorientation of the US “pivot” corrects a policy that had overemphasized the military component and put the US on a path toward conflict with China.
It was Secretary of State Hillary Clinton who signaled a more hawkish US stance on China with her tough talk at the 2010 Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) Regional Forum in Hanoi; now she is moderating that position by promoting trade and investment during her visits to Asian countries.
Obama, too, is highlighting the economic aspects of the US “pivot,” portraying his Asia tour as an effort to generate more domestic manufacturing jobs through higher exports to “the most rapidly growing and dynamic region in the world.”
Even his historic visit to Myanmar – the first ever by a US president – is as much about trade as it is about weaning a strategically located, resource-rich country from Chinese influence.
The refocus on trade and economic issues has also prompted Washington to promote the Trans-Pacific Partnership, which aims to create a new Asia-Pacific free-trade group that excludes China.
Moreover, the US is emphasizing the importance of the East Asia Summit and ASEAN, whose summit overlaps with the EAS meeting in Phnom Penh that Obama will be attending.
The US course correction is being dictated by another consideration as well: America has nothing to gain from taking sides in China’s disputes with its neighbors – unless, of course, US interests are directly at stake, as in the South China Sea, where Chinese maritime claims threaten freedom of navigation in some of the world’s most heavily trafficked shipping lanes.
Concern for its own national interest explains why America has charted a course of tacit neutrality regarding the revival of Sino-Indian territorial disputes, including China’s sudden resurrection of a claim to the large Himalayan Indian state of Arunachal Pradesh.
Similarly, the US has urged both China and Japan to resolve peacefully their dispute over the Japanese-controlled Senkaku Islands.
America’s main goal is to prevent the standoff from escalating to the point that it would be forced – against its own interests –&#160;to take Japan’s side.
When US Defense Secretary Leon Panetta met Chinese leader Xi Jinping in China in September, he got “an earful” that the US should stay out of the Sino-Japanese dispute. Indeed, amid the orchestrated anti-Japanese protests in China in September, Panetta – instead of advising China to rein in the often-violent demonstrations –&#160;publicly reiterated America’s neutrality in the struggle over control of the islands.
The correction in US policy actually extends even to terminology.
American diplomats have now abandoned the term “pivot” altogether, owing to its military connotation, in favor of “rebalancing.”
Whatever one calls it, the new policy approach is all about China, with America bolstering alliances and friendships with countries around China’s periphery, including India, Japan, the Philippines, Vietnam, Indonesia, and South Korea.
Yet the Obama administration continues to deny that China is at the center of its strategy. In fact, it is reluctant to say or do anything publicly that might raise China’s hackles.
The Asia-Pacific region will loom larger in Obama’s second-term agenda, especially as the ongoing US troop withdrawal ends the Afghanistan war by 2014.
But Obama will have to define a clearer US policy, addressing China’s rapid rise under an authoritarian regime that aggressively pursues border claims and whips up nationalism at home.
The US and the rest of Asia must not merely adjust to China; they must seek to shape a China that plays by the rules.
America’s War-Torn Economy
NEW YORK – Some say there are two issues in the coming American elections: the Iraq war and the economy.
On days when the war seems to be going better than expected, and the economy worse, the economy eclipses the war; but neither is faring well.
In some sense, there is only one issue, and that is the war, which has exacerbated America’s economic problems.
And when the world’s largest economy is sick – and it is now very sick – the entire world suffers.
It used to be thought that wars were good for the economy.
After all, World War II is widely thought to have helped lift the global economy out of the Great Depression.
But, at least since Keynes, we know how to stimulate the economy more effectively, and in ways that increase long-term productivity and enhance living standards.
This war, in particular, has not been good for the economy, for three reasons.
First, it has contributed to rising oil prices.
When the United States went to war, oil cost less than $25 a barrel, and futures markets expected it to remain there for a decade.
Futures traders knew about the growth of China and other emerging markets; but they expected supply – mainly from low-cost Middle East providers – to increase in tandem with demand.
The war changed that equation.
Higher oil prices mean that Americans (and Europeans and Japanese) are paying hundreds of millions of dollars to Middle East oil dictators and oil exporters elsewhere in the world rather than spending it at home. 
Moreover, money spent on the Iraq war does not stimulate the economy today as much as money spent at home on roads, hospitals, or schools, and it doesn’t contribute as much to long-term growth.
Economists talk about “bang for the buck” – how much economic stimulus is provided by each dollar of spending.
It’s hard to imagine less bang than from bucks spent on a Nepalese contractor working in Iraq.
With so many dollars going abroad, the American economy should have been in a much weaker shape than it appeared.
In a sense, the strategy worked: a housing bubble fed a consumption boom, as savings rates plummeted to zero.  The economic weaknesses were simply being postponed to some future date; the Bush administration hoped that the day of reckoning would come after November 2008.  Instead, things began to unravel in August 2007.
Now it has responded, with a stimulus package that is too little, too late, and badly designed.
To see the inadequacy of that package, compare it with the more than $1.5 trillion that was borrowed in home equity loans in recent years, most of it spent on consumption.
That game – based on a belief in ever-spiraling home prices – is over. 
With home prices falling (and set to continue to fall), and with banks uncertain of their financial position, lenders will not lend and households will not borrow.
So, while the additional liquidity injected into the financial system by the Fed may have prevented a meltdown, it won’t stimulate much consumption or investment.
Instead, much of it will find its way abroad.
China, for example, is worried that the Fed’s stimulus will increase its domestic inflation. 
There is a third reason that this war is economically bad for America.
Not only has America already spent a great deal on this war – $12 billion a month, and counting – but much of the bill remains to be paid, such as compensation and health care for the 40% of veterans who are returning with disabilities, many of which are very serious.
Moreover, this war has been funded differently from any other war in America’s history –perhaps in any country’s recent history.
Normally, countries ask for shared sacrifice, as they ask their young men and women to risk their lives.
Taxes are raised.
There is a discussion of how much of the burden to pass on to future generations.  In this war, there was no such discussion.
When America went to war, there was a deficit.
Yet remarkably, Bush asked for, and got, a reckless tax cut for the rich.
That means that every dollar of war spending has in effect been borrowed.
For the first time since the Revolutionary War, two centuries ago, America has had to turn to foreigners for financing, because US households have been saving nothing .
The numbers are hard to believe.
The national debt has increased by 50% in eight years, with almost $1 trillion of this increase due to the war – an amount likely to more than double within ten years. 
Who would have believed that one administration could do so much damage so quickly?
America, and the world, will be paying to repair it for decades to come.
Obama’s Year of Iran
PRINCETON – As US President Barack Obama begins his second term, he will have to devote much of his attention to figuring out how to get America’s domestic finances in order.
But foreign-policy issues loom large as well, and, notwithstanding the ongoing conflict in Syria and the possible spread of war across Africa’s Sahel region, the consensus in Washington is that 2013 will be the “year of decision” on Iran.
Obama began his first administration with an offer to engage with the Islamic Republic; as he memorably put it in his first inaugural address in 2009, “We will extend a hand if you are willing to unclench your fist.”
He repeated that commitment, although much more obliquely, in his second inaugural address: “We will show the courage to try and resolve our differences with other nations peacefully – not because we are naive about the dangers we face, but because engagement can more durably lift suspicion and fear.”
As the American scholar and activist Hussein Ibish recently argued, Obama has appointed a cabinet designed to give him maximum room to negotiate a deal with Iran.
In particular, naming military veterans as Secretary of State and Secretary of Defense will provide him with valuable domestic political cover for an agreement that would inevitably require lifting sanctions on Iran and almost certainly recognizing its right to enrich uranium at a low level of concentration.
That should signal to Iran’s rulers not only that the US is serious about a deal, but also that whatever the US offers is likely to be the best deal that they can get.
The Obama administration has assembled an extraordinary coalition of countries to impose economic sanctions that are having a demonstrable effect on the price and availability of goods in Iran and on the ability of even powerful institutions, such as the Revolutionary Guard, to do business.
But coalitions do not hold together forever, and the pain of sanctions often cuts both ways, affecting buyers as well as sellers.
Countries like South Korea and Japan, for example, have curtailed their imports of Iranian oil only reluctantly; countries like China and Russia rarely play straight on sanctions in the first place.
Moreover, Obama can threaten that “all options are on the table” only so many times without losing credibility with the Iranians and other countries in the Middle East.
As Brookings Institution foreign-policy expert Suzanne Maloney points out, countries in the region and beyond are already dismayed at the lack of US leadership concerning Syria.
If the US gives negotiations one more serious try (a credible offer and a genuine willingness to engage), gets rebuffed, and then does nothing, it will effectively declare itself a paper tiger.
At that point, the sanctions coalition will most likely disintegrate amid a much broader loss of confidence in US leadership.
The US has thus painted itself into a corner.
Former US National Security Adviser Zbigniew Brzezinski recently argued strongly against military action, proposing, instead, a strategy that would continue sanctions and extend deterrence.
Like US policy toward the Soviet bloc during the Cold War, “An Iranian military threat aimed at Israel or any other US friend in the Middle East would be treated as if directed at the United States itself and would precipitate a commensurate US response.”
I can certainly see the wisdom in Brzezinski’s approach.
But Obama has marched the US and its allies too far down the current path.
Moreover, and crucially, Brzezinski forgets that Obama’s determination to stop Iran from acquiring a nuclear weapon does not stem only from his concern for Israel’s security or the stability of the wider Middle East.
Obama has repeatedly committed himself to the goal of turning the world in the direction of “global zero” – a world without nuclear weapons.
He believes (as do former Secretaries of State Henry Kissinger and George Shultz, former Secretary of Defense William Perry, and former Senator Sam Nunn) that unless the world finds a way to live without nuclear weapons, we will find ourselves in an international system in which 30-50 states possess them, raising the danger of accidental or deliberate launch to an unacceptably high level.
Convincing great powers to eliminate their nuclear arsenals might seem as politically fanciful as pushing gun-control legislation through the US Congress, but on that issue, too, Obama has made clear that he is willing to try.
However logical or attractive a containment policy might be, and however disastrous the consequences of bombing are likely to be, Obama’s commitment to realizing global denuclearization as part of his legacy implies that he will not allow another country to acquire a nuclear weapon on his watch, as his predecessors allowed India, Israel, North Korea, and Pakistan to do.
Thus, the stakes for both the US and Iran are very high.
Other countries would do well not to underestimate Obama’s resolve; governments that have relations with Iran should emphasize that the time to make a deal is now.
And countries like Turkey and Brazil (and perhaps India and Egypt) could play a useful role by devising face-saving ways for the Iranians to meet the international community’s demands, together with longer-term alternatives for fuel enrichment that would be consistent with reducing the global nuclear threat.
America’s allies, in turn, must be prepared to close ranks with it on both the outlines of a deal and the willingness to strike militarily.
The art of statecraft is not to choose between war and diplomacy as if they were mutually exclusive alternatives, but to understand how they fit together.
In the case of Syria, the West has repeatedly called for diplomacy while ruling out any military action, with predictably bad results.
The US will not make that mistake with Iran.
America the Hypocritical
In commemorating the 230th anniversary of America’s independence last July, President George W. Bush noted that the patriots of the Revolutionary War believed that all men are created equal, and with inalienable rights.
Because of these ideals, he proclaimed, the United States “remains a beacon of hope for all who dream of liberty and a shining example to the world of what a free people can achieve.”
But, at the same time, his administration was holding approximately 400 prisoners at the US Naval Base at Guantánamo Bay in Cuba.
Some of them have now been there for more than five years. None of them has ever been put on trial.
Last month, a highly reputable source confirmed that the Guantánamo prisoners are suffering from more than indefinite detention.
The US Federal Bureau of Investigation released documents showing that an FBI agent witnessed “on several occasions” detainees who were “chained hand and foot in [a] fetal position to [the] floor,” without a chair, or food or water.
In these conditions, “most urinated or defecated on [them]selves.”
They were left there for 18 or 24 hours, or more.
On one of these occasions, the agent reported, “the air conditioning was turned up so low that the barefooted detainee was shaking with cold.”
On another occasion the room was unventilated, the temperature over 100 degrees Fahrenheit, and the detainee was almost unconscious on the floor with a pile of hair next to him – “he had apparently been pulling it out throughout the night.”
Another FBI agent was laughingly told by a civilian contractor, “[Y]ou have to see this.”
He was then taken to an interrogation room where he saw a longhaired man with a full beard who was gagged with duct tape that “covered much of his head.”
When the agent asked how the tape would be removed, he was not given any answer.
Other FBI agents reported seeing prisoners left in shackles for 12 hours or more, again in cold conditions, being subjected to strobe lights and loud rap music for many hours, or being forced to wrap themselves in an Israeli flag.
The FBI report noted these incidents with the comment: “doesn’t seem excessive given Department of Defense policy.”
Several of the detainees told the FBI agents that they had no connection with terrorism and had no idea why they had been abducted and taken to Guantánamo.
Many prisoners were not captured fighting in Afghanistan.
Some were picked up in Bosnia, Indonesia, Thailand, Mauritania, and Pakistan.
The case of Khaled el-Masri, a German citizen of Lebanese descent, appears to be another of these errors.
Seized by the CIA in Macedonia, he was taken to Afghanistan and interrogated for five months before being released without charge.
A German court has now issued arrest warrants for those involved in his abduction.
If there are any human rights at all, the right not to be locked up indefinitely without trial is surely one of them.
The US Constitution’s Bill of Rights puts considerable emphasis on that right, specifying in the Sixth Amendment that in all criminal prosecutions, “the accused shall enjoy the right to a speedy and public trial, by an impartial jury” and “to be informed of the nature and cause of the accusation; to be confronted with the witnesses against him.”
None of the Guantánamo inmates has been granted these rights.
So it has never been proved, by the standards laid down in the US Constitution that any of them really are terrorists.
But the Sixth Amendment does not apply to the Guantánamo prisoners, because they are not US citizens and are in a facility that, technically, is not part of US territory, although it is under the full control of the US government.
Whatever US courts say about it, abducting people all over the world, locking them up for years without establishing that they are guilty of anything, and subjecting them to harsh and abusive treatment is a flagrant violation of international law.
By any standard of justice, it is also just plain wrong.
Tom Paine, the great American revolutionary and author of The Rights of Man, wrote: “He that would make his own liberty secure must guard even his enemy from oppression; for if he violates this duty he establishes a precedent that will reach himself.”
If America would only follow that advice, it might really be a beacon of hope and a shining example.
But as long as it continues to hold and abuse prisoners without giving them a fair trial, America’s professed ideals will continue to sound to the rest of the world like the deepest hypocrisy.
The State of the United States
NEW YORK – The US presidential election is still more than half a year away, and it is impossible to know with any certainty who will be nominated to represent the major parties, much less who will be the 45th occupant of the White House.
But it is not too soon to assess the mood of the country's more than 320 million inhabitants and what it will mean for the man or woman who ultimately prevails in what must seem to most people around the world to be an endless political soap opera.
The dominant mood in the United States today is one of considerable anxiety, if not outright anger.
The Washington Post recently published a four-part series of articles revealing popular fury aimed at Wall Street, Muslims, trade deals, Washington, police shootings, President Barack Obama, Republicans, immigrants, and other targets.
One of the worst descriptions to be applied to a person nowadays is “professional politician.”
The beneficiaries of this state of mind are anti-establishment candidates who espouse policies in opposition to free trade and immigration reform and who call for a radical overhaul of current tax and spending policies.
The details of what they advocate may well differ, but their platforms share a promise of radical departure from the status quo.
The basis of this mood is hardly self-evident, as the country is better off economically than it was a half-dozen years ago, in the immediate aftermath of the 2007-2008 economic crisis.
Over nine million jobs have been created since then, interest rates are low (making loans for homes and cars more affordable), and the fall in the price of gasoline is the equivalent of a $700 tax cut for the average American family.
Moreover, the stock market has risen some 200% since its low of seven years ago, and millions of people who were without health insurance are now covered.
Yet this good economic news is offset in many cases by weak growth in household incomes, which have stagnated in real (inflation-adjusted) terms for some 15 years.
The percentage of Americans working full time has still not reached the level it was at seven years ago.
And many fear that their jobs will disappear because of foreign competition, new technologies, or outsourcing.
A large number of Americans are living longer, but are anxious, as they have failed to set aside the funds needed to ensure that their retirement will allow them to live comfortably into old age.
Some are paying health-insurance premiums that they previously had avoided because of mandates in the reform enacted under Obama.
There is also the issue of inequality.
This causes real anger, but the problem is not so much inequality (which, though worse, is nothing inherently new) as it is the decline in opportunity.
The American Dream is giving way to class consciousness – a profound change for a country founded on the ideal that anyone can improve his or her lot through hard work.
But the reasons for anxiety and anger transcend economic realities and worries.
There is also physical insecurity, whether because of crime or the fear of terrorism.
In many communities, there is concern, too, about where the culture and the society are heading.
Modern media tend to make things worse.
Ours is an age of “narrowcasting,” not broadcasting.
People increasingly tune in to cable channels or websites that reinforce their views and ideologies.
Little of this is reassuring.
The national mood transcends the election campaign and will pose a real challenge to the new president and Congress.
The divisions within and between the Democratic and Republican parties will make compromise and the formation of coalitions that are essential for governing all but impossible.
Concerns over retirement and health-care affordability will make it that much more difficult to reform entitlements, even though their expansion will drive up the national debt to record levels.
Free trade is blamed for job losses and is losing support, even though it has also been a source of new jobs and greater consumer choice – and has strengthened America’s strategic position around the world.
Immigration, long part of the country’s heritage and a source of valuable talent, is now the object of so much controversy that prospects for reform are dim.
The mood of the US may also intensify officials’ domestic focus.
Already turned off by foreign involvement in the wake of the Iraq and Afghanistan interventions, which cost much more than they achieved, many Americans are skeptical of what the US can accomplish abroad.
They are frustrated with allies seen as not carrying their fair share of common burdens, and they are increasingly convinced that the government needs to focus less on the world and more on fixing what is wrong with the US.
Some in other countries will no doubt read all of this with satisfaction; but, overall, it is bad news for much of the world.
An America that is distracted and divided is less likely to be willing and able to take the lead in promoting stability in the Middle East, Europe, or Asia, or in meeting global challenges.
And, without US leadership, these challenges are likely to go unmet, turning into problems or, worse, crises.
America Wakes Up to Climate Change
After years of debate in the United States, and opposition to action by the Bush administration, America is finally waking up to the reality of global climate change.
Leadership is still not coming from the president, but the private sector has begun to act.
Leaders of major US companies have decided that global man-made climate change is real, must be controlled, and that business must play a constructive part in the process.
Thus, even as the Bush administration and some scientific contrarians pretend that there is no problem, US corporate leaders are seeking practical solutions.
The basic situation has been clear for years.
Global use of fossil fuels is contributing to a sharp rise in atmospheric carbon dioxide, which is causing the Earth to warm.
Rainfall patterns are changing.
Deserts and dry regions are becoming drier.
Extreme weather events such as hurricanes and typhoons are likely to increase.
Flooding in Europe is likely to intensify, a process that may already have begun.
Sea levels are rising, and could climb sharply if global warming leads to a destabilization of the Greenland and Antarctic ice sheets.
In short, the scientific evidence is strong and growing that the planet is at grave risk, with many ill effects already being felt and more to come.
The proper responses are also increasingly understood.
We must move to a sustainable energy system, one that does not mean a huge increase of carbon in the atmosphere.
This will require a shift to renewable energy sources such as solar power, and perhaps nuclear power, as well as new technologies to capture carbon dioxide at power plants and then to dispose of the carbon dioxide in safe underground deposits.
Society will have to pay a price for these investments in new energy technologies, but the benefits will be vastly greater than the price.
The US is the world’s major emitter of carbon dioxide from energy use, but it has done the least among all major economies to confront the global challenge.
The Bush administration claims that more research is needed before any action is taken.
Yet real action in the US is starting, thanks to leadership in other parts of the world, and thanks to the enlightened understanding of some major American businesses.
First, the rest of the world ratified the Kyoto Protocol to control emissions of carbon dioxide.
At the beginning of this year, Europe introduced a new Greenhouse Gas Emissions Trading Scheme that uses market-based incentives to control carbon emissions.
American companies operating in Europe are part of that system for their European-based emissions, so that US companies are being pulled into climate control even if their own government avoids the issue.
Second, major US investors, such as pension fund managers, are realizing that US companies that fail to control their emissions may be vulnerable to financial losses in the future.
They know that, sooner or later, the US will have to join the rest of the world in controlling climate change.
At that point, power companies that use antiquated technologies that emit massive amounts of greenhouse gases may face serious financial losses.
So investors are telling companies to report their carbon emissions today in order to assess future liabilities.
Similarly, many company bosses know that pretending that climate problems do not exist is bad for shareholders, because reality will one day strike.
They know that investing today in clean technologies can give them a long-term competitive advantage.
As a result, many companies are taking steps now to limit their emissions to avoid future financial liabilities and a lack of investor confidence.
The most dramatic breakthrough of this kind occurred when General Electric, one of the world’s most important, innovative, and respected companies, announced that it was going “green” with a major new corporate focus on environmentally sound technologies and a commitment to limit its own greenhouse gas emissions.
With GE’s leadership, which it termed “ecomagination” (combining ecology with imagination), many US businesses are sure to follow.
It is too early to count on success in engaging the US on climate change.
The Bush administration continues to delay and to avoid sound science.
Yet it is reasonably clear that a tipping point has been reached.
Reality is catching up with the US, as it already has elsewhere in the world.
As US citizens and businesses continue to suffer the results of climate change – heat waves, droughts, hurricanes, and floods – more and more Americans, including an increasing number of business leaders, will press America’s political leaders for real action.
The solutions will not be easy, and the effort must last over many decades in all parts of the world.
But the effort needs to start now.
As with Europe’s new carbon trading, all producers and consumers around the globe will need to face market incentives to adopt technologies and consumption patterns that slow (and eventually stop) the increase of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere.
We will all need to pay a “market price” when we contribute to global climate change, so that we give true economic incentives to sustainable energy systems and new public investments – for example, mass transit – that reduce greenhouse gas emissions and thereby head off future climatic disasters.
The Right Weights for Mortgage Risks
ABU DHABI – Ever since hunter-gatherers started to build their own dwellings some 14,000 years ago, homeownership has been a mark of high social and economic status.
Today, the United States has built a mammoth financial bureaucracy to promote homeownership, and economists, bankers, politicians, and of course homeowners themselves keenly follow house-price indicators.
But, as we have recently witnessed, unless mortgage risks are properly calculated, the dream of homeownership can all too easily become an economic nightmare.
Mortgage debt has become households’ biggest liability throughout the developed world.
In the decade preceding the financial crisis, US mortgage debt increased almost threefold, while the real economy grew by only one-third.
At its 2007 peak, US mortgage debt stood at $10.6 trillion – more than double the combined GDP of China and India.
The six major banking crises in the advanced economies since the mid-1970s were all associated with a housing bust.
A real-estate price crash has also been a key cause of emerging-market crises, such as the 1997-98 Asian collapse.
Research shows that lost output during recessions accompanied by a housing bust is double or triple what it might otherwise have been had real-estate prices held up.
Moreover, housing busts tend to prolong recessions by almost three years.
Given the enormous social and economic costs when high levels of mortgage debt meet a crash in house prices, one would expect regulators to be fully engaged on the issue.
Unfortunately, they are not.
Although the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, the primary global benchmark for bank regulations, proposed reforms after the 2008 crisis that are aimed at strengthening the financial system, mortgage regulations have changed little.
The key to mortgage regulation is the concept of “risk weight,” a measure that increases with the probability that a borrower will default.
For example, a loan to AAA-rated Microsoft has a 0% risk weight, meaning that it is virtually risk-free.
A loan to the Indian government will have a risk weight of 50%, and one to a riskier Argentina will be weighted at 150%.
When it comes to mortgages, the standard risk weight is 35% (down from 50% a decade ago).
But banks can use internal mathematical models to calculate their own risk weights.
This is akin to marking one’s own exam paper; unsurprisingly, banks’ risk scores are usually on the safe side.
Consider, for example, a $200,000 bank loan to buy a $235,000 home.
If the bank attaches a 10% risk weight to the loan, the risk-weighted equivalent is $20,000.
If the amount of bank capital needed to protect that risk-weighted equivalent is 10%, then the bank requires just $2,000 of its own capital to fund the mortgage, $198,000 of which the bank itself borrows.
All it takes to wipe out the bank’s own money is a 16% drop in the house’s price (from $235,000 to below $198,000).
US house prices – as measured by the S&amp;P/Case-Shiller National Home Price Index – fell by more than 30% from June 2006 to March 2009, while European countries, including Spain, Ireland, and the United Kingdom, experienced similar or greater declines.
The problem is that banks continue to offer big mortgages while having little of their own “skin in the game.”
The IMF estimates that the average mortgage risk weight in Europe and Asia was 14% and 15%, respectively, with some banks using a risk weight as low as 6%.
Recently, some regulators have become suspicious of banks’ do-it-yourself risk weights.
In 2012, the UK authorities asked banks to apply a temporary minimum 15% risk weight to their mortgage portfolios, though that guidance expired in July.
The Swedish regulator has recommended that mortgage lenders raise their risk-weight floor from 15% to 25%.
Although welcome, these steps may still be too little; more important, they lack flexibility.
A better option would be to implement time-varying, pro-cyclical floors, forcing banks to hold more capital during housing booms.
And, whereas a single, fixed floor might push banks toward riskier loans that offer higher returns for the same amount of capital, a dynamic system would allow lower floors for the lowest-risk mortgages and require higher floors for riskier loans.
Moreover, while risk weight is an important macro-prudential lever, it must be used in conjunction with regulators’ other tools.
These include mortgage eligibility criteria, such as loan-to-value and loan-to-income ratios, and dynamic provisioning (that is increasing banks’ mandatory loan-loss reserves during housing booms).
It is important to calibrate the impact of risk weights on housing-market cycles relative to other measures, not least because excessive and overlapping intervention could itself fuel dangerous cycles.
The reliance of modern banking regulation on risk weighting is nowhere more important than in the mortgage market.
If regulators get it wrong, the entire edifice could collapse – yet again.
The views expressed in this column are the author’s own, and do not represent those of the National Bank of Abu Dhabi.
Hardening Brazil’s Soft Power
BRASILIA – It is, perhaps, a truism for Brazil’s citizens that their country is and always will be a peaceful one.
After all, Brazil has lived with its ten neighbors without conflict for almost 150 years, having settled its borders through negotiation.
It last went to war in 1942, after direct aggression by Nazi U-boats in the South Atlantic.
It has forsworn nuclear weapons, having signed a comprehensive nuclear-safeguards agreement with Argentina and the International Atomic Energy Agency.
Through the Common Market of the South (Mercosur) and the Union of South American Nations (Unasur), Brazil is helping to integrate the region politically, economically, socially, and culturally.
But is soft power enough for one of the world’s major emerging countries?
To be sure, Brazil’s peaceful foreign policy has served it well.
Brazil has used its stature to advance peace and cooperation in South America and beyond.
Its constructive stance derives from a worldview that accords pride of place to the values of democracy, social justice, economic development, and environmental protection.
Brazil’s unique approach to promoting these ideals is an important source of its soft power, reflected in the broad international support that placed Brazilians atop international institutions like the Food and Agriculture Organization and the World Trade Organization.
Yet no country can rely on soft power alone to defend its interests.
Indeed, in an unpredictable world, where old threats are compounded by new challenges, policymakers cannot disregard hard power.
By deterring threats to national sovereignty, military power supports peace; and, in Brazil’s case, it underpins our country’s constructive role in the pursuit of global stability.
That role is more necessary than ever.
Over the past two decades, unilateral actions in disregard of the UN Security Council’s primary responsibility in matters of war and peace have led to greater uncertainty and instability.
Likewise, little progress toward nuclear disarmament has been made, in disregard of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty.
Brazil’s abundance of energy, food, water, and biodiversity increases its stake in a security environment characterized by rising competition for access to, or control of, natural resources.
In order to meet the challenges of this complex reality, Brazil’s peaceful foreign policy must be supported by a robust defense policy.
Brazil’s National Defense Strategy, updated in 2012, states that the modernization of the Armed Forces is intrinsically linked to national development.
Thus, it emphasizes the need to strengthen the domestic defense industry.
In accordance with the Strategy, Brazil is enhancing its conventional deterrence capabilities, including by building a nuclear-propelled submarine as part of a naval program commensurate with its responsibilities in the South Atlantic.
Brazil coordinates closely on defense matters with its neighbors, both bilaterally and through Unasur’s South American Defense Council, which aims to promote confidence-building, transparency, a joint regional defense industry, and, most important, a common defense identity.
One potential mechanism for advancing these objectives is a South American Defense College, now under consideration.
South America is becoming a region where war is unthinkable – what the political scientist Karl Deutsch once called a “security community.”
Having visited every South American country in my tenure as Defense Minister, I am convinced that, the most effective deterrent on the continent is cooperation.
At the same time, Brazil is pursuing increased bilateral defense cooperation with African partners.
With our neighbors on both shores of the South Atlantic, Brazil is working closely to strengthen the Zone of Peace and Cooperation of the South Atlantic (ZPCSA), which aims to keep the ocean free from rivalries foreign to it and from nuclear weapons.
Brazil is also reaching out to other emerging countries, such as its fellow BRICS (Brazil, Russia, India, China, and South Africa) and members of the IBSA Dialogue Forum (India, Brazil, and South Africa).
For example, Brazil conducts IBSAMAR, a regular trilateral naval exercise, with South Africa and India.
More broadly, we are exploring ways to cooperate in the joint development of defense technologies.
Through such endeavors, Brazil hopes to contribute to a more balanced international order, one less subject to hegemonies of any kind, without losing sight of the importance of mutually beneficial partnerships with developed countries.
Even as Brazil hardens its soft power, it remains deeply committed to the path of dialogue, conflict prevention, and the negotiated settlement of disputes.
The presence of Brazilian peacekeepers in countries like Haiti and Lebanon underscores Brazil’s contribution to maintaining peace and security worldwide.
In the twenty-first century, a truly stable global order will depend on a legitimate and effective UN Security Council, one that reflects the plurality of the emerging multipolar world.
China Grows Down
HONG KONG – For more than three decades, China’s GDP has grown by an average of more than 10% annually.
But former Premier Wen Jiabao rightly described this impressive growth performance as “unstable, unbalanced, uncoordinated, and unsustainable,” highlighting the many economic, social, and environmental costs and challenges that have accompanied it.
Now China must choose between the export-based, investment-driven growth model of the past and a new, more viable economic order.
Cheap credit and perverse incentives – such as promotions for officials who contribute most to GDP growth – have led to massive but redundant investment, which, in turn, has contributed to excess capacity in manufacturing and infrastructure.
This model is not only inefficient; channeling government resources to support investment also undermines China’s social development.
Given this, China’s leaders have decided to stop using GDP growth as the primary criterion for evaluating officials’ performance.
Indeed, the 12th Five-Year Plan, which extends until 2015, aims to shift China’s economy to a new, more sustainable growth model based on quality and innovation, and accepts that annual GDP growth will likely fall to 7% during the transition.
Most discussion of growth models nowadays is based on work by the Nobel laureate Robert Solow.
For Solow, GDP growth is determined by the factor inputs of land, labor, and capital, together with the economy’s total factor productivity (TFP, or the change in output not accounted for by changes in the volume of inputs, but by factors like technological innovation and institutional reform).
Since 1978, China, by implementing major reforms, has achieved three periods of high TFP growth, each lasting 5-7 years.
First, in the early 1980’s, following the introduction of the rural household-responsibility system, which boosted agricultural productivity and released a large amount of unskilled labor to work in the higher-productivity urban and industrial sectors, annual TFP growth accelerated to 3-4%.
The second such period followed Deng Xiaoping’s southern tour in 1992, during which he emphasized the need to shift to a market-based – albeit state-controlled – system by opening China’s economy to foreign direct investment and establishing special economic zones to help develop export-oriented industries.
This time, TFP growth soared to 5-6%, partly owing to the “catching up” process facilitated by China’s adoption of foreign technology and know-how.
Finally, after major reforms of state-owned enterprises (SOEs) and the tax system, China acceded to the World Trade Organization in 2001. With the country fully integrated into global supply chains, TFP growth hit 4%, where it remained until 2007.
Since then, however, the TFP growth rate has fallen by almost half.
Indeed, China’s economy has experienced a significant – and ongoing – growth slowdown in the wake of the global economic crisis that erupted five years ago.
By 2012, human capital’s contribution to China’s GDP growth fell almost to zero, with fixed-capital accumulation accounting for roughly 60% of total growth.
Large-scale, debt-funded capital investments have raised the country’s credit/GDP ratio to nearly 200%, increasing the financial system’s vulnerability – a development reflected in the recent spike in interbank interest rates.
In order to achieve more balanced and sustainable GDP growth, China’s leaders must implement a set of deep, comprehensive, and long-lasting institutional reforms aimed at boosting TFP.
In particular, the reforms should be designed to facilitate China’s transition from its traditional supply-based growth model, which assumes that building hard infrastructure leads automatically to demand growth.
In fact, GDP growth may be slowing precisely because existing investment in manufacturing and infrastructure, undertaken largely by local governments and SOEs, does not match the pattern of domestic demand.
As a result, China now faces the problem of short-term excess capacity.
Improving the quality of GDP growth will depend on Chinese leaders’ willingness to enact market-oriented reforms.
Rather than directly driving investment, the state must emphasize its regulatory and enforcement functions, including setting and overseeing standards, building an effective property-rights infrastructure, and managing macroeconomic conditions.
At the same time, the state must improve the quality and delivery of education, health care, and security, while minimizing corruption and administrative abuses.
In short, China must shift its focus from meeting GDP growth targets to creating an environment that fosters innovation and competition, thereby enabling market forces to set prices and allocate resources more effectively.
The state would thus become an intermediary agent, facilitating the development of a sustainable economic order in which less is more – that is, a system in which less intervention creates more opportunities for creativity.
SOEs undoubtedly played an important role in China’s previous growth model, delivering the infrastructure and services that were deemed necessary for the global manufacturing supply chain to function.
But access to cheap credit from state-controlled banks creates an incentive for SOEs to generate surplus capacity, which increases systemic risk in the economy.
To correct China’s excess-capacity problem would require the relevant enterprises, whether SOEs or private firms, to exit the market.
Unless China’s leaders implement major structural reforms aimed at establishing a market-based growth model, they will be unable to avoid the “middle-income trap” that has prevented so many developing economies from attaining advanced-country status.
The deceleration in GDP growth that such reforms would cause would be more than offset by increased market dynamism and overall economic stability.
A Murder in Moscow
It is time to end the fiction that Vladimir Putin’s “dictatorship of law” has made postcommunist Russia any less lawless.
The murder of Anna Politkovskaya, one of Russia’s bravest and best journalists, a woman who dared to expose the brutal murders committed by Russian troops in Chechnya, is final proof that President Putin has delivered nothing more than a run of the mill dictatorship with the usual contempt for law.
This recognition is a timely one for the world to make, particularly Europe.
Germany’s Foreign Ministry is preparing a policy on Russian/German relations that will enshrine indifference to Putin’s lawlessness as being in the national interest of the most powerful member of the European Union.
But indifference becomes appeasement when it encourages Putin to pursue his lawless ways in the international arena, as in his current campaign to strangle Georgia’s economy.
The killing of Politkovskaya has incited an eerie sense of déjà vu : just as in the KGB’s heyday, people simply disappear in Putin’s Russia.
Politkovskaya’s is the third politically tinged killing in three weeks.
Enver Ziganshin, the chief engineer of BP Russia, was shot to death in Irkutsk on September 30.
Andrei Kozlov, the deputy governor of Russia’s central bank who was leading a campaign against financial fraud, was assassinated on September 14.
The fact that Russia’s Prosecutor General Yuri Chaika, took over the investigation into Politkovskaya’s killing, as he did with the murder of Kozlov, doesn’t inspire hope, as such senior level involvement would in any real democracy.
In fact, the involvement of the highest level of Russia’s government is almost a guarantee that the killers will never be found.
Politkovskaya’s murder is a particularly grim augury when you consider that she was a powerful critic of Russia’s President.
In her articles for one of the few remaining independent papers in Moscow,
I am not accusing Putin’s government of the contract killing of Politkovskaya.
After all, as a campaigning investigative journalist she made many people angry besides Putin, not least of which is the current Chechen Prime Minister, Ramzan Kadyrov, whom she accused of a policy of kidnapping for ransom.
But even if Vladimir Putin’s associates had nothing to do with Politkovskaya being gunned down in an elevator of her apartment building in the center of Moscow, his contempt for law created the climate in which the murder was carried out.
Like the murder of Archbishop Thomas Beckett in his Canterbury Cathedral many centuries ago, the crime was committed in the clear belief that it would please the king.
Given what Politkovskaya represented—the responsibility of a democratic press to question the Kremlin and its policies—the government should have made certain that nothing bad happened to her.
Putin’s Russia has already lost 12 leading journalists to murder in the past six years.
None of those crimes has been solved, which would not be the case if Putin’s “dictatorship of law” was anything more than a PR strategy.
The six year period since Vladimir Putin arrived in the Kremlin has been a time of deeply conflicting signals.
On one hand, the world sees a young, educated leader pledging to modernize Russia, particularly in terms of bringing its law enforcement and judicial practices into line with international norms.
On the other, the president watches in silence while his ex-colleagues in Russia's FSB security service (the former KGB) provide no security to those murdered, and launch a series of notorious espionage cases against journalists, scientists, and environmental activists.
These “neo-spies” include journalist Gregory Pasko, arms control expert Igor Sutyagin, diplomat Valentin Moiseyev, physicist Valentin Danilov, and others.
The supposedly civilizing influence of being a Western partner — chairing a G-8 summit in Saint Petersburg for example — seems to have been lost on Putin’s Kremlin cabal.
Once again exposure to Western values has delivered another Potemkin Village; Russia presents a façade of laws and democratic institutions, but behind that cardboard surface the same arbitrary brutes rule.
The danger for the world is that Putin’s lawlessness is being exported.
Across Russia’s near abroad, a form of criminalized diplomacy is taking root.
Look at Putin’s attempt to rig Ukraine’s previous presidential election, and the on again off again criminal charges brought against the opposition leader Yuliya Tymoshenko.
Look at the rogue breakaway regions in Moldova and Georgia that exist only because of the Kremlin’s backing.
Look at how the Kremlin seeks to blackmail its neighbors by threatening their energy supplies.
Every policeman knows that when you ignore criminal behavior, criminals grow bolder.
It is past time for the world to recognize Vladimir Putin for what he is: a man who is taking Russia back into the shadows.
So the world must now ponder that old Latin maxim qui tacet consentere videtur – silence means consent – and ask itself if it is wise to quietly consent to Putin’s construction of a lawless energy superpower.
An Accidental Cure for Iraq
Doctors use the word “crisis” to describe the point at which a patient either starts to recover or dies.
President George W. Bush’s Iraqi patient now seems to have reached that point.
Most commentators appear to think that Bush’s latest prescription – a surge of 20,000 additional troops to suppress the militias in Baghdad – will, at best, merely postpone the inevitable death of his dream of a democratic Iraq.
Yet as “Battle of Baghdad” begins, factors beyond Bush’s control and not of his making (at least not intentionally) may just save Iraq from its doom.
One key factor is that, for the first time since the United States and Britain invaded Iraq, Arab Sunni leaders are backing a US military plan for that country.
These Sunni leaders live in abject fear of the geopolitical earthquake that any disintegration of political authority in Baghdad would bring, believing that all-out civil war would invariably follow – a war that would not respect international borders.
Of course, America has been encouraging Sunni leaders in this belief.
Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice’s recent tour of Middle East capitals helped spread the word to Egypt, Jordan, Saudi Arabia, and the Gulf states that any US failure and sudden withdrawal would be certain to destabilize them.
Given the fragile grip that these leaders have over their societies, America’s warnings have been taken to heart.
But the truly curious factor that might bring success to Bush is that those who have opposed or resented America’s presence in Iraq, such as the Iranian-backed Shi’a parties now also appear to want Bush’s new strategy to succeed.
They are for it because they believe it will defang Moqtada al-Sadr, the rogue Shi’a cleric whose power has mushroomed over the past three years – to the point that he now dominates much of Baghdad and holds the allegiance of countless angry young Shi’a men.
Of course, attacking Moqtada al-Sadr’s Mahdi Army in the name of fighting militia death squads has the potential to draw American military forces into a level of urban warfare unseen since the Falluja assaults of 2004 and 2005.
Al-Sadr is seen as the protector of the Shi’a of Iraq and has are an estimated 60,000 fighters in his militia.
But he is deeply mistrusted by other Shi’a leaders, who fear that they may one day have to take him on by themselves.
Better to let the Americans do it, though of course these Shi’a leaders prefer a slow strangulation of al-Sadr to a direct and bloody assault.
But make no mistake: how al-Sadr is handled is the big test of Bush’s new strategy.
Should the US choose to face al-Sadr and his forces head on, they risk alienating Iraq’s largest sectarian community, the Shi’a, adding fuel to the anti-occupation resistance and thus probably dooming Bush to failure.
Iran and Syria, which have played a spoiler role in Iraq up to now, may also now be anxious to find a way to pull the country back from the brink.
Bush still refuses to talk to either of them, and has lately been having US troops arrest Iranian agents in Iraq.
Yet Iran may already see itself as victorious, with the current Iraqi government friendlier than any the Iranians have ever known.
So maintaining that government in office has now become a strategic priority for Iran, particularly as it is now clear that any US hopes of using Iraq as a permanent military base are dead. 
The “surge” also opens, perhaps for the first time, a serious possibility of pouring water on the insurgent fires in Anbar province, the heartland of the Sunni insurgency.
The US has achieved relative successes in the province through alliances with Sunni tribes.
The hope is that such realistic and pragmatic accommodations will be extended to Iraqis who are fighting under the banner of a nationalist and anti-occupation agenda.
So some of the stars have come into alignment for Bush.
But to keep them there in the long term, the Iraqi government will need to amend the constitution in a way that appeases the Sunni community.