So, what might an alternative look like?
The 1944 Bretton Woods conference featured a clash of two men and their visions: Harry Dexter White, President Franklin Roosevelt’s representative, and John Maynard Keynes, representing a fading British Empire.
Unsurprisingly, White’s scheme, founded on the United States’ post-war trade surplus, which it deployed to dollarize Europe and Japan in exchange for their acquiescence to full monetary-policy discretion for the US, prevailed.
And the new post-war system provided the foundation for capitalism’s finest hour – until America lost its surplus and White’s arrangement collapsed.
The question asked periodically during much of the last decade is straightforward: Would Keynes’s discarded plan be more appropriate for our post-2008 multipolar world?
Zhou Xiaochuan, the governor of China’s central bank, suggested so in early 2009, lamenting that Bretton Woods had not embraced Keynes’s proposal.
Two years later, Dominique Strauss-Kahn, then-Managing Director of the International Monetary Fund, was asked what he thought the IMF’s post-2008 role ought to be.
He replied: “Keynes, 60 years ago, already foresaw what was needed; but it was too early.
Now is the time to do it.
And I think we are ready to do it!”
Within weeks, however, Strauss-Kahn fell from grace, without ever explaining what he meant.
But it is not too hard to sketch out what “it” might be.
Above all, the new system would reflect Keynes’s view that global stability is undermined by capitalism’s innate tendency to drive a wedge between surplus and deficit economies.
The surpluses and deficits grow larger during the upturn, and the burden of adjustment falls disproportionately on debtors during the downturn, leading to a debt-deflationary process that takes root in the deficit regions before dampening demand everywhere.
To counter this tendency, Keynes advocated replacing any system in which “the process of adjustment is compulsory for the debtor and voluntary for the creditor” with one in which the force of adjustment falls symmetrically upon debtors and creditors.
Keynes’ solution was an international clearing union (ICU) to which all major economies would subscribe.
While keeping their own currencies and central banks, members would agree to denominate all payments in a common accounting unit, which Keynes named the “bancor,” and to settle all international payments through the ICU.
Initially, each member state’s reserve account with the ICU would be credited with a sum of bancors proportionate to its relative share of world trade.
Thereafter, each would be credited with extra bancors in proportion to its net exports.
Once established, the ICU would tax persistent surpluses and deficits symmetrically, to annul the negative feedback mechanism between unbalanced capital flows, volatility, inadequate global aggregate demand, and unnecessary unemployment distributed unevenly around the world.
Keynes’s proposal was not without problems.
It envisaged fixed currencies, which would require limited overdraft facilities for countries in chronic deficit and would entail constant haggling between finance ministers about re-setting exchange and interest rates.
And rigid financial controls, which lend bureaucrats inordinate discretionary power over capital transfers, amount to a fatal flaw.
But there is no reason why an ICU cannot be designed with variable exchange rates and simple, automated rules which minimize politicians’ and bureaucrats’ discretionary power, while preserving the benefits of Keynes’s original idea for keeping global imbalances in check.
A new ICU, or NICU, would be as Keynes had envisaged it.
But, in place of the abstract bancor, it would feature a common digital currency – say, Kosmos – to be issued and regulated by the IMF.
The Fund would administer Kosmos on the basis of a transparent digital distributed ledger and an algorithm that would adjust total supply in a pre-agreed manner to the volume of world trade, allowing for an automatic countercyclical component that boosts global supply at times of a general slowdown.
Foreign-exchange markets would function as they do now, and the exchange rate between Kosmos and various currencies would vary in the same way that the IMF’s Special Drawing Rights do vis-à-vis the dollar, euro, yen, pound, and renminbi.
The difference, of course, would be that, under NICU, member states would allow all payments to one another to pass through their central bank’s NICU Kosmos account.
To exploit the scheme’s full potential for keeping imbalances in check, two stabilizing transfers would be introduced.
First, a trade-imbalance levy would be charged annually to each central bank’s Kosmos account in proportion to its current-account deficit or surplus and paid into a common NICU fund.
Second, private financial institutions would pay a fee into the same NICU fund in proportion to any surge of capital flows out of a country, reminiscent of the price hike that companies like Uber impose during peak traffic.
The trade-imbalance levy is intended to motivate surplus countries’ governments to boost domestic spending and investment while systematically reducing deficit countries’ international spending power.
Foreign-exchange markets will factor this in, adjusting exchange rates faster in response to current-account imbalances and canceling out much of the capital flows which today support chronically unbalanced trade.
Likewise, the “surge” charge will automatically penalize speculative, herd-like capital inflows or outflows, without increasing bureaucrats’ discretionary power or introducing inflexible capital controls.
Suddenly, the world will have acquired, without the need for subscribed capital, a global sovereign wealth fund.
This would enable the transition to a low-carbon energy system to be financed on a global scale and in a manner that stabilizes the global economy through investments in research and development dedicated to green energy and sustainable technologies.
Keynes was ahead of his time: His proposal necessitated digital technologies and foreign-currency markets that did not exist in the 1940s.
But we have them today, along with institutional experience with international clearing systems.
We also have a desperate need for the global green transition fund that a Keynesian Bretton Woods would automatically create.
All that we lack is the political process, indeed a Roosevelt, to convene the players and catalyze change.
Imagining Recession
The world’s housing, oil, and stock markets have been plunged into turmoil in recent months.
Yet consumer confidence, capital expenditure, and hiring have yet to take a sharp hit.
Why?
Ultimately, consumer and business confidence are mostly irrational.
The psychology of the markets is dominated by the public images that we have in mind from day to day, and that form the basis of our imaginations and of the stories we tell each other.
Popular images of past disasters are part of our folklore, often buried in the dim reaches of our memory, but re-emerging to trouble us from time to time.
Like traditional myths, such graphic, shared images embody fears that are deeply entrenched in our psyche.
The images that have accompanied past episodes of market turmoil are largely absent today.
Consider the oil crisis that began in November 1973, resulting in a world stock market crash and a sharp world recession.
Vivid images have stuck in people’s minds from that episode: long lines of cars at gas stations, people riding bicycles to work, gasless Sundays and other rationing schemes.
Today, the real price of oil is nearly twice as high as it was at the peak of that crisis, but we have seen nothing like the images from 1973-5.
Mostly we are not even reminded of them.
So our confidence is not shaken, yet.
Just before the October 19, 1987, stock market crash, the biggest one-day drop in history, the image on people’s minds was the crash of 1929.
Indeed, the Wall Street Journal ran a story about it on the morning of the 1987 crash.
I know that those images contributed to the severity of the 1987 crash by encouraging people to sell, because I ran a survey of individual and institutional investors the following week.
Images of 1929 – of financiers leaping from buildings, unemployed men sleeping on park benches, long lines at soup kitchens, and impoverished boys selling apples on the street – are not on our minds now.
The 1929 crash just does not seem relevant to most people today, probably because we survived the 1987 and 2000 crashes with few ill effects, while 1929 seems not only the distant past, but another world.
But images of the 1987 crash, driven by computers in tall modern steel-and-glass office buildings, do seem to be on people’s minds today.
The stock market suffered one of its biggest one-day drops this year on the 20th anniversary of the 1987 crash, with the S&amp;P 500 falling 2.56%.
No previous anniversary of the 1987 crash showed any such drop.
The image of a bank run, of long lines of angry people lining up outside a failed bank, was briefly on our minds after the Northern Rock failure in Britain.
But the Bank of England’s direct intervention prevented these images from gaining a foothold on our collective psychology.
The images that are uppermost in our minds are of a housing crisis.
We imagine residential streets with one “for sale” sign after another.
Worse, there are images of foreclosures, of families being evicted from their homes, their furniture and belongings on the street.
If home prices continue to decline in the United States and possibly elsewhere, there could be many more vivid images.
You may yet be presented with the image of your child’s playmate moving away because his parents were thrown out in a foreclosure.
You may see a house down the street trashed by an angry owner who was foreclosed.
Such images become part of your sense of reality, and could disturb your sense of confidence and reduce your willingness to spend and support the economy.
Could such changes in psychology be big enough to tip us into a world recession?
While it is far from clear that they will, it is a possibility.
Psychology need only change enough to bring about a drop in consumption or investment growth of a percentage point or so of world GDP, and market repercussions can do the rest.
The IMF’s Euro Crisis
OXFORD – Over the last few decades, the International Monetary Fund has learned six important lessons about how to manage government debt crises.
In its response to the crisis in Greece, however, each of these lessons has been ignored.
The Fund’s participation in the effort to rescue the eurozone may have raised its profile and gained it favor in Europe.
But its failure, and the failure of its European shareholders, to adhere to its own best practices may eventually prove to have been a fatal misstep.
One key lesson ignored in the Greece debacle is that when a bailout becomes necessary, it should be done once and definitively.
The IMF learned this in 1997, when an inadequate bailout of South Korea forced a second round of negotiations.
In Greece, the problem is even worse, as the €86 billion ($94 billion) plan now under discussion follows a €110 billion bailout in 2010 and a €130 billion rescue in 2012.
The IMF is, on its own, highly constrained.
Its loans are limited to a multiple of a country’s contributions to its capital, and by this measure its loans to Greece are higher than any in its history.
Eurozone governments, however, face no such constraints, and were thus free to put in place a program that would have been sustainable.
Another lesson that was ignored is not to bail out the banks.
The IMF learned this the hard way in the 1980s, when it transferred bad bank loans to Latin American governments onto its own books and those of other governments.
In Greece, bad loans issued by French and German banks were moved onto the public books, transferring the exposure not only to European taxpayers, but to the entire membership of the IMF.
The third lesson that the IMF was unable to apply in Greece is that austerity often leads to a vicious cycle, as spending cuts cause the economy to contract far more than it would have otherwise.
Because the IMF lends money on a short-term basis, there was an incentive to ignore the effects of austerity in order to arrive at growth projections that imply an ability to repay.
Meanwhile, the other eurozone members, seeking to justify less financing, also found it convenient to overlook the calamitous impact of austerity.
Fourth, the IMF has learned that reforms are most likely to be implemented when they are few in number and carefully focused.
When a country requires assistance, it is tempting for lenders to insist on a long list of reforms.
But a crisis-wracked government will struggle to manage multiple demands.
In Greece, the IMF, together with its European partners, required the government not just to cut expenditures, but to undertake far-reaching tax, pension, judicial, and labor-market reforms.
And, although the most urgently needed measures will not have an immediate effect on Greece’s finances, the IMF has little choice but to emphasize the short-term spending cuts that boost the chances of being repaid – even when that makes longer-term reforms more difficult to enact.
A fifth lesson is that reforms are unlikely to succeed unless the government is committed to seeing them through.
Conditions perceived to be imposed from abroad will almost certainly fail.
In the case of Greece, domestic political considerations caused European governments to make a show of holding the government’s feet to the fire.
The IMF, too, sought to demonstrate that it was being as tough with Greece as it has been on Brazil, Indonesia, and Zambia – even if doing so was ultimately counterproductive.
The sixth lesson the IMF has swept aside is that bailing out countries that do not fully control their currencies carries additional risks.
As the Fund learned in Argentina and West Africa, such countries lack one of the easiest ways to adjust to a debt crisis: devaluation.
Having failed to forewarn Greece, Portugal, Ireland, and Spain about the perils of joining a currency bloc, the IMF should have considered whether it was proper or necessary for it to intervene at all in the eurozone crisis.
Its rationale for doing so highlights the risks associated with its decision.
The most obvious reason for the IMF’s actions is that Europe was failing to address its own problems, and had the power and influence to drag in the Fund.
The IMF’s managing director has always been a European, and European countries enjoy a disproportionate share of the votes on the IMF’s board.
Equally important, however, is the fact that the IMF made its decision while facing an existential crisis.
Historically, the biggest threat to the IMF has been irrelevance.
It was almost made redundant in the 1970s, when the US floated the dollar, only to be saved in 1982 by the Mexican debt crisis, which propelled it into the role of global financial lifeguard.
A decade later, the IMF’s relevance had started to wane again, but was revived by its role in the transformation of the former Soviet-bloc economies.
At the time of the euro crisis, the Fund was floundering once more in the aftermath of the East Asian crisis, as its fee-paying clients did anything they could to avoid turning to it.
The IMF’s participation in the eurozone crisis has now given powerful emerging economies another reason to be disenchanted.
After the US stymied their demands for a greater say within the Fund, they now find that the organization has been doing Europe’s bidding.
It will be difficult for the IMF to regain the trust of these increasingly prominent members.
Unless the US and the EU relinquish their grip, the Fund’s latest bid for relevance may well turn out to be its last.
The IMF Still Misunderstands the Euro Crisis
WASHINGTON, DC – In July, the International Monetary Fund’s Independent Evaluation Office released a major report on how the Fund handled the euro crisis after 2010.
The IEO report is critical of Fund behavior; but, as with previous IMF self-evaluations, it misses many substantive issues.
Specifically, the IEO argues that the Fund was captive to European interests – hardly surprising, given that Europeans constitute one-third of the Fund’s executive board.
Moreover, the Fund was mistaken in assuming that “Europe is different,” and that “sudden stops could not happen within the euro area.”
In a financial crisis, authorities must act fast to address the problems that caused it and restore confidence.
The United States government did just that in the fall of 2008; European leaders, meanwhile, dithered – a point the IEO neglects to mention.
The IEO report also doesn’t assess IMF programs’ effectiveness.
Consider Greece, where the Fund’s response was clearly insufficient.
In 2009, the Greek budget deficit was 15% of GDP; with an IMF program, the deficit fell in 2010, but only to 11% of GDP.
Meanwhile, the three Baltic countries – Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania – carried out budget tightening of 9% of GDP in 2009.
The Fund and the European Union have long been oblivious to many EU countries’ excessive fiscal burdens.
The Fund was lenient toward Greece because Greece is a eurozone member; but this favoritism was unjustified and ultimately costly.
Greek public expenditures have fluctuated between 50% and 59% of GDP since 2010, creating a massive debt overhang and hindering growth.
By comparison, Germany and the United Kingdom have kept public expenditures at a reasonable 44% of GDP.
The IEO report ignores this and focuses instead on the need to restructure public debt, in order to make it sustainable.
But this didn’t necessarily apply to Greece in 2009, when its public debt was high – at 127% of GDP – but not unsustainable.
Greek debt surged and became insurmountable only under the IMF’s financing plan concluded in May 2010.
At the end of 2015, Italy’s public debt was 133% of GDP, and the ratio for Portugal was 129%. Should Italy and Portugal now be forced to restructure their debt, too?
The European economy grows slowly because it is overtaxed and overregulated.
Rather than being told to restructure debt, European countries should be told to deregulate markets for labor, products, and services; and southern countries such as Italy, Greece, Spain, and Portugal should be told to expand secondary education and vocational training.
As the Baltic example shows, quicker fiscal adjustments can drive structural changes.
Instead, policymakers miss the forest for the trees, as the IEO report shows.
Any accounting of European economic oversight in recent years should ask why the Greek crisis erupted in the spring of 2010, almost two years after the global financial crisis.
The answer is that when the European Central Bank flooded eurozone countries with cheap liquidity, governments dispensed with serious reforms and splurged instead.
This was partly because, in the fall of 2008, the G20 and the Fund issued desperate appeals for debt-financed fiscal stimulus.
Many European countries heeded the call; but, rather than stimulating economic growth, deficit spending jeopardized several countries’ financial stability.
Before it was all over, at least eight of the then 27 EU member states required IMF financing and restructuring programs.
The obvious lesson should have been that fiscal expansion does not stimulate economic growth when there is financial instability.
But the IMF, blinkered by its Keynesian orthodoxy, still refuses to acknowledge this fact.
Many EU countries were vulnerable because they had accumulated excessive and unnecessary public debts by maintaining budget deficits during the pre-crisis boom years.
By the end of 2007, the average public debt in the eurozone was 65% of GDP, five points above the ceiling set in the Maastricht treaty for countries seeking eurozone membership.
This partly reflected the decision by France, Germany, and Italy in 2003 to violate and later “reform” the Maastricht rules, effectively declaring them null and void.
The IMF did not object to these countries’ flouting of the public debt rules.
In fact, if one compares the Fund’s own positions with that of its internal watchdog, they are strikingly similar, raising doubts about the IEO’s independence in writing its report.
The IMF and the IEO both ignore the same central problems in the official response to the euro crisis so far.
A financial crisis should be met with swift action, and budget deficits should be slashed instantly, mainly through spending cuts.
Rapid fiscal adjustments drive structural reforms, which lead to faster economic growth.
The IMF’s acronym used to stand informally for “It’s Mostly Fiscal.”
Following its inadequate response to the euro crisis, the Fund should admit that the time has come to return to its roots.
The Fund that Cried Wolf?
LONDON – If you ask Google to find the text of the International Monetary Fund’s Global Financial Stability Report for April 2006, it helpfully asks whether you are really looking for the April 2016 version.
I am sure the IMF would never seek to manipulate a search engine, but I imagine that the Fund’s public affairs officials are happy if as few people as possible can access the 2006 version.
It was not one of the IMF’s most prescient publications.
Issued just as the first doubts about the subprime mortgage market in the United States were emerging, it presented a rosy view of the present and the future.
The authors did address whether global imbalances, derivatives, and subprime mortgages posed a threat to financial stability.
But they liked what they saw.
In the mortgage market, the IMF saw prospects of a soft landing.
It believed that global imbalances would unwind gradually.
And it paid tribute to the ability of US markets and financial firms to create innovative instruments to “attract and sustain high levels of capital inflows.”
Indeed, US markets were described as “deep, flexible, sophisticated, and by and large well-regulated.”
But the most remarkable misjudgment appears in the discussion of credit risk transfer.
The IMF concluded that “a wider dispersion of credit risk has derisked the financial sector.”
As a result, “banks should become more resilient and financially stable,” the consequences of which “should be seen in fewer bank failures and more consistent credit provision.”
We have entered an era in which “commercial banks may be less vulnerable to credit or economic shocks.”
This was not, shall we say, the IMF’s finest hour.
It brings to mind John Kenneth Galbraith’s famous quip that economic forecasters were put on Earth to make astrologers look good.
So maybe we should take the IMF’s more recent reports, which are full of dark warnings, with a grain of salt.
It would not be surprising if, even a decade on, the Fund continues to be influenced by its failure to warn in good time that a global financial crisis – the worst in nearly 80 years – was a material risk.
And, indeed, there are signs that the IMF now sees trouble everywhere it looks.
But, though the Fund’s economists may be at risk of forecasting ten of the next three crises, it would be unwise to dismiss their concerns entirely on the basis of past errors.
(That has been the trivializing response of “Brexit” campaigners to warnings by the European Union, the IMF, and the OECD, that withdrawal from the EU would cause severe damage to the British economy.)
The Fund makes some strong points, but others appear much less well founded.
The IMF’s strongest arguments concern China and European banks.
It is surely true that the buildup of debt in China calls for close monitoring, and that corporate deleveraging, which is urgently required, “should be accompanied by a strengthening of banks and social safety nets, especially for displaced workers in overcapacity sectors.”
There is no reason why that cannot be achieved – the overall balance sheet of China, Inc. remains strong – but the domestic distributional consequences will require careful management.
The second big challenge that the IMF identifies – excess capacity in the eurozone banking system, and the related problem of non-performing loans – is also, in principle, solvable.
The European Central Bank is well aware of the risk from weaker banks; but, with the eurozone economy heavily reliant on bank credit, addressing it is not straightforward.
And continued massive ECB intervention in the bond markets can only postpone the day of reckoning, not avert it.
But the third problem detected by the IMF may not be a problem at all.
The Fund argues that the life insurance industry could be a future source of systemic risk, and should therefore be subject to macroprudential stress testing, or counter-cyclical capital buffers, on the model used for banks.
The first recommendation is curious: IMF staff seem unaware that a stress-testing regime for insurers has already been put in place in some jurisdictions, notably the United Kingdom.
Indeed, there are stress tests, and so-called reverse stress tests, whereby insurers are required to describe what would need to occur to make them fail.
And of course insurers did – almost universally – pass a real-world stress test in the form of the financial crisis.
The one big failure, AIG, occurred because of problems in its non-insurance business.
Likewise, the IMF’s makes no compelling case for a macroprudential countercyclical approach to insurance capital.
The Fund’s own analysis does not demonstrate that insurers behave in a procyclical way.
On the contrary, there is some evidence that they acted counter-cyclically in the crisis.
Even the IMF concludes that “the evidence is not unequivocal.”
That is a thin basis on which to propose a new set of capital requirements, which would be “built up during upswings of the financial cycle and run down during periods of financial stress.”
Why such tinkering is appropriate on the asset side of the balance sheet, while liabilities remain unchanged, is not explained.
Perhaps it would be better if the IMF’s 2006 report could be put beyond reach, behind a firewall or somewhere on the dark web, in an unindexed museum of forecasting disasters.
Then the IMF could again take a balanced view, rather than issuing so many false alarms that it is ignored when a real fire starts.
The IMF’s “Tough Choices” on Greece
ATHENS – The International Monetary Fund’s chief economist, Olivier Blanchard, recently asked a simple and important question: “How much of an adjustment has to be made by Greece, how much has to be made by its official creditors?”
But that raises two more questions: How much of an adjustment has Greece already made?
And have its creditors given anything at all?
In May 2010, the Greek government agreed to a fiscal adjustment equal to 16% of GDP from 2010 to 2013.
As a result, Greece moved from a primary budget deficit (which excludes interest payments on debt) of more than 10% of GDP to a primary balance last year – by far the largest such reversal in post-crisis Europe.
The IMF initially projected that Greece’s real (inflation-adjusted) GDP would contract by around 5% over the 2010-2011 period, stabilize in 2012, and grow thereafter.
In fact, real GDP fell 25%, and did not recover.
And, because nominal GDP fell in 2014 and continues to fall, the debt/GDP ratio, which was supposed to stabilize three years ago, continues to rise.
Blanchard notes that in 2012, Greece agreed “to generate enough of a primary surplus to limit its indebtedness” and to implement “a number of reforms which should lead to higher growth.”
Those so-called reforms included sharply lower public spending, minimum-wage reductions, fire-sale privatizations, an end to collective bargaining, and deep pension cuts.
Greece followed through, but the depression continued.
The IMF and Greece’s other creditors have assumed that massive fiscal contraction has only a temporary effect on economic activity, employment, and taxes, and that slashing wages, pensions, and public jobs has a magical effect on growth.
This has proved false.
Indeed, Greece’s post-2010 adjustment led to economic disaster – and the IMF’s worst predictive failure ever.
Blanchard should know better than to persist with this fiasco.
Once the link between “reform” and growth is broken – as it has been in Greece – his argument collapses.
With no path to growth, the creditors’ demand for an eventual 3.5%-of-GDP primary surplus is actually a call for more contraction, beginning with another deep slump this year.
But, rather than recognizing this reality and adjusting accordingly, Blanchard doubles down on pensions.
He writes:
“Why insist on pensions?
Pensions and wages account for about 75% of primary spending; the other 25% have already been cut to the bone.
Pension expenditures account for over 16% of GDP, and transfers from the budget to the pension system are close to 10% of GDP.
We believe a reduction of pension expenditures of 1% of GDP (out of 16%) is needed, and that it can be done while protecting the poorest pensioners.”
Note first the damning admission: apart from pensions and wages, spending has already been “cut to the bone.”
And remember: the effect of this approach on growth was negative.
So, in defiance of overwhelming evidence, the IMF now wants to target the remaining sector, pensions, where massive cuts – more than 40% in many cases – have already been made.
The new cuts being demanded would hit the poor very hard.
Pension payments now account for 16% of Greek GDP precisely because Greece’s economy is 25% smaller than it was in 2009.
Without five years of disastrous austerity, Greek GDP might be 33% higher than it is now, and pensions would be 12% of GDP rather than 16%.
The math is straightforward.
Blanchard calls on Greece’s government to offer “truly credible measures.”
Shouldn’t the IMF do likewise?
To get pensions down by one percentage point of GDP, nominal economic growth of just 4% per year for two years would suffice – with no further cuts.
Why not have “credible measures” to achieve that goal?
This brings us to Greek debt.
As everyone at the IMF knows, a debt overhang is a vast unfunded tax liability that says to investors: enter at your own risk.
At any time, your investments, profits, and hard work may be taxed away to feed the dead hand of past lenders.
The overhang is a blockade against growth.
That is why every debt crisis, sooner or later, ends in restructuring or default.
Blanchard is a pioneer in the economics of public debt.
He knows that Greece’s debt has not been sustainable at any point during the last five years, and that it is not sustainable now.
On this point, Greece and the IMF agree.
In fact, Greece has a credible debt proposal.
First, let the European Stabilization Mechanism (ESM) lend €27 billion ($30 billion), at long maturities, to retire the Greek bonds that the European Central Bank foolishly bought in 2010.
Second, use the profits on those bonds to pay off the IMF.
Third, include Greece in the ECB’s program of quantitative easing, which would let it return to the markets.
Greece would agree to fair conditions for the ESM loan.
It does not ask for one cent of additional official funding for the Greek state.
It is promising to live within its means forever, and rely on internal savings and external investment for growth – far short of what any large country, controlling its own currency, would do when facing a comparable disaster.
Blanchard insists that now is the time for “tough choices, and tough commitments to be made on both sides.”
Indeed it is.
But the Greeks have already made tough choices.
Now it is the IMF’s turn, beginning with the decision to admit that the policies it has imposed for five long years created a disaster.
For the other creditors, the toughest choice is to admit – as the IMF knows – that their Greek debts must be restructured.
New loans for failed policies – the current joint creditor proposal – is, for them, no adjustment at all.
IMF Go Home
BRUSSELS – The curtains are up on another act of the Greek debt drama.
Eurozone finance ministers and the International Monetary Fund have agreed with Greece to begin, per the IMF’s demands, providing some debt relief to the country, and to release €10.3 billion ($11.6 billion) in bailout funds.
Greece, for its part, has agreed to another round of austerity and structural reform.
Until recently, the IMF insisted that it would participate in the next Greek rescue program only if it deemed Greek debt to be sustainable.
Based on the IMF’s most recent debt sustainability analysis, that is not the case.
Germany, however, insisted that the IMF remain on board – and, with the latest deal, it seems to have prevailed, in exchange for agreeing to debt relief that it opposed.
The victory may well not have been worth the sacrifice.
In fact, it would have been better to let the IMF pull out, for two reasons. First, the IMF’s assessments of debt sustainability in Greece are undermined by a deep conflict of interest.
Second, and more important, IMF credits are too expensive.
In a normal bailout procedure, the IMF acts as an impartial judge of the troubled country’s debt sustainability; then, if it so chooses, it can step in as the lender of last resort.
This is what happened in 2010, when the private sector wanted to flee from Greece and a systemic crisis loomed.
But today Greece has only a few private-sector obligations. Eurozone governments are the ones offering large amounts of funding.
For its part, the IMF has a large volume of credits outstanding.
Of course, if Greece’s creditors accept a haircut, the IMF’s credits would become more secure – hence the conflict of interest.
Indeed, the IMF’s debt sustainability analysis can hardly be considered neutral, and would surely be rejected by private-sector actors.
A neutral judge – not one of the creditors – usually sets the terms in insolvency proceedings.
This is not to say that the IMF’s conclusion is necessarily wrong.
In fact, one could debate the question of Greece’s debt sustainability endlessly.
Some might suspect that Greece’s debt is sustainable, since the Greek government has to pay less in interest than Portugal or Italy, both of which have much lower debt levels.
The IMF, however, argues that, despite these low interest payments, the refinancing needs of Greece will surpass 15% of GDP (an arbitrary threshold, to be sure) at some point – perhaps as soon as 15 years.
What the IMF fails to highlight is that, if that happens, it will be primarily because of the IMF itself – or, more precisely, the high cost of its loans.
The IMF is charging a much higher interest rate (up to 3.9%) than the Europeans (slightly above 1%, on average), largely because it has surcharges of up to 300 basis points on its own funding costs, compared to less than 50 basis points for the European lenders.
Moreover, IMF loans are to be repaid in just 5-7 years, on average, compared to up to 50 years for the European funding.
The IMF assumes that its loans will be substituted by private-sector loans at even higher interest rates (over 6%).
This would cause Greece’s debt to snowball, given that its GDP growth is highly unlikely to achieve such a rate in the foreseeable future.
The good news is that there is a simple way to avoid this outcome: replace the IMF’s expensive short-term funding with cheap long-term European loans.
With that switch, Greek debt may well become sustainable, even by IMF standards.
Of course, this would require more funding from the European Stability Mechanism, the eurozone’s rescue fund.
But the ESM would face lower risks, because the IMF has “super-senior status,” meaning that its loans are supposed to be repaid first, anyway. (It should be noted that the most senior creditor usually charges the lowest, not the highest, interest rate, as the IMF does.)
The savings for Greece would be huge.
Given that the average surcharge on the IMF’s Greek loans is about 250 basis points, and the IMF has more than €14 billion in outstanding credits, the IMF is extracting huge profits from Greece – more than €800 million annually since 2013, nearly the equivalent of the Fund’s yearly operating costs.
The IMF is a valuable global institution, but it should not be financed mainly by Greek taxpayers (and pre-financed by eurozone taxpayers).
By sending the IMF packing today, Greece might save several billion euros over the next decade, with a commensurate reduction in risk for European creditors.
Add to that the IMF’s inability to provide impartial analysis of Greece’s debt sustainability, and it is hard to see how anyone can argue that the Fund can make a contribution to the Greek negotiations today.
There is a broader point as well.
Greece is not the only country suffering from the high cost of IMF loans.
The outstanding IMF loans held by Ireland and Portugal, which amount to another €23 billion, should also be re-financed.
If IMF loans are replaced with ESM financing, eurozone taxpayers will save hundreds of millions of euros per year.
The IMF’s participation in the rescue programs for Greece, Ireland, and Portugal has already cost taxpayers in those countries nearly €9 billion in excess charges.
While that mistake cannot be reversed, it can be rectified.
If it is handled quickly enough, some €4 billion could still be saved.
A few years ago, European bodies may not have had the expertise to manage adjustment programs without the IMF’s guidance.
That is no longer true. There is no good reason to keep the IMF around today – and there are billions of good reasons to send it home.
How the IMF Failed Greece
NEW DELHI – Democracy is about real choices.
But, throughout their country’s crisis, the Greek people have been deprived of them.
For this, the Europe Union and especially the International Monetary Fund bear considerable responsibility.
Greece was offered two stark choices: Leave the eurozone without financing, or remain and receive support at the price of further austerity.
But Greece should have been offered a third option: Leave the euro, but with generous financing.
This option should have been put on the table, recognizing that Greece has broader political reasons for staying within the eurozone.
Although exiting the monetary union would have yielded considerable benefits, “Grexit” would have entailed sizeable costs as well.
The benefits would have included a massive devaluation, which would have restored some dynamism to what was once a fast-growing economy.
But the costs were terrifying.
The government would have had to default, the banks would have been ruined, and both would have struggled for years to regain the trust of financial markets.
As a result, interest rates would have remained high for a long time to come, impeding efforts to restore growth.
Is it any wonder that the Greek government shrank from this horror and chose the “safe” option of austerity?
But this option may not be safe at all.
It is in fact, to quote T.S. Eliot, that “awful daring of a moment’s surrender...”
Greece will now need to grind away at austerity, hoping that in some distant future “internal devaluation” – that is, wage and price deflation – will help to spark a recovery.
Only the IMF could have offered the third option of an orderly exit.
Greece should have been told that it could reap the benefits of devaluation, while the international community would act to minimize the attendant costs.
The precise terms of Grexit – agreed by the troika (the IMF, the European Commission, and the European Central Bank) and Greek authorities – surely would have included a negotiated reduction in Greece’s debts, as well as a strategy for recapitalizing the banking system in order minimize uncertainty, pain, and disruption.
Still, the costs would have been sizeable, so the IMF would have needed to offer generous financing, covering the country’s import requirements for, say, two years while providing the liquidity to manage the transition to a new currency.
Of course, this would have increased the IMF’s already-large exposure to Greece; but this would have been a worthwhile trade-off, because it would have served a strategy that would have had a much better chance of success.
But is there any strategy that could have succeeded in restoring the Greek economy?
After all, under any scenario, Greece will need to run a primary surplus and undertake structural reforms to transform its economy.
And many insist that this will not happen, because Greece simply refuses to change.
And yet such assessments overlook the record of the past few years, during which successive governments have taken some fairly radical measures to strengthen Greece’s fiscal position and scale back the public payroll.
Moreover, the skeptics overlook the fact that incentives to carry out structural reforms are partly endogenous.
After all, without devaluation and the prospect of debt relief, reform merely spells more short-term pain, not less.
The reason why an assisted Grexit was never offered seems clear: Greece’s European creditors were vehemently opposed to the idea.
But it is not clear that the IMF should have placed great weight on these concerns.
Back in 2010, creditor countries were concerned about contagion to the rest of the eurozone. If Grexit had succeeded, the entire monetary union would have come under threat, because investors would have wondered whether some of the eurozone’s other highly indebted countries would have followed Greece’s lead.
But this risk is actually another argument in favor of providing Greece with the option of leaving.
There is something deeply unappealing about yoking countries together when being unyoked is more advantageous.
More recently, creditor countries have been concerned about the financial costs to member governments that have lent to Greece.
But Latin America in the 1980s showed that creditor countries stand a better chance of being repaid (in expected-value terms) when the debtor countries are actually able to grow.
In short, the IMF should not have made Europe’s concerns, about contagion or debt repayment, decisive in its decision-making.
Instead, it should have publicly pushed for the third option, which would have been a watershed, for it would have signaled that the IMF will not be driven by its powerful members to acquiesce in bad policies.
Indeed, it would have afforded the Fund an opportunity to atone for its complicity in the creditor-driven, austerity-addled misery to which Greeks have been subject for the last five years.
Above all, it would have enabled the IMF to move beyond being the instrument of status quo powers – the United States and Europe.
From an Asian perspective, by defying its European shareholders, the IMF would have gone a long way toward heralding the emergence of a new institution: a truly International Monetary Fund, in place of today’s Euro-Atlantic Monetary Fund.
All is not lost.
If the current strategy fails, the third option – assisted Grexit – remains available.
The IMF should plan for it.
The Greek people deserve some real choices in the near future.
The IMF Needs More Lagarde
DAVOS – Christine Lagarde has said she is open to serving another five-year term as Managing Director of the International Monetary Fund.
She should get it.
The IMF has never had better leadership, and its board of directors should give her the chance to finish the work she has begun.
When Lagarde took the helm in July 2011, she inherited an institution in crisis.
The global financial meltdown in 2008 and its economic aftershocks had discredited Western-led multilateral lenders and the free-market “Washington Consensus.”
Lagarde’s leadership has helped to restore the Fund’s reputation.
Much attention is paid to her personal qualities – and rightly so.
She is frank, forceful, warm, and engaging.
In country after country, officials with whom she has met, often under delicate circumstances, describe her as both a teller of difficult truths and a sensitive listener.
These are important qualities for the leader of an institution that must negotiate, rather than dictate, terms of agreement.
The Europeans did not like it much when Lagarde told them their banks needed to be restructured or that they needed to build a firewall to protect against financial contagion – but they did it.
Likewise, she made tough calls on providing IMF support to countries – for example, Greece, Pakistan, Tunisia, and Ukraine – that are crucial to global stability.
And there’s much more.
The Fund is not often associated with creativity and compassion.
Lagarde has begun to change that.
In the process, she has provided a human face for an institution often associated with the prescription of bitter medicine.
Helping to manage the Middle East’s refugee crisis, for example, is not an expected part of the IMF’s mandate.
Yet, under her leadership, the Fund adjusted a program so that Jordan’s government could spend more to help those displaced by conflict in Syria and Iraq (more than a million of whom are housed in camps within its borders).
Similarly, when Ebola struck West Africa in 2014, Lagarde directed the IMF to use its available cash to buy debt relief for countries in crisis, which enabled them to pay more doctors and nurses – the first-ever such use of IMF capital.
In addition, Lagarde has identified, and acted on, three of the most important challenges facing today’s world.
First, she has been both a forceful voice for the introduction of more women into the workforce and an exemplar of the value of having women in leadership positions.
In countries as different as Saudi Arabia and Japan, she has urged leaders to stop wasting so much human talent – and thereby realize their economies’ potential.
Second, under her leadership, the IMF has also addressed the broader question of income inequality.
This is not simply a question of basic fairness.
The Fund’s research has highlighted the direct link between narrowing the gap between rich and poor and higher economic growth.
The IMF is not the first to make this case, but its stature gives the issue greater prominence and urgency.
Lagarde’s personal commitment to driving home this point has been essential to advancing the argument.
Third, Lagarde has done important work in helping the world begin to understand the full implications – some of them frighteningly destabilizing – of technological change.
For example, automation will continue to make manufacturing more efficient and less costly, but it will also ensure that economic growth generates fewer jobs than in the past.
The political, economic, and social consequences of this emerging reality deserve recognition and serious study.
Lagarde has brought the IMF into the center of that work.
Critics will say that it’s time for an IMF head who represents the developing world.
Lagarde is, after all, the 11th consecutive European to hold the post, a privilege that has become hard to justify in today’s world.
Others will say that the failure to recognize the full effects of IMF-endorsed austerity on Greek citizens proves that she is out of touch with ordinary people.
Still others will argue that the charges she faces in connection with a financial scandal in France will distract her from IMF business.
After the ugly scandal surrounding Dominique Strauss-Kahn, her predecessor at the Fund, the Fund, critics will insist, can’t afford such a distraction.
Let’s take these objections one at a time.
The IMF (and the World Bank) should welcome leadership from beyond Europe and the United States.
But the purpose of ending this Western privilege is to make the leadership selection process one that is based on merit, not political considerations.
Lagarde is the best candidate for the job, and emerging powers like the BRIC countries (Brazil, Russia, India, and China) have not united behind an alternative.
The leadership of a European managing director probably facilitated the IMF’s decision late last year to add China’s renminbi to the basket of currencies underpinning its Special Drawing Rights.
In addition, Lagarde displayed impressive political dexterity in finally persuading Republicans and Democrats in the US Congress to pass governance reforms that not only bolster the IMF’s firepower to fight financial crises, but also more accurately reflect changing global economic dynamics.
The BRIC countries, for example, are now among the IMF’s top ten shareholders.
On Greece, Lagarde made some characteristically blunt – some would say clumsy –comments last year.
But she is not near the top of the list of those responsible for the economic pain endured by Greeks, and her tenure at the IMF makes abundantly clear that no managing director in history has done more to lead the Fund in efforts to alleviate the suffering of people in crisis.
Finally, the French charges against Lagarde were filed over the objection of the country’s prosecutor-general, and her involvement in the case appears tangential at best.
The world badly needs a leader dedicated to making the world a safer and more prosperous place.
Lagarde has shown that she is such a leader, committed to making the IMF fit for the twenty-first century.
She deserves the chance to finish what she started.
How to Reform the IMF Now
WASHINGTON, DC – More than four years have passed since an overwhelming majority of the membership of the International Monetary Fund agreed to a package of reforms that would double the organization’s resources and reorganize its governing structure in favor of developing countries.
But adopting the reforms requires approval by the IMF’s member countries; and, though the United States was among those that voted in favor of the measure, President Barack Obama has been unable to secure Congressional approval.
The time has come to consider alternative methods for moving the reforms forward.
The delay by the US represents a huge setback for the IMF.
It stands in the way of a restructuring of its decision-making process that would better reflect developing countries’ growing importance and dynamism.
Furthermore, with the reforms in limbo, the IMF has been forced to depend largely on loans from its members, rather than the permanent resources called for by the new measures.
These loans, meant as a temporary bridge before the reforms entered into effect, need to be reaffirmed every six months.
In our view, the best way forward would be to decouple the part of the reforms that requires ratification by the US Congress from the rest of the package.
Only one major element – the decision to move toward an all-elected Executive Board – requires an amendment to the IMF’s Articles of Agreement and thus congressional approval.
The other major element of the reform package is an increase and rebalancing of the quotas that determine each country’s voting power and financial obligation.
This change would double the IMF’s resources and provide greater voting power to developing countries.
Congress would still need to ratify the measure before the US’s own quota increased, but its approval would not be required for this part of the reform package to take effect for other countries.
The connection between the two parts of the reforms has always been unnecessary; the measures are independent, require different approval processes, and can be delivered separately.
Removing the link between them would require the support of the US administration, but not ratification by Congress.
This separation could be implemented smoothly.
A simple majority of the IMF’s Executive Board would recommend it to the Board of Governors, where a resolution separating the reforms into two parts would require 85% of the votes.
In 2010, the reform package passed with more than 95% of the votes.
The changes to the quotas could then quickly become effective.
The quotas for each member country have already been agreed, so there would be no need for further complex and time-consuming negotiations.
Countries that are willing and able to pay their quota increases would be allowed to do so, increasing the IMF’s resources and boosting their relative voting power.
The key obstacle to this proposal is the requirement of congressional approval to increase America’s quota share.
This opens the possibility that the US’s voting power could temporarily fall below the 15% threshold needed to veto decisions that require the support of 85% of IMF members’ votes.
In order to secure US support, the Board of Governors could commit not to consider any draft decision requiring 85% backing without America’s consent.
This guarantee could be included in the resolution dividing the reform package into two parts.
It would remain valid until the US was in a position to increase its quota and recover its voting share.
The Executive Board could approve an analogous commitment and request the IMF’s managing director to refrain from submitting any draft decision requiring an 85% majority without first obtaining US support.
The US administration might face criticism from Congress for accepting a measure that would temporarily cut the country’s voting share and for relying on a political agreement to preserve its veto power.
But the agreement could also act as an incentive for ratifying the reforms.
The power to reinstate the US’s formal veto power would lie entirely in the hands of Congress – making it unlikely that another four years would pass before the matter is finally resolved.
Airing the IMF’s Dirty Laundry
BERKELEY – Following the International Monetary Fund’s controversial actions in the Asian financial crisis of 1998, when it conditioned liquidity assistance to distressed countries on government belt-tightening, the IMF established an Independent Evaluation Office (IEO) to undertake arm’s-length assessments of its policies and programs.
That office has now issued a comprehensive critique of the Fund’s role in Europe’s post-2008 crisis.
Many of the IEO’s conclusions will be familiar.
Such self-serving claims were in the interest of European officials, but why was the IMF prepared to accept them?
One answer is that European governments are large shareholders in the Fund.
Another is that the IMF is a predominantly European institution, with a European managing director, a heavily European staff, and a European culture.
The report, still on familiar ground, then goes on to criticize the Fund for acquiescing to European resistance to debt restructuring by Greece in 2010. It criticizes the IMF for setting ambitious targets for fiscal consolidation– necessary if debt restructuring was to be avoided – but underestimating austerity’s damaging economic effects.
More interestingly, the report then asks how the Fund should coordinate its operations with regional bodies like the European Commission and the ECB, the other members of the so-called Troika of Greece’s official creditors. The report rejects claims that the IMF was effectively a junior member of the Troika, insisting that all decisions were made by consensus.
But that is difficult to square with everything we know about the fateful decision not to restructure Greece’s debt.
IMF staff favored restructuring, but the European Commission and the ECB, which put up two-thirds of the money, ultimately had their way.
He who has the largest wallet speaks with the loudest voice.
In other words, there are different roads to “consensus.”
The Fund encountered the same problem in 2008, when it insisted on currency devaluation as part of an IMF-EU program for Latvia. In the end, the Fund felt compelled to defer to the EU’s opposition to devaluation, because it contributed only 20% of the funds.
The implication is that the IMF should not participate in a program to which it contributes only a minority share of the finance.
But expecting the IMF to provide majority funding implies the need to expand its financial resources.
This is something that the IEO report evidently regarded as beyond its mandate – or too sensitive – to discuss.
And was the ECB even on the right side of the table in these European debt discussions?
When negotiating with a country, the IMF ordinarily demands conditions of its government and central bank.
In its programs with Greece, Ireland, and Portugal, however, the IMF and the central bank demanded conditions of the government.
This struck more than a few people as bizarre.
It would have been better if, in 2010, the IMF had demanded of the ECB a pledge “to do whatever it takes” and a program of “outright monetary transactions,” like those ECB President Mario Draghi eventually offered two years later.
This would have addressed the contagion problem that was one basis for European officials’ resistance to a Greek debt restructuring.
One objection to imposing conditions on the ECB is that the eurozone, as a regional entity, is not an IMF member. Only countries, not regions, are entitled to draw IMF resources.
But nothing prevents the IMF from demanding policy commitments from regional bodies when lending to their member governments.
This has been done before when African and Caribbean monetary unions and central banks were involved.
Finally, the report criticizes IMF management for failing to ensure adequate involvement by the Executive Board, its oversight committee of 24 national representatives.
Board approval was sought, but only after the key decisions were already made.
Moreover, the Board was forced to act under intense time pressure and lacked the information needed to challenge management recommendations.
LAGUNA BEACH – There were quite a few disconnects at the recently concluded Annual Meetings of the International Monetary Fund and World Bank.
Among the most striking was the disparity between participants’ interest in discussions of inequality and the ongoing lack of a formal action plan for governments to address it.
This represents a profound failure of policy imagination – one that must urgently be addressed.
There is good reason for the spike in interest.
While inequality has decreased across countries, it has increased within them, in the advanced and developing worlds alike.
The process has been driven by a combination of secular and structural issues – including the changing nature of technological advancement, the rise of “winner-take-all” investment characteristics, and political systems favoring the wealthy – and has been turbocharged by cyclical forces.
In the developed world, the problem is rooted in unprecedented political polarization, which has impeded comprehensive responses and placed an excessive policy burden on central banks.
Though monetary authorities enjoy more political autonomy than other policymaking bodies, they lack the needed tools to address effectively the challenges that their countries face.
In normal times, fiscal policy would support monetary policy, including by playing a redistributive role.
But these are not normal times.
With political gridlock blocking an appropriate fiscal response – after 2008, the United States Congress did not pass an annual budget, a basic component of responsible economic governance, for five years – central banks have been forced to bolster economies artificially.
To do so, they have relied on near-zero interest rates and unconventional measures like quantitative easing to stimulate growth and job creation.
Beyond being incomplete, this approach implicitly favors the wealthy, who hold a disproportionately large share of financial assets.
Meanwhile, companies have become increasingly aggressive in their efforts to reduce their tax bills, including through so-called inversions, by which they move their headquarters to lower-tax jurisdictions.
As a result, most countries face a trio of inequalities – of income, wealth, and opportunity – which, left unchecked, reinforce one another, with far-reaching consequences.
Indeed, beyond this trio’s moral, social, and political implications lies a serious economic concern: instead of creating incentives for hard work and innovation, inequality begins to undermine economic dynamism, investment, employment, and prosperity.
Given that affluent households spend a smaller share of their incomes and wealth, greater inequality translates into lower overall consumption, thereby hindering the recovery of economies already burdened by inadequate aggregate demand.
Today’s high levels of inequality also impede the structural reforms needed to boost productivity, while undermining efforts to address residual pockets of excessive indebtedness.
This is a dangerous combination that erodes social cohesion, political effectiveness, current GDP growth, and future economic potential.
That is why it is so disappointing that, despite heightened awareness of inequality, the IMF/World Bank meetings – a gathering of thousands of policymakers, private-sector participants, and journalists, which included seminars on inequality in advanced countries and developing regions alike – failed to make a consequential impact on the policy agenda.
Policymakers seem convinced that the time is not right for a meaningful initiative to address inequality of income, wealth, and opportunity.
But waiting will only make the problem more difficult to resolve.
In fact, a number of steps can and should be taken to stem the rise in inequality.
In the US, for example, sustained political determination would help to close massive loopholes in estate planning and inheritance, as well as in household and corporate taxation, that disproportionately benefit the wealthy.
Likewise, there is scope for removing the antiquated practice of taxing hedge and private-equity funds’ “carried interest” at a preferential rate.
The way home ownership is taxed and subsidized could be reformed more significantly, especially at the top price levels.
And a strong case has been made for raising the minimum wage.
To be sure, such measures will make only a dent in inequality, albeit an important and visible one.
In order to deepen their impact, a more comprehensive macroeconomic policy stance is needed, with the explicit goal of reinvigorating and redesigning structural-reform efforts, boosting aggregate demand, and eliminating debt overhangs.
Such an approach would reduce the enormous policy burden currently borne by central banks.
It is time for heightened global attention to inequality to translate into concerted action.
Some initiatives would tackle inequality directly; others would defuse some of the forces that drive it.
Together, they would go a long way toward mitigating a serious impediment to the economic and social wellbeing of current and future generations.
The Migration Superpowers
LONDON – We have entered the age of migration.
If all the people who live outside the country of their birth united to form their own – a republic of the rootless – it would be the fifth-largest country in the world, with a population of more than 240 million people.
Though much has been written about how a world on the move is changing national politics, there has been little consideration of its geopolitical effects.
But the mass movement of people is already creating three types of migration superpowers: new colonialists, integrators, and go-betweens.
The new colonialists call to mind the settlers from Europe who spread across the world in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, benefiting not just themselves, but also their homelands.
Similarly, the most mobile populations of the twenty-first century are helping their countries of origin obtain access to markets, technology, and a political voice in the world.
The American journalist Howard W. French describes how Africa has become “China’s second continent,” as more than a million new Chinese settlers remake Sub-Saharan Africa.
With more Chinese citizens living outside mainland China than there are French people living in France, a similar story is playing out on almost every continent.
When those migrants return to China, their capabilities are expertly harvested.
Known in China as “sea turtles,” they dominate their country’s technology industry.
India, too, has a large diaspora of an estimated 20 million citizens who are super-successful and hyper-connected.
Indian-born entrepreneurs are responsible for setting up one in ten companies in Silicon Valley.
Microsoft’s chief executive is of Indian origin, as is the inventor of the Intel Pentium processor, the former chief technology officer at Motorola, and the CEO of Google.
How does this benefit India?
For starters, India receives more than $70 billion in remittances every year, the largest sum worldwide, amounting to nearly 4% of its GDP, which is more than it spends on education.