Why are Latvia’s people, among the poorest in the Union, expected to pay for something that Europe’s richest people are finding difficult to do?
Latvia and other new EU members have little recourse but to challenge the European Commission in court.
But suits and countersuits are not how we imagined the EU working when we struggled to join it.
We thought that Europe believed in sharing its burdens equitably.
Unfortunately, when it comes to the environment, Europe’s have-nots are being told to carry the load by themselves.
The Environmental Effect of Tsunamis
Reports about the tsunamis that devastated Southeast Asia barely a month ago have understandably been dominated by tales of death, suffering, and the physical destruction of infrastructure.
But man was not alone in feeling the impact.
Ecosystems and other species were also hit.
To be sure, photographic and video images relayed by the media have shown trees swept away by waves and water-drenched lands.
Other reports have mentioned wildlife that escaped the destruction, as some sort of instinct seemed to tell them to seek higher ground prior to the arrival of the tsunami waves.
And yet the full scope of the tsunamis’ environmental impact remains under-reported, despite its obvious importance for the recovery of the affected areas and the well being of the survivors.
Experience from previous tsunamis and other major floods suggests that the environmental damage they inflict is linked to saltwater intrusion in ground water and to the disappearance or relocation of beaches.
Tsunamis may make small, low islands uninhabitable.
Vegetation in large stretches of lowland can be hurt substantially as saltwater-tolerant mangroves and grasses take over from other species.
For rare animals with specific reproduction sites, like marine turtles, the tsunami’s effects could spell extinction.
But whereas the damage to the environment on land can be seen, the ravages imposed on the marine environment are hidden.
Obviously, when extremely strong waves hit coral reefs, some coral breaks off.
But this is a comparatively small problem.
The surface of coral is highly sensitive, and will now be exposed to major damage from all sorts of silt and debris carried back by water receding from flooded land.
At the same time, the material brought back from land to sea include nutrients and trace elements that cause a boom among plankton, which in turn feed other marine biota.
Locally, but sometimes still at a grand scale, the shock waves cause major sediment slides on steep underwater slopes such as those of the continental shelves.
Closer to the shore, many natural ecosystems, most notably coral reefs and mangroves, act as natural shock absorbers and wave breakers.
During the past several decades, these ecosystems have been damaged and reduced in most countries along the Indian Ocean.
Indeed, the damage from the tsunami waves was far more devastating than it would have been had they still been intact.
Wildlife may fare better than the physical environment.
This is particularly true of fish stocks, owing to large-scale destruction to fisheries.
More than 13,000 fishermen were killed and another 5,000 evacuated in Sri Lanka alone, with 80% of the fishing fleet lost or severely damaged.
On the Thai coast, according to the UN Food and Agriculture Organization, 4,500 fishing vessels were smashed, jeopardizing the livelihoods of 120,000 people in fishing villages there. 
The situation on Sumatra is similarly grim, and it is perhaps even worse in the Maldives, Laccadives, Andamans, and Nikobar islands, where not only fishermen and boats were lost, but harbours were ruined.
Along the coast of the Indian states of Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu, some 30% of the fishery capacity was lost.
Mozambique, Somalia, and Tanzania on the African side of the Indian Ocean have also reported severe damage to their fishing. 
Such major losses in fishing capacity, with their far-reaching negative socio-economic consequences on the human populations affected, are bound to have major, mostly favourable, effects on the fish stocks.
The reason is simple: with most fish populations nowadays hit hard by over-fishing, fewer fishermen will mean more fish.
Another factor that will help fish stocks is a religiously motivated hesitation by the public in some areas to eat marine fish, as they are perceived to have fed on human corpses washed to sea.
It may seem cruel or cold-hearted to focus on such environmental outcomes in the wake of vast human loss and suffering.
A unique ecosystem is being lost.
As in many parts of the world with hot climates, apartment and office buildings in Lebanon use asbestos for heat insulation. This has been standard practice for decades, and most buildings that have been erected or restored since Israel’s last bombings in 1982 have plenty of it. 
When pulverized by bombs and missiles, asbestos fibers are freed and can be inhaled with the rest of the dust.
The protective suits that specially-trained people are legally required to wear in the European Union or the US when demolishing, rebuilding, or repairing any building containing asbestos underscore the risk of pulmonary fibrosis and lung cancer for Lebanese who inhale dust from bombed-out houses and offices. Indeed, US companies have been forced to pay tens of billions of dollars to ex-employees who worked with asbestos.
Lebanon cannot afford to pay anything close to such a sum. But this is just one of many environmental debts that will somehow have to be paid in long after the fighting has stopped – by the victims, if by nobody else.
The Environment Fights Back
Our political systems and global politics are largely unequipped for the real challenges of today’s world.
Global economic growth and rising populations are putting unprecedented stresses on the physical environment, and these stresses in turn are causing unprecedented challenges for our societies.
Yet politicians are largely ignorant of these trends.
Governments are not organized to meet them.
And crises that are fundamentally ecological in nature are managed by outdated strategies of war and diplomacy.
Consider, for example, the situation in Darfur, Sudan.
This horrible conflict is being addressed through threats of military force, sanctions, and generally the language of war and peacekeeping.
Yet the undoubted origin of the conflict is the region’s extreme poverty, which was made disastrously worse in the 1980’s by a drought that has essentially lasted until today.
It appears that long-term climate change is leading to lower rainfall not only in Sudan, but also in much of Africa just south of the Sahara Desert – an area where life depends on the rains, and where drought means death.
Darfur has been caught in a drought-induced death trap, but nobody has seen fit to approach the Darfur crisis from the perspective of long-term development rather than the perspective of war.
Darfur needs a water strategy more than a military strategy.
Its seven million people cannot survive without a new approach that gives them a chance to grow crops and water their animals.
Yet all of the talk at the United Nations is about sanctions and armies, with no path to peace in sight.
Water stress is becoming a major obstacle to economic development in many parts of the world.
The water crisis in Gaza is a cause of disease and suffering among Palestinians, and is a major source of underlying tensions between Palestine and Israel.
Yet again, billions of dollars are spent on bombing and destruction in the region, while virtually nothing is done about the growing water crisis.
China and India, too, will face growing water crises in the coming years, with potentially horrendous consequences.
The economic takeoff of these two giants started 40 years ago with the introduction of higher agricultural output and an end to famines. Yet part of that increased agricultural output resulted from millions of wells that were sunk to tap underground water supplies for irrigation.
Now the water table is falling at a dangerous pace, as the underground water is being pumped much faster than the rains are recharging it.
Moreover, aside from rainfall patterns, climate change is upsetting the flow of rivers, as glaciers, which provide a huge amount of water for irrigation and household use, are rapidly receding due to global warming.
Snow pack in the mountains is melting earlier in the season, so that river water is less available during summer growing seasons.
For all of these reasons, India and China are experiencing serious water crises that are likely to intensify in the future.
The United States faces risks as well.
Midwestern and southwestern states have been in a prolonged drought that might well be the result of long-term warming, and the farm states rely heavily on water from a huge underground reservoir that is being depleted by over-pumping.
Just as pressures on oil and gas supplies have driven up energy prices, environmental stresses may now push up food and water prices in many parts of the world.
Given the heat waves, droughts, and other climate stresses across the US, Europe, Australia, and elsewhere this year, wheat prices are now shooting up to their highest levels in decades.
Thus, environmental pressures are now hitting the bottom line – affecting incomes and livelihoods around the world.
With rising populations, economic growth, and climate change, we will face intensifying droughts, hurricanes and typhoons, powerful El Niño’s, water stress, heat waves, species extinctions, and more.
The “soft” issues of environment and climate will become the hard and strategic issues of the twenty-first century.
Yet there is almost no recognition of this basic truth in our governments or our global politics.
People who speak about hunger and environmental crises are viewed as muddle-headed “moralists,” as opposed to the hard-headed “realists” who deal with war and peace. This is nonsense.
The so-called realists just don’t understand the sources of tensions and stresses that are leading to a growing number of crises around the world.
Our governments should all establish Ministries of Sustainable Development, devoted full-time to managing the linkages between environmental change and human well-being.
Agriculture ministers by themselves will not be able to cope with water shortages that farmers will face.
Health ministers will not be able to cope with an increase in infectious diseases due to global warming.
Environment ministers will not be able to cope with the pressures on oceans and forests, or the consequences of increasing extreme weather events like last year’s Hurricane Katrina or this year’s Typhoon Saomai – China’s worst in many decades.
A new powerful ministry should be charged with coordinating the responses to climate change, water stress, and other ecosystem crises.
At the global level, the world’s governments should finally understand that the treaties that they have all signed in recent years on climate, environment, and biodiversity are at least as important to global security as all of the war zones and crisis hotspots that grab the headlines, budgets, and attention.
By focusing on the underlying challenges of sustainable development, our governments could more easily end the current crises (as in Darfur) and head off many more crises in the future.
The Environment of the Economy
No economy is a closed, autonomous universe, governed by rules independent from law, morals, and politics.
Indeed, the most interesting economic questions are generally located on the borderline with neighboring disciplines.
But nowhere is this clearer than in the interaction between economic processes and the natural environment.
The distinctive feature of this exchange is that it is governed not by the laws of mechanics, but by thermodynamics, particularly the law of entropy, according to which the quantity of free energy that can be transformed into mechanical work diminishes with time – an irreversible process culminating in “heat death.”
Numerous researchers, inspired by the late Nicholas Georgescu-Roegen’s pioneering work on the relationship between economic processes and physics, tried – not very successfully – to formulate an “entropic” theory of economy and society, especially during the 1970’s.
The entropic view assumes that economic processes produce irreversible consequences because of their multiple interactions with nature.
We draw from stocks of non-renewable natural resources (for example, oil and metal ores), and we deteriorate or modify the quality of other resources (for example, water and arable land) by imposing on them a rhythm of exploitation superior to their capacity for regeneration.
In fact, the exploitation of non-renewable resources frees the speed of economic growth from that of ecological renewal, aggravating the deterioration of the biosphere, including irreversible climate changes.
The law of entropy reminds us that we will leave to future generations a degraded natural patrimony, probably less adequate to their needs than what we inherited.
Unfortunately, there are no simple answers.
For the sake of what principle can we ask China and India, for example, to limit their economic dynamism so that they use smaller amounts of the planet’s natural resources?
After all, the advanced countries’ slower growth is not the consequence of voluntary self-limitation, but of our superior standard of living – and of our incapacity to settle our own economic imbalances.
We cannot impose an ecological rhythm on people who are poorer than we are when it is the very fact that we freed ourselves from that rhythm that made us richer.
Economic contraction, or even stagnation, is not a solution for the developed countries, either, for a similar reason: it would imply that we either accept existing inequalities or impose a regime aiming at an equal redistribution of resources.
That choice boils down to an unbearable cynicism or a totalitarian utopia.
But, happily for us, our evolution is determined not only by entropy, but also by the accumulation of knowledge and technological progress – a process that is just as irreversible as the decrease in stocks of non-renewable resources and the degradation of environmental quality.
Thus, the economy is entropic for resources and historical for the production, organization, and spread of knowledge, with the prospects for economic and environmental sustainability residing in the space left between those two dynamic processes: the level of growth we choose must be conditioned on a sufficient level of knowledge to ensure the system’s survival.
Yet nature, like knowledge, is a public good that needs state intervention to be “produced” in sufficient quantities.
The only way to overcome the finiteness of our world is to maintain as much space as possible between entropy and history by investing in education and research aimed at increasing renewable energies, reducing the energy intensity of our standards of living, and slowing the pace of environmental erosion.
It is widely believed that such a strategy would be useless if the only effect is to allow others to get rich faster by opting out.
But if that strategy is conceived as mastering two dynamic processes, overcoming the ecological constraint could be an accelerator of growth.
The Error of the War on Terror
Israel’s failure to subdue Hezbollah demonstrates the many weaknesses of the war-on-terror concept.
One weakness is that even if the targets are terrorists, the victims are often innocent civilians, and their suffering reinforces the terrorist cause.
In response to Hezbollah’s attacks, Israel was justified in attacking Hezbollah to protect itself against the threat of missiles on its border.
However, Israel should have taken greater care to minimize collateral damage.
The civilian casualties and material damage inflicted on Lebanon inflamed Muslims and world opinion against Israel and converted Hezbollah from aggressors to heroes of resistance.
Weakening Lebanon has also made it more difficult to rein in Hezbollah.
Another weakness of the war-on-terror concept is that it relies on military action and rules out political approaches.
Israel withdrew from Lebanon and then from Gaza unilaterally, rather than negotiating political settlements with the Lebanese government and the Palestinian authority.
The strengthening of Hezbollah and Hamas was a direct consequence of that approach.
The war-on-terror concept stands in the way of recognizing this fact because it separates “us” from “them” and denies that our actions may shape their behavior.
A third weakness is that the war-on-terror concept lumps together different political movements that use terrorist tactics.
It fails to distinguish between Hamas, Hezbollah, al Qaeda or the Sunni insurrection and the Mahdi militia in Iraq.
Yet all these terrorist manifestations are different and require different responses.
Neither Hamas nor Hezbollah can be treated merely as targets in the war on terror because they have deep roots in their societies; yet profound differences exist between them.
Looking back it is easy to see where Israeli policy went wrong.
When Mahmoud Abbas was elected president of the Palestinian Authority, Israel should have gone out of its way to strengthen him and his reformist team.
When Israel withdrew from Gaza the former head of the World Bank, James Wolfensohn, negotiated a six-point plan on behalf of the Quartet for the Middle East (Russia, the United States, the European Union and the United Nations).
It included opening crossings between Gaza and the West Bank, an airport and seaport in Gaza, opening the border with Egypt, and transferring the greenhouses abandoned by Israeli settlers into Arab hands.
None of the six points was implemented.
This contributed to Hamas’s electoral victory.
The Bush administration, having pushed Israel to allow the Palestinians to hold elections, then backed Israel’s refusal to deal with a Hamas government.
The effect was to impose further hardship on the Palestinians.
Nevertheless, Abbas was able to forge an agreement with the political arm of Hamas for the formation of a unity government.
It was to foil this agreement that the military branch of Hamas, run from Damascus, engaged in the provocation that brought a heavy handed response from Israel—which in turn incited Hezbollah to further provocation, opening a second front.
That is how extremists play off against each other to destroy any chance of political progress.
Israel has been a participant in this game and President Bush bought into this flawed policy, uncritically supporting Israel.
Events have shown that this policy leads to an escalation of violence.
The process has advanced to the point where Israel’s unquestioned military superiority is no longer sufficient to overcome the negative consequences of its policy.
Israel is now more endangered in its existence than it was at the time of the Oslo Agreement.
Similarly, the US has become less safe since President Bush declared war on terror.
The time has come to realize that today’s policies are counterproductive.
There will be no end to the vicious circle of escalating violence without a political settlement of the Palestine question.
In fact, the prospects for engaging in negotiations are better now than they were a few months ago.
Israelis must realize that a military deterrent is not sufficient on its own.
And Arabs, having redeemed themselves on the battlefield, may be more willing to entertain a compromise.
Strong voices argue that Israel must never negotiate from a position of weakness.
They are wrong.
Israel’s position is liable to become weaker the longer it persists on its present course.
Similarly Hezbollah, having tasted the sense but not the reality of victory (and egged on by Syria and Iran) may prove recalcitrant.
But that is where the difference between Hezbollah and Hamas comes into play.
The people of Palestine yearn for peace and relief from suffering.
The political--as distinct from the military-- wing of Hamas must be responsive to their desires.
It is not too late for Israel to encourage and deal with an Abbas led Palestinian unity government as the first step toward a better balanced approach.
Given how strong the U.S.-Israeli relationship is, it would help Israel achieve its own legitimate aims if the U.S. government were not blinded by the war-on-terror concept.
The Ethanol Hunger
WEST LAFAYETTE, INDIANA – Food prices have in many cases surpassed the peak levels reached in July 2008.
At that time, food-price increases were attributed to growing global demand for food commodities, a major decline in the value of the US dollar, crop failures in some parts of the world, and biofuels.
But what is driving the surge in prices today?
I believe that the key factors now are somewhat different from those that drove up food prices in 2008.
Growth in global demand for food and feed commodities is still a major part of the story, as are biofuels.
But the short- and long-term implications are quite different.
As developing countries become better off, one of the first things that happens is so-called “dietary transition.”
With more income at their disposal, people begin to consume more of their food basket in the form of animal products.
Producing these animal products requires significantly more agricultural resources than a predominantly plant-based diet.
So, as incomes grow, demand for food products grows even faster.
Both population growth and dietary transition contribute to faster demand growth and higher food prices.
Biofuels policies in the US and the European Union have led to the creation of biofuels industries with significant output capacity – mainly ethanol in the US and biodiesel in the EU.
In the US, government policy mandates 48 billion liters of ethanol in 2011. Production capacity already exceeds that level.
Since this quantity is required by the government to be blended with gasoline, regardless of the price of ethanol, corn, or gasoline, the demand that it creates for corn is not at all responsive to the price of corn.
In economic terms, such demand is highly “inelastic”: the mandate must be met at any price.
That is the situation in which we now find ourselves, at least in the short run.
The added inflexibility (or inelasticity) amplifies the price response to a real or perceived crop shortfall either in the US or elsewhere.
In addition, the fact that nearly 40% of the US corn crop is being used for ethanol, up from around 5% a few years ago, means that corn prices must be higher to meet the feed, export, and ethanol demands for corn.
The bottom line is that the current version of US biofuels policy, with its fixed requirement for blending, leads to a greater price response in the event of a crop shortfall – in the short run.
We saw this in 2008, and are now seeing it again.
But the 2011 surge appears to be rooted in broader commodity scarcity than before.
In the first half of 2008, commodity prices moved up quickly – and plummeted just as fast in the second half of the year.
There may well have been speculative behavior that contributed to the rapid swing.
Even with normal crop production around the world, we will end this year with stocks-to-use ratios near historic lows.
Stocks-to-use ratios are a primary driver of commodity prices, because they give us an indication of the cushion that we have for shortfalls somewhere in the world. The ratio tells us essentially how many months of stocks we have, and today they are around 15% for some key commodities – meaning two months of stocks.
What about the long run?
With several years to adjust, we would expect a powerful supply-side response to higher commodity prices now prevailing all over the world.
In many regions around the world, crop yields are only a fraction of US levels – even in agricultural zones with similar climate, soils, and other production conditions.
In the US, it is common to see a gap of around 20% between test plots and actual yields in the same area.
In many other regions, these gaps are 40-60%.
The bottom line is that there is huge potential to increase production in many parts of Eastern Europe, Africa, and South America.
To the extent that higher commodity prices benefit farmers in these regions, they will respond by increasing their production, which will eventually reduce scarcity, increase stocks-to-use ratios, and attenuate the higher prices.
In fact, to the extent that developing countries permit higher prices to go to their farmers, the result could be a significant stimulus to economic growth in rural regions of developing countries – where most of the world’s poor live.
One problem is that developing countries often attempt to isolate their domestic markets from world prices, particularly price increases, in order to protect their more politically powerful urban citizens.
This policy can stymie rural development and diminish poverty alleviation.
The short- and long-term stories are simplifications, but they nonetheless convey the essence of some critical drivers of price changes.
America’s biofuels policies inevitably lead to larger price responses to supply shocks in the short run.
In the long run, the higher prices that result could become an engine of economic development in the world’s poor rural regions.
That distinction could make a huge difference to millions of people.
The Ethics of “Biosecurity”
An ominous new word has crept into the life sciences and biomedical research: “biosecurity.”
The term reflects a growing awareness that rapid developments in these fields offer the potential for great benefits, but that the knowledge, tools, and techniques that enable scientific advances also can be misused to cause deliberate harm.
Any effort to address this “dual use” dilemma must ultimately be international, since biotechnology research is a genuinely global enterprise.
The international scientific community has a key role to play in ensuring that efforts to manage the risks improve security and strengthen international collaboration to ensure non- maleficent use of scientific advances.
Professor Ronald Atlas of the University of Louisville and I recently presented a proposed 
 Code of Ethics for the Life Sciences
 in the journal 
 Science
 .
Our proposal what we need for a code and for its contents have both met with strongly conflicting views.
The scientific community increasingly recognizes that science itself is not a value-free activity and, therefore, the choice of what research to undertake and how to undertake it must be governed by ethical principles.
But there is still a nucleus of scientists who oppose that concept, arguing that there must be no restrictions on the search for new knowledge, and that ethical principles only become relevant in the application of that knowledge.
In our 
 Science
 article, we speculated on scientists’ reasons for holding such a view.
But, as we noted, “even those who question the value of a code agree that research in the life sciences, including biodefense research, must be conducted in a safe and ethical manner.”
Bodies speaking out publicly about this need include the General Assembly of the World Medical Association, the British Medical Association, the US National Research Council, the British Parliament, and the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) leaders.
A code of ethics is needed because the power of science to result in harm, if it is not well governed, has grown vastly.
Society has entrusted scientists and scientific institutions to show respect for life, in particular human life.
Safeguards are needed to ensure fulfillment of that trust, in particular, to ensure that science is not used in the cause of bioterrorism or biowarfare.
A code of ethics offers several benefits. It would underscore the importance of ethics reviews of proposed scientific research and monitoring of ongoing research, especially research involving humans or animals as subjects.
It can also establish a basic presumption of scientific openness and transparency, while allowing for exceptions when there is a real risk that scientific knowledge could be used to cause serious harm.
Moreover, a code of ethics could help protect “whistle blowers” who bring ethical breaches to the attention of the relevant authorities or the public.
Finally, it could allow for conscientious objection to participation in certain research.
In short, a code can help to embed ethics in all aspects of scientific research from its inception.
Although no consensus has yet emerged on a code of ethics, there is wide agreement among scientists that a robust public health system is an essential safeguard against biological threats, whether intentional or unintentional.
Security and public health concerns now overlap, whereas traditionally they had been separate areas that elicited different kinds of policy responses.
The technology making this possible will most likely become common within the next two years at a substantially reduced cost.
Safeguards such as a moratorium on such developments or registering the equipment needed to implement them should be considered.
There are ancient taboos on the use of “poison or plague” as weapons or for warfare, and doing so has long been stigmatized in many cultures and prohibited by customary international law and international treaties.
The taboo is the companion to the sacred: that which we regard as sacred we protect with taboos.
We have lost both concepts in relation to much conduct in our contemporary world, but we urgently need to re-find them in relation to the new possibilities opened up by the life sciences if we are to continue to respect all life, especially human life.
The challenge is no less than to prevent the life sciences from becoming the death sciences.
That will require complex, multiple, varied, and integrated responses from a very wide variety of sources at individual, institutional, societal, and global levels.
Above all, it will require integrity, honesty, trust, courage, and sometimes restraint.
This is no small order at the level of international relations and cooperation.
The Ethics of Citizenship Tests
PRINCETON – Can citizenship really be tested?
An increasing number of countries – especially, but not only, in Europe – seem to think so.
Over the last decade, tests and exams for immigrants have proliferated – but so have controversies about what they may legitimately ask.
Recently, the revelation that the “Life in the UK” test tries to instill respect for the practice of queuing – standing in line, that is – caused as much ridicule as indignation.
The British minister responsible for the test justified the idea by claiming that “the simple act of taking one’s turn is one of the things that holds our country together.
It is very important that newcomers take their place in queues whether it is for a bus or a cup of tea.”
While this might sound like an excerpt from a Monty Python sketch, it raises an important issue: should there be limits as to what prospective citizens are tested for?
Can testing become counter-productive?
Critics of the spreading practice of citizenship testing certainly think so; in fact, they go so far as to lament the rise of a new “repressive liberalism” – Western states’ efforts to achieve democratic and liberal ends with increasingly illiberal means.
Making “integration courses” and language instruction compulsory, prohibiting headscarves in schools, as in France, or restricting the rights of immigrants to marry foreigners, as in Denmark, are just some instances of coercive measures adopted in the name of supposedly universal liberal values.
Such measures have the appearance of a (seemingly self-contradictory) program to force men and women to be free.
Citizenship tests are an integral part of this program; and, in the eyes of critics, they resemble “loyalty oaths” and other intolerant measures traditionally associated with the anti-communist witch-hunts of McCarthyism in 1950’s America.
But do countries somehow automatically turn illiberal just because they make certain measures mandatory?
If that were true, “progressive legislation” would inevitably be a contradiction in terms.
The real question is whether states purposefully target or even exclude certain groups – while ostensibly applying universal standards.
Think, for example, of a German (oral) test which was to apply only to immigrants from states belonging to the Organization of the Islamic Conference (the test in question was later withdrawn), and which asked, among other things, the applicant’s opinion about the fact that in Germany homosexuals hold high public office.
Similar tendencies appeared in the Netherlands, which was once committed to multiculturalism, but more recently has sought to confront would-be citizens with images of men kissing and of bare-breasted women emerging from the North Sea – presumably all to get across the point that a true Dutch citizen had better be tolerant.
It is clearly helpful for immigrants to get hints about how to navigate daily life practically – such as norms about standing in line.
But this kind of local knowledge should not be subject to testing.
Most people acquire survival skills – if not more sophisticated forms of savoir-faire – informally, as a quick glance at the immigration experience in the United States demonstrates.
They will also come to get the point of more informal social norms – against homophobia, for instance.
The lesson is that national governments should not test the attitudes of immigrants to moral and cultural questions that remain controversial even among established members of the host country.
It would be hypocritical, for example, to pretend that everyone in Western liberal democracies is enthusiastic about gay people or nudists – what matters is that their rights be respected, not that everyone like them.
Tests should communicate lessons about rights and democracy, that is, politics – not about lifestyles or the supposed core content of a “national culture” (on which established members of a host country themselves would probably be hard pressed to reach consensus).
Of course, it is true that birthright citizens live their lives – and retain their citizenship – without ever being tested on the basics of their political systems.
But it is a reasonable expectation – often legitimately reinforced through civic education for all children – that citizens know how to participate in public affairs, and especially that they know what their and others’ rights are.
So, citizenship tests – rather than being repressive – can actually be empowering, if they make immigrants aware of rights and possibilities for participation.
They are akin to language requirements – except that the language here is a civic, not a national one, which in the best case allows new citizens to voice their concerns with perfect political grammar.
Tests might also make the passage to citizenship meaningful, a ritual similar to the solemn swearing of an oath of allegiance, which can be integrated as a major event into the story of one’s life (to be sure, some will always dismiss such ceremonies as political kitsch).
What these kinds of exams cannot do – and should not attempt to do – is test people’s political convictions.
For one thing, such convictions can always be faked by those determined to dissimulate.
At the same time, most would-be citizens will probably feel alienated from a state that suspects political danger emanating from newcomers and consistently sends a message of distrust.
In the end, citizenship exams, rather than really being “tests” in any meaningful sense at all, are tools for communication.
And every country should think very carefully about what it wishes to communicate about itself.
The Ethics of Eating
Global meat consumption is predicted to double by 2020.
Yet in Europe and North America, there is growing concern about the ethics of the way meat and eggs are produced.
The consumption of veal has fallen sharply since it became widely known that to produce so-called “white” – actually pale pink – veal, newborn calves are separated from their mothers, deliberately made anemic, denied roughage, and kept in stalls so narrow that they cannot walk or turn around.
In Europe, mad cow disease shocked many people, not only because it shattered beef’s image as a safe and healthy food, but also because they learned that the disease was caused by feeding cattle the brains and nerve tissue of sheep.
People who naively believed that cows ate grass discovered that beef cattle in feed lots may be fed anything from corn to fish meal, chicken litter (complete with chicken droppings), and slaughterhouse waste.
Concern about how we treat farm animals is far from being limited to the small percentage of people who are vegetarians or even vegans – eating no animal products at all.
Despite strong ethical arguments for vegetarianism, it is not yet a mainstream position.
More common is the view that we are justified in eating meat, as long as the animals have a decent life before they are killed.
The problem, as Jim Mason and I describe in our recent book, The Way We Eat, is that industrial agriculture denies animals even a minimally decent life.
Tens of billions of chickens produced today never go outdoors.
They are bred to have voracious appetites and gain weight as fast as possible, then reared in sheds that can hold more than 20,000 birds.
The level of ammonia in the air from their accumulated droppings stings the eye and hurts the lungs.
Slaughtered at only 45 days old, their immature bones can hardly bear the weight of their bodies.
Some collapse and, unable to reach food or water, soon die, their fate irrelevant to the economics of the enterprise as a whole.
Conditions are, if anything, even worse for laying hens crammed into wire cages so small that even if there were just one per cage, she would be unable to stretch her wings.
But there are usually at least four hens per cage, and often more.
Under such crowded conditions, the more dominant, aggressive birds are likely to peck to death the weaker hens in the cage.
To prevent this, producers sear off all birds’ beaks with a hot blade.
A hen’s beak is full of nerve tissue – it is, after all, her principal means of relating to her environment – but no anesthetic or analgesic is used to relieve the pain.
Pigs may be the most intelligent and sensitive of the animals that we commonly eat.
When foraging in a rural village, they can exercise that intelligence and explore their varied environment.
Before they give birth, sows use straw or leaves and twigs to build a comfortable and safe nest in which to nurse their litter.
But in today’s factory farms, pregnant sows are kept in crates so narrow that they cannot turn around, or even walk more than a step forward or backward.
They lie on bare concrete without straw or any other form of bedding.
The piglets are taken from the sow as soon as possible, so that she can be made pregnant again, but they never leave the shed until they are taken to slaughter.
Defenders of these production methods argue that they are a regrettable but necessary response to a growing population’s demand for food.
On the contrary, when we confine animals in factory farms, we have to grow food for them.
The animals burn up most of that food’s energy just to breathe and keep their bodies warm, so we end up with a small fraction – usually no more than one-third and sometimes as little as one-tenth – of the food value that we feed them.
By contrast, cows grazing on pasture eat food that we cannot digest, which means that they add to the amount of food available to us.
It is tragic that countries like China and India, as they become more prosperous, are copying Western methods and putting animals in huge industrial farms to supply more meat and eggs for their growing middle classes.
If this continues, the result will be animal suffering on an even greater scale than now exists in the West, as well as more environmental damage and a rise in heart disease and cancers of the digestive system.
It will also be grossly inefficient.
As consumers, we have the power – and the moral obligation – to refuse to support farming methods that are cruel to animals and bad for us.
The Ethiopia Card
BRUSSELS – Two decades ago, Ethiopia was a Cold War battlefield.
On the ideological map of the world, it was Soviet territory, a land of famine, dictatorship, and civil war.
But, with the overthrow of Mengistu Haile Mariam’s Marxist-Leninist dictatorship in 1991, Ethiopia began to transform itself.
Today, it ranks among the five fastest-growing economies in the world, and is a bastion of regional stability.
That stability matters, because the Horn of Africa is becoming a security headache once again.
If the region is to be stabilized, Ethiopia will need to play a key part.
Indeed, it should be considered an indispensable strategic partner for those in the international community who want to prevent the entirety of East Africa from slipping into chaos.
Besides the never-ending anarchy of neighboring Somalia, the regional challenges facing Ethiopia and its long-serving prime minister, Meles Zenawi, are daunting.
The country remains on a war footing with Eritrea over the disputed border village of Badme.
The peace deal between the government and the former rebel SPLM is unraveling fast in neighboring Sudan, where a scheduled referendum in the South in January 2011 on secession and independence – part of the 2005 peace deal – may provoke a return to all-out war.
Further south, Kenya remains scarred by the aftermath of post-election violence, and its constitutional review process could lead to yet more bloodshed.
Moreover, Ethiopia’s proximity to strife-torn Yemen (where violent jihadis are congregating) just across the Red Sea, is complicating the country’s foreign policy because of its role in working to keep Somalia out of Islamist control.
Despite these myriad problems – or perhaps because of them – Ethiopia has an opportunity to emerge as the undisputed regional leader.
Rapid population growth is projected to put it among the world’s ten most populous states by mid-century.
Though landlocked, Ethiopia is comparatively well endowed with natural resources, not least its fertile farmland, which has attracted significant investment from Saudi Arabia, among others.
A final settlement of the lengthy dispute with Egypt over the waters of the Blue Nile – which rises in Ethiopia – appears to be in sight, and could have a powerful impact on economic growth.
But, despite Ethiopia’s progress, the international community (especially the West) has been reluctant to view the country as a strategic partner.
Of course, Ethiopia has its problems, but these should be seen in an African context.
The human-rights situation could undoubtedly be improved – in particular, the treatment of the political opposition leader Birtukan Mideksa – but Isaias Afwerki’s regime in neighboring Eritrea is worse by orders of magnitude.
The country’s ruling coalition, the Ethiopian People’s Revolutionary Democratic Front, dominates the political landscape – but who can blame Ethiopians, surrounded by potential enemies, for giving priority to stability and order over Western-style democratic development?
Western leaders can hardly denounce Zenawi while lauding Vladimir Putin for bringing a focus on modernization to Russia’s governance.
Furthermore, President Yoweri Museveni of Uganda has created what amounts to a one-party state during his 24 years in power, yet he is feted in the West as one of Africa’s visionary leaders.
It seems that Ethiopia, more often than not, is the victim of diplomatic double standards.
If Zenawi consolidates his hold on power in the parliamentary elections due this May, the world should expect the stability that he has brought to take deeper root.
Whether it will ripple throughout the region is another question.
That is why, regardless of the electoral result, Ethiopia needs international backing.
It is interesting to contrast the likely consequences of the election in Ethiopia with the expected fallout from the presidential election scheduled in Sudan at around the same time.
If Omar al-Bashir retains Sudan’s presidency, as expected, he will be emboldened to step up his hostility to the country’s restless regions.
Bashir will also no doubt try to stop the oil-rich devolved region of South Sudan from declaring independence.
The people of South Sudan, most of whom are Christian or animists, are likely to favor secession – not least because of the memory of decades of war and the deeply resented imposition of Sharia law by Bashir’s government in Khartoum.
Many now believe that Bashir will seek to prevent the referendum from taking place, or to use its result as a pretext to return to war with the South – with devastating consequences across the Horn of Africa.
Ethiopia’s diplomacy will be vital to minimizing the potential for such violence to spread, but Ethiopia can fulfill this role only if it receives strong strategic backing from the West.
Regional rivalries and past history mean that Ethiopia has few natural allies in the region.
One such ally could be Somaliland, the former British protectorate, which broke away from Somalia in 1991 and lies to the northeast of Ethiopia.
Somaliland is, like Ethiopia, relatively stable, economically improving, and secure.
It also has a lengthy coastline and a deepwater port, Berbera, which could help land-locked Ethiopia unlock even more economic growth.
The moderate Islam practiced in Somaliland could not be farther removed from the barbarity of the Al-Shabab in Somalia.
If Ethiopia were to recognize Somaliland as sovereign, other African Union countries would likely follow – and so, perhaps, would the United States and EU member states, which increasingly despair of patching Somalia together.
Ethiopia ’s leadership throughout the Horn of Africa could bring lasting change in a part of the world that has largely been written off.
It is time to give Ethiopia the diplomatic tools that it needs.
The EU is Missing in Action in Afghanistan
The withdrawal of Britain’s Paddy Ashdown as a candidate for the post of UN envoy in Afghanistan means that the international community still has some way to go before it speaks with one voice in that country.
Such a unified voice is needed, for six years of war and the biggest military operation in NATO’s history have failed to subdue the Afghan insurgency, leaving President Hamid Karzai’s increasingly corrupt government dependent on the continued presence of international forces.
Afghanistan remains the world’s fifth poorest country and its biggest opium producer, with a weak central state that is further debilitated by warlordism and the Taliban insurgency.
There are many reasons for this outcome, but at least some of the blame lies with the European Union.
On paper, the EU effort looks impressive.
Twenty-five EU nations have contributed troops to NATO’s 35,000-strong army in Afghanistan, and now represent more than half of all troops.
EU states command a third of all Provincial Reconstruction Teams (PRTs), and, together with the European Commission, have paid for a third of the country’s post-2001 reconstruction.
But European support for the Afghan mission is in fact limited, and cooperation between the biggest EU donor governments and the European Commission remains inadequate.
Public support for Europe’s engagement has been plummeting, and most EU governments have failed to act on NATO’s request to boost troop levels.
One exception is the United Kingdom, which has recently pledged to increase its troop numbers in the restive poppy-growing province of Helmand.
But European troop contributions continue to fall short of the 17,000 US troops deployed with the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) and its 8,000 Coalition Force troops outside of ISAF.
Apart from 1,500 Dutch soldiers in the neighboring Uruzgan province and a Polish and Romanian presence in Ghazni, Paktika, and Zabul, no other EU nations are willing to operate in the insurgency-ridden southern and eastern parts of the country, giving the Taliban free reign.
Overall, there are at least 60 such operating restrictions – known as “caveats” – on European troops, preventing commanders from deploying military assets where they are most needed.
In areas such as policing, the rule of law, and counter-narcotics, EU states have pursued policies entirely independently of each other.
The EU Police Mission (EUPOL), launched in June 2007, was meant to address this lack of coordination, but in the end its focus was narrowed to police reform, with the Commission funding a separate judicial program.
EUPOL started poorly, losing its first commander, and faces serious problems recruiting high-caliber staff.
Finally, the Commission’s annual development assistance to Afghanistan is falling this year, from €200 million to €150 million.
Individual commitments are also being cut – for example, France’s five-year, €33 million pledge for reconstruction support is strikingly low compared to its total foreign-aid budget of €9 billion.
The EU cannot alter the international coalition’s strategy alone.
But a united EU can act as a powerful advocate for a better and more coordinated international approach.
The US has argued that more troops are needed to dominate the terrain, lambasting EU governments for failing to step up their efforts as the US commits 3500 additional marines to the fray.
European countries, meanwhile, criticize the current military strategy.
They fear that more troops may only lead to more civilian casualties, antagonizing Afghans.
Without a grand bargain between the US and the EU that ensures increased European support and troops, success in Afghanistan will be elusive and alliance-testing tensions with the US will remain.
Such a bargain must contain two elements.
First, the EU should commit to sending more troops, trainers, and civilians to the Afghan mission, as well as lifting all remaining “caveats” on its troops.
The mission needs a 10% troop increase, more military and police trainers, and more military equipment, including helicopters.
In addition, the Commission should reverse the decline in assistance and spend more money though local governments and the PRTs.
In exchange, the US should accept a strategic shift from combat operations to human security.
Such a strategy means focusing more attention on ordinary Afghans, gradually expanding NATO’s security presence outward from population centers, and working hand-in-glove with state and local authorities.
This new strategy would be further strengthened if the international community abandoned the current counter-narcotics policy – including an end to aerial eradication – and helping Karzai reach a political settlement with mid-ranking, “moderate” insurgents.
All of this will require leadership that cuts across institutional boundaries, which can be provided only by the UN and a strong-willed individual.
The appointment of a new UN envoy should prove a more efficient way of coordinating Afghanistan’s international helpmates.
And it is to be hoped that whoever is chosen may be able to foster the grand bargain between the US and EU that is so badly needed.
Despite the deteriorating situation in Afghanistan, all is not lost.
But turning the situation around will require changing the way the international community operates.
By striking a bargain with the US, the EU should lead the way.
The EU Moves Ahead At Last
With much noise and commotion, the European Union has sidestepped catastrophe – but only just.
It was damned close. In a united effort, a major crisis that would have openly divided the Union for years to come and which would have made Europe a global laughingstock was averted.
The EU ran aground two years ago when France and the Netherlands said no to the European constitution.
With the new agreement, the Union has once again started to move.
While the mandate for an intergovernmental conference to develop a new treaty will create something less than a constitution, the coming treaty will go well beyond the present Treaty of Nice – provided things go according to what has been agreed.
But two steep hurdles still need to be overcome: the intergovernmental conference and ratification through the national parliaments or by means of a referendum in all member states.
Still, German Chancellor Angela Merkel can be proud of what was achieved.
It is her first real success in international diplomacy.
That Friday night in Brussels involved very real and tough decisions.
The German chancellor played for high stakes and won.
She deserves respect and recognition.
If the new treaty comes into being, the institutional reforms that the union needs will become a reality, and a new double majority voting procedure will take effect, even if with some delay.
The EU has worked for 20 years on these reforms.
The enlarged Union, inevitable when Europe’s Cold War division ended in 1989, needed new institutions to act efficiently and with transparency.
The new treaty is supposed to become effective in 2009.
Twenty years seems to be what it takes Europe to change, and that is anything but reassuring.
The treaty calls for a new EU foreign minister – although he is formally denied that title, this is what everyone will call him – with a strong administrative infrastructure in the European Commission and the Council.
The rotating presidency will be replaced by an elected President of the Council.
A new balance will be struck between the EU and member states, and a stronger role will be given to the European Parliament and the national parliaments.
EU citizens will be endowed with legally binding fundamental rights, and majority decisions will become the general norm.
A high price had to be paid for this agreement.
The new treaty is not simpler or more transparent than the rejected Constitution, quite the contrary.
And the wrangling in the run-up to and in Brussels itself surely did not contribute to the EU’s popularity among its citizens.
Indeed, the damage sustained in the process will linger.
The following consequences are already foreseeable:
First, that night of hard negotiations in Brussels reinforced the two-tier Europe for the next two decades.
The recalcitrant states achieved a Pyrrhic victory because it will quickly become clear to them that, even if the EU is getting a new institutional framework, the avantgarde countries will decide among themselves what the concrete arrangements will look like.
Enhanced cooperation among these countries and the Euro zone will be the instrument for this.
Second, Franco-German cooperation has shown itself all the more indispensable in the enlarged Union.
Despite all the differences that might exist between the two countries – differences that are likely to grow – there is no alternative to their alliance.
Third, the UK has once again weakened its own position within Europe.
Its policy of “opting out” keeps Britain on the sidelines of the EU.
This will further reduce the importance of Britain, both in Europe and in the world.
The political and economic significance of all the mid-sized European powers is waning, and they are shrinking relative to the US and the rising giants of Asia.
Only a strong Europe can provide the necessary counterweight.
A UK that plays a marginal role within the EU will thus lose its influence even faster, including its special voice in the US.
Fourth, Poland has to ask itself what kind of role it wants to play within the EU.
Poland is an important country within the Union.
Properly considered, Poland’s existential interests, its geopolitical location, and its history, demand that it do everything to contribute as much as possible to a strong EU.
Instead, the nationalistic government in Warsaw is bent on isolating itself within Europe.
The Poles should ask themselves the following question: Would, Poland’s traditional security concern, Russia, be happy or sad if the Polish government had really carried out its threat and used its veto to block the Brussels agreement?
The answer is clear: of course, the Russians would have rubbed their hands in jubilation and secretly celebrated the twin brothers at the head of the Polish state.
Ukraine, on the other hand, whose cause in Europe the Poles ostensibly champion, would have been in serious difficulties in the wake of a Polish veto.
It is not for nothing that Ukraine’s President Viktor Yushchenko tried, or so it is said, to make this clear to the Polish leadership in several telephone calls.
The damage to German-Polish relations also goes beyond the spat between the two governments, and reaches deep into both German and Polish societies.
It will not be easily repaired.
This is important because a consistent European policy toward Russia – one of the key urgent challenges facing Europe – depends on close cooperation between Poland and Germany.
As I said, it is too early to celebrate.
The time for celebrations will come only after the new treaty is ratified.
Indeed, the circumstances under which the Brussels compromise has been reached leave a bitter aftertaste.
But still, last Friday the EU took a decisive step in the right direction.
The EU Must Start Negotiations with Turkey
On December 17 of last year, the European Council decided to open accession negotiations with Turkey this October. Two conditions were put to the Turkish government: a comprehensive legal reform aimed at reinforcing the rule of law and human rights, and approval of the Adaptation Protocol of the Ankara Agreement, which extends the customs union with the EU to all new member states, including the Republic of Cyprus.
Turkey has met these conditions: the legal reform entered into force on June 1, and the Protocol was signed on July 29.
A formal recognition by Turkey of the Republic of Cyprus, including its extension to the Northern part of the island, was not requested as a precondition for starting accession talks.
This is a complex matter related to the efforts by UN Secretary General Kofi Annan to negotiate a comprehensive settlement leading to reunification of the island.  
Last year, both Turkey and the Turkish Cypriot community accepted the Secretary General’s proposals, which were, however, rejected by the Greek Cypriot side.
There is every reason to expect Annan to resume his good offices soon and to bring the question to a positive conclusion well before Turkey’s possible entry into the EU around 2015.
The Cyprus issue should therefore not be construed as an obstacle to the start of negotiations.
The same is true of the reported intention of some EU governments to have the so-called “Privileged Partnership” concept explicitly included in the negotiating framework as an alternative to full membership.
This proposal was discussed at last December’s European Council meeting and rejected, resulting in a reference to “open-ended negotiations” in the Council’s conclusions.
That wording – never used in previous enlargement rounds – may have ruffled Turkey’s feathers, but it was finally accepted as the type of constructive ambiguity that is so often used in international diplomacy.
It is nonetheless obvious from the very nature of accession negotiations that full membership must be the goal.
Without that prospect, no candidate country would go through the painful process of adopting the tens of thousands of rules and regulations contained in the Acquis Communautaire (the body of EU law).
To ensure that it does, is, after all, the main purpose of accession talks.
Moreover, it is difficult to imagine what advantages could be offered to Turkey in the framework of a “Privileged Partnership” beyond its long-time status as an Associate Member of the EU.
The Customs Union concluded ten years ago allows free trade for all but agricultural goods.
Turkey is invited to Council meetings, it can participate in various EU programs and in manifestations of the European Common Foreign Policy, and, as a member of NATO, it is a partner in EU-NATO security cooperation.
Finally, like all candidate countries, Turkey also receives financial and technical assistance in support of ongoing reform programs.
Short of full membership, there is hardly room for added value in Turkey’s relationship with the EU.
Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn has spelt it out with the necessary clarity: “If we stick to what we have ourselves decided at the highest political level in the European Council, as we should, I am reasonably confident that the negotiations shall start on the October 3.”
This statement is to the credit of the European Commission, and there is not much to be added, except to emphasize that it is up to EU governments to treat Turkey with the fairness that all candidate countries deserve.
To renege on formal decisions and commitments, or to add last-minute obstacles, would make a mockery of the Union’s credibility.
Negotiations therefore must begin on October 3.  
The Euro-American Debt Dilemma
PALO ALTO – Wealthy Europe and America, crown jewels of mixed capitalist democracies, are drowning in deficits and debt, owing to bloated welfare states that are now in place (Europe) or in the making (the United States).
As Europe struggles to prevent financial contagion and America struggles to reduce its record deficits, their dangerous debt levels threaten future living standards and strain domestic and international political institutions.
The ratings agencies are threatening additional downgrades; others envision an eventual breakup of the euro and/or demise of the dollar as the global reserve currency.
The economists Ken Rogoff and Carmen Reinhart estimate that public debt/GDP ratios of 90% are associated with sharply diminished growth prospects.
Greece’s debt ratio is over 120%, Italy’s is around 100%, and the US is at 74%, up from 40% a few years ago – and rapidly approaching 90%.
The International Monetary Fund estimates that each 10-point increase in the debt ratio lowers economic growth by 0.2 percentage points.
Thus, increases of 40-50% of GDP risk cutting long-run growth in half in parts of Western Europe, and by one-third in America – a devastating reduction in gains in living standards over the course of a generation.
Worse yet, the burden of banking losses that will sooner or later be socialized, and that of future unfunded public pension and health costs, are often understated in official debt figures.
Moreover, the problematic finances of some sub-national governments, for example in the US and Spain, will place pressure on central governments for fiscal aid.
In Europe, voters in fiscally responsible countries like Germany and the Netherlands are balking at bailouts of governments, banks, and bondholders.
American voters traditionally have favored smaller government and lower taxes than Europeans have favored (or at least tolerated).
Add continued anger over financial bailouts, rising spending, and the exploding national debt, and even America’s Democrats – the country’s traditional big-spending party – are finally talking deficit reduction.
Following the last deep American recession, in 1981-1982, when the unemployment rate peaked at a higher level than in the recent recession, Democrats blasted President Ronald Reagan for deficits of 6% of GDP.
Republicans now berate President Barack Obama for deficits of 10% of GDP.
Similar political and substantive jockeying occurs in European countries.
The simplistic categorization of political parties by their preference for a particular size of government masks more complex intraparty tendencies.
America’s Republican Party has three types of fiscal conservatives: supply-side tax-cutters, those who would limit government spending, and budget balancers.
They historically have feuded over tactics and strategy, but, since the deficit is the difference between revenues and outlays, they are closely interconnected.
Indeed, because the sum of all future tax revenues (discounted to today) must cover the sum of all future spending plus the national debt, the only way to keep taxes relatively low is to control spending.
Just as Democrats have long championed more government spending, and more benefits for more people, either on ideological grounds or as a political coalition-building strategy, so Republicans have regarded the goal of lowering taxes.
So, not surprisingly, Republicans are using the vote on the debt ceiling to force cuts in entitlement spending, while Obama and Congressional Democrats are using it to force higher taxes, in part to fracture their opponents’ coalition.
High levels of debt combine with slow economic growth in a devilish dance.
Interest payments on the debt eventually become so burdensome that bondholders demand higher interest payments (Greek debt recently yielded over 30%).
Interest rates on US government debt remain low, so this threat is prospective, but future deficits will be far higher than government projections when rates normalize.
The best response would be to enact strong controls on budgets, together with structural reforms to promote growth.
In the US, which has the most progressive income tax among the major economies, federal tax reforms that would lower the rates and broaden the base are being discussed.
In Europe, structural reforms focus on higher retirement ages and labor-market flexibility.
The deleveraging of governments, financial institutions, and households is one major cause of the sluggish economic recovery.
But sluggish growth means less tax revenue and more demands for payments to cushion hardship, placing pressure on government budgets.
The gamble has been that a solid, durable recovery would enable banks and households to rebuild their balance sheets quickly enough to avoid the need for additional bailouts.
But, so far, that gamble isn’t working as well or as rapidly as hoped.
Banks are profitable on an ongoing basis, borrowing at very low interest rates, often from the central bank, and collecting higher interest rates on their loans.
But, while instantaneous mark-to-market accounting can overstate the expected losses during a panic, the current values are often an accounting and political fiction.
Further action on Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac (America’s huge quasi-government mortgage agencies) and on some weak banks in America, as well as on some of Europe’s weaker, more thinly capitalized banks (the recent stress tests were a tepid first step), will be necessary.
Banking systems need more capital.
The best solution is private capital – from retained earnings, new entrants, new ownership, and new investment.
But in some cases, additional public capital probably cannot be avoided, as distasteful as it is.
The debt dilemmas in Europe and the US prove yet again that elected officials will ignore long-run costs to achieve short-run benefits, and will act only when forced, in a doomed effort to circumvent the laws of economics and revoke the laws of arithmetic.
And that implies an extended period of episodic economic disruption and political upheaval far beyond this summer’s debates on America’s debt ceiling and Europe’s distressed sovereign debtors.
These debates represent just one round in an ongoing struggle, with vast political and economic consequences for years to come.
The Euro Ark
BRUSSELS – The euro is celebrating its tenth anniversary against the background of the most difficult economic climate since its birth.
The financial storm that swept in from the United States, and the onset of a severe economic downturn, confronts Europe with unprecedented challenges.
Faced with the biggest test in its history, the euro is far from steering into disaster, as the Nobel laureate economist Milton Friedman predicted ten years ago.
On the contrary, Europe’s Economic and Monetary Union is proving a major asset in these tumultuous times. 
Doubters should remember that the euro was itself born out of crisis.
The single currency was conceived as an answer to the upheavals of the postwar period – double-digit inflation, high unemployment, and speculative attacks on the pound, the lira, and the French franc.
It was the crisis of the European Monetary System that drove the euro’s launch on January 1, 1999. 
In ten short years, the euro revolutionized the global economic environment, rising to the status of the world’s second currency and rivaling the dollar as a medium for international trade and finance.
Today’s financial turmoil and economic downturn are highlighting the EMU’s advantages in several important ways.
First, the euro has eliminated the possibility of exchange-rate turbulence and speculative currency attacks that more vulnerable economies could have expected in the current turmoil.