To most Bolivians, what is at stake is a matter of fairness: Should foreign oil and gas companies get a fair return on their capital, or a supernormal return?
Should Bolivia be paid a fair value for its resources?
And should Bolivia, or foreign companies, reap most of the windfall gains from increases in energy prices?
Moreover, many deals were apparently done in secret by previous governments – and apparently without the approval of Congress.
Indeed, because Bolivia’s Constitution requires the approval of Congress for such sales, it isn’t clear that Morales is nationalizing anything: the assets were never properly sold.
When a country is robbed of a national art treasure, we don’t call its return “re-nationalization,” because it belonged to the country all along.
As with many privatizations elsewhere, there are questions as to whether the foreign investors have kept their side of the bargain.
Bolivia contributed to these joint enterprises not only with resources, but also with previous investments.
The foreign companies’ contribution was supposed to be further investment.
But did they fully live up to their commitments?
Are accounting gimmicks being used to overstate the true value of foreign capital contributions?
Bolivia’s government has, so far, simply raised questions, and set in motion a process for ascertaining the answer.
The problem in Bolivia is a lack of transparency, both when contracts are signed and afterwards.
Without transparency, it is easy for citizens to feel that they are being cheated – and they often are.
When foreign companies get a deal that is too good to be true, there is often something underhanded going on.
Around the world, oil and gas companies have themselves to blame: too often, they have resisted calls for greater transparency.
In the future, companies and countries should agree on a simple principle: there should be, to paraphrase President Woodrow Wilson’s memorable words, “open contracts, openly and transparently arrived at.”
If the Bolivians do not get fair value for their country’s natural wealth, their prospects are bleak.
Even if they do, they will need assistance, not only to extract their resources, but also to improve the health and education of all Bolivians – to ensure long-term economic growth and social welfare.
For now, the world should celebrate the fact that Bolivia has a democratically elected leader attempting to represent the interests of the poor people of his country.
It is a historic moment.
Who Pays for Bird Flu?
Fifty years ago, American chicken farmers found that by keeping their birds in sheds they could produce chickens for the table more cheaply and with less work than by traditional farmyard methods.
The new method spread: chickens disappeared from fields into long, windowless sheds.
Factory farming was born.
It isn’t called “factory farming” merely because those sheds look like factories.
Everything about the production method is geared towards turning live animals into machines for converting grain into meat or eggs at the lowest possible cost.
Walk into such a shed – if the producer will let you – and you will find up to 30,000 chickens.
The National Chicken Council, the trade association for the US chicken industry, recommends a stocking density of 85 square inches per bird – less than a standard sheet of typing paper.
When the chickens approach market weight, they cover the floor completely.
No chicken can move without having to push through other birds.
In the egg industry, hens can barely move at all, because they are crammed into wire cages, which makes it possible to stack them in tiers, one above the other.
Environmentalists point out that this production method is unsustainable.
For a start, it relies on the use of fossil fuel energy to light and ventilate the sheds, and to transport the grain eaten by the chickens.
When this grain, which humans could eat directly, is fed to chickens, they use some of it to create bones and feathers and other body parts that we cannot eat.
So we get less food back than we put into the birds – and less protein, too – while disposing of the concentrated chicken manure causes serious pollution to rivers and ground water.
Animal-welfare advocates protest that crowding the chickens keeps them from forming a natural flock, causes them stress, and, in the case of laying hens, prevents them from even stretching their wings.
The air in the sheds is high in ammonia from bird feces, which are usually allowed to pile up for months – and in some cases for a year or more – before being cleaned out.
Medical experts warn that because the birds are routinely fed antibiotics to keep them growing in such crowded, filthy, and stressful conditions, antibiotic-resistant bacteria could cause a public-health threat.
Yet, despite these well-founded criticisms, over the last 20 years factory farming – not only of chickens, but also of pigs, veal calves, dairy cows, and, in outdoor feedlots, cattle – has spread rapidly in developing countries, especially in Asia.
Now we are discovering that the consequences may be far more deadly than we ever imagined.
As University of Ottawa virologist Earl Brown put it after a Canadian outbreak of avian influenza, “high-intensity chicken rearing is a perfect environment for generating virulent avian flu viruses.”
Other experts agree.
In October 2005, a United Nations task force identified as one of the root causes of the bird flu epidemic, “farming methods which crowd huge numbers of animals into small spaces.”
Supporters of factory farming often point out that bird flu can be spread by free-range flocks, or by wild ducks and other migrating birds, who may join the free-range birds to feed with them or drop their feces while flying overhead.
But, as Brown has pointed out, viruses found in wild birds are generally not very dangerous.
On the contrary, it is only when these viruses enter a high-density poultry operation that they mutate into something far more virulent.
By contrast, birds that are reared by traditional methods are likely to have greater resistance to disease than the stressed, genetically similar birds kept in intensive confinement systems.
Moreover, factory farms are not biologically secure.
They are frequently infested with mice, rats, and other animals that can bring in diseases.
So far, a relatively small number of human beings have died from the current strain of avian influenza, and it appears that they have all been in contact with infected birds.
But if the virus mutates into a form that is transmissible between humans, the number of deaths could run into the hundreds of millions.
Governments are, rightly, taking action to prepare for this threat.
Recently, the US Senate approved spending $8 billion to stockpile vaccines and other drugs to help prevent a possible bird flu epidemic.
Other governments have already spent tens of millions on vaccines and other preventive measures.
What is now clear, however, is that such government spending is really a kind of subsidy to the poultry industry. Like most subsidies, it is bad economics.
Factory farming spread because it seemed to be cheaper than more traditional methods.
In fact, it was cheaper only because it passed some of its costs on to others – for example, to people who lived downstream or downwind from the factory farms, and could no longer enjoy clean water and air.
Now we see that these were only a small part of the total costs.
Factory farming is passing far bigger costs – and risks – on to all of us.
In economic terms, these costs should be “internalized” by the factory farmers rather than being shifted onto the rest of us.
That won’t be easy to do, but we could make a start by imposing a tax on factory-farm products until enough revenue is raised to pay for the precautions that governments now have to take against avian influenza.
Then we might finally see that chicken from the factory farm really isn’t so cheap after all.
The US Still Runs the World
WASHINGTON, DC – Reports of the death of American power have often been greatly exaggerated.
In the 1950s the Soviet Union was thought to have surpassed the United States; today, the Soviet Union no longer exists.
In the 1980s, Japan was widely regarded as on the verge of overtaking the US; today, after more than two decades of Japanese stagnation, no one would take this scenario seriously.
And in the 1990s, monetary union was considered likely to propel Europe to greater global prominence; today, the European economy is frequently in the world’s headlines, but not in a good way.
Now it is China’s turn.
Until recently, China, in many people’s view, was poised to assume global leadership, if it hadn’t done so already.
Today, doubts about the Chinese economy’s long-term prospects are rattling stock markets worldwide (including in the US).
China matters, and its economic policy, including how the exchange rate is managed, must be taken seriously.
But China does not run the world, and it is unlikely to do so anytime soon.
The potential for global leadership still rests, believe it or not, with the US.
The best case for taking China seriously as a world power is made in Arvind Subramanian’s best-selling book Eclipse: Living in the Shadow of China’s Economic Dominance, published in 2011.
(The author, now Chief Economic Adviser at India’s finance ministry, and I were colleagues and sometimes co-authors at the International Monetary Fund and the Peterson Institute for International Economics.)
One hopes that the Indian government will heed Subramanian’s account of how China grew through exports of manufactured goods and associated productivity improvements.
China also became integrated into global supply chains – producing things for companies elsewhere – on a previously unimaginable scale, and Chinese managers learned how to make better products.
But other parts of China’s experience have served it less well over time.
China ran a very large current-account surplus during the early 2000s and accumulated a vast stock of foreign reserves – including at least several trillion dollars’ worth of US Treasury debt.
Although this looks impressive on paper, reserves of this magnitude are essentially useless.
If China were to sell its US assets, the dollar would weaken, and US companies would find it easier to export and to compete against imports.
But Americans’ anxiety about being overtaken is not new.
There was great angst in the late 1980s when a Japanese company bought New York City’s Rockefeller Center.
In retrospect, that was one of the great non-events of the twentieth century.
Similarly, Americans will most likely look back on China’s accumulation of US government debt and simply shrug.
The bigger issue is China’s exchange-rate policy.
For a long time, China prevented the renminbi from becoming overvalued – and this was good policy, as Subramanian’s research confirms.
But in the early 2000s, China went too far.
For reasons that are still debated, the renminbi became massively undervalued; exports were much higher than imports, and the current-account surplus reached more than 10% of GDP.
Instead of letting the renminbi appreciate and gradually reducing their reliance on export markets, the Chinese authorities preferred to accumulate foreign reserves (US Treasury debt).
Now China has to figure out a way to sustain growth when demand in the rest of the world is sluggish.
A return to a substantially undervalued exchange rate would almost certainly provoke an international response, including from the US Congress.
But switching suddenly to domestic-led growth is not easy.
China will not collapse (it is not the Soviet Union), and Japanese-style stagnation is also unlikely.
But China is aging fast – and could become old before it becomes rich.
Every decade, important people predict the end of American power.
And there are reasons to be concerned – particularly when some US politicians refuse to acknowledge the nature of America’s global role.
For example, the US built the world’s trading and monetary system 70 years ago, but now Republicans in Congress refuse to support change at the IMF – including sensible reforms that almost all other countries favor.
Still, it is the US that is currently leading the push for freer trade across the Pacific and a substantial reduction in barriers to trade with Europe.
If America gets the rules right – favoring ordinary citizens, rather than footloose corporations – its trade initiatives will make a major contribution to global growth and its own prosperity.
Likewise, in terms of monetary policy, the major issue for the world over the next year is when and how much the Federal Reserve will raise interest rates.
As US monetary officials gather for their annual Jackson Hole conclave, they will consider myriad relevant dimensions of the global economy.
But the policy-setting Federal Open Market Committee will move interest rates based almost entirely on its collective read of US economic circumstances.
Once again, the rest of the world will react to what the US does.
Who\u0027s Afraid of Al Jazeera?
No one is indifferent to Al Jazeera, the Qatari-based Arab satellite television station.
You can practically see the blood of US officials boil when they discuss it.
To be sure, in the context of the dream of all Arabs being united and independent of foreign control, Al Jazeera is undeniably partial to Arab aspirations.
But that does not make its news reporting untruthful.
In fact, Al Jazeera, which US Secretary of State Colin Powell calls "horrible" and "slanted," is a pivotal vehicle for reform and change, which genuinely democratic Arab activists and the international community alike have been calling for.
So incensed has America been, however, that it created its own Arabic language mouthpiece in the form of satellite station Al Hurra.
Yet Al Hurra is forbidden from broadcasting within the US, because it is state controlled.
Arabs don't trust it, either.
It demonstrated its lapdog status by never broadcasting images of prisoners being abused inside Baghdad's notorious Abu Ghraib prison.
In this respect, at least, Al Hurra fits perfectly within the tame tradition of Arab state broadcasters.
America, however, is not alone in challenging Al Jazeera head on.
The BBC, which briefly ran its own Arabic language news station in the mid-1990's - before closing it down because its Saudi funders were unhappy with its reporting - recently announced that it will re-launch an Arabic language news satellite station.
But instead of bashing or seeking to undermine Al Jazeera, politicians should encourage this bastion of free expression, recognizing that Arabs will need to endure a messy process on the way to democracy.
Along that tortuous route, the world's major powers are bound to be offended, probably quite regularly.
Television in the Arab world has for years been the mouthpiece used by ruling presidents, kings, and emirs to propagate their official opinions and nothing else.
Elite military units usually protect radio and television stations, because they have often been the first targets in military coups.
Given this history, and the storm of calls for reform in the Arab world, it is a tragic irony that America and the West have paid so little attention to the terrestrial Arab monopoly television channels.
Indeed, US criticism of Al Jazeera sounds more like special pleading because of America's inept bumbling in Iraq than a genuine desire for free, open, and critical Arab media.
If democracy means giving people a free choice, then there is no doubt that the choice of most Arabs is for a television broadcaster that reflects their aspirations.
In this sense, Al Jazeera is clearly biased, because it is run by Arab patriots and reflects Arab sentiment.
But this is no more a crime than the fact that America's media reflects American aspirations, and in times of war behaves like a cheerleader for US forces.
The key issue here is whether Al Jazeera, as well as American TV stations, are truthful in what they say.
Al Jazeera is certainly professional.
Its leading journalists are Western-trained, many having worked for years at the BBC.
In fact, Al Jazeera was founded only after the BBC closed its Arabic language station under Saudi pressure.
Al Jazeera's motto, "opinion and opposing opinion," has galvanized Arab viewers, because clashing opinions are rarely heard on terrestrial Arab television stations.
Of course, when covering the Israeli occupation of Palestine and the US-led war on Iraq, Al Jazeera has not been objective. How could it be?
But it did not make up facts; it merely reflected majority Arab opinion.
On such fundamental issues of Arab consensus, it is simply illogical to expect an Arab broadcaster to be even-handed.
Moreover, Al Jazeera has not been dumb to complaints about it.
In July, Al Jazeera became the first Arab TV station to create a professional code of ethics.
According to the BBC, the code defines with absolute clarity and transparency how Al-Jazeera journalists are to behave, and sets clear divisions between news, analysis, and commentary.
As for Al Jazeera's journalistic performance, it is past time that the station be judged by respected professional journalists, not by US or other officials with a policy axe to grind.
A major university department of journalism working with Arab media critics, for example, could provide a much more honest analysis of the station's work.
If American, British, and other Western officials are serious about reform in the Arab world, they must support reform-minded Arab individuals and organizations, even if those organizations make them uncomfortable at times.
If that becomes the West's standard, Al Jazeera will rightly be seen as part of the solution, not part of the problem.
Who’s Dependent Now?
If the late great Argentine economist Raul Prebisch were alive today, he no doubt would wonder whether the world had turned upside down.
His hugely influential “dependency” theory argued that if poor countries relied too much on commodity exports, they would never achieve the industrial depth needed to sustain rapid growth.
Instead, they would become mired in a cycle of declining global commodity prices and ever-dwindling income shares.
Prebisch’s preferred policy response, protectionism, proved disastrous for the many Latin American and African countries that heeded him.
But the fact is that for many years, Prebisch seemed to have made the right call on long-term commodity price trends.
Relentless efficiency gains in agriculture and resource extraction pushed down prices for commodities, especially during the 1980’s and 1990’s.
With few exceptions, countries that focused on commodity exports performed dismally, whereas many resource-poor Asian countries raced ahead.
Today, however, with Asia’s giants, India and China, joining the global economy, prices for oil, gold, wheat, and virtually every other commodity are exploding.
While there will always be cycles – oil prices, for example, will probably fall before they start rising again – the long-run trend for many commodities will clearly remain upward for some time to come.
What many trade negotiators and other policymakers do not seem to have recognized yet, though Prebisch would have realized it instantly, is that this dramatic turn of events carries huge implications for the global balance of power.
Indeed, perhaps no other aspect of economic globalization will pose greater challenges to world leaders over the coming decades.
The questions are many.
Are today’s rich countries prepared for an era of co-dependency, in which they are just as desperate for commodities as developing countries are for industrial imports and technology?
Are they prepared for the inevitable flow of power and influence to commodity producers as they become much wealthier?
How will the world’s two superpowers, China and the United States, come to terms with the fact that important commodity-exporting regions from Africa to the Middle East to Central Asia are littered with ill-formed nation states?
Some self-anointed seers portray the problem as being one of finite natural resources, with the world running out of critical commodities at an alarming rate.
Nowadays, there are many adherents of the “Hubbert’s peak” theory of oil production, which holds that we have reached the upper limits of output capacity, the wells are running dry, and it is all downhill from here.
However, as leading oil historian Dan Yergin points out, prophets of doom have declared that the world is running out of oil at least four times already.
Each time, radical improvements in technology made the threat evaporate.
In the late 1800’s, oil extraction involved dredging with a mule.
Today, no one thinks anything of drilling 3,000 meters beneath the ocean floor.
There have been similar improvements across the board in metals mining and agriculture.
No, the world is not about to run out of commodities.
Instead, what is happening is that the integration of 2.5 billion people (China and India alone) into the global economy is producing a demand shift that is likely to put far more upward pressure on commodity prices than any technology gains are likely to offset.
So, for at least the next 50 to 75 years, and perhaps until humans start mining on Mars sometime in the coming centuries, prices for many natural resources are headed up.
Will the rebalancing of global economic power that results from this destabilize world politics?
World War I, of course, was partly set off by Germany’s concern that the other colonial powers had locked up too large a share of world oil and commodity supplies.
Similarly, in World War II, Japan feared for the stability of its foreign supplies of oil and other natural resources.
Will similar tensions arise between resource-challenged China (where even water scarcity is a problem) and the West?
Fortunately, this does not seem likely for the moment, especially given the Chinese leadership’s sober and pragmatic approach to its resource problems.
The Chinese are looking to regions like Africa, hoping to find stable trading partners.
They do not share the political evangelism of the Americans, who don’t just want to trade with commodity exporters, but to convert them as well.
Then there are those American leaders who still speak of making the US self-sufficient in energy supplies.
But this is basically a joke: self-indulgent, maybe, but self-sufficient, never.
Much of the Arab world understandably views the invasion of Iraq as the cornerstone of the real US strategy for securing stable energy supplies.
If they are right, one can only hope that America has a plan B.
Meanwhile, commodity prices will continue to rise, with oil exporters now constituting the largest contributors to America’s gaping trade deficit.
Maybe the real US strategy is to try to owe the commodity-exporting countries so much money that they will feel dependent on making America happy!
That is one twist that Prebisch would never have anticipated.
Whose Champions, Anyway?
The links between states and companies have grabbed headlines, most recently in Russia, where President Vladimir Putin seems obsessed with creating “national champions” in the energy and aerospace sectors.
Such efforts seem but a part of a surge of protectionism in European political debate about business, especially when it comes to cross-border acquisitions. 
Across Europe, governments position themselves to be seen as defending “national” players from “foreign” competitors.
“Economic patriotism,” the slogan coined by France’s Prime Minister Dominique de Villepin following PepsiCo’s rumored attempt in July 2005 to takeover Danone, perhaps best encapsulates the political imperative.
He later argued that Danone should be considered “French” because its “milk collection and its water sources are in France.”
But Danone’s own filings indicate that only 22% of its global sales and less than 14% of its global workforce are in France. 
Where relevant information for companies was available, the comparable distribution of employees was also examined.
The results show that the share of the home base in total revenue has become, on average, relatively low: just three-eighths, or 37.5%, on average for Europe’s largest 100 companies.
Of course, this figure covers a wide diversity of industries, and also some geographical differences across the continent.
For example, the averages for German (34%) or French (35%) companies are markedly lower than for their Spanish (56%) or Italian (65%) counterparts.
But the general trend is unambiguous.
Moreover, this is not just a story about sales. The survey also measured the geographical distribution of employees relative to the distribution of revenue.
While the distribution profiles between employees and revenue could be sharply dissimilar in some companies, on average they were almost identical: for a sub-sample of 73 companies among Europe’s top 100, the home base represented 37% of employees and 35% of revenue on average in 2005, while the rest of Europe accounted for 29% of employees and 28% of revenue.
This strongly suggests that jobs broadly “follow” sales (or perhaps the other way round), even though, once again, this is true only on average and not for all companies.
What are the implications for policymakers?
Put simply, the numbers show a growing gap of interests between these so-called “champions” and their national home bases.
For Europe’s governments, fostering champions increasingly means providing benefits to non-national customers and employees – a dubious use of taxpayer money.
Another consequence is that regulatory competition is likely to increase in Europe, as companies are less bound by local interests to keep their headquarters at “home” if the tax or regulatory environment becomes unfavorable.
The decision by Depfa Bank to shift its headquarters from Wiesbaden to Dublin in 2002 may be a sign of things to come.
The biggest risk is that the growing disconnect between the perception of “national” companies and the reality of Europeanization may lead to spectacularly ill-judged policies.
It is high time for business leaders to be more candid about where their real constituencies lie, and for national politicians to recognize that they can no longer wield control over the giants of today’s European business.
Whose Corporate Social Responsibility?
NEW YORK – Increasingly, corporations are under pressure, often from activist non-governmental organizations, to take on specific “corporate social responsibility” (CSR) obligations.
Prior to the rise of the corporation, there were mainly family firms, such as the Rothschilds. When they made money, it accrued principally to the family itself.
Altruism, where it existed, also was undertaken by the family, which decided how and on what to spend its money. Whether the firm or its shareholders and other stakeholders spent the money was beside the point.
With the rise of the business corporation, large family firms have generally disappeared.
But that does not mean that a corporation is the right entity to engage in altruism – though its various stakeholders obviously can spend any portion of the income they earn from the corporation and other sources in altruistic ways.
Instead of CSR, we should have PSR (personal social responsibility).
One can also argue for PSR on the grounds that asking for CSR becomes a way of “passing the buck” – evading personal responsibility for doing good.
This is the flip side of blaming corporations for everything from obesity to scalding from spilled coffee – both the subject of lawsuits in recent years.
There is also an added advantage in replacing CSR with PSR: there is virtue in diversity of approaches to altruism.
Chairman Mao wanted a hundred flowers to bloom, but only so that he could cut them all off at their roots.
But PSR is more like President George H.W. Bush’s metaphor of a “thousand points of light.”
Moreover, it is hard to see how a corporation’s stakeholders can always arrive democratically at a common position on how the corporation should engage in social responsibility on their behalf.
Each will consider his or her CSR view the best.
But there are strong arguments in favor of CSR as well. First, the political reality is that society treats corporations as if they were persons, which is often also a legal reality for many purposes.
Society increasingly demands that these “corporate citizens” be altruistic, just as people are.
Given this reality, corporations want to give simply because it is expected of them.
Such CSR builds the firm’s image as a “good” corporation, just as giving by Bill Gates and Warren Buffet builds their image as “good” billionaires.
Second, many corporations view CSR as an effective defensive strategy against powerful activist NGOs (such as Greenpeace) that have taken to using online agitation, boycotts, and other means to “blackmail” targeted corporations into acceding to the activists’ demands.
The more CSR a company can point to, the less such efforts will succeed – or even be mounted.
Consider the contrasting experiences of Coke and Pepsi.
Coke has been targeted by NGOs for alleged lapses in labor and environmental standards.
By contrast, Pepsi, which once teamed up with AT&amp;T and the CIA to oust President Salvador Allende in Chile, smells like a rose nowadays, because it has distributed CSR largesse to several causes that influential NGOs embrace.
That is a lesson that Wal-Mart has since learned.
In 2005, the Service Employees’ International Union (SEIU) created Wal-Mart Watch, with an annual budget of $5 million. The purpose was to make Wal-Mart a “better employer, neighbor, and corporate citizen,” and Wal-Mart eventually capitulated on some of the SEIU’s specific demands as well.
Finally, CSR can be simply a matter of advertising.
In this case, the choice of CSR spending is focused directly on generating added revenue, much like advertising, and is aimed at sales much the way advertising is.
A benign example is Adidas’s sponsorship of tennis tournaments.
A malign example is Philip Morris’s donation of money to museums, symphony orchestras, and opera houses, cynically aimed at buying off artists who might otherwise work to ban cigarettes.
All these rationales for CSR suggest that it should be left to each corporation to determine, just as PSR leaves altruism to each individual’s conscience and sense of what needs supporting.
The attempt by some NGOs and activists to impose a straitjacket on CSR, reflecting their priorities, is misguided and must be rejected.
Instead, the model should be former United Nations Secretary General Kofi Annan’s initiative, the Global Compact.
What Annan has done is to embrace ten wide-ranging guiding principles while leaving signatory corporations free to choose that which they wish to support actively.
Whose Georgia?
In recent weeks, leaders of various opposition organizations in Georgia, such as Antisoros and Fairness, have been jailed on unfair accusations of plotting a coup on behalf of Russia.
But the wave of political repression merely reflects President Mikhail Saakashvili’s desperate effort to cling to power.
With popular dissent growing and opposition forces strengthening, the authorities have sought to controll non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and strengthen the security forces.
But this will only make mass protests inevitable, ultimately jeopardizing the democratic transition in Georgia that Saakashvili claims to represent.
Saakashvili sees a “Moscow hand” in every challenge to his authority, which could be explained by his government’s close alliance with the United States.
But the people rounded up in the latest raid against the opposition were originally imprisoned by Eduard Shevarnadze’s government, which Saakashvili helped depose in Georgia’s supposedly democratic “Rose revolution” in 2003.
The latest events clearly indicate that a czarist mentality survived the revolution, reflected in a Byzantine model of political power — an emperor and his court — that has as its main vehicle largely unconstrained presidential authority.
Before the security forces targeted the opposition bloc that I represent, supporters of educational reforms were prosecuted, while most of the press is under the influence of the government.
Saakashvili claims that the opposition forces that I represent oppose Western values.
But we advocate parliamentarism – genuine separation of executive and legislative power – in Georgia.
And, in supporting the Western model of parliamentariansm, we are on the side of Georgia, not Russia.
It is strange that Saakashvili, a graduate of Columbia Law School, fails to see the disparity between his own democratic rhetoric and autocratic actions.
Thus, those of us who value Georgia’s historical ties with Russia are called, at best, “archaists,” and at worst “enemies of Georgian independence,” as if Georgia would become a Russian colony if we ever came to power.
But what separates us from Saakashvili is that we understand that history, geography, and economics dictate close ties to Russia.
We simply see no contradiction between that stance and support for Western values.
Indeed, even Russia, with all its imperfections, cannot be said to oppose Western values.
The unfortunate paradox in Georgia – and elsewhere in the post-Soviet world – is that self-serving pro-Western rhetoric has often led democratic values to be sacrificed in favor of a new dictatorship.
When the West actively supports popular revolutions, as in Georgia and Ukraine, the newly established power relies on democratic slogans, not democratic behavior.
Shevardnadze, too, was initially viewed as a symbol of post-Soviet Georgian democracy.
As a government minister in 1993, however, I was already hearing CIA officials express concern that a “Mafia state” was being created instead.
First with Shevarnadze, and now with Saakashvili, popular disillusionment reflects not rejection of democracy, but frustration with its continuing absence.
Saakashvili is evidently mesmerized by the US, and the West in general, but what is the point if there is no independent and democratic political process in Georgia today?
And why, then, is sustaining close ties to the US so desirable, while refusing to dismiss Russia as a partner is regarded as being an agent of the Kremlin?
Is the US, in contrast to Russia, by definition honest, innocent, and high-minded?
There should be no place for such unfortunate double standards.
Regardless of what the Saakashvili government claims about his opponents, our political orientation is not pro-Russian, but pro-Georgian.
We believe that Georgia should pursue its own interests, which it may share with Europe, Russia, or the US, but which are nonetheless our own.
We have no interest in merely executing US policy, or in basing Georgia’s foreign and domestic policy solely on distancing the country from Russia, as Saakashvili has done.
Thus, pro-Georgian politics should not countenance nationalism.
Nowadays, some of our politicians have embraced the slogan “Georgia for Georgians.”
But nationalism suggests the lack of a coherent conception of Georgia’s interests.
Georgia’s tradition as a multinational, tolerant state, which has been weakened in the last 15 years, must be reinvigorated, because we have no need for enemies against which to define ourselves.
A strong relationship with Russia need not come at the expense of relations with America and the West, and vice versa.
Georgia should be neither pro-Russian nor pro-American.
It is a small, poor country that desperately needs stability and economic development.
Its model should not be Palestine and permanent battle, but Switzerland and permanent prosperity.
Whose War on Terror?
“We are all Americans,” wrote Le Monde on September 12, 2001. And so it was with most people in the Muslim world, who were as appalled as anyone else at the carnage of the terrorist attacks on Washington and New York.
Indeed, when America responded to the attacks, almost no one mourned the fall of the Taliban, who were universally condemned for their fanaticism.
This unanimity of opinion no longer exists.
In the five years since the attacks, two audiences for the so-called “war on terror” have emerged.
Indeed, as the “war” progressed, the audience closest to the action began to see the emerging combat in a way that was diametrically opposed to that of the United States and the West.
To the US administration, every act in the drama of the war on terror was seen as discrete and self-contained: Afghanistan, Iraq, Palestine, and Hezbollah in Lebanon.
The Bush administration, having proclaimed a war on terror, invaded and occupied countries, and yet failed to see that these events were being linked in the eyes of people in the region.
Glued to Al Jazeera and other Arab satellite channels, the various battles of the “war on terror” came to be viewed as a single chain of events in a grand plot against Islam.
Many Muslims also understand that the problem of Palestine, unsolved for three generations, goes beyond the suffering of the Palestinian people. They know that the region’s dictators have used Palestine to justify their misrule and to avoid political and economic liberalization.
The deeper America sank into the Iraqi quagmire, the more the US began to turn a blind eye to the region’s surviving dictators, particularly those in Saudi Arabia, Syria, Egypt, and Pakistan.
Indeed, the last thing the region’s dictators wanted to see was a democratic Iraq.
Almost from the moment of Saddam’s fall, Saudi/Wahhabi jihadis poured into Iraq almost unimpeded.
Worse yet, the Muslims who supported the project to democratize Iraq widely suspect that the Sunni resistance that incited the Iraqi civil war has been financed by Saudi oil money. (Terrorism also kept Iraqi oil from becoming a serious challenger to Saudi Arabia.)
So the effort to democratize Iraq – indeed, the entire American project to democratize the region – has fallen under deep suspicion by even the most moderate of Muslims.
America, they believe, only wants a democracy that suits its interests.
If Palestinians freely vote for Hamas, their choice is actively opposed.
Lebanon’s “Cedar Revolution,” which galvanized the West in the same way as Ukraine’s Orange Revolution, has been systematically undermined.
With democracy in most of the region still a long way off – indeed, perhaps a more distant prospect now than five years ago – US Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice repeats her mantra that the dead civilians of Beirut, Sidon, Tyre, and Gaza represent the “birth pangs” of a new Middle East.
But until the West stops regarding dead babies as political props, we cannot understand how the Muslim world perceives all that has happened since September 11, 2001.
Only then will we understand why the unified view of five years ago has fractured so violently.
Whose World Bank?
NEW YORK – US President Barack Obama’s nomination of Jim Yong Kim for the presidency of the World Bank has been well received – and rightly so, especially given some of the other names that were bandied about.
In Kim, a public-health professor who is now President of Dartmouth College and previously led the World Health Organization’s HIV/AIDS department, the United States has put forward a good candidate.
But the candidate’s nationality, and the nominating country – whether small and poor or large and rich – should play no role in determining who gets the job.
The World Bank’s 11 executive directors from emerging and developing countries have put forward two excellent candidates, Ngozi Okonjo-Iweala of Nigeria and Jose Antonio Ocampo of Colombia.
I have worked closely with both of them.
Both are first-rate, have served as ministers with multiple portfolios, have performed admirably in top positions in multilateral organizations, and have the diplomatic skills and professional competence to do an outstanding job.
They understand finance and economics, the bread and butter of the World Bank, and have a network of connections to leverage the Bank’s effectiveness.
Okonjo-Iweala brings an insider’s knowledge of the institution.
Ocampo, like Kim, brings the advantages and disadvantages of being an outsider; but Ocampo, a distinguished professor at Columbia University, is thoroughly acquainted with the World Bank.
He previously served not only as minister of economics and finance, but also of agriculture – a critically important qualification, given that the vast majority of the developing countries’ poor depend on farming.
He also brings impressive environmental credentials, addressing another of the Bank's central concerns.
Both Okonjo-Iweala and Ocampo understand the role of international financial institutions in providing global public goods.
Throughout their careers, their hearts and minds have been devoted to development, and to fulfilling the World Bank’s mission of eliminating poverty.
They have set a high bar for any American candidate.
Much is at stake.
Almost two billion people remain in poverty in the developing world, and, while the World Bank cannot solve the problem on its own, it plays a leading role.
Despite its name, the Bank is primarily an international development institution.
Kim’s specialty, public health, is critical, and the Bank has long supported innovative initiatives in this field.
But health is only a small part of the Bank’s “portfolio,” and it typically works in this area with partners who bring to the table expertise in medicine.
Rumors suggest that the US is likely to insist on maintaining the perverse selection process in which it gets to pick the World Bank’s president, simply because, in this election year, Obama’s opponents would trumpet loss of control over the choice as a sign of weakness.
And it is more important for the US to retain that control than it is for emerging and developing countries to obtain it.
Indeed, the more powerful of the emerging markets know how to live within the current system, and they may use it to their advantage.
They will, in effect, obtain an IOU, to be cashed in for something that is more important.
The Realpolitik of the moment makes fighting over the presidency unlikely; America may well prevail.
But at what cost?
Should America continue to insist on controlling the selection process, it is the Bank itself that would suffer.
For years, the Bank’s effectiveness was compromised because it was seen, in part, as a tool of Western governments and their countries’ financial and corporate sectors.
Ironically, even America’s long-term interests would be best served by a commitment – not just in words, but also in deeds – to a merit-based system and good governance.
One supposed achievement of the G-20 was an agreement to reform the governance of the international financial institutions – most importantly, how their leaders are selected.
Since expertise on development by and large lies within the emerging and developing countries – after all, they live development – it seems natural that the World Bank’s head would come from one of those countries.
To maintain a cabal among developed countries, whereby the US appoints the World Bank president and Europe picks the International Monetary Fund’s head, seems particularly anachronistic and perplexing today, when the Bank and the Fund are turning to emerging-market countries as a source of funds.
While the US, the international community, and the Bank itself repeatedly emphasize the importance of good governance, a selection procedure that de facto leaves the appointment to the US president makes a mockery of it.
Okonjo-Iweala put the matter forcefully in an interview with the Financial Times: what is at stake is a matter of hypocrisy.
The integrity of the advanced industrial countries, which have a majority of the votes at the World Bank, is being put to the test.
Who Should Be Helped First?
The list of urgent challenges facing humanity is depressingly long.
AIDS, hunger, armed conflict, and global warming compete for attention alongside government failure, malaria, and the latest natural disaster.
While our compassion is great, our resources are limited.
So who should be helped first? 
To some, making such priorities seems obscene.
But the United Nations and national governments spend billions of dollars each year trying to help those in need without explicitly considering whether they are achieving the most that they can.
The western media focuses on a tsunami in Asia; donations flow freely.
An earthquake that devastates Pakistan garners fewer headlines, so the developed world gives a lot less.
There is a better way.
We could prioritize our spending to achieve the greatest benefit for our money. 
This month, I will ask UN ambassadors how they would spend $50 billion to reduce suffering.
They will repeat the same exercise that some of the world’s best economists tackled in a 2004 project called the “Copenhagen Consensus”: weighing up solutions to the great challenges facing the world, and deciding what should be done first. 
But the question shouldn’t be left to politicians or Nobel laureates alone.
We must all engage in the debate.
One hopes that this task has been made slightly simpler by the publication of a book in which the Copenhagen Consensus economists boil down their insights.
Here’s one fact to consider: the entire death toll from the Southeast Asian tsunami is matched each month by the number of worldwide casualties of HIV/AIDS.
A comprehensive prevention program providing free or cheap condoms and information about safe sex to the regions worst affected by HIV/AIDS would cost $27 billion and save more than 28 million lives.
This, say the economists who took part in the Copenhagen Consensus, makes it the single best investment that the world could possibly make.
The social benefits would outweigh the costs by 40 to one. 
Other options that the economists favored spending some of their $50 billion include providing micro-nutrients to the world’s hungry, establishing free trade, and battling malaria with mosquito nets and medication.
At the other end of the scale, responses to climate change like the Kyoto Protocol would cost more than they would achieve, so the economists crossed them off the list of things to do right now.
Regardless of whether we agree with the economists, everybody must admit that we cannot do everything at once.
Discussing our priorities is crucial.
Often, politicians avoid prioritization.
Why?
The glib answer is because it is hard.
There are many interested parties.
No group wants their solution to come last, and no government wants its country’s national challenges to be overlooked. 
The UN conference won’t be easy.
But it shows that there is a will to put prioritization squarely at the center of attention.
It will produce a “to do” list that will demonstrate how to achieve the most that we can for humanity, which could lead, in turn, to more transparent decision-making.
The principles of economics provide a sound basis on which to make rational choices.
Now, the discussion needs to shift from the academic sphere to political life.
It’s time for all of us to consider and compare our own priority lists. 
We must endeavor to shorten the list of challenges facing humanity.
But that requires all of us to engage in a debate about what we need to do first.
Who Should Lead the IMF?
BERKELEY – The International Monetary Fund, many say, has had a good crisis.
As recently as three years ago, many observers thought that the Fund had outlived its usefulness and should be closed down.
Since then, it has intervened in Hungary, Latvia, Iceland, and Ukraine, among other crisis-stricken countries – and has received a massive infusion of new resources.
Part of the explanation for the higher esteem in which the IMF is now held is its recent display of intellectual flexibility – a rare virtue for a big, lumbering bureaucracy.
It has rethought its traditional opposition to capital controls.
It has suggested that central banks may want to consider higher inflation targets in order to avoid hitting the zero bound in the event of deflationary shocks. For this, it drew a stern reproach from Germany’s Bundesbank – a clear sign that it is doing something right.
The IMF has also put in place a Flexible Credit Line to disburse funds quickly – and free of onerous conditions – to countries buffeted by financial crosswinds through no fault of their own.
The problem is that, despite its alluring name, the new facility has had few takers, and no Asian takers in particular.
Indeed, it is revealing that when South Korea was desperate for dollars following the failure of Lehman Brothers, it borrowed from the United States Federal Reserve, not from the Fund.
After their experience in 1997-1998, Korean policymakers would sooner jump off a cliff than borrow, even without conditions, from the IMF.
Nevertheless, while not all is sweetness and light, there has been progress.
And for this the IMF’s strong, politically astute management – not exactly something from which the Fund has regularly benefited in recent years – deserves credit.
Now, however, the rumor mill is heating up with gossip that the Fund’s managing director, Dominique Strauss-Kahn, will leave in order to oppose Nikolas Sarkozy in the 2012 French presidential elections.
Sarkozy’s popularity is hitting new lows, and Strauss-Kahn’s friends say that he has never made a secret of his political ambitions.
A lame-duck managing director would hamstring the Fund.
Already there is a sense that the IMF is reluctant to tell Europe more forcefully how to handle its problem with Greece because the managing director must be careful to avoid meddling in Europe’s internal politics.
On top of this now comes the interesting news that the IMF has appointed Zhu Min, previously a deputy governor of the People’s Bank of China, as special adviser to Strauss-Kahn.
Zhu will thus be part of the core management team.
This, in turn, has fueled speculation that Zhu will be a candidate to become the next managing director.
It is the turn of someone from outside Europe to head the IMF – Europe having had a monopoly on the position since the Fund was created following World War II.
The bargain then was that the US could pick the president of the World Bank while the Europeans would get the top slot at the IMF (US policymakers in their wisdom believing that the Bank would become the more important institution).
But today’s world is more multi-polar. It is no longer dominated by the Atlantic economies, so those economies should no longer dictate who holds the top jobs at the two Bretton Woods institutions.
It is now, the argument goes, another region’s turn.
The obvious choice is Asia, home to the most dynamic emerging markets.
It is the region to which the world’s economic center of gravity is shifting.
If you ask Asian leaders what would make them consider again approaching the Fund after their traumatic experience with IMF “assistance” in 1997-1998, they will answer: an Asian managing director.
In fact, this is precisely the wrong way to think about the problem.
The IMF’s problem in the past has been parochialism and lack of accountability.
The best way to ensure that the Fund remains open to new ideas is by selecting the person with the best ideas to lead it.
The best way to ensure that the IMF’s management is accountable to all of its governmental shareholders is to prevent the top job from becoming the sinecure of any region, whether Europe or Asia.
The next managing director should be selected on the merits, not on the basis of nationality.
There should be an open competition, in which the best candidate wins on the basis of his or her ideas.
Asia has plenty of competent economic officials who might be considered as the next managing director of the IMF.   But just because they are Asian is not reason enough to select them.   
Prepping Gay Men for PrEP
LONDON – In October, two groups researching the effectiveness of a potential breakthrough drug in the fight against HIV did something unusual.
They announced that the therapy they were testing, an antiretroviral drug called Truvada, had proved effective enough to end the randomized phases of the trials, and that they were offering the pill to all of the studies’ participants.
The researchers found that gay men who take Truvada, in addition to using condoms when they have sex, were significantly less likely to contract HIV.
This is further evidence of the effectiveness of pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP), a technique by which people who are HIV-negative use antiretroviral drugs to protect themselves from infection.
In 2011, a trial funded by the Gates Foundation found that straight couples using Truvada reduced the risk of transmitting HIV by 73%.
Those fighting to prevent the spread of HIV/AIDS thus have a new tool in their arsenal.
The question now is how best to deliver it to those who need it most: gay men in developing countries.
This summer, the World Health Organization took an important step to that end, recommending PrEP for all gay men and men who have sex with men, making it the first major international health organization to do so.
The WHO estimates that increased use of PrEP could reduce HIV infections by up to 25% over the next decade among men who have sex with men (this category includes anyone with elevated risk, not just those who identify as gay).
But an important obstacle remains: the legal predicament of gay men in much of the developing world.
In countries like Nigeria, where anti-homosexuality legislation has recently been approved, those following the WHO’s new PrEP guidelines could find themselves subject to imprisonment.
The climate of officially sanctioned homophobia in Nigeria has already set back the fight against AIDS.
In 2006, a study found that 13% of men who have sex with men in Nigeria were HIV-positive, compared to 4.5% of all Nigerians.
By 2012, the HIV rate among men who have sex with men had jumped to 17%.
Meanwhile, an increasing number of men reported encountering homophobia at healthcare centers, making them less likely to seek help.
The consequences could not be more serious.
Two years ago, a young HIV-positive Nigerian man contacted me on Facebook to tell me about his monthly ordeal at the clinic.
The nurse at the hospital spent more time lecturing him on the evils of homosexuality than telling him about the drugs he was taking and their possible side effects.
The man, a third-year medical student, told me that he had decided to stop going to the clinic.
When I asked how he would continue treatment, he said that he had a friend abroad who could get him the drugs.
Less than two years later, I saw a Facebook update announcing his death.
My Facebook friend is not the only one who has paid the price for Nigeria’s homophobia.
A preliminary report from the Solidarity Alliance Nigeria, a coalition of gay, lesbian, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) organizations, details a huge decrease in the use of HIV services by men who have sex with men in the six months following the enactment of the anti-gay legislation.
The decrease ranges from 40% in Lagos – Nigeria’s most cosmopolitan city – to 70% in Kano, a predominantly Muslim state.
Nigerians living with HIV must do more than just fight the infection; they also must brave social stigma, weather discrimination by secular and religious institutions, and now, potentially, face threats from the legal system.
In this environment, the promise of PrEP begins to dim, as the risks of seeking treatment outweigh the potentially life-saving benefits.
The story is similar in Uganda.
Last spring, as legal persecution of gays there mounted, the government raided an HIV clinic and withheld its operating license for providing care and support to HIV-positive men who have sex with men.
As an African activist with more than ten years of experience in the fight against HIV, I hope that the WHO will build on its important first step of advising the use of PrEP.
That means initiating a public conversation with countries like Nigeria, Uganda, Gambia, and Russia on the importance of inclusion in the battle against HIV.
The WHO should make it clear that while it may not be advocating for LGBT political rights, it is determined to ensure that all those who can benefit from PrEP are able to access the necessary drugs, without fear of legal consequences.
Researchers, drug companies, and human-rights campaigners must take up the fight to ensure that PrEP is made available – without risk – to those who need it most.
Who’s Who on Putin’s Payroll?
MOSCOW – Germany’s ex-Chancellor Gerhard Schroeder is a legend in Russia.
He serves Gazprom’s interests for a measly couple of million euros a year, sits in at sessions of the Russian Academy of Sciences, and writes books about his staunch friendship with “Genosse Wladimir,” who, in the not-so-distant past, earned himself the well-deserved nickname of “Stasi” among business circles in gangster-ridden St. Petersburg.
But it is not immediately obvious whether it is Schroeder licking Putin’s boots nowadays or vice versa.
The two of them are building, or trying to build, the Nord Stream gas pipeline, an exceptionally costly project that satisfies twin strategic objectives.
Demonstratively hostile to the interests of both Belarus and Ukraine, the pipeline is intended to ensure that these countries are under Russia’s energy thumb, regardless of who is in power in Minsk and Kiev.
As a bonus, the pipeline will also consolidate the Russian economy’s status as an appendage of Germany’s – its supplier of natural resources.
Certain of Schroeder’s predecessors as German chancellor sought to attain the same objective by rather different means.
The Kremlin’s achievements in securing the help of Americans willing to offer their influence are equally impressive.
Indeed, the Obama administration’s Russia policy is being nurtured with advice from people who have no official position in the administration but close business ties to Russia and the Kremlin: Henry Kissinger, James A. Baker, Thomas Graham, and Dimitri Simes.
The first two are major geo-politicians; Graham and Simes are respected as outstanding Russia specialists.
They write key reports for the administration, and shuttle between Moscow and Washington, coordinating the parameters of the Obama administration’s effort to “reset” the bilateral relationship.
Like Schroeder, all these people are not economically disinterested.
Baker is a consultant for the two companies at the commanding heights of the Russian economy, Gazprom and Rosneft.
The Kissinger Associates lobbying group, whose Russian section is headed by Graham, feeds in to the Kissinger-Primakov working group, a quasi-private-sector effort, blessed by Putin, to deepen ties between Russia and the United States.
It is highly instructive to read the recommendations of these people and groups, as they unobtrusively render the objectives of their Kremlin clients into a language familiar to American leaders.
Graham’s latest contribution, “Resurgent Russia and US Purposes,” is most revealing in this respect.
The author finds the government of a “Russia getting up off its knees” to consist of progressive modernizers fully aware of the challenges facing their country as it attempts to “return to the great powers club.”
“In order to become a genuinely developed and modern country,” Graham continues, “in the coming decade Russia will need to invest at least one trillion dollars in modernizing its infrastructure.
America and the West in general have a vital interest in seeing the modernization of Russia succeed.
The lion's share of the technologies, know-how, and a substantial proportion of the investment, needs to come from Europe and the USA.”
In addition to the technology and investments, Graham quietly slips in a foreign policy suggestion for the Obama administration that is sure to please the Kremlin: “Finlandizing” Ukraine.
Unless that sort of appeasement is pursued, he warns, Russia will continue to oppose the US “wherever and whenever it can.”
According to Graham, “At the extreme, a weak Russia, with its vast resources and sparse population east of the Urals, could become the object of competition among the great powers, notably China and the United States.”
That unspoken help-us-develop-or-we’ll-let-the-Chinese-do-it threat is a logical development of Prime Minister Putin’s homily at this year’s World Economic Forum in Davos, where he advocated decisive action to end the world economic crisis.
His recipe?
Western countries should write off half a trillion dollars’ worth of debt owed to them by the Russian state corporations run by his pals from the Dresden KGB and the Ozero dacha cooperative.
But no amount of money will succeed in modernizing Putin's kleptocratic regime, which has already squandered trillions in oil wealth.
Simply put, the Putin system is politically, institutionally, and intellectually antithetical to the task of modernization.
Graham’s only error in his presentation is his attempt to frighten the administration with a hypothetical confrontation between the US and China over Russian resources.
This is not his area of specialization.
Kissinger works personally with the Chinese account, jointly propounding with his long-time rival Zbigniew Brzezinski the notion, so seductive for an America growing weary of its imperial burden, of a global Big Two.
Here is a recent sample of Kissinger’s geopolitical arts: “The role of China in a new world order is crucial.
A relationship that started on both sides as essentially a strategic design to constrain a common adversary has evolved over the decades into a pillar of the international system... The Sino-American relationship needs to be taken to a new level.
This generation of leaders has the opportunity to shape relations into a design for a common destiny, much as was done with trans-Atlantic relations in the post-war period.”
No doubt Kissinger believes every word he wrote, but his ideas also honestly articulate the aspirations of his customers.
It’s just that not all customers have the same motives.
One wants to get his hooks into a further trillion dollars that it can pick away at, while the other wants to become “a central construct of the system of international relations.”
But, in both cases, the customers are getting the influence for which they are paying.
Who Wants Peace in the Middle East?
Forty years after the Six Day War peace between Israelis and Palestinians seems as distant as ever.
Israel still refuses to accept the new Palestinian national unity government as a negotiating partner because Hamas is part of that government.
What is the cause of this seeming paradox?
Is there any hope?
The Palestinian government is united administratively, but divided politically.
The Palestinians have one government with two policies.
Politically, Palestine’s Prime Minister Ismail Haniyeh remains against recognizing Israel and respecting the existing agreements.
He declared that he is for the continuation of resistance in all forms.
What kind of guarantee of a good faith effort to reach a peace agreement can come from such a stance?
That is the question the European Union needs to ask itself as it debates whether to resume providing financial aid to the Palestinian Authority.
The EU should make it clear to Hamas that the Union is not going to finance terror and is not going to finance a refusal to make peace.
If the Palestinians want to have European help – which I support completely – it must be ready to make peace, not to break peace.
After all, it is not Hamas as a party that is objectionable; what is objectionable are the politics and policies which Hamas pursues.
We have nothing against Hamas; we are against their belligerent policies, which service in government has not changed.
There was a time when the PLO held positions that were the same as those of Hamas.
Then the PLO changed.
If the current Palestinian leadership changes its position, there will be no problem from our side.
We will have nothing against negotiations. We are for negotiations.
We are for the “two-state solution.”
We accept the Middle East “road map.”
What we are against is terror.
Where we cannot agree, however, is on a “right of return” for Palestinians.
If such a right were recognized, there would be a Palestinian majority instead of a Jewish majority, which would mean the end of the Jewish state.
This is a demographic, not a religious, question: an Arab state is where the Arabs are the majority, and the Jewish state is where the Jews are the majority.
Indeed, the “right of return” contradicts the very idea of a two-state solution, as it would mean one state – a Palestinian state.
Nobody in Israel will accept this.