Who Will Run the World’s Deficits?
SINGAPORE – These days everyone seems to want to run a current-account surplus.
China has long run large surpluses.
The eurozone is now running even larger ones, with swings in southern Europe augmenting Germany’s longstanding surpluses.
Indeed, countries from Singapore to Russia are running large surpluses.
Meanwhile, America’s external deficit – which for decades has helped to sustain surpluses elsewhere – is now smaller than it was before 2008, with many economists arguing that it should never revert to its previous levels (they argue that the shale-gas boom makes this unlikely, anyway).
Financial markets have also made clear that the ability of other major deficit countries, like Brazil and India, to absorb capital flows is reaching its limit.
Since the world is a closed system, this raises the question: Who will run the world’s deficits?
Mainstream economists believe that the global economy should function as a balanced mechanical arrangement in which external surpluses and deficits are smoothed out over time.
But periods of global economic expansion have virtually always been characterized by symbiotic imbalances.
One part of the world runs large deficits for a prolonged period, creating demand; another part of the world runs surpluses, financing its counterparts’ deficits.
This was true of Roman-Indian trade in the first and second centuries, and of the age of European exploration in the sixteenth century.
It was also true of the two Bretton Woods arrangements, in which the US ran the necessary deficits.
Admittedly, imbalanced systems create distortions.
The Romans had to debase their coins, owing to the continuous loss of gold to India.
The Spanish empire flooded the world with silver coins as it paid for its many wars.
Bretton Woods I collapsed in 1971, when the dollar’s peg to gold became untenable, and Bretton Woods II ended in 2008, owing to the misallocation of capital.
But these distortions did not prevent unbalanced systems from enduring for long periods.
The only significant period of “balanced” economic expansion was in the early nineteenth century.
The British East India Company deliberately imposed a triangular trade arrangement whereby Britain sold manufactured goods to India in order to buy opium, which it subsequently sold in China to finance the purchase of tea and other products.
In other words, balanced global economic growth required war, colonization, and large-scale drug trafficking.
So, what symbiotic imbalance will underpin the next round of global economic growth?
Given that the current account is the difference between a country’s saving and investment rates, both of which are heavily influenced by demographics, we need to consider rapid changes in population dynamics.
China currently saves and invests half of its GDP, but, as its workforce shrinks in the coming years, its investment rate is likely to fall sharply.
However, aging will keep the saving rate from falling at the same pace.
This differential will generate large external surpluses that will transform China from the “world’s factory” into the “world’s investor.”
It would be convenient if global demographics were distributed in such a way that aging countries could run surpluses just when younger countries needed the capital.
In reality, many major economies will be trying to save for retirement at the same time.
Moreover, the younger countries are typically emerging markets, which have neither the scale nor the capacity to absorb the world’s excess savings efficiently.
The US is the main exception: it has both the required scale and the youngest population of any major developed country.
Given this, it will once again fall to the US to run the world’s largest external deficit, in what could be dubbed Bretton Woods III.
It may seem appalling to expect such a highly indebted country to continue to run deficits; but the world is willing to finance the US at negative real interest rates.
Indeed, the main international concern has been US policymakers’ reluctance to raise the government’s debt ceiling!
If the US is unable or unwilling to run the required deficits, the global economy will flounder in a savings glut of low demand and cheap capital until another alternative emerges.
Or perhaps the low cost of international capital will entice the US to absorb some of the world’s excess savings, triggering a new period of global expansion.
While a Bretton Woods III arrangement would inevitably generate its own distortions, it could last for years if the capital is invested sensibly.
The prospect of its eventual demise is not a good reason to wait for some theoretical ideal of global balance to materialize.
If history is any indication, we will be waiting for a long time.
Santa Claus Speaks German
Santa Claus was a Turkish Dervish who in the middle ages traveled through Central and Northern Europe, giving gifts to children and claiming to be the re-incarnation of Greek St. Nicholas, who preached in the fourth century.
Together with the Christmas tree, Sankt Niklaus, as the Germans called the benefactor, became a central figure in German Christmas habits.
In the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, German immigrants, the so-called Pennsylvania Dutch, carried them to the United States, from where they later spread to the rest of the world, if only as marketing icons for Coca Cola.
In 2006, Santa Claus again came from Germany with a sack full of good news about the business cycle.
The Ifo business climate indicator, which had been rising since the second half of 2005, reached its highest level since Germany’s unification boom.
After years of stagnant growth, the German economy has been growing at an annual rate of about 2.5% in 2006.
While the value-added tax will rise by three percentage points in 2007, economic growth will remain healthy, at nearly 2%.
The Ifo business climate indicator is generated every month by asking 7,000 firms, primarily from German manufacturing industry, about their current business situation and their expectations for the next six months.
It has been produced for half a century, and, according to a poll conducted by Reuters, it is Europe’s most prominent business indicator, outperforming even official EU indicators.
In early 2006, when the Ifo indicator foresaw an economic upturn while the German Federal Statistical Office reported meager quarterly GDP growth figures, some commentators scoffed.
But when the Office later revised its data upward, it became clear that the Ifo indicator was right.
In 2006, Ireland’s GDP may grow by 5.2%, Finland’s by 5.8% and Spain’s by 3.7%.
While the US economy begins to stagnate, across the Atlantic the business cycle seems to have turned upward at last.
As the world’s second largest exporter, the German boom was initially driven by foreign sales.
Indeed, German exports grew by 6.9% in 2005 and 11.2% in 2006.
But, given increasing capacity utilization in the export industries, as well as higher investment requirements owing to the normal capital replacement cycle, domestic investment demand is now also rising.
Annual investment in equipment increased by 7.7% in 2006, while overall investment, including construction, was up by 5%.
Although Germany’s net investment as a share of GNP remains one of the lowest in the developed world, the additional investment implies more jobs in the construction and machine tool industries, followed by rising employment wherever the investment is placed.
Unfortunately, however, the upturn in the business cycle cannot be taken as a sign of structural improvement in the German economy.
Since 1970, Germany’s business cycles have been surprisingly regular: a downswing in the first half of each decade, followed by an upswing in the second half.
Unemployment has always reached its lowest point at the end of the decade or a year later, driven by cyclical movements in equipment investment that followed the textbook multiplier-accelerator model.
However, unemployment has increased from one boom to the next, with the lowest rate in each business cycle following a linear upward trend.
It is too early to speculate whether Germany will be able to break this pattern and reverse that trend.
Despite the boom, and despite various programs that stimulated part-time employment, unemployment in absolute terms was about 4.5 million in 2006 and will be 4.1 million in 2007, compared to the last low point of 3.9 million in 2000.
Germany’s economic development will have to be observed well into the next full decade in order to judge the potential for a structural trend reversal.
Nevertheless, there is every reason to expect the German economy’s upswing to continue for the time being.
With some luck, good times for Germany, and for Europe as a whole, could last until the end of the decade.
Sarko v Sego At Last
The surprise in the first round of the French presidential election was that there was no surprise, except for the huge level of voter turnout.
The two leaders of the Right and of the Left, the favorites in all the polls for a long time, came first and second.
Four winners and one clear loser emerged from the first round.
The first winner is democracy.
For the first time in my lifetime, as I went to vote on Sunday with my children - in a peaceful celebration of that secular religion that is democracy when it works well - I had to wait in line patiently for a relatively long time.
For 85% of the electorate went to vote in what has been the highest level of participation in presidential elections in France since Charles de Gaulle last ran for president in1965.
The lesson of the first ballot of 2002, which saw a high level of abstention and the surprise elimination of the Socialist Lionel Jospin, partly explains that mobilization.
Also, with the emergence of a new generation of political leaders, the French &#45;&#45; who were thought cynical towards politics &#45;&#45; seem to have regained their unique passion for it.
The second winner is undeniably and by far Nicolas Sarkozy.
With 31% of the vote he will come to the second ballot in a very favorable position.
His strategy to attract the electorates of Jean Marie Le Pen’s extreme right, proved to be a winning one.
A majority of French who voted for him, did it, according to reliable exit poll studies, above all because of his personality.
They wanted a strong charismatic man to reawaken France economically and to reassure them in security terms.
The third winner, though she is mathematically in a much less favorable position, is Segolène Royal.
Her making it to the second round is a huge relief for the Socialist party after the Jospin debacle of 2002 - and with more than 25% of the votes, she did nearly as well as François Mitterrand in 1981.
In order to have a serious chance to win, she has to transform the second ballot into a referendum against Nicolas Sarkozy.
In a classical Left-Right contest she can only lose.
The working class is disappearing in modern France and what’s left of it tends to go more to the extreme-right than to the extreme-left.
Segolène. Royal has done well, but probably not well enough, unless in a face to face debate with Nicolas Sarkozy she can rally a majority of viewers to the radical modernity of electing a woman to the highest French position.
It is not what she says but what she is, or even more so the fear of her opponent that constitute her best chance.
The fourth winner, though his absence from the second ballot is a disappointment for him, is François Bayrou.
With more than18% of the votes he tripled his score of 2002.
He has turned the Center into a force.
In the second ballot of France’s presidential elections, he will prove to be a Queen or more like a King maker.
His votes are needed by both remaining candidates and it is likely they will tend to split equally between Left and Right, for he cannot commit himself to clearly support one candidate over the other.
The clear loser in the first round is the leader of the extreme-right Jean-Marie Le Pen.
With less than 11% of the votes in what will be the last campaign of his career, he turned into an “ageing detail of History”.
In a campaign centered on the emergence of a new generation of political leaders, he lost his appeal.
He did not mellow, but was swallowed by history’s zeitgeist.
Now a second campaign begins.
The key strategic move for the two remaining candidates will be to attract the votes of the Center without losing their core Leftist or Rightist constituencies.
That means emphasizing in a reassuring way, economic credibility for Segolene Royal, and social compassion for Nicolas Sarkozy.
The world and Europe in particular will be watching even more intensely this second round.
One can nearly detect a kind of “North-South divide,” with south Europe (pre dominantly Spain and Italy standing behind Segolène Royal, and northern Europe, predominantly Germany and Britain (the US as well) aligning themselves behind Nicolas Sarkozy.
For the European Union, new man or woman in the Elysee Palace may be a necessary condition for reinvigorating the European project, but it is not a sufficient condition.
The French “No” to the referendum on Europe’s constitutional treaty in May 2005 revealed the depth of Europe’s crisis, it did not create it.
Watching the celebration of patriotism behind the raising of the French flag and the singing of the national anthem during the first round of the campaign, one can easily believe that the British vision of a Europe of independent nation states has won already, if only by default.
On May 6, the date of the second ballot, French citizens will choose between two risks.
The first one, which is potential, given Sarkozy’s domineering personality is to have Sarkozy as president.
The second risk may prove to be even a bigger one, and can be described as follows.
At this particular juncture in time and given the condition of their economy can the French reject the candidate that incarnates by far the best hope for change and “Renaissance.”
To succeed, Nicolas Sarkozy will have to turn his campaign slogan “Together everything becomes possible” into reality.
That implies successfully integrating French immigrants into the wider community with a combination of economic growth, restoration of the authority of the State, but also and above all a far greater sense of solidarity and fraternity.
Sarkozy Agonistes
“Why do they hate us?” asked the Americans of the Islamic fundamentalists after 9/11.
“Why do they not like me?” could be the question asked by Nicolas Sarkozy to the French after more than one year in power.
Sarkozy is omnipresent both domestically and internationally.
On July 13, the leaders of more than 40 countries attended the first gathering of the “Union for the Mediterranean” in Paris.
France is back in the world and in Europe.
Domestically, an ambitious and difficult program of long-awaited reforms, which a majority of French citizens recognize are inevitable, has begun, with some early results in the field of labor law and education.
Sarkozy’s energy, willpower, and activism are nothing short of spectacular.
And yet he is the least popular of the Fifth Republic’s presidents, the one whose “fall from grace” with the French has been the most spectacular, rapid, and durable, to the point where political experts, and his friends and foes alike, wonder whether he can rebound.
What went wrong?
“I don’t want a good General, I want a lucky one” the French Emperor Napoleon I used to quip.
By that standard, he would not have wanted Sarkozy.
Having campaigned on a promise to restore and improve the French people’s purchasing power, Sarkozy came to power, in May 2007, just a few weeks before the sub-prime mortgage crisis erupted, and a few months before commodity prices exploded.
He then assumed the European Union presidency just days after the resounding Irish “No” to the Lisbon Treaty reduced his role to an exercise in damage control at best.
And, to make matters worse, the French soccer team, whose World Cup victory in 1998 gave his predecessor Jacques Chirac a short respite and a passing popularity boom, was humiliated in June’s Euro championship.
Yet the international context, with its unforeseen events, does not suffice to explain Sarkozy’s unpopularity with the French.
His problem stems from the combination of his essence and style, which adds up to a brutal lack of coherence.
As economic crisis engulfs France and most of the world, the French are not reassured by their young and energetic president.
Of course, there is an element of deeply unfair subjectivity in this perception.
But this is what politics is all about.
The president’s physical appearance and his body language – if he was a Shakespeare character, he would probably be the traitor Iago in Othello – are part of the problem.
His nervousness, his impulsiveness verging on vulgarity, is disconcerting even for the majority of French who voted for him.
At home for example, the badly needed reform of the army has been accompanied by unnecessary malignity, as if a former interior minister imbued with a “police culture” was utterly incapable of understanding the “army culture” and its sense of honor.
And his undeniable success in implementing his labor laws, exemplified by sparse street demonstrations, has been undermined by his irrepressible will to provocation, reflected in his gratuitous remark that “today when there is a strike in France, no one notices it!”
In his foreign policy, too, Sarkozy seems to combine the right intuitions with the wrong tactics – that is, when his entire strategy is not marred by the pursuit of contradictory objectives.
France’s policy toward China and the issue of the French and EU president’s attendance at the opening ceremony of the Beijing Olympics has represented a spectacular illustration of this lack of consistency.
Sarkozy misjudged the balance of power between France and China, and France came out of that diplomatic episode badly bruised, with its president swallowing his human rights claims and bending to the diktat of realpolitik.
In the same vein, there is a mismatch in Sarkozy’s approach to Europe between the message and the messenger, between careful diplomacy needed to create a new consensus within the European Commission and with countries like Ireland, and president’s rather authoritarian style.
While Sarkozy’s popularity remains low, a majority of the French want him to succeed, for he has four more years to go, and there is no alternative around the corner.
The left remains in disarray, caught between its internal feuds and the rise of anti-capitalist extremism at its margins.
For a president bent on implementing reforms, “less can be more” – less aggressiveness and less ego.
But can a man act against his deepest nature?
The answer is probably no.
Sarkozy and the Euro’s Perfect Storm
The more French president Nicolas Sarkozy attacks the European Central Bank and the strong euro, the more he is criticized in the European media, by European finance ministers, European Union officials and the ECB itself.
The critics are right.
The fundamental reason behind France’s current economic weakness is its lack of competitiveness even in other euro-zone economies where the euro is not a factor.
But Sarkozy has a point.
A perfect storm is forming in the foreign exchange markets that threatens to catapult the euro to levels that will make even the euro-zone’s most efficient exporter—Germany—unable to compete in world markets.
If German exporters can’t compete at 1.50 euros to the dollar, what chances do French exporters have?
The euro is gaining ground for several reasons.
A precipitating factor is that the Federal Reserve has had a dramatic change of heart about the strength of the US economy.
Fed chairman Ben Bernanke is now extremely concerned that the economy’s housing market and mortgage problems will cause a recession unless interest rates are aggressively cut even if this means taking some risks with inflation.
This new “no recession” Fed policy has started the US dollar down the path to new lows.
The decline will likely be sustained by the substantial US current account deficit, which found in Bernanke’s cuts the spark it needed to make its impact fully felt in foreign exchange markets.
Of course, if interest rates also were being cut in the euro-zone, the fall in the dollar against the euro would be moderated.
This is Sarkozy’s major point.
But the ECB has made it clear not only that interest rate cuts are not on the table—it is merely postponing, not abandoning, the interest rate increase originally planned for September.
The perfect storm is forming because both Europe and America, for different reasons, are following monetary policies that encourage the euro to rocket to dangerous levels.
The anti-inflation hawks in Frankfurt are not at all happy with Bernanke’s aggressive 50 basis point cut and the promise of more to come.
It gives comfort to ECB critics like Sarkozy, and otherwise puts pressure on them to drop the central bank’s inflationary bias because of its effect on the euro.
Some are recalcitrant and are more than willing to see the euro rise because, with rate hikes off the table, the strong euro may be the only way left for fighting the incipient inflation they fear.
But this policy is unsustainable.
The ECB should drop its inflationary bias because the European economy is weakening, and the weaker economy will contain whatever inflationary pressures now exist.
The anti-inflationary bias, which made sense until recently, now is seriously out of whack with current economic realities.
But European officials—and not only the ECB&#45;&#45; seem very reluctant to admit that their economy is faltering, fearing that it will further weaken confidence and add to the slowdown pressures.
Every soft number — and there have plenty lately — is given a positive spin (“euro-zone economic fundamentals remain strong” or “the economy remains robust”) &#45;&#45; and the media goes along with the deception.
The Ifo business confidence indicator in Germany has been down four months in a row but, according to Ifo, “the ECB does not have to change policy.”
The European Commission’s economic index is plummeting, purchasing managers indices are down and so are German retail sales.
Ordinary Europeans will pay a high price for their leaders self -deception and mistaken policies.
The longer the ECB maintains its inflationary bias, the steeper the consequent economic decline as the economy crumbles under the weight of the skyrocketing euro and interest rates that are too high for current economic realities (though lower than where the ECB hawks had planned to go before the current financial crisis hit).
Ironically, the ECB will have to cut interest rates sooner, and by greater amounts, because its inflationary bias is sending the euro to dangerous levels for the current state of its economy.
It will not do ECB credibility any good if takes an economic collapse to convince it that the coast is clear on the inflation front.
The ECB is not the old Bundesbank, which had such public support and trust in Germany that it could get away with almost anything.
The ECB’s margin for error is much narrower—the support of its constituents less deep.
A major policy mistake and the same public officials now criticizing Sarkozy for attacking the ECB will be joining him.
Maastricht treaty or no Maastricht treaty, loss of public support for the ECB will diminish its independence.
Sarkozy at Dusk
PARIS – And the next French President will be…the Socialist Party’s candidate François Hollande.
A month ago, any prediction uttered with such certainty would have sounded imprudent, if not foolish. Uncertainty prevailed.
Four candidates dominated the competition, and no one would have dared to predict which two will make it to the second-round run-off.
Indeed, the race looked more open than ever in recent memory.
Suddenly, something happened – not an event in itself (though it started with Hollande’s first great public rally in mid-January), but rather something that may resemble an irresistible process that can be summarized as follows: a majority of the French want to punish a president who has fallen from their graces.
They might not have dared to do so had they not found a reasonably credible alternative.
Hollande, by appearing more sound and determined than most French voters thought he was, has given a voice (and a face) to a widespread desire to reject the incumbent, Nicolas Sarkozy.
That is not to say that Hollande is charismatic.
On the contrary, there remain lingering doubts about his gravitas, not to mention serious concerns about the realism or the wisdom of his program.
But, unlike his former companion, Ségolène Royal, who challenged Sarkozy for the presidency in 2007, he looks and sounds “real.”
From now on, the campaign appears set to be transformed into a classic left-right struggle, but with a major difference between the two main candidates’ strategies.
Hollande wants to turn the presidential election into a referendum on Sarkozy, who, given his unpopularity, is seeking to frame the battle in terms of values and experience.
Indeed, the essence of Sarkozy’s campaign message has become: “You might not like me personally (you would be wrong, by the way, because I am not as you see me, and my experience in power has transformed me deeply), but you support my conservative values, because they represent what you really think.
In a world that is changing so rapidly and brutally, you need stability and reassurance.
I can give you that.”
By emphasizing the ideological divide between him and Hollande, Sarkozy is also being led to court, more openly than ever, the extreme-right electorate of Marine Le Pen’s National Front, as if he sensed that she might not find enough signatures to qualify for a place on the ballot.
This strategy may make sense in the first round, but, by attracting extreme-right voters in the first round, Sarkozy could lose the support of centrist voters in the run-off.
They might be willing to vote for “experience,” but not for a “Christian conservative” who strays from humanistic values.
In any case, one could argue that the French are being unfair toward their president.
Sarkozy has had to confront exceptionally difficult circumstances, and his record is far from poor.
At the beginning of his term, France was at the helm of the European Union, and he proved to be a skillful leader.
Understanding the gravity of the economic crisis that erupted in 2008, he reacted swiftly and with considerable energy.
He has also launched a major and long-overdue reform of the pension system and higher education. He made the right choices in intervening in Côte d’Ivoire and Libya.
One could easily add more such examples.
In brief, Sarkozy has sincerely tried to reform a deeply paralyzed country. And he cannot be held responsible for high unemployment, given the depth of the world crisis.
Yet, barring a last-minute miracle – a major mistake by Hollande that wrecks his credibility, or a fresh bout of crisis that stokes voters’ desire for reassuring continuity at the top – Sarkozy appears condemned to be the second one-term president in the history of the Fifth Republic, following Valéry Giscard d’Estaing.
In 1981, Giscard was defeated largely as a result of the “betrayal” of his former prime minister, Jacques Chirac, who ran against him.
In 2012, no one in Sarkozy’s camp is betraying the president (those who are trying, such as former Prime Minister Dominique de Villepin, have received no support). It is Sarkozy himself who has betrayed the hopes of his supporters and consolidated the hostility of his opponents.
Sarkozy did so mostly at the very beginning of his presidency, and he is likely to be punished for it in 2012.
He has changed for the better, but only up to a point, and clearly not enough for a majority of the French, who, according to recent public-opinion polls, simply cannot stand the idea of having him on their television screens for another five years.
Of course, as former British Prime Minister Harold Wilson used to say, “a week is a long time in politics,” and Sarkozy will officially become a candidate only this week.
Yet it will be extremely difficult, if not impossible, for him to prevent the upcoming election from becoming an emotional and negative referendum on his persona.
Sarkozy, Carpe Diem!
Nicolas Sarkozy’s presidential election triumph in May, and now the victory of his party, the UMP, in the parliamentary election, has created the most favorable opportunity in decades for deep structural reform in France.
Not only did Sarkozy win the presidency with 53% of the vote, but his approval rating has since soared, to 62%, after he formed an inclusive government with high-ranking recruits from the opposition. 
In the first round of the parliamentary election, the UMP won a record-high 40% of the vote.
While voters denied the UMP a landslide victory in the second round, its overall win meant that the governing party retained its legislative majority for the first time in 29 years.
In the days following his election, Sarkozy brought France “back to Europe,” reinvigorating the Franco-German partnership and giving decisive support to German Chancellor Angela Merkel’s campaign to revive the European Union’s draft constitutional treaty.
He demonstrated pragmatism by not vetoing ongoing EU accession negotiations with Turkey, thus avoiding unnecessary confrontation with Great Britain and Spain, despite maintaining his long-term opposition to full membership for Turkey.
Likewise, his government’s discreet silence in the wake of the European Central Bank’s latest interest rate increase constitutes eloquent recognition of the ECB’s independence. 
But how will Sarkozy and his government respond to France’s internal challenges?
With anemic growth, unemployment stuck between 9% and 10% for more than 20 years, and immigrant ghettos that vacillate between lawlessness and despair, France is indeed one of the sick men of Europe.
Where adaptation to ruthless international competition and rapid technological change calls for flexibility and individual responsibility, the dominant culture in France continues to be one of assistance and entitlement.
It is now clear that the French government will follow Sarkozy’s presidential program to the letter. The program’s flagship measure is the wholesale exemption of overtime hours from social security and income taxes.
Many economists and some foreign observers are puzzled by the emphasis Sarkozy has placed on this expensive provision.
Indeed, it might appear disproportionate to give higher priority to encouraging overtime than to stimulating employment.
But France is not a normal country.
For ten years, it has struggled with the costs of a mandatory 35-hour week – a ceiling that is now so embedded in the legislation regulating working hours that simple abrogation would lead to chaos.
The alternative, a targeted tax holiday, constitutes a welcome break with the culture of “time off,” and an encouragement to those who, as Sarkozy’s campaign slogan put it, want to “work more in order to earn more.”
The program’s other measures are a series of tax cuts for the middle class, entrepreneurs, and the wealthy, which, though expensive, constitute a similarly welcome break with France’s tradition of punitive taxation.
However, none of these measures goes to the heart of France’s structural problems.
The Gordian knot paralyzing initiative and blocking employment consists in the maze of regulations that stifle the labor market.
French companies live under the constant threat of a surprise visit from the labor inspector to determine compliance with a thick book of arcane measures.
Worse yet, the knowledge that some law or regulation covers every aspect of employment poisons the workplace and discourages attempts to resolve problems pragmatically.
When both parties to a dispute know that they are likely to end in a labor court, neither has an incentive to compromise. 
The law’s most onerous provisions are those regulating the terms of employment contracts, for they condemn employers who decide to close a plant to a marathon of legal proceedings of uncertain duration and unpredictable outcome.
This not only hampers restructuring, but also makes firms hesitant to hire and inhibits innovation.
The proceeds of the tax could be used in part to fund the much needed expansion of France’s underdeveloped public job placement services. 
Unfortunately, Sarkozy’s program in this critical area is vague.
Job protection benefits the employed at the expense of the unemployed, and some unions, notably the most militant, are strongly opposed to greater flexibility, and have already threatened to block liberalizing measures in the streets.
The pragmatic course, therefore, was to set general objectives during the campaign, and, after the elections, to encourage the unions to make the first proposals.
Prime Minister François Fillon has called for tripartite negotiations on tenure and seniority this summer and fall.
Will the government settle for marginal changes to the existing labor code, or will it seize its unique opportunity to break with a generation of stifling regulations?
The future of the French economy, the stability of French society, and the influence of France in the world hangs on the outcome.
Sarkozy Chooses Dishonor
PARIS – “Britain and France had to choose between war and dishonor.
They chose dishonor. They will have war.”
Winston Churchill’s famous denunciation of the delaying tactics of the British and French on the eve of World War II should be a warning to French President Nicolas Sarkozy.
In fanning vicious anti-immigrant passions for short-term political gain, he will have dishonor first and then defeat.
For, although a majority of French today may be inclined to sympathize with Sarkozy’s immigrant-bashing rhetoric, there is no guarantee that they will re-elect him in 2012.
It is not so much Sarkozy’s performance as president that most Frenchmen reject; it is his essence.
At a time of rising unemployment, with France dominated by fears about the future, the French need a reassuring father or mother figure, not a jittery and manipulative leaderready to compromise ethics and France’s proud tradition that every citizen is entitled to equal treatment under the law.
Former Prime Minister Michel Rocard did not mince words about Sarkozy’s recent proposals to strip foreign-born French nationals of their citizenship if convicted of threatening the life of a police officer, practicing polygamy, or female “circumcision.” “One has not seen such measures since the Vichy regime or since the Nazis,” Rocard declared.
Equating Sarkozy with Marshal Pétain’s collaborationist Vichy regime is, of course, an exaggeration, but Rocard’s concerns are shared by many French – and not only intellectuals and pundits.
Even among traditional conservatives, there is a whiff of ethical disgust at Sarkozy.
Can the French really violate their values to such an extent?
Will re-introduction of the death penalty be the next step on this populist downward spiral?
Two years, of course, is a long time in politics, and any predictions today about the presidential vote in 2012 would be imprudent.
Yet few analysts today would bet on Sarkozy’s re-election.
He proved to be a great candidate in 2007, but he was also running against a particularly weak Socialist contender, Ségolène Royal.
In 2012 it is unlikely that a Socialist Party “starved for power” will commit electoral suicide once again by nominating an unelectable figure.
Could France today be like the France of 1980 on the eve of the Left’s first victory since the establishment of the Fifth Republic?
Will Dominique de Villepin, the flamboyant former prime minister under Jacques Chirac, be to Sarkozy what Chirac was to Valéry Giscard d’Estaing in 1981?
Chirac, it should be recalled, guaranteed the defeat of Giscard d’Estaing by dividing the Right so bitterly that it proved impossible to reunite behind Giscard in his final-round confrontation with François Mitterrand.
Behind such speculation are important questions about the state of French society and governmental institutions.
France, perhaps more than most European countries, is faced with serious internal security problems and violence linked to the failures of previous immigration policies, which have turned the dreams of the 1960’s into the nightmares of the present.
The undeniable escalation of violence in too many big-city suburbs, and the emergence of local “Scarfaces” who live totally without rules in a fantasy-like world of brutality, reflect a state that has gone astray.
But a pure “law and order” response to these problems will not magically repair the damage inflicted by years of bad policy and neglect.
Too much state is not the answer to a locally failed state.
Successful education and integration policies take time to work and thus will not bring clear-cut results in time for the next election.
To stigmatize immigrants, Muslims in particular, or to destroy the camps in which Roma live, is a much easier task, even if it reveals the truly opportunistic and amoral nature of both Sarkozy and those who surround him.
For nearly 60 years, universal suffrage has made successive French presidents the modern equivalents of elected monarchs, men who have concentrated in their hands more power than their counterparts in any other democratic country.
Chirac’s shortening of the presidential term from seven to five years has, paradoxically, resulted in an even greater concentration of presidential power.
The problem with this omnipotent presidency is that the qualities needed in order to be elected are not necessarily those required to master the art of government, with its mixture of distance, patience, serenity, and modesty, in addition to energy and activism.
The French presidency combines both the symbols and the realities of power – the equivalent of both the Queen of England and the British prime minister.
But an office designed bespoke for a giant like Charles de Gaulle may simply be too much for any single man or woman.
Indeed, it could very well be that the failures of recent French presidents point to a structural problem at the heart of the French constitution, and not just to the shortcomings of its various incumbents.
Sarkozy Goes to War
PARIS – In 2003, France, under President Jacques Chirac, took the lead in opposing America’s planned invasion of Saddam Hussein’s Iraq.
French Foreign Minister Dominique de Villepin’s flamboyant speech at the United Nations encapsulated the “spirit of resistance” against what proved to be a dangerous adventure.
In 2011, under President Nicolas Sarkozy, France has again taken a highly visible stand on a question of war and peace, except that now the French, together with the British, are leading the fight to protect Libya’s people from their erratic, brutal leader, Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi.
Why does France seem to crave such prominence?
In the eyes of the French, France’s international status remains a key ingredient in forming their own national identity.
The way we French are perceived by others affects how we perceive ourselves, and nothing is more troubling for us than to be perceived with indifference or, worse, not to be noticed at all.
Suddenly, with the Libya issue, we can tell ourselves that we are catching up with Germany, whose pusillanimity is striking; we are showing the way to the United States; and the French (and British) flags are deployed in the streets of “liberated” Libya, together with that country’s own new flag.
And, just as suddenly, the French, according to early polls, are proud again to be French.
France’s seemingly natural propensity to intervene is reinforced in this case by three key factors: Sarkozy, Qaddafi, and the context of a wider Arab revolution.
The Sarkozy factor is fundamental.
The French president loves crises, with their concomitant surge of adrenaline.
For him, this is what power is about: taking hard decisions under unfavorable circumstances.
Of course, domestic considerations are not absent from Sarkozy’s thinking.
In 2007, when he played a key role in the liberation of Bulgarian nurses imprisoned by Qaddafi, Libya’s leader was rewarded with what looked like a legitimacy prize: an official visit to Paris.
He was no longer a pariah, but an eccentric partner.
Today, by contrast, it all looks as if intervention may re-legitimate Sarkozy in the eyes of French citizens, whose votes he will need in next year’s presidential election.
An energetic and daring gambler, Sarkozy is taking a high but legitimate risk that he can retake the moral (and political) high ground.
Beyond Sarkozy is Qaddafi, the ideal villain.
A caricature of a despot, he personifies the type of odious adversary whom all democrats want to see defeated.
His behavior has been abominable for decades – and not only towards his people.
The terrorist attacks on Western targets that he ordered include not only the Pan Am tragedy in Lockerbie, Scotland, but also a French UTA plane blown up over Africa.
And not only is Qaddafi truly bad, but Libya is comparatively small, and his forces appear relatively weak (this remains to be proven on the ground).
Aside from these personality factors, there is the regional context.
Preventing Qaddafi from rebuilding the wall of fear that fell in Tunisia and Egypt is essential if the “Arab spring” is not to be succeeded by a new winter of discontent.
What is now done in the sky over Libya – sanctioned by international law and, unlike in Iraq in 2003, with the ambivalent political support of the Arab League – is fundamental if the Arab revolutionaries are to take a positive view of the West.
The West is not trying, as it did during the Crusades or the Imperialist conquests of the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, to impose its religion or values on the Arabs.
Instead, the West is defending common values, such as freedom, respect for human life, and the rule of law.
We have a duty to protect Arab lives and values, as Arabs themselves have requested.
France has a common history and geography with the countries on the southern Mediterranean shore.
The duty to intervene – and the cost of indifference – is probably higher for France than for any other Western country.
Indeed, France has a very large immigrant population that originated in the Maghreb, and for which the “Arab spring” is vitally important and a source of fascination and pride.
And today, with France taking the lead in an international effort to protect the Libyan people from their leader, they can feel simultaneously proud of being French and of their Arab roots.
These positive identities constitute the best protection against the sirens of fundamentalist Islam.
Of course, an ideal scenario implies that the intervention “goes well,” and that it does not incite confusion or chaos in Libya or the wider region.
France, together with Great Britain, and with the more distant support of the US, is undeniably risking much, for it is easier to start a war than it is to end one.
But it is a worthwhile risk.
The cost of non-intervention, of allowing Qaddafi to crush his own people, and of thus signaling to the world’s despots that a campaign of domestic terror is acceptable, is far more menacing.
Sarkozy has chosen the right course.
In fact, he has chosen the only possible way forward.
Sarkozy’s Moment
LONDON – A little more than three years ago, just as the financial crisis was getting into full swing, I published a guide to the international system of financial regulation, Global Financial Regulation: The Essential Guide.
It described an elaborate spider’s web of committees, councils, and agencies with overlapping responsibilities, unrepresentative memberships, and inadequate enforcement powers – a system built up incrementally over decades, with no guiding architectural hand or central authority to promote coherent global regulatory standards.
After all that has happened in the intervening years to demonstrate the dangers inherent in these flaws, and a plethora of summits and conferences, a 2008 guide to financial regulation ought now to be hopelessly out of date.
Unfortunately, it is not.
True, some things have changed for the better.
At the apex of the pyramid, the G-7 was obliged to give way to the broader G-20, bringing countries like China and India into the decision-making nexus as full partners.
G-20 summits are more cumbersome as a result, but that simply reflects the reality of the ongoing shift in economic power from West to East.
There is no point in pretending that this shift is not happening, or that standards set in New York and London will be slavishly followed in Mumbai and Beijing if China and India are not involved in the process.
So the increased importance of the G-20 should be welcomed.
There has been one other important change, too.
The Financial Stability Forum, created after the Asian financial crisis as an informal coordinating body – the United States resisted anything stronger – was renamed the Financial Stability Board.
A “board” sounds more impressive, authoritative, and permanent than a mere “forum.”
In the arcane world of international financial diplomacy, these subtle shifts in terminology matter.
But the change in name should not blind us to the fact that the FSB has no more power than the FSF had.
Successive G-20 summits have asked its chairman, Mario Draghi (now a favorite to succeed Jean-Claude Trichet as President of the European Central Bank), for updates on progress in reforming regulation, but the FSB has no authority over the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, or any of the other standard setters.
It cannot instruct them to change their rules. Nor can it achieve consistency between different standard setters’ approaches, or, indeed, consistency of implementation by different national regulators.
Yet consistent implementation is crucial to avoiding another regulatory “race to the bottom.”
There are already dangerous signs that global firms are moving activities into more congenial jurisdictions in order to avoid tighter regulation in the major financial centers.
The G-20 should fill that gap urgently.
President Nicolas Sarkozy of France, which chairs the G-20 this year, has asked for a review of the governance of the financial system.
In response, the existing bodies are vigorously defending their autonomy, resisting any attempts to impose on them a modicum of coordination and discipline.
The International Monetary Fund, for example, has always resented the FSB, arguing that the Fund itself should be the monitor of systemic risk – and thus serve as the de facto global financial regulator.
But the IMF’s arguments have been weakened by a recently published report by its own evaluation office, highlighting the Fund’s failure to identify emerging risks in the run-up to the crisis.
The IMF is too political a body to act as the systemic-risk watchdog.
The next G-20 summit should implement a fundamental reform of the FSB.
It should give the FSB a legal personality, enshrined in an international treaty.
Currently, the Board has no formal status and only a small, though high-quality, permanent staff, hosted by the Bank for International Settlements in Basel.
Draghi’s successor as chairman should be a full-time appointee, and the FSB should be given powers to direct the other standard setters, review the implementation of standards by individual countries, and publish the results.
It would be unrealistic to think that the FSB could direct countries to strengthen their regulation, but it should have some form of arbitration power analogous to that held by the World Trade Organization.
So, if a country is thought to be operating a lax regime to attract mobile international business, the FSB could expose that behavior and publish its conclusions.
The anomaly that countries have decided to endow an international body with powers to regulate disputes in trading goods, but not in financial transactions, should be corrected.
There is a strong argument for going further, and subsuming the standard setters – the Basel Committee, the International Organization of Securities Commissions, the International Association of Insurance Supervisors, etc. – in a single body. They could be co-located in a regulatory Tower of Babel in Basel.
That might happen one day, as the borderlines between different sub-sectors of the financial system become more blurred.
But, for now, however logical such an objective may be, it is probably too much to hope for.
Even so, as the saying goes, it is important not to waste a good crisis.
Sarkozy has a golden opportunity to put his mark on the global financial system. Surely a French president, eager for global success with a domestic election looming, will not pass up his chance?
Indeed, Sarkozy has an additional incentive, given that he would be scoring a point against the IMF, led by Dominique Strauss-Kahn, his likely Socialist opponent in the next presidential election.
So, for once, logic and personal political motivation are pushing in the same direction.
That ought to be a winning combination.
Sarkozy’s Société Générale Myopia
SAN FRANCISCO &#45;&#45; The French government should be honoring Bank of France Governor Christian Noyer for saving Société Générale from certain bankruptcy in the current rogue trader scandal, not criticizing him, as some high government officials have done.
“Loose lips sink ships” is received wisdom in central banking circles.
But if President Nicolas Sarkozy’s team in the Élysée Palace had had its way, Noyer would have immediately informed the government of Société Générale’s troubles.
Had that happened, there would have been an unacceptable risk that the news would leak to speculators before Société Générale had a chance to liquidate the extraordinary large stock positions that Jérôme Kerviel had amassed, presumably without the bank’s knowledge.
The loss for Société Générale could have been far higher than the €5 billion it is reported to have incurred.
Speculators could have “front run” the bank in the markets, selling short, driving equity prices down, and forcing the French financial institution to sell into a bottomless pit.
Is a forced bankruptcy in extremely fragile global financial markets what the French government wanted for Société Générale?
How can President Sarkozy, who has repeatedly attacked financial speculators, question the judgment of the very man who, by knowing how to keep his mouth shut in a crisis, thwarted them?
Of course, independent central bankers are not Sarkozy’s favorite people.
According to Laurent Dubois, a political science professor at the Sorbonne in Paris, Noyer may pay for Sarkozy’s battles with the European Central Bank.
Sarkozy has “a problem with central banks’ independence,” and Noyer may become a “scapegoat.”
Not likely – at least in the current political environment.
Sarkozy’s recent poll numbers have been dropping like a stone.
According to the TNS Sofres poll for Le Figaro Magazine, Sarkozy’s popularity tumbled a whopping eight percentage points in January, to just 41%, the lowest level since he took office last May and down from a high of 65% in July.
Sarkozy, who during his electoral campaign vowed to be the “president who delivers on purchasing power,” now faces an angry French public whose primary complaint is that purchasing power is being eroded by inflation.
In this changed political environment, Sarkozy is not likely to go after someone like Noyer who, as Bank of France Governor and a member of the ECB’s Governing Council, is widely viewed as a stalwart against inflation and a defender of French purchasing power.
Why risk a “soft on inflation” label?
Sarkozy might even tone down his attacks on the ECB, whose single-minded, inflation-fighting policies have made it one of his favorite targets.
That would be a good thing.
With Sarkozy off his back, ECB President Jean-Claude Trichet might feel freer to cut interest rates to counter the impending economic slowdown in Europe.
Meanwhile, though Société Générale has been saved by Noyer’s professionalism and political courage, it has been badly wounded and will most likely be taken over by another bank.
A foreign takeover would raise French protectionist hackles.
“Société Générale will remain a great French bank,” Prime Minister Francois Fillon has said.
“The government will not allow it to be the target of hostile raids by other banks.”
So far, the only serious candidates to emerge for a Société Générale takeover are two French banks, Credit Agricole and BNP Paribas.
But should a credible foreign offer for Société Générale appear in the coming weeks ­– and it well might – another disruptive conflict between the Bank of France and the government may be in the offing.
The Société Générale rogue trader scandal has caused more problems than any of the main players possibly could have imagined.
Sarkozy’s Three-Way NATO Bet
PARIS – France’s return to NATO’s integrated military structure after a 43-year absence last year brought to an end one of the exceptions françaises. It also helped frame the growing debate over whether to develop European defense more effectively or to seriously reform the Atlantic alliance.
At first glance, it may seem that France chose NATO at the expense of the ten-year-old European Security and Defense Policy (ESDP).
But that interpretation takes too pessimistic a view of ESDP’s achievements over the past decade, and is based on a flawed understanding of the relationships between NATO and the European Union.
Indeed, France’s return to NATO is far from a U-turn that reflects disenchantment with ESDP.
Rather, it is the product of a 15-year process of rapprochement with NATO – and of the real progress being achieved in European defense.
France ’s re-integration into NATO is, in fact, the final stage in a process that has seen the French military play an increasingly important role in the alliance’s operations.
France has been aligning itself with the military structures of a NATO that has progressively abandoned the practices that were at the root of General Charles de Gaulle’s decision to quit, most notably the placement of all NATO forces under a single command, even in times of peace.
Sarkozy’s NATO policy is thus more of a follow-up on decisions and developments in the 1990’s than a radical U-turn from the policies of his predecessors.
Where Sarkozy does distinguish himself is in adopting a more openly pro-Atlantic stance.
Beyond the often partisan and quintessentially French polemics about Sarkozy’s NATO decision, it is possible to discern what might best be termed a three-way wager by the French president.
The first concerns building European defense in harmony with NATO, rather than in opposition to it.
Ending the exception française in NATO has removed the suspicion that French support for developing European defense was really aimed at competing with the alliance or weakening it.
Whether this suspicion had any truth or not, the message for many allies is clear: the developments the French want for ESDP are compatible with its full and complete membership of NATO.
American support for the European Union’s efforts to play a greater role in defense and security – a stance apparent since 2007 and confirmed by the arrival of the Obama administration – consolidates this approach.
The second part of Sarkozy’s wager concerns reforming and renewing the alliance.
France’s full engagement will increase the pace of reform in NATO and make the alliance a tool better adapted to twenty-first-century crises by paring down its cumbersome bureaucracy. France could not become an active player in this debate without being part of the alliance.
Following the appointment of French officers to a number of key NATO posts, France can, along with the United Kingdom, the Netherlands, and a few other NATO allies, begin to implement much-needed reforms.
The last and perhaps most difficult part of the wager is “Europeanizing” the alliance.
France can help to give NATO more balance by spreading political and military responsibilities more evenly among Europeans and Americans.
Now that the right political conditions exist in the United States, it is up to Europeans to make the political decisions on budgets and resources that will enable them to strengthen their role in NATO.
There is no guarantee, of course, that the three parts of this wager will pay off.
The forces of inertia are always strong, and when it comes to resources the current economic crisis favors neither ambitious reforms of the alliance nor serious intensification of ESDP.
It will be a few years yet before we can determine whether these ambitions have borne fruit.
The most serious criticism of France’s return to the alliance has been that it places the European defense project at risk, or at least endangers the ambitious vision of the EU as a leading strategic player.
If that were the case, Sarkozy’s decision, regardless of the advantages to NATO or France, would clearly be open to question.
If France had returned fully to NATO’s military structures 10 or 15 years ago, before ESDP existed, this would indeed be a serious and well-founded objection.
But the fact that the EU has become a politico-military player since 1998 has radically changed the stakes.
In just a few years, the Union built a framework for managing civilian and military crises, however imperfect or incomplete these tools may still be.
The EU has since 2003 begun to assert itself operationally as well, carrying out 23 ESDP missions, six of which have been significant military operations.
It has engaged in the Balkans, Africa, the Middle East, and Afghanistan, as well as South-East Asia with its Aceh peacekeeping mission, and more recently in the Caucasus and in the Indian Ocean.
These operations have varied widely in scale, ranging from a few dozen observers, police officers, or civilian advisors to several thousand soldiers.
Although they have mostly been on land, operation “Atlanta” off the coast of Somalia saw the EU’s first naval operation.
All were launched autonomously, relying either on national command arrangements or on making the most of command arrangements with NATO known as Berlin-plus.
In these circumstances, France’s full involvement in NATO, far from burying the European project, looks like a vital tool for furthering it.
Sarkozy's decision has put France in a position to gain influence in the alliance and increase the pace of NATO’s reform, while at the same time strengthening the ESDP.
Building Bridges over the Persian Gulf
MADRID ‒ Tensions between Iran and Saudi Arabia spiked earlier this month, with protesters storming the Saudi embassy in Tehran after the execution of a Shia cleric in the Kingdom.
This is just the latest manifestation of the deep-rooted rivalry between the two Middle Eastern powers.
But while their mutual enmity is longstanding, it is far from age-old, as it is sometimes portrayed.
Given their common interests, a return to cooperation, though highly challenging, is not impossible.
Although it has been essential in establishing their national identities, these countries’ sectarian divide – Saudi Arabia is the Arab world’s leading Sunni power, while Iran is majority Shia – has not always been an element of confrontation in the region.
It was not until 1501 that the Safavid dynasty established Shi’ism as the official religion of Persia, thereby distinguishing itself from its Sunni Ottoman neighbors, which were occupying part of their territory.
During the subsequent two centuries, Persia confronted the Ottoman Empire – the heart of the Sunni caliphate – for regional supremacy.
In 1932, when the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia was established, it adopted Wahhabism – a school of Sunni Islam – as its official creed.
Nonetheless, Saudi Arabia and Iran established diplomatic relations.
In the 1960s and early 1970s, their security and political cooperation deepened, owing to a shared interest in confronting radical movements that threatened their monarchies.
As they worked to limit Soviet-style communism’s advancement in the Arab world, they emerged as key Cold War allies of the West, especially the United States.
In the late 1970s, however, a sectarian battle of identities flared up.
Saudi Arabia, supported by the financial gains brought by rising oil prices, started expanding its security efforts by exporting Wahhabism.
And it perceived a direct threat after 1979, when Iran’s Islamic Revolution toppled the Shah and the new regime declared itself to be the leader of Shia worldwide.
In response to Iran’s call for the liberation of all Shia, Saudi Arabia redoubled its efforts to spread Wahhabism, intensifying the struggle between the two powers.
Though conflict has not erupted into direct confrontation, there has been no shortage of proxy battles, beginning with the Iran-Iraq war in the 1980s.
More recently, it has shaped the course of Syria’s civil war, in which Iran backs President Bashar al-Assad, who represents the Alawite sect of Shia Islam, while the Saudis are supporting anti-Assad Sunni forces.
In Yemen, a Saudi-led coalition has used airstrikes to beat back the Houthis, Iran-backed Zaidi Shia rebels fighting the Sunni-led government – a conflict that has already claimed some 6,000 lives.
But, as in the past, the latest confrontation between the two powers is related to domestic developments.
Both Iran and Saudi Arabia are currently undergoing important political and economic transitions that could leave their regimes vulnerable.
Iran, gearing up to elect a new parliament and Assembly of Experts (which chooses the country’s Supreme Leader) in February, remains in dire straits economically.
The unemployment rate reached 11.4% in 2014, and is considerably higher among young people.
The international agreement on Iran’s nuclear program has now led to the lifting of sanctions; but the economic benefits are yet to be widely felt.
Of course, if President Hassan Rouhani’s efforts to open Iran to the outside world continue, those benefits ultimately will be widely felt, fueling the growth of the middle class.
But for precisely that reason, more conservative elements within Iran’s government are deeply suspicious of Rouhani’s reformist agenda, viewing the potential emergence of a more worldly, pluralistic society as a serious threat to the regime’s survival.
Indeed, although Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei ratified the nuclear deal last year, he has repeatedly declared that he still mistrusts the US.
In addition, the conservative-controlled Guardian Council – which comprises six theologians appointed by the Supreme Leader and six jurists nominated by the judiciary and approved by the parliament – has rejected 99% of reformist candidates for the upcoming election.
It thus appears that parliamentary opposition to Rouhani’s reforms is set to intensify.
Saudi Arabia, too, is at a turning point.
Last year, following the death of King Abdullah bin Abdulaziz Al Saud, who ruled for a decade, his half-brother, Salman bin Abdulaziz Al Saud, ascended to the throne.
Salman has since been shifting governmental responsibility to Crown Prince Muhammad bin Nayef and Deputy Crown Prince Mohammad bin Salman Al Saud.
These changes at the top are occurring in a context of severe economic decline brought on by the collapse of world oil prices; budget revenue has been depleted to the point that the fiscal deficit reached 15% of GDP last year.
In this unstable context, leaders in both Iran and Saudi Arabia seem to believe that continued confrontation will help sustain them in power, not least by reinforcing the notion that more change, especially in the form of increased economic or political openness, would be dangerous.
Friendly (or at least constructive) relations between both powers would thus appear to be a remote possibility, at least for the foreseeable future.
But steps can be taken that might at least prevent tensions from escalating further.
Khamenei’s condemnation of the attack on the Saudi embassy, which he called harmful for the country and Islam, was noteworthy in this sense.
Even with such steps, Iran and Saudi Arabia are highly unlikely to reach an agreement on Syria in the next round of international talks.
But progress toward ending the war in Yemen – which is at an earlier stage than the Syrian war, and entails fewer international and regional interests – is possible, especially given Saudi Arabia’s economic travails.
The key will be agreement on a cease-fire, as a precursor to a long-term resolution of the conflict.
While the gulf between Iran and Saudi Arabia runs deep, instances of pragmatic cooperation on specific issues like Yemen can help to build bridges.
Doing so would benefit the entire region.
The Kingdom Beyond Oil
RIYADH – Over the past few weeks, the government of Saudi Arabia has been engaged in an unprecedented strategic policy review that could have ramifications for every aspect of the country’s social and economic life.
The full details are expected to be announced in January, but it is already clear that the kingdom – the world’s nineteenth-largest economy – is in desperate need of far-reaching reform.
There are two reasons why change has become urgent.
The first is the dramatic drop in global oil prices, from above $100 per barrel in the middle of 2014 to below $40 today.
With oil exports accounting for nearly 90% of government revenue, the pressure on Saudi finances has been intense; the fiscal balance has swung from a small surplus in 2013 to a deficit of more than 21% of GDP in 2015, according to projections by the International Monetary Fund.
The second reason is demographic.
In the next 15 years, some six million young Saudis will reach working age, putting enormous pressure on the labor market and potentially doubling its size.
It is easy to be pessimistic about this confluence of circumstances, and many international commentators are.
But there are also good reasons for optimism, most notably the new Saudi leadership’s recognition of the challenge and the possibilities that addressing them could create.
According to research by the McKinsey Global Institute, Saudi Arabia has the potential to double its GDP and create six million additional jobs by 2030, enough to absorb the influx of young men – and, increasingly, young women – entering the labor market.
To accomplish this however, the kingdom will have to dramatically reduce its unhealthy dependence on oil – a strategic goal that has been long discussed, but never implemented.
Saudi Arabia has many sectors with strong potential for expansion.
The country has substantial untapped deposits of metals and non-metallic minerals, including phosphate, gold, zinc, bauxite, and high-quality silica.
Its retail sector is already growing quickly, but it lags behind in areas like e-merchandizing and supply-chain efficiencies.
The country’s tourism sector could be developed and upgraded, not only for the millions of Muslim pilgrims who visit the holy sites of Mecca and Medina every year, but also for leisure tourists.
Saudi Arabia has a long coastline on the Red Sea, as well as other unspoiled areas of natural beauty that could attract visitors.
The manufacturing sector, too, could be built up; at the moment, the kingdom has only small-scale domestic manufacturing, despite being one of the largest markets in the region for cars, machinery, and other capital goods.
Exploiting these opportunities will require trillions of dollars in investment, radical improvements in productivity, and the government’s firm, sustained commitment.
Doubling GDP over the next 15 years will necessitate about $4 trillion in investment, two-and-a-half times the amount of money that flowed into the kingdom’s economy during the 2003-2013 oil boom.
Attaining this level of investment will require radical policy reforms.
During the oil boom, the state increased public-sector wages and social-welfare transfers – and thus was a major contributor to households’ growing prosperity.
The public sector continues to dominate most aspects of the economy, especially employment; about 70% of Saudi nationals work for the state.
But transforming the economy will require the participation of investors and businesses; indeed, we calculate that by 2025, at least 70% of the investment should come from the private sector.
Achieving this will require overhauling the country’s regulatory and legal framework.
It will also require large improvements in productivity.
Saudi Arabia’s productivity growth has lagged behind that of most other G-20 countries, rising by just 0.8% in the past decade.
Jump-starting productivity growth will require reworking the kingdom’s restrictions on business and labor practices.
For now, the Saudi economy relies heavily on low-wage and low-productivity foreign workers on limited contracts; indeed, such workers hold more than half the jobs in the country.
That will have to change if the economy is to raise productivity and modernize its non-oil sectors.
The kingdom’s new leadership has some difficult but important choices to make as it formulates a detailed economic strategy.
The most important priorities include boosting the efficiency of government spending and developing new sources of revenue to replace oil exports.
The government has a number of options for new revenue, including a reform of wasteful energy subsidies and the introduction of levies that are standard in the G-20, such as value-added tax.
Weaning Saudi Arabia’s economy off oil will not be easy, and the kingdom has an uneven track record in this regard.
But there are encouraging early signs about the government’s focus, energy, and determination.
One is the recent decision to levy a tax on unused land that could be developed for housing.
Another is the new inter-ministerial coordination and cooperation that appears to be taking place under the auspices of the Council of Economic and Development Affairs, a body established in January 2015.
If the government is able to sustain its resolve over the years it will take to set the economy firmly on a new trajectory, the kingdom will be thoroughly transformed – for the better.
Living the Saudi Dream