But, while war and force may be down, they are not out.
They are simply evolving according to a new “generation” of rules and tactics.
The first generation of modern warfare comprised battles fought with massed manpower, using Napoleonic line and column formations.
The second, which culminated in World War I, was driven by massed firepower, and is expressed in the saying, reportedly coined at the Battle of Verdun in 1916, “artillery conquers, infantry occupies.”
And the third generation – perfected by Germany with the “blitzkrieg” method employed in World War II – emphasized maneuver over force, with militaries using infiltration to bypass the enemy and collapse its force from the rear, rather than attacking frontally.
Fourth-generation warfare takes this decentralized approach one step further, with no definable fronts at all.
Instead, it focuses on the enemy’s society, reaching deep into its territory to destroy political will.
One might even add a fifth generation, in which technologies like drones and offensive cyber tactics allow soldiers to remain a continent away from their civilian targets.
While particular generational delineations are somewhat arbitrary, they reflect an important trend: the blurring of the military front and the civilian rear.
Accelerating this shift is the replacement of interstate war by armed conflict involving non-state actors such as insurgent groups, terrorist networks, militias, and criminal organizations.
Confusing matters further is the overlap among these groups, with some even receiving state support.
The Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia – Latin America’s oldest guerilla group – formed alliances with narcotics cartels.
Some Taliban groups in Afghanistan and elsewhere developed close ties with transnational Al Qaeda terrorists.
The insurgents in eastern Ukraine are fighting alongside Russian troops (bearing no insignias).
Such organizations often take advantage of states that lack the legitimacy or capacity to administer their own territory effectively, launching a mix of political and armed operations that, over time, give them coercive control over local populations.
The result is what General Sir Rupert Smith, a former British commander in Northern Ireland and the Balkans, called “war among the people” – a kind of struggle that is rarely decided on conventional battlefields by traditional armies.
These hybrid wars are fought using a wide variety of weapons – not all of which have firepower.
With cameras in every cell phone and photo-editing software on every computer – not to mention the prevalence of social media – the information contest has become a critical aspect of modern warfare, exemplified in the current wars in Syria and Ukraine.
In hybrid warfare, conventional and unconventional forces, combatants and civilians, physical destruction and information manipulation become thoroughly intertwined.
In Lebanon in 2006, Hezbollah fought Israel through well-trained cells that combined propaganda, conventional military tactics, and rockets launched from densely populated civilian areas, achieving what many in the region considered a political victory.
More recently, Hamas and Israel have conducted air and land operations in the densely populated Gaza Strip.
This kind of warfare emerged largely in response to America’s overwhelming conventional military advantage after the Soviet Union’s collapse, underscored by its victory in the 1991 Iraq War, with only 148 American casualties, and its intervention in the 1999 conflict in Kosovo, in which no American lives were lost.
In the face of this asymmetry, America’s opponents – both state and non-state actors – began to emphasize unconventional tactics.
In China, for example, military planners developed a strategy of “unrestricted warfare” that combines electronic, diplomatic, cyber, terrorist-proxy, economic, and propaganda tools to deceive and exhaust US systems.
As one Chinese military official put it, “the first rule of unrestricted warfare is that there are no rules.”
For their part, terrorist groups, recognizing that they cannot defeat a conventional military in a direct war, attempt to use governments’ own power against them.
With violent theatrics, Osama bin Laden outraged and provoked the US, driving it to overreact in ways that destroyed its credibility, weakened its alliances in the Muslim world, and ultimately exhausted its military – and, in a sense, its society.
The Islamic State is now employing a similar strategy, mixing ruthless military operations with an incendiary social-media campaign, punctuated by photos and videos of brutal executions, including the beheading of US and other Western citizens.
These efforts have mobilized the Islamic State’s enemies, while inspiring a growing number of discontented individuals and groups to self-recruit to its banner.
The unpredictable evolution of warfare poses a serious challenge for defense planners.
For some weak states, internal threats provide clear objectives.
The US, for its part, must balance continued support for its conventional military forces, which remain an important deterrent in Asia and Europe, with investment in a broad portfolio of alternative capabilities that conflicts in the Middle East require.
At a time of unprecedented change, the US – and other major powers – must be ready for anything.
Taming India’s Elite
NEW DELHI – It has been more than a year and a half since Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi came to power on a promise to build a new India, one founded on a radical break with the past.
It is still too early to gauge the impact of his economic and foreign policies, but there is one area where his government is making palpable progress: taming India’s entrenched elite.
India has a population of 1.2 billion people, but it has long been dominated by a tiny elite: a couple of hundred extended families, totaling perhaps 4,000-5,000 people.
Many countries have powerful elites with outsize influence, but in India, dynastic elites control the top echelons in every sphere of public life: politics, business, the media, and even Bollywood.
Many of these dynasties have roots that stretch back to the colonial era, implying at least seven decades of dominance.
Every point of leverage – from government contracts and industrial licenses to national awards – is used to maintain this ecosystem of power.
Over time, ties of patronage and marriage have fused these dynasties into a discernable class, concentrated in central New Delhi, with a few pockets in Mumbai and a small presence in other parts of the country.
Exclusive English-language schools, holiday homes in Goa, and summers in London or Switzerland have given them a shared world-view.
Occasionally, new faces are admitted, but only if they do not interfere with the system’s perpetuation.
Unsurprisingly, the result has been the creation of a class of people with a strong sense of entitlement, who react to even minor challenges by closing ranks.
They flaunt their power so often (usually with some variant of the phrase, “Do you not know who I am?”) that even those who do not “belong” sometimes use similar lines to try to bluff their way out of trouble.
One of Modi’s more symbolic blows to the old establishment has been his government’s success in evicting high-status squatters from hundreds of government bungalows in central Delhi.
Few of the occupants of these sprawling official residences had the right to live in them.
In some cases, they had been there for generations; when faced with eviction notices, some families argued that the bungalows had effectively become memorials to their famous ancestors and that they should thus be allowed to remain.
An even more visible change is the sudden increase in criminal charges – ranging from corruption to sexual offenses – being filed against members of the old elite.
The homes of several senior civil servants have been raided recently as part of corruption investigations, and serious accusations of sexual harassment have been leveled against India’s top environmentalist, Rajendra Pachauri, who headed the United Nations Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change when it received the Nobel Peace Prize.
Meanwhile, banks have begun to demand repayment from large borrowers accustomed to having their loans rolled over.
Vijay Mallya, a businessman famous for his colorful lifestyle and string of failed ventures, is being investigated as a willful defaulter.
Much of this would have been unthinkable until a few months ago.
And, inevitably, many accuse the government of carrying out political vendettas.
On December 19, Sonia Gandhi, President of the Congress party, and her son, Rahul Gandhi, the party’s vice president, were forced to appear in court on corruption charges.
In response, their party’s MPs brought legislative activity to a halt for days.
The two were quickly released on bail.
The case against the Gandhis – as well as many other high-profile investigations – is likely to drag on for years.
And, of course, in some cases the accused will be exonerated.
But the very fact that members of the old elite can be investigated and questioned is undeniable progress in a country where they have long enjoyed impunity.
What remains to be seen is whether Modi is able to cement these gains.
The elite can be remarkably resilient, retaining the power to strike back at the first sign of weakness.
History – from post-revolutionary France to modern Thailand – has repeatedly shown that it is a mistake to write off the old establishment.
Markets’ Federal Reserve Love Story
LAGUNA BEACH – The morning drive to my 11-year old daughter’s school is always fun, and often a source of insight.
That was certainly the case last week when she pointed out something about Frozen, the hugely popular Disney film, that had totally escaped me.
“It’s unusual,” she said, “to see a Disney movie in which they end up telling us not to marry someone we’ve just met.”
Quite early on in the movie, Princess Anna meets Prince Hans at her sister Princess Elsa’s coronation ball.
They immediately connect on many levels and, yes, “fall in love.”
He quickly proposes, and she accepts, but Elsa refuses to give her blessing.
It then takes Anna most of the movie to figure out that Hans is evil – set on getting rid of both her and her older sister in order to take over the kingdom.
Luckily for her, there is a wonderful commoner – Kristoff – whom she has gotten to know during the course of her adventures.
Unlike Hans, he is genuine and dependable; they end up together.
After many decades of Disney movies, we have been conditioned to expect princesses to fall in love quickly with their charming princes and “live happily ever after.”
And when there are challenges or obstacles (mostly in the more recent movies), these are quickly overcome (and with humor).
Similarly, for many years market participants have been richly rewarded for falling in love – quickly and decisively – with the new policy measures adopted by America’s Federal Reserve.
Indeed, the romance has overwhelmingly followed the Disney script.
Yes, there may have been some bumps along the way, but they have been overcome quickly.
And the romance has resulted in both parties living happily: the Fed feels better positioned to pursue its dual mandate of high employment and stable inflation, while investors feel that they have the opportunity for sizeable financial rewards.
This relationship has been so comfortable that market participants have adopted the mantra “Never fight the Fed” – and for good reason. The Fed is the world’s most powerful central bank.
It owns the printing press that produces the world’s main reserve currency. It enjoys a significant amount of political independence.
And it has not been shy about using its considerable operational autonomy.
Market participants also know that the Fed needs them to leverage its policy influence and deliver on its mandate, which, in recent years, has rightly been broadened in practice to incorporate the goal of financial stability.
To this end, the Fed has become much more “transparent” with markets in the last few years, sharing more readily the minutes and transcripts of its policy discussions.
The Chair of the Federal Reserve Board has even taken to holding periodic press conferences that are closely watched on trading floors around the world.
Since the 2008 global financial crisis, the romance has become particularly intense, especially as the Fed has been compelled to use a range of unconventional measures to overcome the capital-market disruptions that almost tipped the world economy into a deep depression.
In doing so, the Fed has become more involved in how markets function, the valuation of assets, and fluctuations in their prices.
And the markets have come to depend much more on the Fed, expecting more frequent attention and support from it (and throwing a short tantrum when they feel disappointed, as was the case a year ago).
Initially, central bankers were keen to cultivate this romance as a means of meeting their broader policy objectives of growth, employment, stable inflation, and financial stability.
More recently, however, some have become less comfortable, warning that the codependence is encouraging excessive risk-taking and, in some cases, bubbly valuations.
Some worry that it may even undermine the Fed’s political independence.
And, only two weeks ago, an outgoing Fed governor, Jeremy Stein, declared that the Fed is in the middle of a policy transition that renders its guidance to markets “more qualitative,” “less deterministic” and, therefore, less precise.
Like Princess Anna in Frozen, it will take time for markets to recognize that their relationship with the Fed is changing (and should change); and, similar to the movie, some sort of shock may be involved in socializing the new understanding.
Having said that, the outcome will certainly not be as dramatic as in the movie – if only because, unlike Hans, the Fed is not out to take over the markets.
So the romance will survive, but it is unlikely to be as intense, and it is unlikely to be unconditional.
The hope is that, by that time, a more vibrant real economy will perform the role that Kristoff played in the movie.
The best and most sustainable love story for markets is one based on a healthy and dynamic real economy that creates jobs and opportunities for many more people.
Unfortunately, on that count, it is too soon to predict whether we will live happily ever after.
Markets’ Rose-Tinted World
LAGUNA BEACH – This has been an unusual year for the global economy, characterized by a series of unanticipated economic, geopolitical, and market shifts – and the final quarter is likely to be no different.
How these shifts ultimately play out will have a major impact on the effectiveness of government policies – and much more.
So why have financial markets been behaving as if they were in a world of their own?
Apparently unfazed by disappointing growth in both advanced and emerging economies, or by surging geopolitical tensions in Eastern Europe and the Middle East, equity markets have set record after record this year.
This impressive rally has ignored a host of historical relationships, including the long-established correlation between the performance of stocks and government bonds.
In fact, correlations among a number of different financial-asset classes have behaved in an atypical and, at times, unstable manner.
Meanwhile, on the policy front, advanced-country monetary-policy cohesion is giving way to a multi-track system, with the European Central Bank stepping harder on the stimulus accelerator, while the US Federal Reserve eases off.
These factors are sending the global economy into the final quarter of the year encumbered by profound uncertainty in several areas.
Looming particularly large over the next few months are escalating geopolitical conflicts that are nearing a tipping point, beyond which lies the specter of serious systemic disruptions in the global economy.
This is particularly true in Ukraine, where, despite the current ceasefire, Russia and the West have yet to find a way to ease tensions definitively.
Absent a breakthrough, the inevitable new round of sanctions and counter-sanctions would likely push Russia and Europe into recession, dampening global economic activity.
Even without such complications, invigorating Europe’s increasingly sluggish economic recovery will be no easy feat.
In order to kick-start progress, ECB President Mario Draghi has proposed a grand policy bargain to European governments: if they implement structural reforms and improve fiscal flexibility, the central bank will expand its balance sheet to boost growth and thwart deflation.
If member states do not uphold their end of the bargain, the ECB will find it difficult to carry the policy burden effectively – exposing it to criticism and political pressure.
Across the Atlantic, the Fed is set to complete its exit from quantitative easing (QE) – its policy of large-scale asset purchases – in the next few weeks, leaving it completely dependent on interest rates and forward policy guidance to boost the economy.
The withdrawal of QE, beyond being unpopular among some policymakers and politicians, has highlighted concerns about the risk of increased financial instability and rising inequality – both of which could undermine America’s already weak economic recovery.
Complicating matters further are the US congressional elections in November.
Given the likelihood that the Republicans will continue to control at least one house of Congress, Democratic President Barack Obama’s policy flexibility will probably remain severely constrained – unless, of course, the White House and Congress finally find a way to work together.
Meanwhile, in Japan, the private sector’s patience with Prime Minister Shinzo Abe’s three-pronged strategy to reinvigorate the long-stagnant economy – so-called “Abenomics” – will be tested, particularly with regard to the long-awaited implementation of structural reforms to complement fiscal stimulus and monetary easing.
If the third “arrow” of Abenomics fails to materialize, investors’ risk aversion will rise yet again, hampering efforts to stimulate growth and avoid deflation.
Systemically important emerging economies are also subject to considerable uncertainty.
Brazil’s presidential election in October will determine whether the country makes progress toward a new, more sustainable growth model or becomes more deeply mired in a largely exhausted economic strategy that reinforces its stagflationary tendencies.
In India, the question is whether newly elected Prime Minister Narendra Modi will move decisively to fulfill voters’ high expectations for economic reform before his post-victory honeymoon is over.
And China will have to mitigate financial risks if it hopes to avoid a hard landing.
The final source of uncertainty is the corporate sector.
So far this year, healthy companies have slowly been loosening their purse strings – a notable departure from the risk-averse behavior that has prevailed since the global financial crisis.
Indeed, an increasing number of firms have started to deploy the massive stocks of cash held on their balance sheets, first to increase dividends and buy back shares, and then to pursue mergers and acquisitions at a rate last seen in 2007.
The question is whether companies also will finally devote more cash to new investments in plant, equipment, and people – a key source of support for the global economy.
This is a rather weighty list of questions.
Yet financial-market participants have largely bypassed them, brushing aside today’s major risks and ignoring the potential volatility that they imply.
Instead, financial investors have trusted in the steadfast support of central banks, confident that the monetary authorities will eventually succeed in transforming policy-induced growth into genuine growth.
And, of course, they have benefited considerably from the deployment of corporate cash.
In the next few months, the buoyant optimism pervading financial markets may prove to be justified.
Unfortunately, it is more likely that investors’ outlook is excessively rosy.
Achieving Escape Velocity
NEWPORT BEACH – It is not often that one can confidently claim that a single remedy could make billions of people around the world significantly better off; do so in a durable and mutually supportive manner; and thus improve the well-being of both current and future generations.
Yet that is the case today.
The remedy I have in mind, of course, is faster economic growth – the one thing that can raise living standards, reduce excessive inequalities, improve job prospects, alleviate trade tensions, and even moderate geopolitical pressures.
And most forecasters – including the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank – are now predicting that global growth will pick up in 2014, and that it will be more balanced among the world’s major economic regions.
Such forecasts reflect three welcome developments.
For starters, Europe will exit recession, with the peripheral economies benefiting from the strongest relative improvement in growth prospects.
Meanwhile, 3% annual GDP growth is no longer out of reach for the United States.
And emerging economies will be anchored by China’s slower but still-robust 7% annual growth.
But, while the prospect of faster global growth is indeed good news, especially given still-high unemployment in many countries and the associated pressures on social safety nets, it is too early to celebrate.
There is a risk that, by tempting policy complacency, this year’s economic upturn could end up being counterproductive.
This is not because the predicted acceleration in growth is still quite modest.
After all, even a limited uptick can make a significant difference if it is part of an encouraging medium-term growth dynamic.
Rather, the risk lies in the manner in which this growth is likely to materialize – namely, by depending too much on old and exhausted growth models, rather than by comprehensively embracing new ones.
In Europe, growth this year will largely reflect the impact of financial stabilization, not deep structural reforms.
With interest-rate spreads having compressed sharply, and with the threat of a meltdown averted, both domestic and foreign investors continue to return to peripheral economies, thereby alleviating severe credit rationing.
That is certainly good news, especially if the source of stabilization is shifted from the European Central Bank’s unconventional policies to more durable endogenous balance-sheet healing among a broader set of financial institutions, non-financial firms, and households.
But few of these economies are prepared to embark on the type of internal reforms that promise sustained high growth rates and a substantial reduction in unemployment, which has been at alarming levels for young people and in terms of duration.
Meanwhile, exchange-rate appreciation is beginning to undermine exports in the eurozone’s core countries, particularly Germany, which has been the regional growth engine in recent years.
The predicted acceleration in US growth this year is more notable, because it reflects the positive impact of a multi-year process of economic and financial healing.
We are also starting to see the macro-level impact of certain productivity revolutions – particularly in the energy and technology sectors – that, so far, have mainly been industrial and sectoral phenomena.
Yet America’s actual economic growth in 2014 will remain well below potential.
Moreover, the US economy’s performance remains overly dependent on the Federal Reserve’s experimental monetary policies, courageously adopted in the absence of adequate measures by other economic policymakers.
The US economy is certainly capable of reaching the “escape velocity” that the country needs if unemployment is to fall in a more definitive and lasting manner.
But this requires Congress to support President Barack Obama’s administration in three areas: improving the composition and level of aggregate demand; enhancing the economy’s supply responsiveness; and removing residual debt overhangs that continue to inhibit economic activity.
Only decisive progress on these fronts will unlock the trillions of corporate dollars that, rather than being invested in new plants and equipment, remain stranded on companies’ balance sheets or are handed over to shareholders via higher dividends and share buybacks.
The issues in the emerging world are more complex and diverse.
Some countries are making consistent efforts to revamp exhausted growth models.
In China, for example, this involves less reliance on exports and public investment, and more on the private components of domestic aggregate demand.
Other countries, however, have responded to their growth slowdown in 2012 and 2013 by reverting to old practices that offer the temptation of immediate expansion at the cost of growth-dampening outcomes down the road.
This is the case, for example, in Brazil and Turkey.
All of this implies that the emerging world as a whole is unlikely in 2014 to resume its role as a major engine of the global economy, and that the quality of what growth there is will be far from optimal.
Indeed, the more detailed one’s analysis of today’s global growth dynamics is, the more likely one is to conclude that this year’s brighter prospects are just that – brighter prospects for 2014.
There is still much that can (and should) be done if this year’s predicted upturn is to provide a springboard for a meaningful medium-term growth spurt that improves prospects for current and future generations.
Unless policymakers keep in mind the larger tasks at hand, they risk falling into a trap of comfortable underachievement.
America’s Partisan Peril
NEWPORT BEACH – The United States’ reputation for sound economic policymaking took a beating in 2013.
Some of this was warranted; some of it was not.
And now a related distorted narrative – one that in 2014 could needlessly undermine policies that are key to improving America’s economic recovery – is gaining traction.
The 2008 global financial crisis left the US economy mired in a low-level equilibrium, characterized by sluggish job creation, persistently high long-term and youth unemployment, and growing inequalities of income, wealth, and opportunity.
Many Americans started 2013 with high hopes that congressional leaders would overcome, even if only partly, the polarization and political dysfunction that had slowed recovery.
Expectations of less political turbulence were enhanced at the start of 2013 by a bipartisan agreement that avoided the so-called fiscal cliff (though at the last minute and with much rancor) and a deal reached later in January to raise the debt ceiling (albeit temporarily).
With expectations of less political brinkmanship and lower policy uncertainty ahead, consensus projections foresaw faster, more inclusive economic growth.
In turn, faster growth was expected to revitalize the labor market, counteract worsening income inequality, mollify concerns about debt and deficit levels, and enable the Federal Reserve to start normalizing monetary policy in an orderly fashion.
It would also facilitate a return by Congress to more normal economic governance – whether passing an annual budget, something not accomplished in four years, or finally taking steps to enhance rather than impede growth and job creation.
But optimism foundered over the course of 2013, and frustration soared.
Growth has again fallen short of expectations.
With another year of uneven job creation, the problems associated with long-term and youth unemployment have become more deeply embedded in the economy’s structure.
Inequalities remain too high, and continue to grow.
Congressional paralysis has reached levels unparalleled in recent history.
And, again, lawmakers have not enacted an annual budget.
This is not to say that there has been no economic or financial progress in 2013.
After all, economic growth, while unnecessarily held below potential by Congress (and vulnerable to decline if Congress is not careful), has again outpaced that of Europe.
The budget deficit has fallen markedly, while companies and households, too, have continued to strengthen their balance sheets.
Many segments of the equities market have bounced back strongly, with price indexes hitting record highs.
And Americans are on the verge of obtaining much better access to health care.
What is frustrating is that the country could have – and should have – done a lot better.
Recognizing this, Americans are not hesitant to blame a Congress that seems more eager to manufacture problems than to enable the economy to reach its considerable potential.
Rather than building on some of the fledgling bipartisanship from earlier in the year, Congress decided to produce a mid-year government-financing drama.
Even immigration reform – a bipartisan pro-growth issue with considerable support from much of American society – has languished unnecessarily.
More broadly, Congress took no significant action to avoid headwinds that impose a drag on growth and discourage companies and individuals from investing in their future.
According to a survey based on data from the Office of the Clerk of the US House of Representatives, the current 113th Congress has delivered the lowest legislative activity “since at least 1947, when the data collection began.”
And Americans know it.
According to Gallup, the 9% approval rating for Congress is the lowest level in the survey’s 39-year history.
Partisan polarization in Congress has also undermined the executive branch, unduly blocking government appointments – including routine and essentially uncontroversial ones – and placing unwarranted obstacles in the way of implementing even the most sensible and seemingly bipartisan legislative proposals.
The resulting sense of political drift and dysfunction has been exacerbated by the poor rollout of the Affordable Care Act (Obamacare) – a massive, avoidable distraction that has been allowed to cast doubt on this landmark initiative.
Yes, 2013 was not a good year for public-sector decision-making, especially given that most of the slippages were “own goals.”
In the process, the US damaged the reputation for effective economic management that it had earned during the global financial crisis, when bold and timely measures prevented a period of reckless private risk-taking and financial leverage from ending in Great Depression II.
The Congress-imposed government shutdown and near-default in October were particularly harmful to the country’s global standing.
As a result, the popular narrative is shifting to the danger of “government failure.”
More and more Americans are being led to forget how, just a few years ago, a united US government reacted decisively to “market failures” and thus helped to avoid a global economic meltdown that would have devastated millions of lives and undermined future generations’ prospects.
Now, as the pendulum swings back, it risks overshooting the optimal combination of private and public activity and ending up at a simplistic view of government as the problem and the private sector as the solution.
If this occurs, the outlook for faster, more inclusive growth would be weakened further.
Government has a long pro-growth to-do list heading into 2014.
The top priorities include modernizing the country’s transport and energy infrastructure, reforming an underperforming education system, improving the labor market, bringing order to an overly-fragmented fiscal structure, enhancing the provision of public goods, and safeguarding America’s interests abroad.
It is tempting for politicians and analysts to overplay simple narratives that place the blame entirely on one side or the other.
The truth is more nuanced and complex.
America is in desperate need of a Congress that encourages, rather than impedes, better partnerships between the public and private sectors.
Constantly pitting one side against the other may make for entertaining roundtables on cable television and energizing political rallies.
But it comes at the cost of undermining an economy that could – and therefore should – be performing much better.
Mexico’s Breakout Moment?
MEXICO CITY – Less than two years into Enrique Peña Nieto’s presidency, Mexico is implementing an ambitious structural-reform package designed to lift its economy out of a multi-decade low-growth trap and create new opportunities for its citizens.
The reforms involve restructuring economic sectors once deemed politically untouchable, and are backed by constitutional amendments and a bold legislative agenda.
Indeed, thanks to the “Pact for Mexico,” much of this agenda has the support not only of Peña Nieto’s government, but also of the two main opposition parties.
This unique arrangement soon will be tested as the reforms begin to bite, and the outcome could have important and lasting consequences for efforts to implement structural reforms elsewhere around the world.
Such reforms are never easy to initiate and are usually difficult to complete.
Politicians advocate them when they are in opposition, but rarely embrace and sustain them when in government.
The reason is simple: front-loaded costs and back-loaded benefits make structural reforms politically perilous.
Governments that do embark on structural reform often find it frustrating to wait for that often-elusive “critical mass” of revitalized sectors to materialize; and economists find it very difficult to predict the timing and magnitude of the growth liftoff that should follow.
Complicating matters further, the inevitability of unanticipated developments, whether homegrown or external in origin, means that course corrections often are needed.
As a result, there are only a few good historical examples – including China, Poland, and South Korea – of successful structural reforms.
And many dismiss countries that succeed as “special” or “unique” – and thus of little value as a model for other countries to emulate.
Against this background, it is fascinating to observe what is happening in Mexico.
The “why,” “how,” and “what” of the country’s ambitious structural-reform efforts could – and should – have important signaling effects around the world.
Mexican officials are the first to point out their country’s relatively poor economic performance over the last 33 years.
Average annual growth, at only 2.4%, is well below what is needed and possible for a country with such enormous human and natural endowments, a prime location on the United States’ doorstep, and considerable catch-up potential.
Moreover, Mexico’s growth record is far inferior to that of some other countries that started with a lot less and yet leap-frogged it (and other Latin American economies).
Policymakers could easily dodge responsibility for Mexico’s middling performance by hiding behind the various emerging-market crises, Latin America’s “lost decade,” and the impact of the 2008 global financial crisis and the subsequent Great Recession.
But Mexico’s officials are not looking for excuses.
Instead, they point to domestic indicators showing poor productivity and competitiveness, both over time and relative to other countries.
They also note that Mexico’s impressive accomplishments in terms of macroeconomic stabilization, while necessary, have not proved sufficient to unleash the country’s growth potential.
Yes, Mexico has built strong domestic and foreign financial buffers, put its fiscal house in order, opened up its economy to the outside world, and concluded many free-trade arrangements, led by the North American Free Trade Agreement.
But now the time has come to build on this progress by simultaneously reforming five large and influential sectors: education, energy, finance, telecommunications, and the labor market.
And Peña Nieto’s government has worked hard – and successfully – in recent months to adopt the necessary constitutional amendments and enact initial legislation.
At least three of these areas – education, energy, and the labor market – were long deemed untouchable or nearly so.
Indeed, I remember my own experience in Mexico in the late 1980s and early 1990s, when I was part of the International Monetary Fund’s team working with officials there to assist with the country’s recovery from the Latin American debt crisis.
Any mention of energy reforms was met with immediate resistance, including references to national sovereignty and constitutional protections.
Today, Mexico is seeking long-term foreign investors to support ambitious and comprehensive reform efforts, with foreign participation particularly important for infrastructure investments in telecom networks, toll roads, gas pipelines, and, down the road, the oil sector.
All of this is anchored by a clear political mandate, as well as by Peña Nieto’s stated personal commitment to overcome three decades of inadequate growth and productivity deficits.
Given the possibility of a domestic political backlash, the inherent complexities of implementing a multi-dimensional reform package, and the cyclical headwinds implied by still-sluggish growth in the US (which accounts for roughly 80% of exports), Mexico may need both anchors if it is to sustain reform momentum.
Fortunately, the government has room for countercyclical policy, and has already responded with more accommodating fiscal and monetary policies.
Mexico has a good chance to realize its impressive structural-reform agenda.
Doing so would give the rest of the world an important example of how such programs can be designed and implemented for the long term, thereby enabling a critical mass of strong sectors – and thus faster growth and greater prosperity – to be achieved and citizens’ legitimate aspirations to be met.
Wallets Wide Shut
NEWPORT BEACH, CALIFORNIA – Some economists, like Larry Summers, call it “secular stagnation.”
Others refer to it as “Japanization.”
But all agree that after too many years of inadequate growth in advanced economies, substantial longer-term risks have emerged, not only for the wellbeing of these countries’ citizens but also for the health and stability of the global economy.
Those looking for ways to reduce the risks of inadequate growth agree that, of all possible solutions, increased business investment can make the biggest difference.
And many medium-size and large companies, having recovered impressively from the huge shock of the 2008 global financial crisis and subsequent recession, now have the wherewithal to invest in new plants, equipment, and hiring.
Indeed, with profitability at or near record levels, cash holdings by the corporate sector in the United States have piled up quarter after quarter, reaching all-time highs – and earning very little at today’s near-zero interest rates.
Moreover, because companies have significantly improved their operating efficiency and lengthened the maturities on their debt, they need a lot less precautionary savings than they did in the past.
However one looks at it, the corporate sector in advanced economies in general, and in the US in particular, is as strong as it has been in many years.
Non-financial firms have achieved a mix of resilience and agility that contrasts sharply with prevailing conditions for some households and governments around the world that have yet to confront adequately a legacy of over-leverage.
But, rather than deploy their abundant cash in new investments to expand capacity and tap new markets – which they have been very hesitant to do since the global financial crisis erupted – many companies have so far preferred (or have been pressured by activist investors) to give it back to shareholders.
Last year alone, US companies authorized more than $600 billion of share buybacks – an impressive amount by any measure, and a record high.
Moreover, many companies boosted their quarterly dividend payouts to shareholders.
Such activity continued in the first two months of 2014.
But, while shareholders have clearly benefited from companies’ unwillingness to invest their ample cash, the bulk of the injected money has been circulating only in the financial sector.
Little of it has directly benefited economies that are struggling to boost their growth rates, expand employment, avoid creating a lost generation of workers, and address excessive income inequality.
If advanced economies are to prosper, it is necessary (though not sufficient) that the corporate sector’s willingness to invest match its considerable wallet.
Six factors appear to pose particularly important constraints.
First, companies are concerned about future demand for their products.
The recent economic recovery, as muted as it has been (both in absolute terms and relative to most expectations), has been driven by the experimental policies that central banks have pursued to sustain consumption.
Now, with the US Federal Reserve beginning to withdraw monetary stimulus, and with growth in emerging countries slowing, most companies are simply unable to point to massive expansion opportunities.
Second, with China such an influential driver of global demand (both directly and indirectly through important network effects), the outlook for the world’s second-largest economy has a disproportionate impact on projections of global corporate revenues.
And, as China’s excessive domestic credit growth and shadow-banking system attract increased attention, many companies are becoming anxious.
Third, while companies recognize that innovation is a key comparative advantage in today’s global economy, they are also humbled by its increasingly winner-take-all nature.
Successful innovation today is a lot less about financing and much more about finding the “killer app.”
As a result, many companies, less convinced that “normal” innovation yields big payoffs, end up investing less overall than they did before.
Fourth, the longer-term cost-benefit analysis for would-be investors is clouded by legitimate questions about certain operating environments.
In the US, many companies expect major budgetary reform; but they are not yet able to assess the impact on their future operating profits.
In Europe, politicians are aware of the need for major structural reforms, including those required to solidify regional integration; but companies lack adequate clarity about the components of such reforms.
Fifth, the scope for risk mitigation is not as large as financial advances would initially suggest.
Yes, companies have more hedging tools at their disposal.
But the ability to manage downside risk comprehensively is still limited by incomplete longer-term markets and public-private partnerships that cannot be sufficiently leveraged.
Finally, most corporate leaders recognize that they owe a large debt of gratitude to central bankers for the relative tranquility of recent years.
Through bold policy experiments, central bankers succeeded in avoiding a global multi-year depression and buying time for companies to heal.
But, working essentially alone, central banks have not been able to revamp properly the advanced economies’ growth engines; nor do they have the tools to do so.
Though many corporate leaders may still be unable to grasp the precise threats, they seem uneasy about the longer-term collateral damage implied by running modern market economies at artificially repressed interest rates and with bloated central-bank balance sheets.
The good news is that each of these constraints on investment can – and should – be addressed; and recent US business investment data suggest some progress.
The bad news is that it will take a lot more time, effort, and global coordination.
In the meantime, the corporate sector will only gradually take on more of the heavy lifting.
That will be enough to keep the advanced economies growing this year; unfortunately, it will not be enough to attain the faster growth that their citizens’ wellbeing – and that of the global economy – urgently requires.
The Fragmentation of Bretton Woods
LAGUNA BEACH – The world has changed considerably since political leaders from the 44 Allied countries met in 1944 in Bretton Woods, New Hampshire, to create the institutional framework for the post-World War II economic and monetary order.
What has not changed in the last 70 years is the need for strong multilateral institutions.
Yet national political support for the Bretton Woods institutions – the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank – seems to have reached an all-time low, undermining the global economy’s ability to meet its potential and contributing to geopolitical insecurity.
When the Bretton Woods conference was convened, its participants understood that the IMF and the World Bank were integral to global stability.
Indeed, both institutions were designed to discourage individual countries from adopting short-sighted policies that would harm other economies’ performance, incite retaliatory action, and ultimately damage the entire world economy.
In other words, they were intended to prevent the kind of beggar-thy-neighbor policies that many major economies adopted during the Great Depression of the 1930s.
Moreover, by encouraging better policy coordination and the pooling of financial resources, the Bretton Woods institutions boosted the effectiveness of international cooperation.
And they enhanced stability by offering collective insurance to countries facing temporary hardship or struggling to meet their development-financing needs.
It is difficult to identify more than a small handful of countries that have not benefited in some way from the IMF or the World Bank.
Yet countries seem hesitant to contribute to the reform and strengthening of these institutions.
In fact, a growing number of systemically important countries have taken measures that are undermining the Fund and the Bank, albeit largely inadvertently.
In recent years, mounting domestic political pressure has driven Western governments to adopt increasingly insular policies.
And, just a few weeks ago, the BRICS countries (Brazil, Russia, India, China, and South Africa) acted to bolster a currency-reserve pool to help ease short-term liquidity pressures and to establish their own development bank – a direct challenge to the IMF and the World Bank.
Indeed, unlike existing parallel arrangements, which have always been regional in nature and intended to complement the work of the IMF and the World Bank, the BRICS’ New Development Bank and contingent reserve agreement are not based on cultural, geographical, or historical links.
Instead, they are founded on a shared frustration with the outmoded entitlements to which the US and Europe are clinging – entitlements that are diminishing the Bretton Woods institutions’ credibility and effectiveness.
Most important, Europe and the US continue to resist the full dismantling of a nationality-based appointment system that favors their citizens for the highest leadership positions at the IMF and the World Bank, despite offering the occasional promise of change.
Moreover, they have stifled efforts to recalibrate the balance of representation even marginally.
As a result, Western Europe enjoys a massively disproportionate level of representation, and emerging economies, despite their increasing systemic importance, barely have a voice.
And, during the eurozone’s debt crisis, European leaders showed little hesitation in bullying the IMF into flouting its own lending rules.
In this sense, it is the countries that spearheaded the creation of the Bretton Woods institutions that pose the greatest threat to their legitimacy, impact, and, ultimately, relevance.
After all, emerging economies cannot reasonably be expected to support institutions that offer unfair advantages to countries that so often preach the importance of meritocracy, competition, and transparency.
That is why they are now determined to use their collective economic weight to circumvent these institutions.
Another challenge to the international monetary system lies in the proliferation of bilateral payment agreements.
By bypassing more efficient and inclusive structures, these arrangements undermine multilateralism.
In some cases, they even conflict with countries’ obligations under the Bretton Woods Articles of Agreement.
The consequences of this gradual process of fragmentation extend well beyond lost economic and financial opportunities, to include weaker political cooperation, reduced interdependencies, and, in turn, growing geopolitical risks.
One need look no further than the current turmoil in Ukraine or Iraq to understand what can happen in the absence of credible multilateral structures capable of shaping developments in crisis situations.
So much for the problems.
What about the solutions?
Simply put, the IMF and the World Bank urgently need self-reinforcing reforms.
With a few key measures – none of which is technically complicated – the Bretton Woods institutions can move beyond the mindset of 1944 to reflect today’s realities and enhance tomorrow’s opportunities.
Such reforms include the elimination of nationality-based hiring; adjustments to representation, with emerging economies gaining more influence at the expense of Europe; and more equality and evenhandedness in lending and economic-surveillance decisions.
The challenge will be to overcome political resistance – no small feat at a time when domestic polarization has made politicians wary of publicly supporting economic multilateralism.
The repeated rejection by the US Congress of a much more limited set of reforms – which was approved by most other countries in 2010-12, imposes no incremental financial obligations on the US, and implies no reduction in America’s voting power or influence – is a case in point.
Enlightened self-interest must overcome such political obstacles.
The longer that world leaders resist the overwhelming need for reform, the worse the world’s future economic and financial prospects – not to mention its security situation – will be.
Egypt’s Monster in the Making
BRUSSELS – On December 15, Egypt’s draft constitution is due to be put to a referendum.
A year ago, Egyptians were thrilled to know that finally their country’s constitution would reflect their democratic hopes and aspirations.
Yet the document that they will now vote on is more likely to dash those hopes and dim Egyptians’ prospects for democracy.
The constitutional drafting process was rushed, without the input of liberals, non-Muslims, and women, all of whom boycotted the process, owing to the preponderance of Islamists.
The Muslim Brotherhood, and primarily President Mohamed Morsi, is banking on the assumption that the strength of Egypt’s Islamist vote will earn him enough support among “regular Egyptians,” and that the opposition will have little impact on the referendum’s outcome.
One political adviser for the ruling Freedom and Justice Party – the Muslim Brotherhood’s political wing – even boasted that the Brothers could easily mobilize 20 million supporters.
The Brothers dismiss those who have demonstrated in the streets during the past three weeks as Mubarak sympathizers.
Morsi’s decision on November 22 to grant himself absolute authority for the spurious purpose of defending the revolution is not new for Egypt.
A succession of dictator-presidents ruled the country under a state of emergency for more than 40 years.
While Morsi has now bowed to pressure to annul a decree granting him powers without judicial oversight, it seems only yesterday that people were prepared to put their fears aside and trust that Morsi was ready to rule in the interests of all Egyptians.
Eric Trager of the Washington Institute for Near East Policy notes that Morsi’s previous role in the Muslim Brotherhood’s Guidance Council sheds some light on the motives behind his current behavior.
In the past, Morsi advocated a platform that excluded Christians from political life and granted Islamic scholars oversight authority to ensure that all legislation complied with Sharia law.
He also worked to expunge young members of the Freedom and Justice Party that he deemed to hold dissenting views.
While the draft constitution does contain positive provisions, many are causing concern.
For example, Article 11 authorizes the state to “safeguard ethics, public morality, and public order, and foster a high level of education and of religious and patriotic values.”
This leaves plenty of room for interpretation by the government.
In addition, the mosque of al-Azhar is promised an advisory role in Islamic legislation.
The Brothers’ political opponents have not been silent.
On December 8, the National Salvation Front announced that the draft “does not represent the Egyptian people.”
Moreover, ordinary Egyptians have responded viscerally and swiftly to Morsi’s moves, perhaps more so than he had anticipated.
Strikes were called, newspapers halted publication, and fears of widespread insurrection remain high.
Hundreds have been injured in street clashes in Cairo.
The president’s supporters have declared that “defending Morsi is defending Islam.”
Today, Morsi seems as besieged as Syria’s President Bashar al-Assad.
The military has barricaded the presidential palace and, until the results of the referendum are announced, they are under orders to protect Egypt’s state institutions.
Outside the Middle East, the United States has scaled back its relations with Egypt since the government’s weak response to the attack on the US embassy in September, which signaled a rapid deterioration in bilateral relations.
America’s main priority now is to ensure that the peace treaty with Israel is maintained.
The European Union cannot afford to engage in wishful thinking when it comes to Morsi’s ambitions and the Muslim Brotherhood’s agenda.
The EU’s “more for more” policy has made human rights a cornerstone of its foreign policy toward states in the Union’s neighborhood.
And, though Morsi’s recent role in mediating discussions between Hamas and the Israeli government was invaluable in preventing a serious regional conflict, his government’s actions are undermining prospects for further cooperation with Europe.
No matter how Morsi attempts to sideline his domestic opponents, Egypt is in no shape to ignore the rest of the world.
It lacks a stable economy, relying heavily on tourism and imports to feed the country’s more than 80 million people.
Power cuts and public-service strikes are a regular feature of daily life.
Egypt’s government needs to secure consistent foreign financing to keep the country afloat, providing leverage for international opposition to Morsi’s efforts to impose an agenda that runs contrary to Egyptians’ fundamental rights.
Egypt can thrive only on the basis of honest adherence to a democratic process.
The current constitutional crisis has caused many to wonder how Egypt will face future political tests.
The referendum’s outcome will prove an important guide regarding the direction the country is likely to take.
Will it embrace a new Islamic authoritarianism, or build the democracy that Egyptians have risked their lives to secure?
Egypt’s Democratic Dictator?
CAIRO – Mohamed Morsi, Egypt’s first-ever elected civilian president, recently granted himself sweeping temporary powers in order, he claims, to attain the objectives of the revolution that overthrew Hosni Mubarak’s dictatorship.
But the decrees incited strong opposition from many of the revolutionary forces that helped to overthrow Mubarak (as well as from forces loyal to him), with protests erupting anew in Cairo’s Tahrir Square.
Morsi has thus been put in the odd position of having to defend his decision against the protesters while simultaneously making common cause with them.
“I share your dream of a constitution for all Egyptians and with three separate powers: executive, legislative, and judicial,” he told his opponents.
“Whoever wants Egyptians to lose this opportunity, I will stop him.”
So, was Morsi’s “auto-coup” necessary to realize the revolution’s avowedly democratic goals?
The new Constitutional Declaration, the Revolution Protection Law, and the new presidential decrees have several aims:
·&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160; To remove the public prosecutor, a Mubarak-era holdover who failed to convict dozens of that regime’s officials who had been charged with corruption and/or abuse of power;
·&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160; To protect the remaining elected and indirectly elected institutions (all of which have an Islamist majority) from dissolution by Constitutional Court judges (mostly Mubarak-era holdovers);
·&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160; To bring about retrials of Mubarak’s security generals;
·&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160; To compensate and provide pensions for the victims of repression during and after the revolution.
While most Egyptians may support Morsi’s aims, a dramatic expansion of presidential power in order to attain them was, for many, a step too far.&#160; Given Egypt’s extreme polarization and distrust between its Islamist and secular forces, Morsi should have anticipated the protests.
Suspicion of the powerful, after all, has been one of the revolution’s animating factors.
Another is a “zero-sum” attitude: any achievement by Morsi is perceived by his opponents as a loss.
The anti-Morsi forces are sharply divided ideologically and politically.
Nobel laureate Mohamed ElBaradei, a liberal reformer, has little in common with Ahmed El-Zind, the head of the Judges Club and a Mubarak loyalist.
But the anti-Morsi forces that backed the revolution regard the price of cleansing the judiciary as too high, arguing that the constitutional declaration will lead to dictatorship.
Indeed, the declaration protects presidential decrees from judicial review (although Morsi stipulated that it pertains only to “sovereignty” matters, and stressed its temporary nature).
It also gives the president emergency-like power to fight vague threats, such as those “endangering the life of the nation.”
Only if the new draft constitution is upheld in a popular referendum on December 15 will these provisions be annulled.
But the opposition factions have not been adhering to democratic principles, either.
Mostly comprising electoral losers and remnants of Mubarak’s regime, some aim to topple Morsi, not just get him to backtrack on his decree.
ElBaradei, for example, “expects” the army to do its national duty and intervene if “things get out of hand” – hardly a compelling democratic stance, given the army’s track record.
Morsi’s decrees have undoubtedly polarized Egyptian politics further.
The worst-case scenario is street clashes between pro- and anti-Morsi hardliners.
Historically, such clashes have often sparked civil war (for example, Spain in 1936 or Tajikistan in 1992) or brutal military coups (as in Indonesia in 1965 and Turkey in 1980).
For Morsi and his supporters, it was imperative to neutralize the Constitutional Court judges, whose ruling last June dissolved the first freely elected, post-revolution People’s Assembly (the parliament’s lower house).
According to the Morsi camp, the politicized Court intended to dissolve the Consultative Council (the upper house) and the Constitutional Assembly, as some of its judges publicly hinted.
Likewise, the sacked public prosecutor had failed to present any solid evidence against those of Mubarak’s security chiefs and officers who were accused of killing protestors, leading to acquittals for almost all of them.
As a president who was elected with only a 51.7% majority, Morsi needs to be sensitive to the demands of his supporters, mainly the Islamists and revolutionaries victimized by the security forces.
But, for many revolutionaries, there were other ways to sack a tainted prosecutor and cleanse the judiciary.
For example, a new law regulating the judiciary has been a demand of the revolution since its early weeks.
For Morsi, the dilemma was that the Constitutional Court could strike down the law, rendering the effort meaningless.
He had already backed off twice: once in July 2012, when he abandoned his effort, under pressure from the Supreme Council of the Armed Forces, to reinstate the elected parliament; and once when he tried to remove the public prosecutor by making him Egypt’s ambassador to the Holy See.
Morsi’s “Constitutional Declaration” was a decisive – though undemocratic, polarizing, and thus politically costly – step to break the impasse.
And, while such decrees have led to dictatorships, not democracies, in other countries undergoing political transition, none had a politicized judicial entity that played the role of spoiler in the democratization process.
Indeed, almost two years after the revolution began, Egypt’s security forces have not been reformed in any meaningful way.
Now, Morsi, in his effort to force out the prosecutor, will have to avoid opening another front with the Mubarak-era security generals, whom he will need to protect state institutions and maintain a minimum level of public security.
The security sector may, it seems, emerge from this crisis as the only winner.
It will enforce the rule of law, but only for a price.
That price will be reflected in the constitution, as well as in the unwritten rules of Egypt’s new politics.
This constitutes a much more serious and lasting threat to Egypt’s democratization than do Morsi’s temporary decrees.
The End of the Two-State Solution
BANGALORE – US Secretary of State John Kerry’s valiant effort to save the Israeli-Palestinian peace process is about to end in failure.
Though achieving a substantive settlement was always a pipe dream, this latest disappointment will render the United States unable to preserve even the façade of a “peace process” that was all process and no peace.
And that might not be such a bad thing.
The negotiations are failing for several reasons, beginning with Israel’s continued colonization of lands occupied in 1967, despite opposition from the international community, including the US.
If anything, Israel has accelerated settlement construction since the latest round of talks began, while escalating its demands, especially regarding the stationing of Israeli troops in the Jordan Valley.
Releasing a few dozen Palestinian prisoners is no substitute for genuine concessions on these contentious issues.
Making matters worse, the US has continually refrained from using its substantial leverage to compel Israel to change course, owing to the domestic political strength of the pro-Israel lobby, especially the American Israel Public Affairs Committee.
Tellingly, Kerry appointed Martin Indyk – a British-born Australian citizen, who began his political career in the US working for AIPAC in the early 1980s – as the principal US facilitator.
Another obstacle to a peace agreement has been the division between Hamas-controlled Gaza and the Fatah-controlled West Bank.
This, too, is rooted in American and Israeli intransigence – specifically, their refusal to accept Hamas’s victory in the 2006 election and recognize the group as the legitimate Palestinian representative.
This policy encouraged Fatah not to cede any power to Hamas in the West Bank, engendering the split in occupied Palestine.
In the latest round of negotiations, however, this division has not been a major obstacle, because Hamas remained on the sidelines – neither participating nor seeking to play a spoiler role.
This decision may have stemmed from an assumption that the talks would collapse, thereby discrediting the Fatah-dominated Palestinian Authority.
Regardless, the division among Palestinians cannot be blamed for the talks’ failure this time.
This brings us back to Israel’s continued colonization of Palestinian land, which all but excludes the possibility of a two-state solution.
Add to that the Israeli right’s insistence that no concessions are possible on territorial issues, Jerusalem, or the Palestinians’ right of return, and it is clear that Kerry never really had a chance.
Perhaps the clearest indication of Israel’s obstinacy came from its economy minister, Naftali Bennett, last July.
“The idea that a Palestinian state should be established within the Land of Israel has reached a dead end,” he declared.
“The most important thing for the Land of Israel is to build and build and build [Jewish settlements].”
Paradoxically, the discerning Palestinian observer may find comfort in America’s failure to stop Israel from expanding its settlements (and thus effectively annexing a growing share of Palestinian land), for it ends the charade on which the peace process has been based.
The most likely outcome now is the establishment of a single unified country within the borders of the 1922 British Mandate for Palestine, including all of present-day Israel and the occupied territories.
In other words, Israel and Palestine are moving inexorably toward the establishment of a binational state between the Jordan River and the Mediterranean Sea.
Such a state will be based on one of two mutually exclusive principles: equal rights for all of its inhabitants or some form of apartheid, characterized by Jewish control and Palestinian subordination.
The problem for Palestinians is that Jewish Israelis would have more clout in directing this unified state’s development, and they are unlikely to choose equality on their own.
After all, granting equal political and civil rights to all citizens would diminish the country’s exclusivist Jewish character, reversing Zionist goals and achievements – an outcome that most of Israel’s Jewish population would reject.
Calling the country “Israel” would be inadequate to moderate this resistance.
The international community would probably respond to the emergence of an apartheid state with opprobrium and ostracize Israel, regardless of American protests.
Moreover, conflict within such a country would be bound to spill over its borders, possibly sparking a major regional conflagration.
This would have serious consequences for the US and other staunch Western supporters of Israel that have major strategic and economic interests in the region.
It is time, therefore, for the US to rethink its policy toward the Israel-Palestine conflict.
Instead of pursuing the mirage of a two-state solution, the US should use its leverage in the region to clear the way for the emergence of a binational, democratic state that guarantees full political and civil equality for all of its inhabitants.
This may not be an ideal solution for any of the parties to the Israel-Palestine conflict, but it is far better than the alternative: an apartheid state that is likely to further destabilize the Middle East and lead to a never-ending cycle of conflict in the region.
The Intellectual Battle Against ISIS
DUBAI – The global financial crisis taught the world how profoundly interdependent our economies have become.
In today’s crisis of extremism, we must recognize that we are just as interdependent for our security, as is clear in the current struggle to defeat ISIS.
If we are to prevent ISIS from teaching us this lesson the hard way, we must acknowledge that we cannot extinguish the fires of fanaticism by force alone.
The world must unite behind a holistic drive to discredit the ideology that gives extremists their power, and to restore hope and dignity to those whom they would recruit.
ISIS certainly can – and will – be defeated militarily by the international coalition that is now assembling and which the UAE is actively supporting.
But military containment is only a partial solution.
Lasting peace requires three other ingredients: winning the battle of ideas; upgrading weak governance; and supporting grassroots human development.
Such a solution must begin with concerted international political will.
Not a single politician in North America, Europe, Africa, or Asia can afford to ignore events in the Middle East.
A globalized threat requires a globalized response.
Everyone will feel the heat, because such flames know no borders; indeed, ISIS has recruited members of at least 80 nationalities.
ISIS is a barbaric and brutal organization.
It represents neither Islam nor humanity’s most basic values.
Nonetheless, it has emerged, spread, and resisted those who oppose it.
What we are fighting is not just a terrorist organization, but the embodiment of a malicious ideology that must be defeated intellectually.
I consider this ideology to be the greatest danger that the world will face in the next decade.
Its seeds are growing in Europe, the United States, Asia, and elsewhere.
With its twisted religious overtones, this pre-packaged franchise of hate is available for any terrorist group to adopt.
It carries the power to mobilize thousands of desperate, vindictive, or angry young people and use them to strike at the foundations of civilization.
The ideology fueling ISIS has much in common with that of Al Qaeda and its affiliates in Nigeria, Pakistan, Afghanistan, Somalia, Yemen, North Africa, and the Arabian Peninsula.
What most worries me is that a decade ago, such an ideology was all that Al Qaeda needed to destabilize the world, even from a primitive base in the caves of Afghanistan.
Today, under ISIS, adherents have access to technology, finance, a huge land base, and an international jihadist network.
Far from being defeated, their ideology of rage and hate has become stricter, more pernicious, and more widespread.
The destruction of terrorist groups is not enough to bring lasting peace.
We must also strike at the root to deprive their dangerous ideology of the power to rise again among people left vulnerable by an environment of hopelessness and desperation.
And, on this note, let us be positive.
The solution has three components.
The first is to counter malignant ideas with enlightened thinking, open minds, and an attitude of tolerance and acceptance.
This approach arises from our Islamic religion, which calls for peace, honors life, values dignity, promotes human development, and directs us to do good to others.
Only one thing can stop a suicidal youth who is ready to die for ISIS: a stronger ideology that guides him onto the right path and convinces him that God created us to improve our world, not to destroy it.
We can look to our neighbors in Saudi Arabia for their great successes in de-radicalizing many young people through counseling centers and programs.
In this battle of minds, it is thinkers and scientists of spiritual and intellectual stature among Muslims who are best placed to lead the charge.
The second component is support for governments’ efforts to create stable institutions that can deliver real services to their people.
It should be clear to everyone that the rapid growth of ISIS was fueled by the Syrian and Iraqi governments’ failings: the former made war on its own people, and the latter promoted sectarian division.
When governments fail to address instability, legitimate grievances, and persistent serious challenges, they create an ideal environment for hateful ideologies to incubate – and for terrorist organizations to fill the vacuum of legitimacy.
The final component is to address urgently the black holes in human development that afflict many areas of the Middle East.
This is not only an Arab responsibility, but also an international responsibility, because providing grassroots opportunity and a better quality of life for the people of this region is guaranteed to ameliorate our shared problems of instability and conflict.
We have a critical need for long-term projects and initiatives to eliminate poverty, improve education and health, build infrastructure, and create economic opportunities.
Sustainable development is the most sustainable answer to terrorism.
Our region is home to more than 200 million young people.
We have the opportunity to inspire them with hope and to direct their energies toward improving their lives and the lives of those around them.
If we fail, we will abandon them to emptiness, unemployment, and the malicious ideologies of terrorism.
Every day that we take a step toward delivering economic development, creating jobs, and raising standards of living, we undermine the ideologies of fear and hate that feed on hopelessness.
We starve terrorist organizations of their reason to exist.
I am optimistic, because I know that the people of the Middle East possess a power of hope and a desire for stability and prosperity that are stronger and more enduring than opportunistic and destructive ideas.
There is no power stronger than that of hope for a better life.
The Brain Regain
DUBAI – In 1968, while studying at the Mons Officer Cadet School in the United Kingdom, I needed to visit a hospital.
There I met a doctor who, to my surprise, spoke fluent Arabic.
I learned that he was new to the UK, so I asked if he intended to stay long or return home.
He replied with an Arabic saying that translates as: “My home is where I can eat.”
That doctor’s words stayed with me for many years, because they underscored the contradiction between our idealized view of “home” and the harsh realities of life that push talented people to leave their homes.
The doctor was a classic case of the “brain drain” phenomenon that has afflicted developing countries for decades.
These countries spend scarce resources educating doctors, engineers, and scientists, in the hope that they will become engines of prosperity.
Then we watch with dismay as they migrate to the West, taking with them the promise of their talent.
It is, of course, everyone’s right to choose a better life, wherever in the world they wish.
We understand why they go.
Talent is drawn – like a magnet – to opportunity.
For the countries left behind, however, it feels like an endless vicious cycle: they need talent to create opportunity; but without opportunity, talent gravitates to the bright lights of the West.
Indeed, the United Nations and the OECD report that migration for work has risen by one-third since 2000.
One in nine university graduates from Africa now lives and works in the West.