Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump has proposed slapping a 45% tax on Chinese imports into the US, a plan that appeals to many Americans who believe that China is getting rich from unfair trade practices.
But, for all its extraordinary success in recent decades, China remains a developing country where a significant share of the population live at a level of poverty that would be unimaginable by Western standards.
Consider China’s new five-year plan, which aims to lift 55 million people above the poverty line by 2020, a threshold defined as just CN¥2,300, or $354, per year. This compares with a poverty line of around $12,000 for a single person in the US.
Yes, there are significant cost-of-living differences that make direct comparisons dubious, and, yes, poverty is as much a social condition as an economic one, at least in advanced economies; but the general point that inequality between countries swamps inequality within countries is a very powerful one.
And China’s poverty problem is hardly the world’s worst.
India and Africa both have populations roughly comparable to China’s 1.4 billion people, with significantly smaller shares having reached the middle class.
Democratic presidential candidate Bernie Sanders is a far more appealing individual than “The Donald,” but his anti-trade rhetoric is almost as dangerous.
Following prominent left-leaning economists, Sanders rails against the proposed new Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP), even though it would do much to help the developing world – for example, by opening up Japan’s market to Latin American imports.
Sanders even hammers his opponent Hillary Clinton for her support of earlier trade deals such as the 1992 North America Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA).
Yet that agreement forced Mexico to lower its tariffs on US goods far more than it forced the US to reduce its already low tariffs on Mexican goods.
Unfortunately, the resounding success of Sanders’s and Trump’s anti-trade rhetoric has pulled Clinton away from her more centrist position, and might have the same effect on many members of the House and Senate. This is a recipe for disaster.
The TPP does have its flaws, particularly in its overshoot on protection of intellectual property rights.
But the idea that the deal will be a huge job killer for the US is highly debatable, and something does need to be done to make it easier to sell high-tech goods to the developing world, including China, without fear that such goods will be instantly cloned.
A failure to ratify the TPP would almost certainly condemn tens of millions of people in the developing world to continued poverty.
The right remedy to reduce inequality within the US is not to walk away from free trade, but to introduce a better tax system, one that is simpler and more progressive.
Ideally, there would be a shift from income taxation to a progressive consumption tax (the simplest example being a flat tax with a very high exemption).
The US also desperately needs deep structural reform of its education system, clearing obstacles to introducing technology and competition.
Indeed, new technologies offer the prospect of making it far easier to retrain and retool workers of all ages.
Those who advocate redistribution by running larger government budget deficits are being short sighted.
Given adverse demographics in the advanced world, slowing productivity, and rising pension obligations, it is very hard to know what the endgame of soaring debt would be.
Do pro-deficit progressives realize that the burden of any future debt crises (or financial-repression measures) are likely to fall disproportionately on poor and middle-income citizens, as they have in the past?
Simple redistribution of income through taxes and transfers is far more direct and more potent, and would certainly serve to expand aggregate demand.
Anyone who portrays the US as a huge loser from the global economic status quo needs to gain some perspective on the matter.
I have little doubt that a century from now, Americans’ consumption-centric lifestyle will no longer be viewed as something to envy and emulate, and the country’s failure to implement a carbon tax will be viewed as a massive failure.
With under 5% of the world’s population, the US accounts for a vastly disproportionate share of carbon-dioxide emissions and other pollution, with much of the blame falling on America’s middle class.
But the idea that trade fuels inequality is a very parochial perspective, and protectionists who shroud themselves in a moralistic inequality narrative are deeply hypocritical.
As far as trade is concerned, the current US presidential campaign is an embarrassment of substance, not just of personality.
The US Election and the Global Economy
STANFORD – Big changes are underway in the United States, as the country gears up to elect a new president, one-third of the Senate, and the entire House of Representatives this November.
The outcome will have profound consequences for US economic policy, and thus for the global economy.
As it stands, Hillary Clinton remains the frontrunner for the Democratic nomination, though she has not yet pulled away from her socialist opponent, Senator Bernie Sanders.
The bombastic billionaire Donald Trump is leading the Republican field, followed by firebrand Senator Ted Cruz of Texas, Senator Marco Rubio, a talented mainstream conservative from Florida, and, further back, popular Ohio Governor John Kasich and neurosurgeon Ben Carson.
It is impossible to know whether these early trends will hold through the rest of the primaries, now turning to the South and Midwest.
America’s media and political junkies are consumed by the various possibilities.
Can Rubio rally a broad coalition, or will Trump win the Republican nomination?
Would a Trump nomination help Clinton win the general election?
In fact, many Republicans fear a contest pitting Trump against Clinton.
Though Clinton has plenty of weaknesses – voters, especially young people, do not trust her, and she may face legal repercussions for dealing with highly classified information using a private email server when she was Secretary of State – the nasty infighting among Republicans may give her a big advantage in November.
Many Republicans believe that Trump’s nomination would cost them the Senate and the White House.
With so much uncertainty, there are a number of directions that US policy could take in the coming years.
While a lot of attention has been paid to headline-grabbing issues like immigration and national security, American voters are highly concerned about economic issues – concerns that the leading candidates would address in very different ways.
On trade, Trump’s ideas are dangerous and would reverse decades of beneficial bipartisan American leadership in trade liberalization, with large tariffs on foreign imports, such as from China and Mexico.
The other Republican candidates barely discuss the topic.
As for the Democrats, Sanders inveighs against free trade.
Clinton has flip-flopped on the issue: She now opposes Canada’s Keystone XL pipeline and the Trans-Pacific Partnership, which she promoted as Secretary of State.
The risk of a trade war is low, but rising.
Clinton has also inched toward Sanders’s position on financial-system reform, as his attacks on her for taking large donations and speaking fees from Wall Street have clearly struck a chord among young voters.
Confronting the big-bank bogeyman has been a centerpiece of Sanders’ campaign; Clinton is now partly echoing his populist anti-bank positions.
The Democrats favor loose monetary policy, low interest rates, and a depreciated dollar.
Republicans also oppose bailouts, but worry about excessively loose monetary policy and too much discretion for the US Federal Reserve outside real emergencies.
These differences will have a far-reaching impact.
By appointing a new Fed Chair (or reappointing Janet Yellen), and possibly other Fed governors, the next president will have an indirect influence on interest rates, exchange rates, and global financial markets.
If inflationary pressures rise – unlikely any time soon, but possible when the global economy gains strength – the Fed’s response will be a key determinant of economic stability.
The candidates also differ enormously in their tax and spending plans – and thus their deficit and debt proposals.
Sanders is proposing about $18 trillion of additional spending over the next decade to cover a single-payer health-care system, infrastructure investment, and “free” (that is, taxpayer-paid) tuition at public colleges.
During that period, he would impose tax hikes of $6.5 trillion, mostly on the “wealthy.”
The catch: Democrats define “wealthy” as an annual household income above $250,000 – roughly the starting salary of an urban couple in their first jobs after law school.
The $11.5 trillion deficit would eventually have to be covered by a gigantic future tax hike.
Clinton has similar spending and tax priorities, though with smaller increases.
The Republicans want to lower personal income tax rates and broaden the tax base.
They would reduce America’s corporate-tax rate – the highest in the OECD – to a far more competitive level.
Some propose replacing the current personal and corporate income taxes with a flat tax on consumption.
The Republicans would slow growth in spending in most areas, while increasing defense spending.
Whereas Trump proposes an outsize $10 trillion in tax cuts and Cruz about $9 trillion (statically scored), Rubio and Kasich have offered more economically and arithmetically plausible fiscal plans.
Campaign proposals are, of course, partly aspirational, and will have to be negotiated with Congress.
The empirical evidence suggests that tax cuts are more likely than spending increases to spur growth, and that lower spending is more likely than tax hikes to consolidate budgets effectively.
While past experience indicates that constraining spending growth will not be easy, especially with the aging of the post-1945 baby-boom generation fueling rising health-care and pension costs, many countries – including Canada, the United Kingdom, Sweden, and even the US itself – have managed to do so in recent decades.
Republicans and Democrats differ starkly on reforming exploding entitlement costs, which have unfunded liabilities several times the national debt.
The Republicans – with the exception of Trump, who rejects future Social Security “cuts” – would gradually slow growth, whereas the Democrats propose increasing Social Security benefits.
The next leader of the free world should know that when a ship starts leaking, the first priority is to plug the leak, not open new ones.
Overall, the policies proposed by Sanders and Clinton would take the US closer to a European-style social-welfare state.
But, as Republicans point out, Western Europe’s standard of living is 30% lower than that of the US, on average; Europe also faces slower growth, higher unemployment, and heightening social tensions.
That is why Republican candidates – for the presidency, the House, and the Senate – want to roll back President Barack Obama’s tax and spending increases, expensive health-care reform, and regulatory overreach.
America’s Why Not Election
WASHINGTON, DC – Those having trouble making sense of the American presidential election campaign need not worry.
It doesn’t make sense.
The 2016 race is shaping up as the weirdest in modern times, owing not just to the number of candidates – currently 14, with two or three more expected to announce soon – but also to the unusual nature of many of them.
The usual question posed about presidential aspirants is: Why is he running?
This year, the answer seems to be: Why not?
As long as one is not too attached to one’s dignity, there is little to lose and a lot to be gained from running.
A failed presidential campaign, even a disastrous one, can lead to higher speaking fees, richer book contracts, or a television gig.
Newt Gingrich and Mike Huckabee both failed to win the Republican nomination, but secured seats on cable talk shows.
On the Democratic side, the question asked in political circles these days is not whether Hillary Clinton can win the nomination, but whether she can lose it.
The answer is yes – in the sense that anything is possible.
Nobody I know thinks she is likely to stumble so badly; still, the Clintons are known to be accident-prone, and they have been full of surprises – scandals and scandalettes – since they first appeared on the national scene a quarter-century ago.
This is why many Democrats back her without enthusiasm.
Bernie Sanders, a self-described socialist, inspires enthusiasm.
Sanders is riding the leftist wave in Democratic politics, and while many of his proposals may not be able to stand up against hard questioning (how, for example, would he fund his plan to make college tuition free for everyone?), he has so far managed to avoid any serious challenge to them.
Sanders’s main advantage is that he comes off as authentic – a candidate, who, like the billionaire businessman Ross Perot in 1992, “tells it like it is” – while Clinton very much does not.
She seems packaged and cautious, slow to get around to a position on some key issues, such as trade, that divide Democrats.
For the moment, however, nobody can predict whether Sanders will be able to convert the impressive crowds he has been drawing into electoral strength, or even how long he will remain in fashion.
The latest entry into the Democratic race, Jim Webb – who has served as Assistant Secretary of Defense, Secretary of the Navy, and Senator from Virginia – has talent, but lacks steadiness.
Martin O’Malley, the former governor of Maryland, has promise, but has yet to catch on.
And Lincoln Chaffee, a former governor of Rhode Island, is an ethereal mystery.
None is likely to make more than a fleeting impact, if that.
Clinton has fame, money, and organization – advantages that only she (or perhaps her husband) can throw away.
The Republican race, by contrast, remains wide open.
At the beginning of the year, the conventional wisdom was that if Jeb Bush threw his hat into the ring, he would be the odds-on favorite.
He looked like a shoo-in on paper, but candidates don’t run on paper.
Will he prove nimble enough to maneuver through the Republican nominating process, given that its early stages are heavily tilted to the right?
Evangelical Christians play a crucial role in the Iowa caucuses, the first contest in the quest for the nomination, but putting too much effort into pleasing them can make a candidate unelectable.
Bush shows signs of skipping Iowa, but then he would “have to” win New Hampshire.
Bush’s interest in running was enough to convince Mitt Romney, who lost the 2012 election to Barack Obama, not to try a third time.
But even the supposedly formidable Bush name was not enough to convince younger, scrappier candidates to step aside.
Ambitious young pols like Florida Senator Marco Rubio and Wisconsin Governor Scott Walker currently are viewed as Bush’s strongest rivals, but both will be facing increased scrutiny and testing.
Rand Paul enjoyed a period of buzz, but that seems to have faded, as his dovish brand of libertarianism clashes with a party that leans toward social conservatism and interventionism abroad.
I seem to have been one of the few journalists who from the outset didn’t think that Donald Trump’s entry into the presidential race was funny.
Trump is not remotely qualified to be president, but he is no joke.
And, sure enough, even in his announcement speech, he demonstrated his ability to appeal to Americas’ dark side.
Trump’s offensive comments about immigrants from Mexico – “They’re bringing drugs.
They’re bringing crime.
They’re rapists.
And some, I assume, are good people.” – sent his popularity soaring, to the mortification of many Republican leaders.
Those leaders have good reason to be panicked by Trump's rise: They know that if they can’t find a way to attract more Hispanic voters than Romney did in 2012, they will have a poor chance of winning the presidency.
Trump’s comments may have cost him some of his commercial ties, but anyone who thinks he doesn’t know what he’s doing should think again.
No one knows right now whether Trump will flame out or prove to have staying power, but one thing is clear: he is not the only one injecting strangeness into the nomination contest.
One of the more bizarre aspects of this election is the success of Ben Carson, a retired neurosurgeon and political neophyte.
His extreme views on homosexuality – he has likened it to bestiality and claimed that spending time in prison makes people gay – has resonated with a swath of the Republican electorate, making him a real contender in Iowa.
The 2016 presidential election campaign not only has more candidates than ever; it also has the highest proportion in memory who are flat-out unqualified for the job.
And some of them are doing very well at this point.
Many observers will remain mystified; few will be bored.
Foreign Policy and America’s Presidential Campaign
NEW YORK – It is impossible to know whom American voters will choose as their next president.
But it is certain that the choice will have profound consequences, for better and for worse, for the entire world.
More than anything else, this reflects the continuing reality of American power.
It also reflects the near-certainty that the next president will inherit a world in considerable turmoil.
What he or she chooses to do, and how he or she chooses to do it, will matter a great deal to people everywhere.
That said, it is difficult to know what role foreign policy will play in determining who will next occupy the Oval Office.
The 2016 election is still 17 months away.
A lot can, and will, happen between now and then.
Two related but distinct political processes – the Democratic and Republican parties’ nominating contests – will play out over the next year.
Former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton is the Democratic frontrunner, though her nomination is not a foregone conclusion.
In any case, foreign policy probably will play little role in the decision, as the issues that most concern voters likely to participate in the Democratic primary elections are domestic and economic in nature.
The Republican side is far more crowded and uncertain, and it seems far likelier that foreign policy will play a large role in choosing the party’s nominee.
The economy is improving under President Barack Obama, making it a less attractive political target.
Global turbulence, by contrast, has given the Republicans more room to attack Obama and the Democrats.
Nonetheless, a few foreign-policy issues will dominate the conversation in both parties.
One is trade, which is both a domestic and international matter.
Obama is seeking Trade Promotion Authority, a necessary prelude to gaining congressional support for the Trans-Pacific Partnership, which would reduce barriers between the US and 11 other Pacific Rim countries. Many – but not all – of the Republican candidates back the TPP; the politics on the Democratic side is more hostile to the deal, making it potentially risky for any Democratic candidate to support it.
A second issue certain to dominate both parties’ nominating debates is Iran and the international negotiations to contain its nuclear program.
One can expect many of the Republican candidates to be critical of any proposed deal.
Questions will be raised about which sanctions are to be eased and when; about the terms of compliance inspections; and about what will happen once some of the limits on Iran’s nuclear activities expire.
Democratic candidates are more likely to be sympathetic to whatever is negotiated; but there are certain to be differences among candidates on both sides.
A third issue is climate change.
Pope Francis will boost the issue’s salience when he releases a major statement on it next week.
Likewise, planning for the United Nations Climate Change Conference in Paris in December will keep the issue in the news.
Democrats will be more supportive of more far-reaching US commitments, although, again, differences of view will emerge on both sides.
A fourth cluster of issues involves the Middle East.
There is little appetite on either side for large-scale military intervention in Iraq and Syria to counter the Islamic State.
But there will be heated debate – and considerable posturing – over what should and should not be done.
Then there are all the other issues, from Chinese assertiveness in Asia to Russian revanchism in Ukraine.
The rhetoric, especially on the Republican side, will be muscular.
One hopes that what emerges from the parties’ nominating processes is insight into how the successful candidates answer three big questions.
The first concerns how much importance, in absolute and relative terms, the nominee assigns to foreign policy.
If one thinks of national security as two sides of a coin, with foreign policy on one side and domestic policy on the other, how likely is each to land face up for the next president?
This is the classic “guns versus butter” debate over how resources, from dollars to presidential attention, should be allocated.
Second, what are the purposes and priorities of foreign policy?
The realist tradition in international relations focuses on influencing other countries’ foreign policies and places less emphasis on their internal affairs.
The main alternative tradition takes the opposite tack, arguing that other countries’ domestic affairs are what matter most, whether for reasons of morality and principle, or because it is believed that how a government behaves at home affects how it acts abroad.
According to this idealist view, countries that are democratic and treat their citizens with respect are more likely to treat other countries’ citizens with respect.
The problem, of course, is that affecting the trajectories of other societies is typically a difficult, long-term proposition; in the meantime, there are pressing global challenges that need to be addressed, sometimes with the assistance of unsavory regimes.
The last question concerns the nominees’ approach to the execution of foreign policy.
What will be their preferred mix of unilateralism and multilateralism, and which tools – from diplomacy and sanctions to intelligence operations and military force – will they reach for most often?
The answers to these questions should become clearer during the campaign.
Along the way, Americans will gain a better sense of whom to vote for, and people everywhere will develop a better sense of what to expect in January 2017, when the 45th US president takes the oath of office.
The Not-Ready-for-Prime-Time Republicans
WASHINGTON, DC – Shortly after America's Republican Party trounced the Democrats and gained control of the Senate in last November's midterm congressional elections, Mitch McConnell, the new Senate majority leader, appealed to his colleagues not to be “scary," but to be “positive" and effective.
This has proved very difficult.
McConnell's strategy is typically farsighted.
He knows that, if the Republicans are to win back the presidency in 2016, they must prove their ability to govern responsibly.
He also recognizes that the Republicans would otherwise find it much more difficult to hold onto the Senate in the next election, when more swing-state seats are in play.
And he is aware that public approval of Congress has fallen to the mid-teens – nearly an all-time low.
With this in mind, McConnell decided that continuing to block President Barack Obama's initiatives, as the Republicans had done during the previous six years, could no longer work.
So he promised that his party would try to compromise on a few issues, and offered an explicit pledge that there would be no government shutdowns like the highly unpopular one in 2013.
And he schemed to make Obama the “negative" one by regularly sending him bills that he would be forced to veto.
But the strategy has been tough to execute – partly because Congress' staunchest conservatives, such as Senator Ted Cruz of Texas and his Tea Party-affiliated allies, refuse to be tamed.
In fact, the Tea Party candidates who swept into Congress in 2010 campaigned on a pledge never to compromise – even, apparently, if it means opposing their own party members, such as House Speaker John Boehner, whom they view as too amenable to bipartisanship.
This refusal to compromise has put the Republican Party in a pickle.
Meanwhile, many Democrats view their new minority status as a source of relief, as it has removed the pressure to deliver results or obey their party's leaders.
Even Obama seems to feel liberated, proposing popular programs – for example, free tuition at two-year community colleges and a minimum-wage increase – that he knows the Republicans will reject, thereby upholding their reputation as the “party of no."
The ideological divide between Republicans and Democrats is deeper than ever.
The Republicans eschew anything that enhances the role of the federal government, unless they consider it to be essential to national security (the party of personal liberty supports warrantless wiretapping, for example).
The Democrats, by contrast, support a more active federal role in setting national standards and ensuring that the benefits of public programs are distributed fairly.
The Tea Party's rise exacerbated this split.
Though the movement's ranks have thinned somewhat, its adherents continue to exert considerable influence in Congress.
It has powerful and well-funded backers, including the billionaire brothers Charles and David Koch.
And, after some successful challenges by Tea Party members, Republican incumbents have moved steadily rightward.
Some Republican strategists say that even Ronald Reagan could not be nominated by today's Republicans.
To be sure, now that the Democrats are the minority in both congressional chambers, they have turned to tactics – like Senate filibusters and amendments that would be politically costly to oppose – previously favored by Republicans.
But the Democrats' efforts – say, to force a vote on an amendment designating climate change a human-induced phenomenon – pale in comparison to past Republican manipulations, such as the addition of anti-abortion provisions to entirely unrelated bills.
Despite the desire of party leaders to boost trust in a Republican-led government, many Republicans care little about the effect of their behavior on their party's prospects of winning back the White House.
Indeed, the party's agenda remains laden with proposals to reverse or overturn Obama's achievements.
In the new Congress' first couple of weeks, the House passed a bill scaling back the Dodd-Frank financial reform act.
Numerous proposals are pending to undo significant parts of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, Obama's signature health-insurance program (if the Supreme Court does not do the job later this year).
Moreover, the Senate spent weeks on a bill to force Obama to approve the Keystone XL pipeline, a 1,179-mile conduit to carry oil from Canada's tar sands to the US for refinement and export.
Obama has, as promised, vetoed the bill, owing to the pipeline's adverse environmental implications.
Though it will be difficult to marshal the two-thirds House and Senate majorities needed to override a presidential veto, the Republicans will seek to capitalize politically by portraying Democrats who oppose the pipeline as effete elitists who do not care about jobs or national security.
But it is the House Republicans' move to overturn Obama's executive actions on immigration reform – which would shield as many as five million undocumented immigrants from deportation – that has turned into the biggest headache for party leaders.
They know that in 2016, the party will need more Hispanic votes than it received in 2012.
In this sense, the recent ruling by a federal judge in Texas halting the order's implementation – a decision that the Obama administration is appealing – does not help the Republicans, however joyous anti-immigration forces may be.
Likewise, House Republicans set a trap for their party last December, by demanding that funding of the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) be separated from legislation funding all other government agencies, so that the anti-immigration legislation could be attached to it.
But, as should have been expected, the Senate – which adopted a bipartisan immigration bill in 2013 – would not accept the anti-immigration baggage.
The Republicans' inability to control their House faction has exposed them to responsibility for a DHS shutdown at a time of increased terror threats.
To break the impasse, McConnell has proposed addressing the issues in separate bills.
In their first couple of months dominating Congress, the Republicans have passed no major legislation; taken largely negative positions; and may be about to impede the operation of a crucial government department.
This is exactly where McConnell and other national leaders did not want their party to be.
The End of US Soft Power?
NEW DELHI – One major casualty of Donald Trump’s victory in the bruising US presidential election is, without a doubt, America’s soft power around the world.
It is a development that will be difficult – perhaps even impossible – to reverse, especially for Trump.
Traditionally, countries’ global political power was assessed according to military might: the one with the largest army had the most power.
But that logic was not always reflected in reality.
The US lost the Vietnam War; the Soviet Union was defeated in Afghanistan.
In its first few years in Iraq, the US discovered the wisdom of Talleyrand’s adage that the one thing you cannot do with a bayonet is sit on it.
Enter soft power.
The term was coined by Harvard’s Joseph S. Nye in 1990 to account for the influence a country – and, in particular, the US – wields, beyond its military (or “hard”) power.
As Nye put it, a country’s power rests on its “ability to alter the behavior of others” to get what it wants, whether through coercion (sticks), payments (carrots), or attraction (soft power).
“If you are able to attract others,” he pointed out, “you can economize on the sticks and carrots.”
Nye argues that a country’s soft power arises from “its culture (in places where it is attractive to others), its political values (when it lives up to them at home and abroad), and its foreign policies (when they are seen as legitimate and having moral authority.)”
But I believe that it also emerges from the world’s perceptions of what a country is about: the associations and attitudes conjured by the mention of a country’s name. Hard power is exercised; soft power is evoked.
The US has been the world’s largest economy and oldest democracy, a haven for immigrants, and the land of the American Dream – the promise that anyone can be anything if they work hard enough.
It is also the home of Boeing and Intel, Google and Apple, Microsoft and MTV, Hollywood and Disneyland, McDonald’s and Starbucks – in short, some of the most recognizable and influential brands and industries in the world.
The attractiveness of these assets, and of the American lifestyle that they represent, is that they enable the US to persuade, rather than compel, others to adopt its agenda.
In this sense, soft power acts as both an alternative and a complement to hard power.
But there are limits to a country’s soft power – even America’s.
In the wake of the US terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, there was an outpouring of goodwill for the US.
Then the country launched its War on Terror, in which it relied heavily on hard power.
The instruments of that power – the Iraq invasion, indefinite detention of “enemy combatants” and other suspects at Guantánamo Bay prison, the Abu Ghraib scandal, revelations of CIA “black sites,” the killing of Iraqi civilians by private US security contractors – were not received well by the global public.
America’s soft-power assets were inadequate to compensate for the deficiencies of its hard-power approach.
Fans of American culture were not prepared to overlook the excesses of Guantánamo.
Using Microsoft Windows does not predispose you to accept torture by the country that produces it.
America’s soft power declined sharply, demonstrating that how a country exercises its hard power affects how much soft power it can evoke.
America’s domestic narrative soon overcame its foreign-policy setbacks, thanks partly to today’s unprecedented connectivity.
In a world of instant mass communications, countries are judged by a global public fed on a diet of relentless online news, smartphone videos, and Twitter gossip.
In such an information age, Nye wrote, three types of countries are likely to gain soft power: “those whose dominant cultures and ideals are closer to prevailing global norms (which now emphasize liberalism, pluralism, autonomy); those with the most access to multiple channels of communication and thus more influence over how issues are framed; and those whose credibility is enhanced by their domestic and international performance.”
The US had done pretty well on all of these fronts.
Indeed, America’s culture and ideals set the bar for others, and its international credibility rested on its domestic arrangements.
Overcoming the legacy of centuries of slavery and racism to elect a black president in 2008 and again in 2012 seemed to embody the country’s capacity to reinvent and renew itself.
Trump’s ascent to power has shattered that image.
It has exposed and encouraged tendencies the world never used to associate with the US: xenophobia, misogyny, pessimism, and selfishness.
A system that promised a level playing field on which anyone could fulfill their aspirations is being denounced by its own political leaders as stacked against ordinary citizens.
A country that confidently counsels others on democratic practice has elected a president who suggested that, if he lost, he might not recognize the result.
Nye has argued that, in an information age, soft power often accrues to the country with the better story.
The US has long been the “land of the better story.”
It has a free press and an open society; it welcomes migrants and refugees; it has a thirst for new ideas and a knack for innovation.
All of this has given the US an extraordinary ability to tell stories that are more persuasive and attractive than those of its rivals.
But the story of America told in this election has deeply diminished the soft power the US evokes.
Fear trumped hope.
The American Dream became the world’s nightmare.
And the demons released from Pandora’s box in 2016 – echoing in widespread reports of racist taunts by Trump supporters of non-whites in America – will continue to roam free in the country’s self-perception, and taint everyone else’s perception, too.
In our eyes, America will never be the same – and Trump’s term hasn’t even begun.
America’s Incarcerated Economy
BERKELEY – The United States has 5% of the world’s population and 25% of the world’s prison population – about 2.2 million people, five times as many as in 1980.
One out of every 100 American adults is incarcerated – the highest per capita rate in the world, 5-10 times higher than in Western Europe or other democracies.
The social and economic toll is similarly high.
The boom in America’s prison population in recent decades is the result of ramped up punitive crime-prevention measures, including tougher drug penalties and mandatory minimum sentences, backed up by growing numbers of police and other law-enforcement officials.
Beyond the financial costs of larger police forces and increased pressure on the judicial system is $60 billion a year in spending on state and federal prisons, up from $12 billion 20 years ago.
And then there are the huge costs for those imprisoned (many for non-violent crimes) and for their families and communities – costs that fall disproportionately on the poor, the uneducated, African-Americans and Latinos, and the mentally ill.
Perhaps the worst part is that the expected benefits of America’s “get tough” approach have failed to materialize.
Indeed, there is only a modest correlation between higher incarceration rates and lower crime rates.
Moreover, the recidivism rate is shockingly high: according to a recent US Department of Justice report, more than one-third of released prisoners were rearrested within six months, and more than two-thirds were rearrested within three years.
In order to reduce the size of the prison population, the recidivism rate must drop.
Of course, this is a complex problem.
Released inmates face huge barriers to employment, housing, health care, and education.
At least half face the added challenge of mental health and addiction issues.
Yet very few have support networks to navigate re-entry to society.
Clearly, a new approach is needed – one that capitalizes on the comparative advantages of the private sector, state authorities, and the federal government.
The federal government should rely on “progressive federalism” to catalyze and fund state-level programs to combat recidivism.
Many of these programs can be based on pay-for-performance contracts, such as social impact bonds, in which the federal and state governments share risk with private-sector actors.
Social impact bonds, or SIBs, require that private investors and other non-government actors cover most or all of the upfront cost of a pilot project, to be reimbursed by the contracting government agency only if independent evaluators conclude that the project achieves its goals and saves taxpayers money.
The world’s first SIB, launched in the United Kingdom in 2010, focused on reducing recidivism rates among 3,000 prisoners at Her Majesty’s Prison Peterborough in Cambridgeshire, and showed promising results.
The first American SIB, aimed at reducing recidivism among juvenile inmates at New York City’s Rikers Island Correctional Facility, was not so effective.
Indeed, last month, independent evaluators concluded that the program had not met New York City’s targets.
But, far from being a failure, the Rikers Island project validated the pay-for-performance approach.
New York City did not have to foot the bill for the failed effort, but officials gained valuable knowledge about what does and does not work.
Based on this experience, another US firm is developing a SIB for a different recidivism project run by New York State.
In fact, many state-level pilot projects – some based on pay-for-success deals – to reduce recidivism are underway across the country.
New York State and Massachusetts have launched statewide pay-for-success experiments.
Minnesota and Texas have run pilot projects with promising results. Georgia, using a $6 million grant from the Department of Justice, is financing 15 separate pilot programs that range from job-training and housing-support services for released prisoners to faith-based “in-reach” programs for those still in prison.
These state projects collectively amount to a form of crowdsourcing – an effective method of testing a wide variety of innovative ideas, which can then be scaled up if they prove successful.
In this sense, state and local governments are serving as “laboratories of democracy.”
This is where progressive federalism comes in.
The federal government can work to sharpen and reinforce state efforts by providing funding and encouraging best practices, while avoiding imposing any ideology on the projects.
The federally assisted pilot projects to combat recidivism in Georgia, for example, reflect both “liberal” and “conservative” strategies, supported by Democrats and Republicans, respectively.
The social sector also has an important role to play in combating recidivism.
Advocacy groups like The Coalition for Public Safety are changing the national dialogue.
There is an entire sub-industry of nonprofits like Defy Ventures working to help former inmates build new careers and even become entrepreneurs.
Others programs, such as Measures for Justice, are creating the data needed to gauge results, while non-profits like Pew Charitable Trusts, California Forward, and Third Sector Ventures are helping counties and cities find economically effective alternatives to expensive and ineffective prison expansion.
Democrats want an active government that solves tough social problems, whereas Republicans want private-sector investment and innovation to do the job.
But both parties like the idea of testing rival strategies in the real world, as evidenced by bipartisan support in Congress for a new federal fund to support pay-for-performance projects on a wide range of social problems, including health care, child care, and job training.
The combination of pay-for-performance contracts and progressive federalism seems to meet both sides’ requirements.
The Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act of 1994 – which provided funding for states to put more police on the beat, impose tougher prison sentences, and build more prisons – was an example of how the federal government can encourage action by state and local authorities.
A new federal crime bill, incorporating pay-for-success contracts, could encourage states to take a smarter approach to crime, reducing mandatory prison sentences and investing in effective anti-recidivism programs.
Such an approach would reduce incarceration and recidivism rates – and drastically cut the onerous social, economic, and moral costs of imprisonment.
Санкциялар мен доллар үшін тәуекел
КЕМБРИДЖ – АҚШ өзіне шетелдік державалардың немесе олардың сенiмді өкілдерінің кибер шабуылдарына қалай жауап бере алады?
Бұл Президент Барак Обама АҚШ-тың соңғы сайлау циклі кезінде ресейлік хакерлердің бұзу істері туралы есептемеге тап болғаны жайындағы мәселе.
Бірақ ол Ресей немесе Обама туралы ғана емес.
Сайланған Президент Дональд Трамп та дәл сондай мәселеге тап болады.
Және оның да керемет таңдауы болмайды.
«Атау мен ұялту» нәтижесіз шешім, себебі көп жағдайда хакерлер шын мәнінде ұялмайды.
Сол сияқты, қылмыстық іс айыптау - бұрын қытай хакерлеріне қарсы қолданылған шара - соттың талқылауына ешкімді келтіре алмайды.
АҚШ вице-президенті Джозеф Байден Ресей компьютерлік желілеріне қарсы шабуылды ұсынды, бірақ бұл моральдық негізден қарағанда жоғарырақ позициядан айрылып,  шиеленістің артуына да түрткі болуы мүмкін.
Экономикалық санкциялар шетелдік бұзуларды айыптаудың ең қарапайым және арзан тәсілі сияқты көрінуі мүмкін; Ресейге байланысты жағдайда, оның ірі банктері мен Ресей президенті Владимир Путиннің серіктестеріне қарсы қолданыстағы санкцияларды күшейтуге болар еді.
Бірақ тым жиі санкцияларға жүгінудің, сайып келгенде, дүниежүзілік экономикадағы АҚШ рөлін төмендететін алыс-жетіп салдары болуы мүмкін.
Әлемдік қорлардың үштен екісі долларлық, және әлемдік барлық валюталық операциялардың 88%-ы долларды қамтиды.
Сондықтан, Американың ең қуатты санкциялық құралы қылмыстық немесе алаяқтықпен айналысушы банкке АҚШ долларлық трансакцияларды жүргізуге блок қою болып табылады. Бірақ АҚШ әр кез біржақты тәртіпте басқа елге қарсы санкцияларды қатайтқан сайын, ол сондай-ақ болашақ санкциялардың әсерін азайтып, әлемдегі негізгі резервтік валюта ретінде доллардың мәребесіне де нұқсан келтіретін тәуекелдерді тудырады.
Әрине, АҚШ доллармен трансакцияларды жүргізуге блок қою арқылы террористік ұйымдар мен есірткі басшыларына қарсы ауыр соққы жасай алады, және заңды банктердің менеджерлерінің долларды қолдануды жоғалту деген ойдың өзінен беттерінен қан қашары сөзсіз.
Бірақ, санкциялар белгілі бір елге мақсатты түрде арналса, олардың нәтижелілігі басқа елдердің қатысуына байланысты болады және оны қамтамасыз ету құны саяси капиталга тіреледі.
Мысалы, АҚШ-тың санкциялары соңында Иранды ядролық келіссөздер үстеліне әкелді; бірақ санкциялар, сайып келгенде, Біріккен Ұлттар Ұйымының Қауіпсіздік Кеңесі қолдауымен кең халықаралық коалицияның Иранды қаржылай оқшаулауы арқасында нәтижелі болды.
2014 жылы орын алған Ресейдің Қырымға басқындығы салдарынан енгізілген Ресейге қарсы АҚШ санкциялары кездейсоқ мұнай бағасының төмендеуімен күшейтіледі, және  Ресейдің ең ірі сауда әріптесі -Еуропалық Одақтың ұқсас іс-шаралар қолданғанының да арқасында орын алды.
ЕО қатысуынсыз АҚШ санкциялардың нәтижесі  мен әсері әлдеқайда төмен болар еді.
Халықаралық одақтар АҚШ-ты санкциялар бойынша қолдаса да, олар осыл және уақытша болып табылады. Иран мәмілесіне қол жеткізілгеніне тек бір жыл өтсе де, қазірдің өзінде Қытай немесе Ресейдің Иранға қарсы одан әрі бірлескен іске қосылуларын елестету қиын, тіпті келісім өз күшін жоғалта бастаса да.
Сол сияқты, еуропалық көшбасшылар әр алты ай сайын Ресейге қарсы санкцияларын жаңартып отырулары керек, бұл олардың Кремль саясатын өзгертуге жеткілікті ұзақ уақыт орын алатындарының екіталай екенін білдіреді.
Путин мен Трамптың айқын өзара түсінушіліктеріне қарамастан, АҚШ-тың санкциялары әлдеқайда ұзақ мерзімді болады.
Обама бұрын Дүниежүзілік сауда ұйымына Ресейдің кіруін белсенді қолдаса да,  ол қалыпты сауда шарты ретінде Кеңес Одағынан еркін еврей көшуін қорғаған 1974 Джексон-Вэник түзетпесінің күшін жоюдың өзіне айтарлықтай саяси капиталды жұмсауы керек болды.
Қазіргі кезеңде, басқа дипломатиялық «қайта жүктеу» өте қиын немесе мүмкін еместей.
Санкциялар коалицияларын құрудан бұрын, АҚШ әлемдік қаржы жүйесіндегі тең емес ықпалын шын мәнінде жаһандық мүдделерді ілгерілетуге пайдаланып жатқанына кепіл болуы керек.
Тек бірнеше адам ғана, кейбір нақты жағдайлар туралы келіспеушіліктер бар болса да, қылмыскерлерді және лаңкестерді жазалау заңсыз деп ойламайды. Қаржы санкцияларын ядролық қаруды таратпау сияқты барша келіскен әлемдік шараларды қолдау немесе шекаралық егемендік сияқты бірлесе қолдаған принциптерді қорғауға қолдану әрқашан нәтижелі бола бермесе де, олар кеңінен қабылданған тактика болып табылады.
Бірақ әлемдік қағидаттары мен негізгі ұлттық мүдделердің арасындағы айырмашылық жиі тек оларға “қараушының көзінде” болады: АҚШ масқара деп қарастырған мәселе басқа елдерге  тар американдық мүдде ретінде көрінуі мүмкін.
Мысалы, Обама өткен жылы Sony Pictures-ке қарсы кибер шабуылдарға жауап ретінде Солтүстік Кореяға қарсы санкциялар қолданғанда, келіспеушілік, қарсы көзқарастар аз болды.
Бірақ АҚШ Судан, Иран және Кубаға қарсы санкцияларды бұзғаны үшін, 2014 жылы BNP Paribas француз банкісіне белгілі бір доллар операцияларын тоқтатып, $8,9 млрд айыппұл салғанда, Американың өкілеттікті асыра қолдануы туралы көп әңгіме болды.
Сол сияқты, американдық демократиялық процесті бұзу мақсатында АҚШ-тың саяси ұйымдарына хакерлік бұза кіру, бәлкім, барлық сыйлы елдер қолдамайтын іс ретінде саналады.
Бірақ кейбір бақылаушылардің мұны Ресей мен АҚШ арасындағы үлкен қуатты бәсекелестіктің тағы бір тарауы ретінде сипаттары да сөзсіз.
Егер АҚШ  тар, өзімшіл пайда мүдделерін қорғау үшін долларға қол жеткізуді тым оңай жаба берсе, онда көп тәуекелдері болары анық.
Sony туралы кибер шабуыл коммерциялық дау барысында шетелдік бәсекелестен болғанда, АҚШ санкциялармен жауап берер ме еді?
Немесе, егер шабуыл Таяу Шығыстағы даулы АҚШ саясатына наразылық ретінде жүргізілді-мыс десек?
Бұл айтарлықтай қиын сын-тегеуріндер, сондықтан кез-келген АҚШ әкімшілігі долларлық сауда жүйесінен жеке тұлғаларды, фирмалар, және елдерді шығаруы бұрын біраз кідірту керек.
Уақыт өте, тіпті заңды ойыншылардың өзі де, егер олар долларға қол жеткізу АҚШ мүдделерін қолдауға қарсы шықпаудың шарты екенін ұйғарса, басқа, олар балама коммерциялық және қаржы арналарын таба алады.
Санкцияларды енгізу жаһандық наразылықты көрсетудің оңай, ештеңеге тұрмайтын құралы сияқты, бірақ ол бұлай емес.
АҚШ әрбір санкцияларды орналастыруды мұқият зерделеу керек, және олардың қандай бір күмән арттырудан гөрі, америкалық көшбасшылық пен долларға сенімді нығайтатынына көз жеткізуі тиіс.
The Kingdom and the Power
DENVER – US President Barack Obama supposedly “cleared the air” with Saudi King Salman before the latest meeting of the Gulf Cooperation Council in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia’s capital.
Given how strained the bilateral relationship is – a situation long in the making – that was probably the best outcome that could reasonably be expected.
But it is not enough.
America’s relationship with Saudi Arabia is based on a pragmatic give-and-take approach aimed at advancing mutual interests, the most important of which is maintaining relative peace and security in a volatile region that is vital to the global economy.
But this approach is fast becoming passé.
Indeed, we have entered a new age of ideology, in which the case for pragmatism, rather than shared values, is increasingly difficult to make.
Against this background, it should perhaps not be surprising that cracks in the bilateral relationship have begun to show.
In a recent interview, Obama described the Saudis (as well as other US allies) as “free riders” on American foreign policy.
That sparked discussion not only about whether it is true (the Saudis purchase huge amounts of military hardware from the US), but also about whether it should have been said out loud.
After all, in politics as in life, not everything a person believes needs to be shared publicly.
But Obama did not stop there.
In the same interview, he declared that Saudi Arabia needs to learn to “share” the Middle East with its archrival Iran.
And he has been openly critical of the Kingdom’s treatment of women, arguing that “a country cannot function in the modern world when it is repressing half of its population.”
Overall, however, US officials remain meek in discussing Saudi Arabia.
When they acknowledge “differences” with Saudi Arabia concerning how and where to fight terrorism, they sound like they are describing a disagreement between Roosevelt and Churchill about where precisely the Allies should strike Nazi Germany.
In fact, the differences are huge, and many are rooted in the Kingdom’s internal attitudes and policies.
Consider, for example, Saudi Arabia’s approach to the Islamic State (ISIS) and, more broadly, to Sunni radicalism throughout the Arab world.
It is often alleged that the Saudis export terrorism.
They don’t.
But what they have done is encourage their own radicals – a natural byproduct of Wahhabism, Saudi Arabia’s fundamentalist brand of Islam – to commit their terrorist acts elsewhere.
As the radicals leave, so does Saudi money, which funds their violent activities.
During President George W. Bush’s administration, the US worked with the Saudis to track financial flows to radical groups and thus weaken such groups’ operations throughout the region, including in western Iraq.
Their efforts brought some results.
In fact, instead of congratulating itself for the supposed success of the US troop surge in Iraq in 2007, perhaps the Bush administration should have been touting the impact of that funding-focused initiative.
Unfortunately, the effort to interdict financial flows from Saudi Arabia weakened substantially after 2011, when parts of North Africa and the Middle East became engulfed in the so-called Arab Spring (a moniker that surely will be replaced with something both less cheerful and more accurate).
The chaos that ensued fueled the spread of radical Sunnism – a trend to which Saudi inattentiveness surely contributed.
And Saudi Arabia is unlikely to start paying attention now, when it is facing a perfect storm of problems, beginning with rock-bottom oil prices.
Then there is conflict over the royal succession process, with King Salman’s effort to consolidate power in the hands of his aggressive and talented but not particularly popular 30-year-old son causing considerable upset within the extended royal family.
Iraq poses another problem for the Kingdom, as it sets an example of Shia consolidating political power.
That example, the Saudis fear, could sustain political unrest in the Kingdom’s Shia-majority Eastern Province, where most of the country’s oil production is based.
If Iraq’s government deepens ties with Iran, the risk to stability could be heightened further.
For Saudi Arabia, these challenges are a higher priority than defeating ISIS, which accounts for the country’s virtual disappearance from the fight.
Indeed, while many Saudis (not necessarily the elites) view ISIS as a barbaric movement with the potential eventually to harm their own country, they are willing, for the time being, to allow ISIS to continue its violent campaign.
After all, for all the horrors seen in Paris, Brussels, and San Bernardino, the victims of ISIS have been, by and large, Shia.
Now that the US has “cleared the air” with the Saudis, the real work must begin.
That means engaging in an honest conversation about the bilateral relationship, based on some acknowledgment of Wahhabism’s central role in the rise of Sunni radicalism throughout the region.
Saudi Arabia can no longer be allowed to shift the blame – for example, to Iraq’s Shia-led government, for failing to reach out to the Sunni community.
It is the responsibility of all Saudis – and not just the royal family – to work harder to tamp down radicalism within their country’s borders and beyond.
The Secret Corporate Takeover
NEW YORK – The United States and the world are engaged in a great debate about new trade agreements.
Such pacts used to be called “free-trade agreements”; in fact, they were managed trade agreements, tailored to corporate interests, largely in the US and the European Union.
Today, such deals are more often referred to as “partnerships,”as in the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP).
But they are not partnerships of equals: the US effectively dictates the terms.
Fortunately, America’s “partners” are becoming increasingly resistant.
It is not hard to see why.
These agreements go well beyond trade, governing investment and intellectual property as well, imposing fundamental changes to countries’ legal, judicial, and regulatory frameworks, without input or accountability through democratic institutions.
Perhaps the most invidious – and most dishonest – part of such agreements concerns investor protection.
Of course, investors have to be protected against the risk that rogue governments will seize their property.
But that is not what these provisions are about.
There have been very few expropriations in recent decades, and investors who want to protect themselves can buy insurance from the Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency, a World Bank affiliate (the US and other governments provide similar insurance).
Nonetheless, the US is demanding such provisions in the TPP, even though many of its “partners” have property protections and judicial systems that are as good as its own.
The real intent of these provisions is to impede health, environmental, safety, and, yes, even financial regulations meant to protect America’s own economy and citizens.
Companies can sue governments for full compensation for any reduction in their future expected profits resulting from regulatory changes.
This is not just a theoretical possibility.
Philip Morris is suing Uruguay and Australia for requiring warning labels on cigarettes.
Admittedly, both countries went a little further than the US, mandating the inclusion of graphic images showing the consequences of cigarette smoking.
The labeling is working.
It is discouraging smoking.
So now Philip Morris is demanding to be compensated for lost profits.
In the future, if we discover that some other product causes health problems (think of asbestos), rather than facing lawsuits for the costs imposed on us, the manufacturer could sue governments for restraining them from killing more people.
The same thing could happen if our governments impose more stringent regulations to protect us from the impact of greenhouse-gas emissions.
When I chaired President Bill Clinton’s Council of Economic Advisers, anti-environmentalists tried to enact a similar provision, called “regulatory takings.”
They knew that once enacted, regulations would be brought to a halt, simply because government could not afford to pay the compensation.
Fortunately, we succeeded in beating back the initiative, both in the courts and in the US Congress.
But now the same groups are attempting an end run around democratic processes by inserting such provisions in trade bills, the contents of which are being kept largely secret from the public (but not from the corporations that are pushing for them).
It is only from leaks, and from talking to government officials who seem more committed to democratic processes, that we know what is happening.
Fundamental to America’s system of government is an impartial public judiciary, with legal standards built up over the decades, based on principles of transparency, precedent, and the opportunity to appeal unfavorable decisions.
All of this is being set aside, as the new agreements call for private, non-transparent, and very expensive arbitration.
Moreover, this arrangement is often rife with conflicts of interest; for example, arbitrators may be a “judge” in one case and an advocate in a related case.
The proceedings are so expensive that Uruguay has had to turn to Michael Bloomberg and other wealthy Americans committed to health to defend itself against Philip Morris.
And, though corporations can bring suit, others cannot.
If there is a violation of other commitments – on labor and environmental standards, for example – citizens, unions, and civil-society groups have no recourse.
If there ever was a one-sided dispute-resolution mechanism that violates basic principles, this is it.
That is why I joined leading US legal experts, including from Harvard, Yale, and Berkeley, in writing a letter to congressional leaders explaining how damaging to our system of justice these agreements are.
American supporters of such agreements point out that the US has been sued only a few times so far, and has not lost a case.
Corporations, however, are just learning how to use these agreements to their advantage.
And high-priced corporate lawyers in the US, Europe, and Japan will likely outmatch the underpaid government lawyers attempting to defend the public interest.
Worse still, corporations in advanced countries can create subsidiaries in member countries through which to invest back home, and then sue, giving them a new channel to bloc regulations.
If there were a need for better property protection, and if this private, expensive dispute-resolution mechanism were superior to a public judiciary, we should be changing the law not just for well-heeled foreign companies, but also for our own citizens and small businesses.
But there has been no suggestion that this is the case.
Rules and regulations determine the kind of economy and society in which people live.
They affect relative bargaining power, with important implications for inequality, a growing problem around the world.
The question is whether we should allow rich corporations to use provisions hidden in so-called trade agreements to dictate how we will live in the twenty-first century.
I hope citizens in the US, Europe, and the Pacific answer with a resounding no.
Make America Trade Again
COPENHAGEN – No matter how much some US presidential candidates may deride free trade, it remains the backbone of the American economy.
Without it, the country would become significantly poorer and its global influence would diminish significantly.
So why has bashing free trade become a key theme in this year’s presidential race?
One of the clearest reasons for this is that economic anxiety is widespread in the United States, which is still reeling from the aftereffects of the 2008 financial crisis.
Too many Americans are working fewer hours and earning less than they once did.
They are tired of the status quo, and the presidential candidates are right to address their concerns.
But introducing protectionist measures is a quack cure that would solve nothing; on the contrary, it would only exacerbate the economy’s problems.
Free trade is not a liability for the US economy; it is a necessity.
The US has negotiated free-trade agreements with 20 countries.
And though these countries represent only 10% of the rest of the world economy, in recent years they have purchased nearly half of all US exports.
Furthermore, free trade benefits working-class families and low-income groups.
Surges in cheap imports have greatly increased US workers’ spending power.
One study calculated that the American median-income earner would lose 29% of his or her purchasing power if the country were to be closed to trade; the poorest in the US would forfeit as much as 62% of their purchasing power.
The US is in a unique position to reap the benefits of free trade, so its leaders are right to be working to secure trade agreements with the world’s most important economic regions – Europe and Asia.
The proposed trade deal with the European Union (the Trans-Atlantic Trade and Investment Partnership, or TTIP) would boost US exports to the EU by $300 billion annually, adding $125 billion to America’s annual GDP.
It would also increase the typical American family’s purchasing power by nearly $900.
Europeans would reap similar gains; that is the nature of mutually beneficial free-trade agreements.
American workers, farmers, and businesses are also positioned to benefit greatly from the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) agreement with Asia.
Many countries in the Asia-Pacific region maintain steep barriers against imports from the US.
The TPP would lower tariffs and allow consumers in Asia to buy more US products.
This could, according to research conducted by the Peterson Institute, boost US incomes by 0.4% – roughly $77 billion a year.
To be sure, free trade is not trouble-free.
The costs often are very focused, while the benefits are more widely dispersed.
And the negative consequences can be very concrete; competition from Mexico can force US workers to accept a wage cut or cause their workplaces to be relocated across the border.
What Americans need are political leaders with the courage to pursue a balanced approach to free trade, championing its long-term benefits, while delivering short-term relief to those at risk of displacement.
For example, US legislators could ease economic anxiety by allocating more resources to retraining schemes and job programs.
Concluding the trade deals now on the table with Asia and Europe would not only demonstrate political leadership; it would also underline the US’s commitment to preserving the international order.
Speaking as a former NATO secretary general and former prime minister of a longstanding American ally, I urge the US presidential candidates to stop bashing free trade and begin working toward a balanced approach, one that eases economic anxiety while ensuring American prosperity in the decades to come.
America does not need to be made “great again.”
It remains the world’s preeminent power, because it has the world’s preeminent economy.
The challenge facing America is to ensure that its greatness lasts far into the future.
And doing so will require coupling its longstanding pursuit of free trade with policies addressing the very real needs of the small number of Americans for whom the costs outweigh the benefits.
New and Improved Trade Agreements?
WASHINGTON, DC – Trade is high on the agenda in the United States, Europe, and much of Asia this year.
In the US, where concern has been heightened by weak recent trade numbers, President Barack Obama is pushing for Congress to give him Trade Promotion Authority (TPA), previously known as fast-track authority, to conclude the mega-regional Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) with 11 Asian and Latin American countries.
Without TPA, trading partners refrain from offering their best concessions, correctly fearing that Congress would seek to take “another bite of the apple” when asked to ratify any deal.
In marketing the TPP, Obama tends to emphasize some of the features that distinguish it from earlier pacts such as the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA).
These include commitments by Pacific countries on the environment and the expansion of enforceable labor rights, as well as the geopolitical argument for America’s much-discussed strategic “rebalancing” toward Asia.
As with consumer products, the slogan “New and improved!” sells.
NAFTA and other previous trade agreements are unpopular.
So the Obama administration’s argument is apparently, “We have learned from our mistakes.
This agreement will fix them.”
But the premise is wrong: The previous agreements did benefit the US (and its partners).
The most straightforward argument for TPP is that similar economic benefits are likely to follow.
The economic arguments for the gains from trade of course go back to David Ricardo’s classic theory of comparative advantage.
Countries benefit most from producing and exporting what they are relatively best at producing and exporting, and from importing what other countries are relatively better at producing.
Moreover, trade boosts productivity, which is why exporters pay higher wages than other companies, on average – an estimated 18% higher in the case of US manufacturing.
And the purchasing power of income is enhanced by households’ opportunity to consume lower-priced imported goods.
The cost savings are especially large for food and clothing, purchases that account for a higher proportion of lower-income and middle-class households’ spending.
American trade debates have long been framed by the question of whether a policy will increase or reduce the number of jobs.
This concern is a first cousin to the old mercantilist focus on whether a policy will improve or worsen the trade balance.
A “mercantilist” could be defined as someone who believes that gains go only to the country that enjoys a higher trade surplus, mirrored by losses for the trading partner that runs a correspondingly higher deficit.
Even by this sort of reasoning, one could make an “American” case for the ongoing trade negotiations.
The US market is already rather open; TPP participants such as Vietnam, Malaysia, and Japan have higher tariff and non-tariff barriers against some products that the US would like to be able to sell them than the US does against their goods.
Liberalization would thus benefit US exports to Asia more than Asian exports to the US.
The late 1990s offer a good illustration of how trade theory works in the real world.
The volume of trade increased rapidly, owing partly to NAFTA in 1994 and the establishment in 1995 of the World Trade Organization as the successor to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.
For the US during this period, imports grew more rapidly than exports.
But the widening of the trade deficit had no negative effect on output and employment.
Real (inflation-adjusted) GDP growth averaged 4.3% during 1996-2000, productivity increased by 2.5% per year, and workers received their share of those gains as real compensation per hour rose at a 2.2% annual pace.
The unemployment rate fell below 4% – as low as it goes – by the end of 2000.
A stronger trade balance in the late 1990s would not have added to output growth or job creation, which were running at full throttle.
Further increases in net export demand would have been met only by attracting workers away from the production of something else.
That is why the gains from trade took the form of bidding up real wages, rather than further increasing the number of jobs.
Admittedly, it is harder to make the case for freer trade – particularly for unilateral liberalization – when unemployment is high and output is below potential, as was true in the aftermath of the financial crisis and recession of 2007-2009.
Under such circumstances, there is a kernel of truth to mercantilist logic: trade surpluses contribute to GDP and employment, coming at the expense of deficit countries.
Of course, if one country erects import barriers, its trading partners are likely to retaliate with “beggar-thy-neighbor” policies of their own, leaving everyone worse off.
That is why the case for multilateral renunciation of protectionism is as strong in recessionary conditions as ever.
In response to the 2008-2009 global recession, for example, G-20 leaders agreed to refrain from new trade barriers.
Contrary to many cynical predictions, Obama and his counterparts successfully fulfilled this commitment, avoiding a repeat of the debacle caused in the 1930s by America’s introduction of import tariffs.
In any case, mercantilist logic is no longer relevant.
The US unemployment rate has fallen well below 6% – not quite full employment, but close.
If output and employment were rising this year as rapidly as in 2014, the Federal Reserve would probably have felt the need to start raising interest rates as early as this June.
As it is, the Fed will almost certainly delay raising rates for a while longer.
If trade deals do boost US exports more than imports, the Fed will probably have to put a brake on the economy that much sooner.
But the bottom line is that if the US can boost auto exports to Malaysia, agricultural exports to Japan, and service exports to Vietnam, real wages will be bid upward more than by the creation of more jobs.
That is why, if it is allowed to proceed, the TPP will, like past trade deals, help put real median US incomes back on a rising trend.
America’s Education Bubble
SAN FRANCISCO – One of the fundamental purposes of government is to advance important public goods.
But, if not handled carefully, the pursuit of significant social goals can have unfortunate economic and financial consequences, sometimes even leading to systemic disruptions that undermine more than just the goals themselves.
This happened a decade ago in the United States, with the effort to expand home ownership.
It has been playing out more recently in China, following an initiative to broaden stock-market participation.
And it could happen again in the US, this time as the result of an attempt to improve access to funding for higher education.
In the first case, the US government eagerly supported efforts to make mortgages more affordable and accessible, including the creation of all sorts of “exotic” lending vehicles.