And 2% of assets under management is an annual fee that many sophisticated investors have been willing to pay private hedge funds – topped off with an extra fee of 20% of annual profits, which the Treasury is not paying.
The fact that the Geithner Plan is likely to be profitable for the US government is, however, a sideshow.
The aim is to reduce unemployment.
The appearance of an extra $500 billion in demand for risky assets will reduce the quantity of risky assets that other private investors will have to hold.
And the sudden appearance of between five and ten different government-sponsored funds that make public bids for assets will convey information to the markets about what models other people are using to try to value assets in this environment.
This sharing of information will reduce risk – somewhat.
When assets are seen as less risky, their prices rise.
And when there are fewer assets to be held, their prices rise, too.
With higher financial asset prices, those firms that ought to be expanding and hiring will be able to get money on more attractive terms.
The problem is that the Geithner Plan appears to me to be too small – between one-eight and one-half of what it needs to be.
Even though the US government is doing other things as well –fiscal stimulus, quantitative easing, and other uses of bailout funds – it is not doing everything it should.
My guess is that the reason that the US government is not doing all it should can be stated in three words: Senator George Voinovich, who is the 60th vote in the Senate – the vote needed to close off debate and enact a bill.
To do anything that requires legislative action, the Obama administration needs Voinovich and the 59 other senators who are more inclined to support it.
The administration’s tacticians appear to think that they are not on board – especially after the recent AIG bonus scandal – whereas the Geithner Plan relies on authority that the administration already has.
Doing more would require a legislative coalition that is not there yet.
Kidney for Sale
NEW HAVEN – World Kidney Day, to be held on March 12, is part of a global health campaign meant to alert us to the impact of kidney disease.
Sadly, there is little to celebrate.
According to the International Society of Nephrology, kidney disease affects more than 500 million people worldwide, or 10% of the adult population.
With more people developing high blood pressure and diabetes (key risks for kidney disease), the picture will only worsen.
There are 1.8 million new cases of the most serious form of kidney disease – renal failure – each year.
Unless patients with renal failure receive a kidney transplant or undergo dialysis – an expensive life-long procedure that cleanses the blood of toxins – death is guaranteed within a few weeks.
Last year, an Australian nephrologist, Gavin Carney, held a press conference in Canberra to urge that people be allowed to sell their kidneys.
“The current system isn't working,” the Sydney Morning Herald quoted him as saying. “We’ve tried everything to drum up support” for organ donation, but “people just don’t seem willing to give their organs away for free.”
Carney wants to keep patients from purchasing kidneys on the black market and in overseas organ bazaars.
As an American recipient of a kidney who was once desperate enough to consider doing that myself (fortunately, a friend ended up donating to me), I agree wholeheartedly that we should offer well-informed individuals a reward if they are willing to save a stranger’s life.
If not, we will continue to face a dual tragedy: on one side, the thousands of patients who die each year for want of a kidney; on the other side, a human-rights disaster in which corrupt brokers deceive indigent donors about the nature of surgery, cheat them out of payment, and ignore their post-surgical needs.
The World Health Organization estimates that 5% to 10% of all transplants performed annually – perhaps 63,000 in all – take place in the clinical netherworlds of China, Pakistan, Egypt, Colombia, and Eastern Europe.
Unfortunately, much of the world transplant establishment – including the WHO, the international Transplantation Society, and the World Medical Association – advocates only a partial remedy.
They�focus on ending organ trafficking but ignore the time-tested truth that trying to stamp out illicit markets either drives them further underground or causes corruption to�reappear elsewhere.
For example, after China, India, and Pakistan began cracking down on illicit organ markets, many patients turned to the Philippines.
Last spring, after the Philippines banned the sale of kidneys to foreigners, a headline in the Jerusalem Post read, “Kidney Transplant Candidates in Limbo after Philippines Closes Gates.”
(Israel has one of the lowest donation rates in the world, so the government pays for transplant surgery performed outside the country.)
Similarly, patients from Qatar who traveled to Manila are “looking for alternative solutions,” according to The Peninsula .
True, more countries must develop efficient systems for posthumous donation, a very important source of organs.
But even in Spain, which is famously successful at retrieving organs from the newly deceased, people die while waiting for a kidney.
The truth is that trafficking will stop only when the need for organs disappears.
Opponents allege that a legal system of exchange will inevitably replicate the sins of the black market.
This is utterly backward.
The remedy to this corrupt and unregulated system of exchange is a regulated and transparent regime devoted to donor protection.
My colleagues and I suggest a system in which compensation is provided by a third party (government, a charity, or insurance) with public oversight.
Because bidding and private buying would not be permitted, available organs would be distributed to the next in line – not just to the wealthy.
Donors would be carefully screened for physical and psychological problems, as is currently done for all volunteer living kidney donors.
Moreover, they would be guaranteed follow-up�care for any complications.
Many people are uneasy about offering lump-sum cash payments.
A solution is to provide in-kind rewards – such as a down payment on a house, a contribution to a retirement fund, or lifetime health insurance – so that the program would not be attractive to people who might otherwise rush to donate on the promise of a large sum of instant cash.
The only way to stop illicit markets is to create legal ones.
Indeed, there is no better justification for testing legal modes of exchange than the very depredations of the underground market.
Momentum is growing.
In the British Medical Journal , a leading British transplant surgeon called for a controlled donor compensation program for unrelated live donors.
Within the last year, the Israeli, Saudi, and Indian governments have decided to offer incentives ranging from lifelong health insurance for the donor to a cash benefit.
In the United States, the American Medical Association has endorsed a draft bill that would make it easier for states to offer various non-cash incentives for donation.
Until countries create legal means of rewarding donors, the fates of Third World donors and the patients who need their organs to survive will remain morbidly entwined.
What better way to mark World Kidney Day than for global health leaders to take a bold step and urge countries to experiment with donor rewards?
Killer Fish Farms
A recent report by the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization found that almost half of all the fish eaten worldwide are raised on fish farms rather than caught in the wild.
It is likely that consumption of no other fish has soared more than that of farmed salmon, with production surging by almost 300% in 20 years.
Salmon are carnivorous, however, and to feed the voracious appetite of these legions of farm-raised fish, the aquaculture industry increasingly has turned its attention to a small crustacean commonly known as Antarctic krill.
But that’s bad news for leopard seals and Adelie penguins, humpback and blue whales, and many other species, because most organisms in the Antarctic marine ecosystem eat either krill or something that eats krill.
Found in the cold waters of the Southern Ocean, krill constitute a key ingredient in fish oil and feed.
Unfortunately, recent research indicates that expanded krill fishing might put the Antarctic ecosystem at risk.
Representatives from the world’s major fishing nations, meeting this fall in Australia, have an opportunity to limit krill catches, thereby helping creatures that need krill to survive.
Although each krill may only grow to weigh about two grams, together they constitute one of the most abundant animal species on Earth.
Indeed, krill form the largest known aggregation of marine life, with a biomass perhaps greater than any other multi-cellular animal organism on the planet.
This “pink gold” forms the heart of the Antarctic marine food web, and land-based krill predators, such as penguins and seals, are most vulnerable to krill scarcity.
Scientists have found that demand for krill has begun to exceed supply in some areas of the Southwest Atlantic.
As a result, penguins and albatrosses already experience difficulty rearing their offspring in areas such as South Georgia.
And yet krill fishing is projected to grow.
The Southern Ocean contains the largest population of krill in the world.
As krill tend to aggregate in concentrated swarms, they are easy to catch and have become particularly attractive to large-scale commercial interests.
Moreover, krill fishing has recently been fueled by new technological advances such as vacuum pumps, which allow a single fishing vessel to catch and process huge amounts – up to 120,000 metric tons per season.
Furthermore, demand for krill products – from fish oil and feed to skin creams and other cosmetics – has increased over the past 20 years.
As wild fish populations continue to decrease, in tandem with an ever-growing global appetite for seafood, the pressure on the aquaculture industry for fish feed will skyrocket.
The increased demand for krill, together with the new catching and processing capabilities, has combined in a way that the Antarctic ecosystem might not be able to withstand.
But there is hope.
The Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR) was established in 1982, as part of the Antarctic Treaty System, in response to concerns that continued unregulated fishing might undermine the basis of the Antarctic food chain.
The CCAMLR is governed by a commission of 24 member states – including Argentina, Australia, Chile, Japan, Norway, Russia, South Africa, South Korea, Ukraine, the United States and the European Union – that meets annually in Hobart, Australia, to discuss new fishing regulations concerning marine species in the Southern Ocean.
The CCAMLR has pioneered ecosystem and precautionary approaches to fisheries management, which are now central to maintaining Antarctic krill.
Although the needs of krill-dependent species were previously considered for large areas of the Southern Ocean, the CCAMLR must still scientifically subdivide the overall catch limit into smaller units.
This would help avoid local competition between krill vessels and the creatures that need krill to live, since krill fishing closely overlaps with the critical foraging areas for penguins and seals.
The CCAMLR’s members must honor the organization’s mandate for conservation and ensure that there is enough “pink gold” to feed the penguins and other wildlife that depend on it.
The CCAMLR should also apply to krill fishing the same monitoring, control, and surveillance measures that it requires for all other fisheries.
Antarctic krill must not be fished to feed the fish farms of the world while starving the penguins, seals, whales, and other species whose survival depends on these tiny, but vitally important, creatures.
Killing Growth in Russia
I want Russia to be a boring country – at least for the next few decades.
In the twentieth century, Russia set an unquestionable record for all sorts of upheavals and social experiments that attracted the world’s attention.
A time-out is essential.
This objective seemed to be entirely within reach – or at least possible – until the first half of 2003.
Foreign correspondents accredited in Moscow complained that nothing was happening in Putin’s Russia.
Investment in the Russian economy was growing fast.
Unfortunately, Russia’s rulers are not accustomed to leaving the country and the rest of the world for long without something surprising to gawk at.
Instilling a feeling of insecurity is the best way to scare your population into submission and frighten away potential investors.
How democratic or undemocratic a regime is usually doesn't bother investors. All they need and care about is stable, predictable rules.
Indeed, the watchword among major investors is inertia.
It takes time to reach a decision on whether or not to invest in a project, and once an investment decision is made, it becomes rather difficult to stop the process quickly.
Russia’s government is now doing its best to prove that, while difficult, it is possible to defy the laws of business physics and kill investments that are already in the pipeline.
When Mikhail Khodorkovsky and other executives of Yukos, his oil company, were arrested last year, corporations investing or interested in investing in Russia were prepared to interpret the crackdown as an isolated incident brought on by the political agenda of the company and its CEO, who should have known better.
Never mind that by the second half of 2003, it had become obvious that the government intended to use legal means – in the form of massive tax claims – to destroy the company.
When only one company faced legal and financial problems, investors who had made a decision to put their money in Russia were ready to ignore this kind of development.
“This must be an exception,” they kept repeating, like a mantra or a prayer.
I’ve heard something similar when Russian problems are discussed: “Just finish this Yukos affair.
We don’t care how it goes, just put an end to it.”
Unfortunately, the genie has been let out of the bottle.
Throughout 2004, it became abundantly clear that Russia’s internal security apparatus had gained the upper hand in deciding how to manage economic and political problems.
Security structures developed a taste for this kind of work, and welcomed new responsibilities.
In many ways, they began to see fighting big business as akin to fighting terrorists.
And, indeed, they share one thing in common: the fight never ends.
More and more tax claims are being produced, and not only against Yukos.
Tax claims against the telecommunications company Vympelkom (one of Russia’s leading firms, and the first to be listed on the New York Stock Exchange in 90 years) send an unambiguous signal to investors: no one is safe.
In fact, official documents have now even started questioning the legitimacy of the privatization of the leading Russian companies in the 1990’s, which has opened the way for discussions about revising the outcomes of these privatizations.
Similarly, British Petroleum, which has invested more in Russia than any other company to date, has recently discovered that its rights to the Kovytkino gas field are not guaranteed at all. This property, it now seems, could be reclaimed by the state at any moment.
It would be wrong to draw long-term conclusions from short-term economic information, even if this information confirms reality.
The alarming tendencies we are seeing today may be short-lived and with no serious consequences.
Post-socialist growth is a process that cannot (and should not) be easily stopped.
If, however, the authorities continue their efforts to destabilize the Russian economy, today’s disturbing tendencies may actually take root.
Russia can then forget about attaining the fast, sustainable growth that China has achieved. Instead, we Russians will find ourselves trying to avert an impending economic crisis.
Of course, no one can predict when such a crisis might occur.
But one thing is certain: we will know which path the country’s leaders have chosen sooner rather than later.
Indeed, this year could be Russia’s most fateful yet.
Killing the Death Penalty
It is finally happening.
After 13 years of negotiations, delays, and hesitation, the UN General Assembly will vote this month on the proposal for a universal moratorium on the death penalty.
A large majority of the UN adopted the proposal on 15 November, despite attempts by some member states to obstruct, amend, or bury it.
Fortunately, in the end, the opponents were forced to fight a will stronger than their own: the will of those who – after the abolition of slavery and torture – want to mark another turning point for civilization.
But will this December’s vote be a mere formality?
Experience teaches us to be prudent.
I have not opened my bottle of spumante yet.
To be honest, I am not sure that all of the world’s governments have accepted the inevitable, or that even the most inflexible will now agree to the moratorium.
But I continue to have faith that the General Assembly will know, as always, how to meet this challenge.
We are all aware that even if the vote succeeds, the UN resolution will not be binding, and that establishing and enforcing a moratorium is only a necessary mid-way step toward full abolition.
I believe the UN should push for an immediate de facto suspension, without waiting for the debates to begin on legal reforms in the respective countries.
I hope that this approach will allow a wide consensus in the General Assembly, and that any last minute change of heart will fail.
One big lesson I learned during the struggle to create the International Criminal Court (ICC), and now during the battle for a moratorium on the death penalty, is that it is often better to aim for a realistic result rather than a perfect one.
Before the international community established the ICC, there were two ad hoc tribunals – one for the former Yugoslavia and one for Rwanda.  Their work paved the way for the ICC.
Some European Union countries wanted to push for complete abolition of the death penalty right away.
I understand their position.
I would have wanted the same thing myself.
But had we followed that route, we would most likely have failed.
There is an important lesson in this for the EU at a time when it is seeking to become a global actor: we must reach an internal consensus while always bearing in mind what the external ramifications of our decision might be.
On the moratorium, we remained pragmatic and built a strong European foreign policy.
And it was an advantage in the UN negotiations to have a common Europeans position and to have spoken with a single voice.
A second lesson that I learned is also useful for the EU, which finds itself in a world in which new powers are emerging and where all actors from Manila to Algiers, from Doha to Libreville, must deal with the challenges of globalization and interdependence on a daily basis.
That lesson is that Europe has more friends than it has enemies in the world.
These friends deserve respect and attention.
If Italy and the EU had not understood the need to work with non-European countries, and make them feel that they were responsible and fully-fledged protagonists, the efforts to establish the ICC and be so close to declare a universal moratorium on the death penalty would have failed.
I know that this is not exactly a new lesson, but it is what I have in mind when I think of efficient multilateralism.
Not only does it work, but, above all, in some cases, it is the only way of moving forward.
Finally, a third lesson – relevant to the fight against the death penalty and, indeed, to winning any political battle – is perseverance, which I consider to be a mix of pig-headedness and the ability to maintain one’s position.
Without perseverance, there can be no progress.
All this is a success, not only for anti-death penalty radicals, for the “Hands off Cain” association, the Italian government, and for the European Union and its friends in the world.
It is much more: it is a success for all those who believe that it is still possible to improve our world – and ultimately the human condition – every day.
Is Tsipras the New Lula?
CAMBRIDGE – Greek Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras has the chance to become to his country what South Korean President Kim Dae-jung and Brazilian President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva were to theirs: a man of the left who moves toward fiscal responsibility and freer markets.
Like Tsipras, both were elected in the midst of an economic crisis.
Both immediately confronted the international financial constraints that opposition politicians can afford to ignore.
On assuming power, Kim and Lula were able to adjust, politically and mentally, to the new realities that confronted them, launching much-needed reforms.
Some reforms were “conservative” (or “neo-liberal”) and might not have been possible under politicians of the right.
But others were consistent with their lifetime commitments.
South Korea under Kim began to rein in the chaebols, the country’s huge family-owned conglomerates.
Brazil under Lula implemented Bolsa Familia, a system of direct cash payments to households that is credited with lifting millions out of poverty.
Tsipras and his Syriza party, however, spent their first six months in office still blinkered about financial realities, unable to see things from the perspective of others.
The decision to hold a referendum on the bailout terms set by Greece’s creditors showed that they were politically blinkered as well.
If Tsipras were reading from a normal script, he would logically have asked Greeks to vote yes.
But he asked them to vote no, which they did by a surprisingly wide margin.
He evidently thought that this would strengthen his hand; instead, it merely strengthened the position of those Germans convinced that the time had come to let Greece drop out of the euro.
Only a week after the referendum, Tsipras finally faced up to reality: Greece’s euro partners are not prepared to offer easier terms.
On the contrary, they are insisting on more extensive concessions as the price of a third bailout.
The only possible silver lining to this sorry history is that some of Tsipras’s supporters at home may now be willing to swallow the creditors’ bitter medicine.
One should not underestimate the opposition that reforms continue to face among Greeks.
But like Kim and Lula, Tsipras could marshal political support from some on the left who reckon, “If he now says that these measures are unavoidable, there truly must be no alternative.”
(The same thing has of course happened on the right: Only Nixon could go to China.)
None of this is to say that the international financial realities a country faces are necessarily always reasonable.
Sometimes global financial markets’ eagerness to lend results in unreasonable booms, followed by abrupt reversals.
Foreign creditor governments can be unreasonable as well.
The misperceptions and errors by leaders in Germany and other creditor countries have been as damaging as those on the part of the less-experienced Greek leaders.
For example, the belief that fiscal austerity raises income, rather than lowering it, even in the short run, was a mistake, as was the refusal in 2010 to write down the debt.
These mistakes explain why Greece’s debt/GDP ratio is even higher today than it was then.
Each side’s refusal to admit its mistakes reinforced the other side’s stubbornness.
The Germans would have done better to admit that fiscal austerity is contractionary in the short run.
The Greeks would have done better to admit that democracy does not mean that one country’s people can vote to give themselves other countries’ money.
In terms of game theory, the fact that the Greeks and Germans have different economic interests is not enough to explain the poor outcome of negotiations to date.
The difference in perceptions has been central.
“Getting to yes” in a bargaining situation requires that the negotiators not only have a clear idea of their own top priorities, but also that they understand what the other side wants most.
A “bad bargain” would call on each side to forego its top priorities.
The European Central Bank should not have to agree to an explicit write-down of Greek debt.
And Greece should not have to run a substantial primary budget surplus for now.
Under a relatively “good bargain,” the creditors would modify interest rates and extend maturities further, as the International Monetary Fund now suggests, so that Greece does not have to pay the unpayable over the coming years, in exchange for growth-enhancing structural reforms.
One hopes that the awful experience of the last six months has led both sides to a clearer perception of economic realities and priorities.
This will be necessary if the two sides are to arrive at a good bargain, rather than a bad one – or even an outright failure to cooperate, so that Greece effectively drops out of the euro.
A recurrent theme of the Greek crisis since it erupted in late 2009 is that both the Greeks and the eurozone’s creditor countries have been reluctant to consider lessons from previous emerging-market crises.
After all, they said, Greece was a eurozone member, not a developing country.
That is why, for example, the ECB and European Commission initially did not want Greece to go to the IMF and did not want to write down Greek debt.
Emerging market crises do hold important lessons.
If Tsipras can now follow the course taken by Kim and Lula, he will serve his country well.
Kipling’s Wisdom
LONDON – The beginning of October marked the seventh anniversary of the beginning of the American-led bombardment of Afghanistan.
Seven years later, the Taliban are still fighting.
Some 50 insurgents died recently in an assault on Lashkar gar, the capital of Helmand province.
Osama bin Laden is nowhere to be found.
Has the time come for NATO to declare victory and leave?
Recently, a French diplomatic cable relating a conversation on September 2 between the French ambassador to Afghanistan, Francois Fitou, and his British colleague, Sherard Cowper-Coles, was leaked in Le Canard Enchainé , a French satirical magazine.
Cowper-Coles was reported to have said that the security situation in Afghanistan was deteriorating, that NATO’s presence was making it worse, and that the two American presidential hopefuls should be dissuaded from getting bogged down further.
The only realistic policy would be to cultivate an “acceptable dictator.”
Of course, the British Foreign Office denied that these thoughts reflected the British government’s views.
The departing commander of British forces in Afghanistan, Brigadier Mark Carleton-Smith, has claimed that defeating the Taliban was “neither feasible nor supportable.”
Two days after making that gloomy assessment, the French chief of the defense staff, General Jean-Louis Georgelin, followed suit.
And Kai Eide, the United Nations Secretary-General’s special representative in Afghanistan, has agreed that the situation cannot be stabilized by military means alone.
All call for a concerted political effort implying some form of negotiation with the Taliban.
A draft report by American intelligence agencies has also concluded that Afghanistan is in a “downward spiral” and casts serious doubt on the Afghan government’s ability to stem the Taliban’s resurgence.
Moreover, King Abdullah of Saudi Arabia hosted a Ramadan breakfast for the Afghan government and Taliban representatives.
Predictably, both parties deny that any serious negotiations took place, while the United States and Britain claimed to know nothing about this “Saudi initiative.”
But Afghan Defense Minister Abdul Rahim Wardak subsequently said that resolution of the conflict required a “political settlement” with the Taliban.
Yet at the recent NATO summit in Budapest, US Defense Secretary Robert Gates called on NATO members to provide more troops for missions in Afghanistan.
He accused the British of being “defeatist” and argued that Afghanistan’s deteriorating security situation could be addressed with an Iraq-style “surge,” which has undoubtedly brought down violence levels in that country.
The Americans have already committed 8,000 extra troops for next year.
So there seems to be a split.
The British and French are busy briefing, and preparing to scale down their commitments in Afghanistan.
They believe that boosting allied forces will only increase the sense of occupation and give the Taliban more targets.
The emergence of a “realistic dictator” might allow NATO to withdraw most of its troops within a few years.
But the Americans want a “surge,” and the US general commanding NATO forces in the country said last month that he needed three more brigades, some 15,000 troops in all, and Gates has asked the Europeans either to send or pay for them.
The Americans do recognize the importance of courting those Taliban leaders they believe to be motivated by tribal loyalties rather than religious ideology, but they oppose the latest Afghan policy of negotiating directly and officially with the Taliban.
Both Barack Obama and John McCain advocate increasing troop levels in Afghanistan above the levels that the Bush administration has already pledged.
Obama has that said he would send troops from Iraq as an urgent priority.
McCain has given no details of his plans.
Obama has made it a campaign issue to criticize the Bush administration for neglecting Afghanistan and diverting resources needed there to the misguided war in Iraq.
McCain, though, has always maintained that Iraq is the more important battlefield.
What candidates promise on the stump is not always what they do in office.
In the second presidential debate, Obama said, “We will kill bin Laden.
We will crush al-Qaeda.”
Are his patriotic credentials strong enough for him to renege on this pledge and pursue negotiations to withdraw without capturing the talismanic Osama?
What would a US withdrawal mean for Afghanistan, for Pakistan, and for the future of NATO?
To retreat from its first major “out of area” mission would be a damaging blow for the alliance.
Curiously, McCain may have more room for maneuver.
Republican presidents have a better record in negotiating with enemies than do Democratic ones.
Eisenhower ended the Korean War, Nixon the war in Vietnam – both wars started by their Democrat predecessors.
Nixon, a vitriolic anti-Communist, opened relations with Mao’s China and started détente with the Soviet Union.
Reagan brought the US hostages back from Iran.
Having condemned the “evil empire” of communism, he helped bring the Cold War to an end.  Only recently, George W Bush evicted North Korea from his “axis of evil” by removing that country from America’s list of countries that sponsor terrorism.
And what about the British?
Have they suddenly remembered the unsustainable cost of fighting asymmetric conflicts?
Afghanistan has never been a place any foreign army could stay for long.
The British were burned there twice (1840-1, 1878-80).
So were the Russians.
Rudyard Kipling got his arithmetic right in 1886:
No proposition Euclid wrote,
No formulae the text-books know,
Will turn the bullet from your coat,
Or ward the tulwar’s downward blow
Strike hard who cares – shoot straight who can –
The odds are on the cheaper man.
Asia’s Reform Trinity?
SINGAPORE – Asia is poised to enter a historical sweet spot, with three of its most populous countries – China, India, and Indonesia – led by strong, dynamic, and reform-minded leaders.
In fact, China’s Xi Jinping, India’s Narendra Modi, and Indonesia’s Joko “Jokowi” Widodo could end up ranked among their countries’ greatest modern leaders.
In China, Mao Zedong united the country in 1949, while Deng Xiaoping was responsible for engineering its unprecedented economic rise.
For Xi to join their ranks, he must create a modern, rules-based state.
That requires, first and foremost, slaying the massive dragon of corruption.
Over the years, corruption has become endemic in China, with regional party leaders and bosses in state-owned enterprises wielding their vast privileges and authority to accumulate personal wealth.
This has severely undermined the Chinese Communist Party’s legitimacy, while hampering the kind of market-based competition that China’s economy needs to propel the country to high-income status.
So far, Xi seems to be up to the challenge.
He has been boldly pursuing major figures who were previously considered “untouchable,” such as General Xu Caihou, a former vice chairman of the Central Military Commission, and Zhou Yongkang, a former member of the Politburo Standing Committee, China’s highest government body.
But the long-term fight against corruption cannot depend on Xi alone.
It will succeed only if strong institutions are created to protect and nurture the rule of law long after Xi is out of power.
If Xi chooses to establish such institutions, he has a strong legal tradition upon which to call.
As former US Ambassador to China Gary F. Locke reported in a speech early this year, the concept of equality before the law has deep historical roots.
Indeed, in the fourth century BC, the statesman and reformer Shang Yang famously asserted that, “When the prince violates the law, the crime he commits is the same as that of the common people.”
Building on this tradition, Xi can create strong institutions that will stand the test of time.
If he does – recognizing that, to be credible, the rule of law must apply even to the Party’s most influential figures – he will become modern China’s third-strongest leader.
In India, Mahatma Gandhi rejuvenated the country’s soul, which had been battered by colonialism, and Jawaharlal Nehru established its democratic political culture.
Modi now must lay the foundations for India’s emergence as a global economic power.
Replicating the 10% annual growth rates achieved in Gujarat under Modi’s leadership from 2004 to 2012 would obviously be a boon to India’s development prospects and global standing.
But achieving such high growth rates in a sustainable way will demand far-reaching, sometimes painful reforms, such as the removal of wasteful subsidies, especially for fuel, in order to free up resources for, say, increased health-care expenditure.
Other imperatives include shrinking the budget deficit, removing internal barriers to trade, and encouraging private investment.
To win the support needed to implement these reforms without undermining political stability or social cohesion, Modi must demonstrate that he is an inclusive leader capable of cooperating with Indians outside of his Hindu nationalist base – including the country’s 150 million-plus Muslims.
If he succeeds, he, like Xi, will become his country’s next iconic leader.
In Indonesia’s case, the two most influential leaders so far have been Sukarno, who used powerful rhetoric to foster a sense of national unity in one of the world’s most diverse countries, and Suharto, who overthrew Sukarno and created a strong economic base that lifted millions out of poverty.
Jokowi must now lay the institutional foundations for good governance.
Jokowi has risen from humble beginnings to the apex of power without compromising his image as a “man of the people” or his reputation for pragmatism and honesty.
Jokowi has a long track record of good governance, having implemented effective policies during his stint as Mayor of Surakarta (such as refurbishing markets, relocating slum dwellers, and cutting bureaucratic red tape), and as Governor of Jakarta (where he broadened access to health care and education).
But replicating this success at the national level will be no easy feat.
Jokowi, who takes office in October, must implement policies that address rising inequality, unsustainable fuel subsidies, entrenched corruption, inadequate infrastructure, and restrictive labor laws – all while rebuilding trust in Indonesian institutions.
The challenges facing Jokowi are compounded by the fact that his ruling coalition holds only about one-third of the seats in Indonesia’s parliament, with the rest loyal to the coalition of his rival in the presidential election, Prabowo Subianto.
So, in introducing a new style of governance, exemplified by merit-based cabinet appointments, Jokowi must be careful not to alienate the political and business elites who have long benefited from their tight grip on power.
In short, if Jokowi is to form a national consensus on the institutions that Indonesia needs, he will have to reach across this political divide.
To this end, Mexican President Enrique Peña Nieto’s cross-party “Pact for Mexico” could serve as a useful model.
Promisingly, Jokowi has a reputation for independence from partisan and religious politics, and a talent for communicating with the people.
And, as a political outsider, he is in a unique position to direct Indonesia toward a more prosperous, united future – and vault himself into the country’s pantheon of great leaders.
China, India, and Indonesia are all well positioned to take important steps forward.
A commitment by Xi, Modi, and Jokowi to do what is needed would bring rapid, far-reaching progress to their respective countries, Asia, and the global order.
The Techno-Political Transformation
GENEVA – It would be an understatement to say that our world is undergoing rapid and far-reaching change.
The global economy, the geopolitical landscape, the environment, and technology are subject to constantly shifting conditions that reinforce and transform one another in a web of complex interactions.
In such an unpredictable and interconnected setting, effective leadership must be based on a radical outlook, a multifaceted skillset, and an understanding of technology and talent.
The trends that are shaping the twenty-first-century world embody both promise and peril.
Globalization, for example, has lifted hundreds of millions of people out of poverty, while contributing to social fragmentation and a massive increase in inequality, not to mention serious environmental damage.
Likewise, big data offers untold benefits to companies and consumers, but poses a real threat to privacy and personal freedom.
A similar dichotomy applies to many other critical issues, including adaptation to climate change, efforts to improve resource management, urbanization and the rise of megacities, increased labor mobility, and human-capital expansion.
The scale and complexity of the challenges that lie ahead are undoubtedly daunting.
But rapid, far-reaching change can also present great opportunities.
To make the most of them, the world needs technologically literate leaders – call them “techno-politicians” – who have an intuitive understanding of how to shape progress in this new, unpredictable environment.
Within the framework of techno-politics, economic growth and technological innovation are the two most important factors shaping the global landscape.
How we adapt to and guide their trajectories will determine our collective future.
In economic terms, the world is entering an era of diminished expectations.
If, as predicted, average annual GDP growth amounts to 3% in the foreseeable future, it will take 25 years for the world economy to double in size – ten years longer than it took before the global economic crisis, when average GDP growth stood at 5%.
Learning to live with slower growth will not be easy.
Given that debt-fueled consumption has run its course, productivity gains will become an increasingly critical driver of economic growth.
But, at a time when rising inequality is undermining social cohesion, it is far from certain that the conditions required to support such gains – that is, improved education and stronger incentives to innovate – can be met.
Perhaps most important, even as economic growth slows, technological change continues at a breakneck pace, raising seemingly unanswerable questions about its potential impact on the global economy.
While some warn that technological progress will leave many unemployed, others remain convinced that displaced workers will find new jobs that do not yet exist, as has occurred in the past.
All that is certain is that technology and innovation are disrupting virtually every aspect of life.
How can we adapt to such a world?
What underpins success in this new and challenging environment?
In a techno-polity, two inextricably linked factors are crucial: talent and innovation.
Talent is now the key factor driving competitiveness (or the lack thereof) for companies and countries alike.
Indeed, “talentism” will be the prevailing economic credo, with human or intellectual capital becoming the most critical asset – and the one most difficult to acquire and retain.
Innovation, spurred by talent, will determine success.
In the future, the distinction between high- and low-income countries, or between emerging and mature markets, will no longer matter.
The question will be whether or not an economy can innovate.
A techno-polity also recognizes the critical role of cooperation, strategic thinking, and adaptation.
The biggest challenges nowadays are global in nature, and thus can be addressed only by engaging decision-makers and interest groups from various spheres.
New partnerships must be forged, even among actors with seemingly disparate interests.
Those who struggle to cope with change must be supported, not scorned.
But effective techno-politicians must go beyond firefighting to think about the long term.
They must be able to respond to new and impending developments without delay, constantly experimenting with new ideas and processes.
Moreover, they must to be able to understand and react simultaneously to multiple competing realities.
The role of the techno-polity is to steer the world toward positive outcomes.
It will demand that decision-makers use their heads and hearts – and it will also test their nerves.
India’s Jewel in the Crown
NEW DELHI – India’s Solicitor-General, Ranjit Kumar, recently declared that India would not seek the return of the Kohinoor diamond – one of the world’s oldest and most valuable – from the British, to whom India had “gifted” it.
The statement shocked India and unleashed passionate debate – so passionate, in fact, that the government scrambled to declare that it still wants the gem back.
But the government’s commitment to securing that outcome remains unconvincing, at best.
Kumar was responding before the Supreme Court to a suit filed by the All India Human Rights and Social Justice Front, an NGO, demanding that the government seek the return of the famed diamond, which can be found among Britain’s crown jewels.
He claims that the erstwhile Sikh kingdom offered the gem to the British East India Company in 1849 as “voluntary compensation” for the expenses of the just-concluded Anglo-Sikh wars.
Add to that the Antiquities and Art Treasures Act of 1972, which does not permit the government to seek the return of antiquities exported before India gained its independence in 1947, and, according to Kumar, the Indian government has no recourse to secure the diamond’s return.
The uproar that Kumar’s statement triggered has forced government spokesmen to backpedal furiously, asserting that Kumar’s was not the final official view.
The Ministry of Culture announced that a claim will still be pursued.
But unless Kumar is instructed to file a new deposition before the Supreme Court, his statements appear to have put paid to India’s claim to the world’s most fabled diamond.
So the question is whether that should indeed be the final outcome.
The Kohinoor was first mined by the Kakatiya dynasty near Guntur, in what is now Andhra Pradesh.
The Kakatiya kings installed it in a temple, which was raided by Delhi Sultan Alauddin Khilji, who took it back to his capital along with other plundered treasures.
It passed into the possession of the Mughal Empire that established itself in Delhi in the sixteenth century.
In 1739, the Kohinoor fell into the hands of the Persian invader Nadir Shah, whose loot from his conquest of Delhi (and decimation of its inhabitants) also included the priceless Peacock Throne.
It was Nadir Shah, or so legend has it, who baptized the diamond the Kohinoor, or “Mountain of Light.”
One of his consorts memorably and colorfully stated, “If a strong man were to throw four stones – one north, one south, one east, one west – and a fifth stone up into the air, and if the space between them were to be filled with gold, it would not equal the value of the Kohinoor.”
Upon Nadir Shah’s death in 1747, the diamond fell into the hands of one of his generals, Ahmad Shah Durrani, who became the Emir of Afghanistan.
In 1809, one of Durrani’s descendants was obliged to cede the Kohinoor in tribute to the powerful Sikh Maharaja of Punjab, Ranjit Singh.
But Singh’s successors could not hold on to his kingdom.
The Sikhs were defeated by the British in two wars, culminating in the British Empire’s annexation of the Sikh domains in 1849.
That was when the Kohinoor was supposedly “gifted” to the British.
The argument that the diamond was offered as “voluntary compensation” for the expenses the British incurred in defeating the Sikhs is ridiculous.
For starters, the formal handover was conducted by the last Maharaja of the Sikh Empire, Duleep Singh, who was only ten years old – and most certainly was not given a choice.
As I have pointed out to other Indian politicians, if you hold a gun to my head, I might give you my wallet, but that doesn’t make it a gift – and it doesn’t mean I shouldn’t get it back.
Compensation provided to the winners of a war by those they defeated is usually known as reparations, which are not entirely voluntary.
And, in fact, many former colonies rightly argue that it is Britain that owes them reparations for centuries of oppression and looting.
Returning priceless artifacts of cultural significance purloined at the height of imperial rule might be a good place to start.
To be sure, the Kohinoor poses a particular challenge, owing to competing claims.
The Iranians say that Nadir Shah stole it fair and square, while the Afghans assert that the Sikhs forced them to surrender it.
Now Pakistan has entered the ring, with the somewhat flimsy argument that the capital of the Sikh Empire, the undisputed last pre-British owners, was in Lahore.
(They tend to gloss over the fact that, after decades of ethnic cleansing in Pakistan, hardly any Sikhs are left there.)
But, given that the diamond spent most of its existence on or beneath Indian soil, Indians consider their claim self-evident.
For the British, however, the existence of contending claims is a major relief, as it helps the country to fend off a blizzard of demands to undo the manifold injustices of two or more centuries of colonial exploitation of far-flung lands.
The British expropriation of other peoples’ patrimony, from the Parthenon Marbles to the Kohinoor diamond, is a particular point of contention, as conceding any one item could, the British fear, open a Pandora’s box of problems.
Indeed, on a 2010 visit to India, Prime Minister David Cameron declared outright that the Kohinoor would have to “stay put,” because “if you say yes to one, you would suddenly find the British Museum would be empty.”
With Kumar having essentially taken Britain’s side on the Kohinoor issue, albeit for different reasons, nationalists like me are losing hope that we will get that priceless element of our heritage back.
Britain owes us.
But, instead of returning the evidence of their rapacity to their rightful owners, the British are flaunting the Kohinoor on the Queen Mother’s crown in the Tower of London.
It is a stark reminder of what colonialism truly was: shameless subjugation, coercion, and misappropriation.
Perhaps that is the best argument for leaving the Kohinoor in Britain, where it emphatically does not belong.
Grading Abenomics
TOKYO – It has been almost a year since Prime Minister Shinzo Abe launched his plan to lift Japan’s economy out of two decades of deflation and recession.
How has “Abenomics” fared so far?
Answering this question requires breaking Abenomics down into its three components – massive monetary easing, expansionary fiscal policy, and a long-term growth strategy – which Abe, referring to the tale of Motonari Mori, a sixteenth-century daimyo (feudal lord), calls the “three arrows.”
According to legend, Mori instructed each of his three sons to snap an arrow in half.
After they had succeeded, he told them to tie three arrows together, and break the whole bundle at once; none was able to do it.
Like Mori’s three arrows, the three arrows of Abenomics are supposed to reinforce each other.
But Mori’s arrows were bound together in parallel, whereas Abe’s policy arrows are connected through underlying structural relationships.
While the first and second arrows aim to transform Japan’s actual growth path, the third operates on the economy’s potential growth path, which assumes the optimal use of all available resources and technologies.
Since Abenomics was launched, the “deflation gap” (the difference between actual and potential output) has dropped from roughly three percentage points to below 1.5.
This implies that, while the first two arrows are helping to improve Japan’s actual growth path, the third arrow has yet to do much for potential growth.
In fact, since Abe’s first arrow took flight, Japan’s stock market has soared with it, recording an unprecedented 40% annual gain, while the yen has depreciated against the dollar by 20%, boosting Japanese firms’ export competitiveness.
Moreover, credit growth has accelerated and asset prices have risen – trends that will encourage consumption by triggering the wealth effect (when people spend more because they feel richer).
And monetary expansion is also having a positive impact on the labor market: the unemployment rate has fallen to 4%, and the job-to-applicant ratio is nearing parity.
With real GDP growth around 4% in the first half of the year (though it did fall below 2% in the third quarter), the first arrow has already hit the bull’s eye – a performance worthy of an A+.
The second arrow entails a sharp increase in short-term fiscal expenditure, especially investment in infrastructure projects.
While those who, like me, adhere to the Mundell-Fleming framework (according to which fiscal stimulus will be offset by the resulting increase in capital inflows, currency appreciation, and reduced export competitiveness) do not stress the impact of flexible fiscal policy, Keynesians take it very seriously.
On the assumption that faster growth will neutralize any threat to debt sustainability, the second arrow receives a B.
When the first and second arrows lift actual growth above potential growth, monetary expansion will no longer be able to produce substantial GDP or employment gains.
That is when the third arrow, which aims to boost Japan’s potential growth through structural change (including increased private investment, technological innovation, improved trade links, and reformed corporate-tax policy), will become far more important.
Abe has set out the vision behind his long-term growth plan.
“Japan is a country that challenges, that is open, and that innovates,” he says.
But many of the details of his strategy remain uncertain.
Japan’s longtime approach to industrial policy, in which the Ministry of International Trade and Industry provided support and subsidies for selected industries, helping them to compete in world markets, is now obsolete (indeed, MITI’s role was taken over by the Ministry of Economy, Trade, and Industry in 2001).
When Japanese firms operate at the frontier of industry, bureaucrats cannot choose the winners.
Given this, the government’s role should be confined to areas where externalities exist, such as carbon-emissions reduction.
Unfortunately, a new, clearly defined approach to industrial policy is still missing.
In fact, descriptions of some third-arrow projects seem to be based on little more than wishful thinking, with new technology or knowhow apparently expected simply to fall into Japan’s lap.
A more effective approach would entail achievable, concrete goals like relaxing labor- and financial-market regulations, reducing corporate income taxes, liberalizing trade by joining the Trans-Pacific Partnership, and perhaps easing immigration policy.
The problem is that bureaucrats like the power that regulation affords them.
Indeed, deregulation would require them to put their country’s long-term interests above their own short-term interests – a choice that they have so far resisted.
To paraphrase John F. Kennedy, it is time for Japan’s leaders to ask not what their country can do for its government, but what the government can undo for its country.
In this context, the third arrow of Abenomics cannot yet be fairly assessed.
While its impact has so far been lacking, it certainly cannot be deemed a failure, with Japan’s top leaders still working tirelessly to build the needed momentum.
The most appropriate grade is therefore an “E” for effort.
One hopes that it is an effort that proves adequate to overcome bureaucratic resistance to deregulation in the coming year.
With an A+, a B, and an “E,” Abenomics’s first-year report card reflects important progress, providing plenty of reason for enthusiasm.
It even spells its originator’s name.
Who’s Afraid of Tapering?
TOKYO – The US Federal Reserve’s gradual exit from so-called quantitative easing (QE) – open-ended purchases of long-term assets – has financial markets and policymakers worried, with warnings of capital flight from developing economies and collapsing asset prices dominating policy discussions worldwide.
But, given that most major economies operate under a flexible exchange-rate regime, these concerns are largely unwarranted.
The logic behind the fear of the Fed’s “tapering” of QE is straightforward.
Unconventional monetary policy in the United States – and in other advanced countries, particularly the United Kingdom and Japan – drove down domestic interest rates, while flooding international financial markets with liquidity.
In search of higher yields, investors took that liquidity – largely in the form of short-term speculative capital (“hot” money) – to emerging markets, putting upward pressure on their exchange rates and fueling the risk of asset bubbles.
Thus, the Fed’s withdrawal from QE would be accompanied by a capital-flow reversal, increasing borrowing costs and hampering GDP growth.
Of course, not all emerging markets, according to this logic, are equally exposed.
Among the most vulnerable countries are Turkey, South Africa, Brazil, India, and Indonesia – the so-called “Fragile Five” – all of which are characterized by twin fiscal and current-account deficits, high inflation, in addition to faltering GDP growth.
This logic would be correct if the world were operating under a fixed exchange-rate regime, with governments tying official exchange rates to another country’s currency or the price of gold.
Under these conditions, monetary contraction (or slowing expansion) would have a recessionary (or a less stimulative) impact on other economies.
With flexible exchange rates, however, monetary-policy contraction in a major economy would stimulate other economies in the short run, while monetary expansion would damage their performance.
(To be sure, in the medium or long run, monetary expansion can facilitate increased domestic production and trade, thereby generating positive spillover effects.)
After the collapse of Lehman Brothers in 2008, the rapid expansion of the money supply in the US and the UK triggered a sharp appreciation of the Japanese yen, as well as of some emerging-market currencies.
In short, QE is what merits concern – not its termination.
Of course, the Fed’s policy reversal could hurt countries that maintain fixed – or, like China, “managed floating” – exchange rates.
Likewise, weaker eurozone economies like Greece and Spain, which would prefer stronger monetary stimulus than their more competitive counterparts in Europe are willing to accept, may suffer.
But, given that these economies have chosen to adhere to a fixed exchange rate, the Fed cannot really be blamed for the fallout.
In fact, the Fed – and other advanced-country central banks – should not be blamed for the negative effects of monetary expansion, either.
Japan’s bold monetary easing, for example, was a critical element of Prime Minister Shinzo Abe’s strategy for lifting the Japanese economy out of more than a decade of recession – and it has led to a remarkable recovery.
The problem is that the policy has also caused the yen to depreciate, leading nearby countries to accuse Japan of adopting “beggar-thy-neighbor” policies.
Similarly, emerging-market officials warned that monetary expansion in the US and the UK would trigger a wave of competitive currency devaluations, with Brazilian Finance Minister Guido Mantega going so far as to accuse the Fed and the Bank of England of waging a full-blown “currency war.”
But, while it is true that such expansionary policies can have a recessionary impact on other economies, modern international-finance theory shows that the concept of a “currency war” is a myth.
The reality is that, under a flexible exchange-rate regime, competitive devaluations do not produce undesirable imbalances.
On the contrary, they can bolster recovery in participating economies.
In fact, currency devaluations were critical to ending the Great Depression.
As Barry Eichengreen and Jeffrey Sachs demonstrated in 1984, while abandoning the gold standard had an immediate negative impact, it quickly spurred recovery, with the first countries to devalue their currencies escaping depression earlier than others.
The fact is that, with a flexible exchange rate, a country can offset the recessionary impact of a neighboring country’s monetary easing using its own independent monetary policy, guided by carefully chosen inflation targets.
If all countries adopt this approach, the entire global economy benefits.
By working to revive the domestic economy, the Fed, like other advanced-country central banks, is simply fulfilling its mandate.
Instead of complaining about its actions, emerging-country policymakers should be devising strategies for offsetting the spillover effects on their own economies.
After all, they have the tools to do so.
Japan’s Tax-Hike Test
TOKYO – As October began, Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe announced that his government would raise the country’s consumption-tax rate from 5% to 8% next April, and presumably to 10% 18 months after that.
The contrast with what is now happening in the United States could not be sharper.
As US President Barack Obama’s domestic opponents resist his signature health-care legislation, owing to the wealth transfers that it implies, Japanese bureaucrats are trying to recover the authority to administer tax revenue to support social-welfare programs.
There are many arguments for raising Japan’s consumption-tax rate.
Japan’s government has a huge debt burden, and its consumption-tax rate is far lower than the value-added-tax rates that prevail in Europe.
At the same time, the effective corporate-tax rate in Japan is higher than it is elsewhere, making it difficult for Japan to attract investment, foreign or domestic.
In order to survive international tax competition – and thus be able to rely on corporate taxes as a source of revenue – Japan’s corporate-tax rate should be lowered in the long run.
Nonetheless, with Japan’s economy just beginning to recover from more than 15 years of stagnation, such a steep consumption-tax hike is not advisable.
In fact, such a large increase has seldom – if ever – been attempted, owing to the risk that it would spur consumers to spend before it takes effect, thereby reducing future consumption.
Moreover, any sudden rise in the tax burden results in deadweight losses.
A consumption-tax hike should be timed in such a way that it does not suffocate the economic recovery that Abe’s bold economic program, dubbed “Abenomics,” is facilitating.
Western economists typically favor gradual tax increases; Jeffrey Frankel, for example, recommends a pre-announced plan to increase the tax rate by, say, one percentage point annually for five years.
But Japanese policymakers, media, and academics largely continue to favor a sudden and substantial hike.
Last year, when Japan’s Diet passed the legislation to raise the consumption tax, it included a provision calling for the plan to be reevaluated if economic conditions required it.
When the Cabinet Office called upon 60 business leaders, academics, and economists (including me) to perform such an evaluation, more than 70% favored the hike.
But the selection of experts reflected a clear bias toward the finance ministry’s views.
In fact, the ministry has used its “informational campaign” to shape public discussion, convincing scholars, business economists, and the general public to be more concerned about keeping the budget deficit under control than about the effects of a negative demand shock.
This is a typical example of what economists like Joseph Stiglitz call “cognitive capture.”
For more than two decades – a period characterized by chronic recession and deflation – Japan has retained its position as the world’s richest country in terms of net wealth abroad.
At the end of last year, Japan’s net international wealth amounted to ¥296 trillion ($3 trillion).
But Japan’s government is believed to be the world’s poorest, with the finance ministry reporting that the gross debt/GDP ratio exceeds 200%.
That is an exaggeration.
For example, Ichizo Miyamoto, a former senior finance-ministry official, claims that, accounting for the government’s assets, Japan’s net debt/GDP ratio is below 100%, similar to that of the United States.
The validity of the finance ministry’s position on the tax increase was called into question by the decline in Japan’s Nikkei index of stock futures after Abe’s October 1 announcement.
To be sure, the budget crisis in the US caused most stock futures to decline on that day.
But, if the ministry’s view of the consumption tax was correct, Nikkei futures would have gained more – or at least lost less – than futures in other countries.
Instead, the index declined three times more steeply than others.
And yet, while the consumption-tax increase is not ideally timed, I am not entirely pessimistic about its impact.
The Mundell-Fleming framework – which describes the short-run relationship between the nominal exchange rate, interest rates, and output in an open economy – indicates that, under Japan’s flexible exchange-rate regime, the post-hike decline in demand could be addressed relatively easily with more expansionary monetary policy.
That is why Bank of Japan Governor Haruhiko Kuroda should respond accordingly if the tax increase has a deflationary impact.
In doing so, he would avoid the criticism that former Bank of England Governor Mervyn King faced for supporting a consumer-tax hike in 2011 but failing to use monetary policy to offset its recessionary effects.
Just a year ago, former Prime Minister Yoshihiko Noda attempted, despite a deep recession, to raise the consumption tax without monetary easing – a strategy that could have brought only continued economic stagnation.
Abe must not make the same mistake.
If Japan’s government can overcome a demand setback after the tax increase takes effect – leaving the economy functioning smoothly and initiating a recovery in government revenue – Abe will be able to declare Abenomics an unequivocal success.
Abe’s Bullseye
TOKYO – Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe has unveiled his long-awaited growth strategy – the so-called “third arrow” of what has come to be known as “Abenomics.”
A preliminary version of the plan, announced to Japan’s Diet last year, was met with disappointment in international financial markets, which had expected a bolder approach.
The new version is far more robust – and has received a far more positive global response.
Over the last 18 months, the first and second arrows of Abenomics – consisting of expansionary monetary and fiscal policies – have achieved considerable success in spurring Japan’s economic renewal.
For starters, they have fueled price growth, with the GDP price deflator declining from 3% to nearly zero.
Moreover, the ratio of job openings to applicants, which fell to 0.4 under Japan’s last government, led by the Democratic Party of Japan, is now approaching 1.1.
Indeed, Japan is beginning to show signs of a labor shortage.
But the limits of Abenomics’ first two arrows will soon be reached.
With employment rising as Japan’s economy moves toward realizing potential output, monetary stimulus will create inflationary pressures and public expenditure will yield sharply diminishing returns.
At that point, significant growth can be achieved only by increasing the economy’s real productive capacity. That is what Abe’s new growth strategy aims to achieve.
At the strategy’s core is the removal of obstacles to growth for businesses, particularly the elimination or easing of regulatory barriers.
Deregulation promises to bolster the ability of Japan’s private sector, which already excels in high-technology industries, to innovate and compete globally.
While some officials, who may benefit from business regulations, may resist this initiative, its economic benefits, together with Abe’s determination, are compelling.
At the same time, Japan will undergo sweeping labor-market reforms, open designated industries to foreign workers, and create “special economic zones” within which officials will have the authority that they need to reduce red tape in areas like agricultural land management.
If concluded, the Trans-Pacific Partnership – a mega-regional 12-country free-trade agreement – will provide an additional boost to Japan’s economy.
Perhaps the most promising reform is corporate-tax reduction, which will help Japan boost both foreign and domestic investment.
By spurring increased business activity, it will actually increase Japan’s corporate-tax revenue.
By global standards, Japan’s current corporate-tax rate of 35% is quite high.
Indeed, while it remains lower than in some US states (California’s rate, for example, stands at 40%), it exceeds the rates applied in Germany (25%), China (24%), South Korea (24%), the United Kingdom (24%), and Singapore (17%).
A quarter-century ago, the UK and Germany had higher corporate-tax rates than Japan.
But they have since recognized the value of reduced rates.
The UK practically waged a tax war against other countries to attract investment.
Both countries’ experiences have demonstrated that substantial reductions over a short period are far more effective than a gradual, drawn-out process.
Fortunately, Abe plans to follow suit.
The impact of this approach may be even more pronounced in Japan, where only a small share of firms currently pay corporate tax.
One reason for this is the contractionary monetary policy pursued by former Bank of Japan Governor Masaaki Shirakawa, which prevented the economy from reaching its growth potential for more than 15 years, until Haruhiko Kuroda took over the position.
Japan’s so-called “special measures for corporate tax” – ad hoc provisions that reduce or waive certain taxes for firms at particular times – have also contributed to sustaining the economy’s output gap.