A depreciated rupee should help revive Indian exports and lift growth.
But, in the absence of complementary action, depreciation – whether engineered or market-driven – will make matters worse.
To dampen the additional inflationary pressures implied by a weaker rupee, more aggressive fiscal retrenchment is needed.
Even so, a depreciated rupee will increase the burden of repaying foreign debt, and deepen the woes of domestic companies and banks.
To reclaim its promise, India must foster a new generation of productivity growth. The time for action is now.
Unfortunately, a serious crisis may be required to initiate that response.
A Post-Growth World?
PRINCETON – In a provocative recent paper, Robert Gordon of Northwestern University concludes that the rate of technological progress has slowed sharply, and that the rise in standards of living (at least in the world’s rich countries) is thus set to decelerate.
In the twentieth century, he says, per capita income in the United States doubled about every 25-30 years.
But the next doubling will likely occur only over 100 years, a pace last seen in the nineteenth century.
Long-term growth considerations, while recognized as crucial, seem distant from the here and now of financial repair and restoration of confidence.
So the commentary on Gordon’s paper has been largely dissociated from the policy discussions addressing the ongoing Great Recession.
But a realistic assessment of growth prospects is precisely what is needed right now to design appropriate and feasible policies.
Gordon’s point is not that growth will decelerate in the future, but rather that underlying productivity growth moved to a sharply lower trajectory around the year 2000.
We lived the better part of the subsequent decade with a misguided sense of extended prosperity and inflated a financial bubble.
Worse, we are treating the present as if the bubbly growth from 2000 to 2007 will return.
Consider the International Monetary Fund’s regular projections of world growth.
In April 2010, about 18 months after the Lehman Brothers meltdown, the crisis seemed over.
The forecast was for world GDP to grow at about 4.5% annually until 2015, which is slightly higher than the pace during the pre-crisis decade, while the average annual inflation rate was projected to be lower, at 2.9%.
The future looked bright.
Instead, after successive revisions, world GDP in 2012 is now expected to grow by only 3.3% while inflation is forecast to reach 4%, signaling much weaker global economic momentum than was anticipated.
Lower-than-expected growth and higher-than-expected inflation have affected most economies.
In 2011 and 2012, the United Kingdom stood out among the advanced economies in this regard; but the pattern holds even for Germany.
The shine has similarly worn off the BRICs (Brazil, Russia, India, and China).
Although projections by the IMF and others have been persistently optimistic, each setback has been treated as a temporary deviation, associated with its own unique cause: the Greek bailout, the tragic tsunami in Japan, the spike in volatility following Standard &amp; Poor’s downgrade of US debt, and so on.
The return to 4.5% world growth has merely been pushed back – in the latest forecasts to 2015.
Faith in renewed growth is an ill-advised policy strategy.
At its core, the global economic crisis is a growth crisis.
Financial institutions and markets assumed productivity would continue to grow at the pace of the late 1990’s, which fostered an asset-price boom that conveyed an illusion of well-being; those not directly involved in the financial bubble were coopted through buoyant international trade.
European growth, with its heavy dependence on trade, received a special boost, as did emerging markets.
Once the Great Recession began, this process operated in reverse, unwinding the excesses.
But policymakers continued to benchmark recovery prospects to pre-crisis growth performance.
When reality proved otherwise, the return of the past was not abandoned, but merely postponed.
Continuing to assume the resumption of pre-crisis growth was necessary to justify postponing hard decisions.
For example, a growth rebound underpins the expectation that the European periphery will not restructure or inflate away its sovereign debt.
The assumption that the German economy will accelerate out of its current crawl is essential to confidence in Europe’s financial safety net, and to a banking union that credibly shares risks across the eurozone.
Resumption of robust world economic growth is the basis for delaying the implementation of the Basel III bank rules.
And, if the BRICs slow down, they may be more prone to debt and currency crises.
What is to be done?
Because the elixir of growth in policymakers’ forecasts cannot be counted on to solve the problems, dealing with financial excesses becomes even more urgent.
That means more debt restructuring and more bank closures now, rather than watering down proposals to rein in freewheeling markets.
Looking ahead, as Robert Shiller of Yale University has repeatedly emphasized, public policy must help to forge futures markets that hedge risks better and more reliably align incentives.
There is no magical path to higher productivity growth.
Even if Gordon’s pessimism is excessive, the timing of the next breakthrough in technology is impossible to predict.
So-called “structural” reforms may help, but the likely gains are small and uncertain.
It may simply be time to learn how to live with less.
The Second Coming of Zhu Rongji?
SHANGHAI – The recent release of a book of speeches by former Chinese Premier Zhu Rongji has refocused attention on his bold – and often highly controversial – economic reforms of the 1990’s, which included reining in state-owned enterprises (SOEs) and overhauling the banking system.
But the discussion has taken an unexpected turn, with Chinese media adopting a far less critical stance than that which has prevailed for the last two decades.
Given the apparent parallels between the challenges that Zhu faced and those that current Premier Li Keqiang is now attempting to address, not to mention their shared commitment to economic transformation, this shift could signify rising support for structural reform.
But are Zhu and Li really so much alike?
Today, as in the 1990’s, China is experiencing skyrocketing local-government and commercial-bank debt, rising fiscal and financial risk, uncertainty over institutional reform, and declining central-government revenue.
According to Bloomberg, Li will be the first Chinese premier not to fulfill the official annual growth target since Zhu.
Despite these apparent similarities, however, China’s situation today is fundamentally different from 20 years ago.
In the 1990’s, Zhu’s core mission was to address the consequences of former Premier Zhao Ziyang’s flawed fiscal-decentralization efforts.
By pursuing fiscal reform one sector at a time, Zhao left room for local governments to form alliances with SOEs, which provided subsidies to local bodies and enabled them to withhold income from the central government.
This led to the build-up of national public debt, which, in turn, compelled the central bank to over-issue currency, fueling inflation.
In this context, Zhu’s reform strategy was aimed primarily at reestablishing a sound fiscal relationship between the central and local governments, rather than at increasing the GDP growth rate.
In fact, though Zhu’s reforms were piecemeal, they could easily have led to double-digit GDP growth.
But Zhu recognized that allowing such rapid growth probably would have done more harm than good, given persistent inflation and macroeconomic instability.
Critics assert that Zhu’s 1994 tax reform led to the current real-estate bubble, because it drove local governments to use land sales to boost their incomes.
But the fact is that replacing the income-sharing system with a tax-sharing system stabilized China’s economy and reversed the relative decline of central-government revenue.
Indeed, it was essential to China’s economic development.
By weakening the alliances between local governments and SOEs, Zhu’s tax-sharing system facilitated the strategic restructuring of the state-owned economy.
And, by galvanizing local governments to privatize local SOEs (as well as housing and some public services), Zhu’s reform hastened China’s incorporation into the global economy.
China’s state-owned economy is far less bloated today; the central and local governments have fewer compatibility problems; the country’s fiscal position is strong; and relative macroeconomic stability prevails.
Zhu’s success means that Li must focus on a different challenge.
Li must ensure that China’s economy, which still boasts significant growth potential, does not sink into lethargy and fall into the so-called “middle-income trap.”
A developing economy may slow prematurely when external factors alter the conditions supporting growth.
Wages continue to rise, reducing competitiveness vis-à-vis low-income economies, but the growth model is not yet equipped to support competitiveness in high-skill industries, leading to stagnation.
In order to avoid such an outcome, Li must adapt China’s growth model to current conditions, which include intensifying trade friction with the European Union and the United States, greater pressure to allow the renminbi to appreciate, an aging population, slowing urbanization, and rising labor costs.
The “new normal” that has emerged from the global financial crisis, characterized by sluggish GDP growth and diminished import demand in the West, makes reform even more urgent.
Li should begin by redistributing industrial capital from high-productivity coastal areas.
This would instantly augment growth in less-developed regions and boost overall productivity.
But, with competition in the global supply chain fiercer than ever, China will need more than capital transfer to achieve high-income status.
It will need policies and mechanisms that encourage and guide technological and industrial upgrading.
Fortunately, Li seems to understand this.
Indeed, industrial and technological upgrading forms the core of “Likonomics.”
But significant uncertainty remains over how to achieve it within the constraints of China’s state-led economy.
Over the last decade – especially since 2008 – China’s central government has been tightening its grip on industrial policy, while enhancing the State Council’s dominance over local governments.
By contrast, Li seems intent on returning power to local governments and the market, transforming vertical control into horizontal coordination.
Thus, instead of trying to control technological and industrial upgrading with central mandates, Li is giving local governments and the market the space to drive China’s economic transformation.
Zhu and Li do have one thing in common: they both came to power at a critical juncture in China’s development.
But, whereas Zhu had to grapple with local officials to increase the central government’s authority and revenue, thereby stabilizing the economy and unleashing China’s growth potential, Li must cooperate with local governments to create a system that fosters and protects new sources of innovation and economic dynamism at all levels.
Just as Zhu’s reforms two decades ago laid the foundation for today’s growth, whether Li succeeds may well determine China’s economic trajectory for the next 20 years.
The False Promise of Debt Relief
With debt relief for poor countries shaping up as a focal issue at the July G-8 summit in Scotland, it is a shame that so few people appreciate what a farce such measures could turn out to be.
Unfortunately, most of the public, egged on by well-meaning rock stars, religious leaders, and other popular figures, seem brainwashed into believing that debt relief is a giant step on the road to ending world poverty.
But forgiving poor countries’ debts without agreeing on a better framework for future aid flows is an empty gesture.
At first glance, it seems incredibly generous and statesman-like for G-8 leaders to endorse debt relief for the world’s poorest nations.
But no one really expects the debts to be paid anyway.
Indeed, thanks to ongoing grants and future loans from national aid agencies and multilateral lenders like the World Bank, most of the poor “debtor” countries look set to receive considerably more money than they pay back, with no end in sight.
Citizens of rich countries may be self-centered and self-indulgent, but things are not quite as horrible as some would have us believe.
True, the ultra-rich United States does only give a pathetic 0.2% of its income in aid.
But at least it doesn’t tax poor countries, as rich-country imperialists did until well into the twentieth century.
Besides, it is not like there is huge profit for G-8 leaders in trying to collect coins from impoverished peoples living on a dollar a day.
What would the G-8 leaders do, station troops in Africa to seize coffee beans and peanuts?
Re-colonize Africa?
Debt collection from poor nations is an absurdity, now and into the distant future.
The real issue is how much money rich-country governments will be giving poor-country governments, not vice versa.
Third-world debt burdens are little more than a scorecard for past development failures.
Generously interpreted, past loans reflected naïve optimism that with a bit of seed money, politically and economically backward countries would generate majestic growth and effortlessly repay their loans.
A not-so-generous interpretation of modern aid history is that rich countries’ legislatures were too cheap to give outright grants to the poorest countries, and could be persuaded to help out only if they were told that the money would be repaid.
Of course, I am focusing mainly on official loans, but private-sector lending to the world’s poorest countries is generally a relatively minor issue.
So now rich countries want to feel magnanimous for “forgiving” debts that should have been given as outright grants in the first place.
As all but the most belligerent critics of US President George W Bush will acknowledge, America has taken an important lead in trying to make things marginally better.
The Bush administration has put outright grants at the center of its foreign-assistance policy, a commitment that is embodied in its new aid agency, the “Millennium Challenge Account.”
Moreover, following recent changes at the World Bank, the US is aiming to follow the classic doctor’s dictum: “First, do no harm.”
It is increasing aid, but it is trying to focus the benefits on countries that are reasonably well governed.
The aim is praiseworthy: to ensure that aid will be unambiguously beneficial, and won’t merely be exploited by bad governments to extend their hold on power.
Admittedly, there is still a fierce debate over the right way to assist poor countries, and this will play out behind the scenes at the G-8 summit.
Many Europeans believe that aid agencies like the World Bank will shrivel and die if left to depend on grants for income.
But I believe that the problem could easily be solved by, say, giving the World Bank an endowment of rich-country bonds and permitting it to expend the interest.
The United Nations Development Program has championed the position that all countries should get significant aid, regardless of how they are governed, on the grounds that thousands of children die every day and there is no room for sanctimonious extremism.
I beg to differ; my reading of the evidence suggests that donors really do need to take extreme care not to make things worse, and that this is far more difficult to achieve in corrupt countries than the UN suggests.
In short, the fundamental problem with the debt-relief mantra is that it looks backward rather than forward.
If the G-8 leaders are serious about helping poor countries, finding a reliable way to support grant aid and promote accountability for donors and recipients, not debt relief, is the place to start.
If the political will were there, it would be neither difficult nor expensive to restructure aid agencies like the World Bank and the regional development banks as grants-only agencies.
For example, Professor Jeremy Bulow of Stanford University and I have shown that by endowing the World Bank with $100 billion dollars, it could carry out the tasks that it performs best more effectively and with greater transparency than it does today through borrowing and lending.
Given today’s exceptionally low long-term interest rates, the annual cost would be, well, peanuts.
The Electric Car’s Short Circuit
PRAGUE – For decades, the idea of the electric car has captured the imaginations of innovators – including Henry Ford and Thomas Edison more than a century ago.
Celebrities, pundits, and political leaders alike have cast these vehicles as the apotheosis of an environmentally responsible future.
German Chancellor Angela Merkel has proclaimed that there will be a million electric cars on the Autobahn by 2020.
President Barack Obama has likewise promised a million electric cars in the United States – but five years sooner.
Someday, the electric car will, indeed, be a great product – just not now.
Yet this is clearly not enough.
In Denmark, there are still only 1,224 electric cars.
In Germany, car sales totaled 3.2 million in 2011, but only 2,154 were electric.
The numbers have forced Obama and Merkel to reconcile their projections with reality.
The US Department of Energy now expects only about 250,000 electric cars by 2015 – 0.1% of all cars on America’s roads.
Merkel recently admitted that Germany will not get anywhere near one million electric cars by 2020.
No one should be surprised.
According to an analysis by the US Congressional Budget Office, a typical electric car’s lifetime cost is roughly $12,000 higher than a gasoline-powered car.
Recent research indicates that electric cars may reach break-even price with hybrids only in 2026, and with conventional cars in 2032, after governments spend €100-150 billion in subsidies.
Costs and subsidies aside, electric cars have so far proven to be incredibly inconvenient.
A BBC reporter drove the 778 kilometers (484 miles) from London to Edinburgh in an electric Mini, and had to stop eight times to recharge – often waiting six hours or more.
In total, he spent 80 hours waiting or driving, averaging just ten kilometers per hour – an unenviable pace even before the advent of the steam engine.
Electric cars also fail to live up to their environmental billing.
They are often sold as “zero emissions” vehicles, but that is true only when they are moving.
For starters, the manufacturing process that produces electric cars – especially their batteries – requires an enormous amount of energy, most of it generated with fossil fuels.
A life-cycle analysis shows that almost half of an electric car’s entire CO2 emissions result from its production, more than double the emissions resulting from the production of a gasoline-powered car.
Moreover, the electricity required to charge an electric car is overwhelmingly produced with fossil fuels.
Yes, it then emits about half the CO2 of a conventional car for every kilometer driven (using European electricity).
But, given its high CO2 emissions at the outset, it needs to be driven a lot to come out ahead.
Proponents proudly proclaim that if an electric car is driven about 300,000 kilometers (180,000 miles), it will have emitted less than half the CO2 of a gasoline-powered car.
But its battery will likely need to be replaced long before it reaches this target, implying many more tons of CO2 emissions.
In fact, such distances seem implausible, given electric cars’ poor range: the Nissan Leaf, for example, can go only 117 kilometers on a charge.
That is why most people buy an electric car as their second car, for short commutes.
If the car is driven less than 50,000 kilometers on European electricity, it will have emitted more CO2 overall than a conventional car.
Even if driven much farther, 150,000 kilometers, an electric car’s CO2 emissions will be only 28% less than those of a gasoline-powered car.
During the car’s lifetime, this will prevent 11 tons of CO2 emissions, or about €44 of climate damage.
Given the size of the subsidies on offer, this is extremely poor value.
Denmark’s subsidies, for example, pay almost €6,000 to avoid one ton of CO2 emissions.
Purchasing a similar amount in the European Emissions Trading System would cost about €5.
For the same money, Denmark could have reduced CO2 emissions more than a thousand-fold.
Worse, electric cars bought in the European Union will actually increase global CO2 emissions.
And, as a recent study shows, because China’s coal-fired power plants are so dirty, electric cars make the local air worse.
In Shanghai, air pollution from an additional million gasoline-powered cars would kill an estimated nine people each year.
But an additional million electric cars would kill 26 people annually, owing to the increase in coal pollution.
The electric-car mantra diverts attention from what really matters: a cost-effective transition from fossil fuels to cheaper green energy, which requires research and innovation.
Electric cars might be a great advance for that purpose in a couple of decades.
But lavish subsidies today simply enable an expensive, inconvenient, and often environmentally deficient technology.
The False Promise of Financial Liberalization
Something is amiss in the world of finance.
The problem is not another financial meltdown in an emerging market, with the predictable contagion that engulfs neighboring countries.
Even the most exposed countries handled the last round of financial shocks, in May and June 2006, relatively comfortably.
Instead, the problem this time around is one that relatively calm times have helped reveal: the predicted benefits of financial globalization are nowhere to be seen.
Financial globalization is a recent phenomenon.
One could trace its beginnings to the 1970’s, when recycled petrodollars fueled large capital inflows to developing nations.
But it was only around 1990 that most emerging markets threw caution to the wind and removed controls on private portfolio and bank flows.
Private capital flows have exploded since, dwarfing trade in goods and services.
So the world has experienced true financial globalization only for 15 years or so.
Freeing up capital flows had an inexorable logic – or so it seemed.
Developing nations, the argument went, have plenty of investment opportunities, but are short of savings.
Foreign capital inflows would allow them to draw on the savings of rich countries, increase their investment rates, and stimulate growth.
In addition, financial globalization would allow poor nations to smooth out the boom-and-bust cycles associated with temporary terms-of-trade shocks and other bouts of bad luck.
Finally, exposure to the discipline of financial markets would make it harder for profligate governments to misbehave.
But things have not worked out according to plan.
Research at the IMF, of all places, as well as by independent scholars documents a number of puzzles and paradoxes.
For example, it is difficult to find evidence that countries that freed up capital flows have experienced sustained economic growth as a result.
In fact, many emerging markets experienced declines in investment rates.
Nor, on balance, has liberalization of capital flows stabilized consumption.
Most intriguingly, the countries that have done the best in recent years are those that relied the least on foreign financing.
China, the world’s growth superstar, has a huge current-account surplus, which means that it is a net lender to the rest of the world.
Among other high-growth countries, Vietnam’s current account is essentially balanced, and India has only a small deficit.
Latin America, Argentina and Brazil have been running comfortable external surpluses recently.
In fact, their new-found resilience to capital-market shocks is due in no small part to their becoming net lenders to the rest of the world, after years as net borrowers.
To understand what is going on, we need a different explanation of what keeps investment and growth low in most poor nations.
Whereas the standard story – the one that motivated the drive to liberalize capital flows – is that developing countries are saving-constrained, the fact that capital is moving outward rather than inward in the most successful developing countries suggests that the constraint lies elsewhere.
Most likely, the real constraint lies on the investment side.
The main problem seems to be the paucity of entrepreneurship and low propensity to invest in plant and equipment – what Keynes called “low animal spirits” – especially to raise output of products that can be traded on world markets.
Behind this shortcoming lay various institutional and market distortions associated with industrial and other modern-sector activities in low-income environments.
When countries suffer from low investment demand, freeing up capital inflows does not do much good.
What businesses in these countries need is not necessarily more finance, but the expectation of larger profits for their owners.
In fact, capital inflows can make things worse, because they tend to appreciate the domestic currency and make production in export activities less profitable, further weakening the incentive to invest.
Thus, the pattern in emerging market economies that liberalized capital inflows has been lower investment in the modern sectors of the economy, and eventually slower economic growth (once the consumption boom associated with the capital inflows plays out).
By contrast, countries like China and India, which avoided a surge of capital inflows, managed to maintain highly competitive domestic currencies, and thereby kept profitability and investment high.
The lesson for countries that have not yet made the leap to financial globalization is clear: beware.
Nothing can kill growth more effectively than an uncompetitive currency, and there is no faster route to currency appreciation than a surge in capital inflows.
For those countries that have already made the leap, the choices are more difficult.
Managing the exchange rate becomes much more difficult when capital is free to come and go as it pleases.
But it is not impossible – as long as policymakers understand the critical role played by the exchange rate and the need to subordinate capital flows to the requirements of competitiveness.
Given all the effort that the world’s “emerging markets” have devoted to shielding themselves from financial volatility, they have reason to ask: where in the world is the upside of financial liberalization?
That is a question all of us should consider.
The False Promise of Global Governance Standards
Cambridge – In the wake of last year’s global financial meltdown, there is now widespread recognition that inadequate investor protection can significantly affect how stock markets and economies develop, as well as how individual firms perform.
The increased focus on improving corporate governance has produced a demand for reliable standards for evaluating governance in publicly traded companies worldwide.
World Bank officials, shareholder advisers, and financial economists have all made considerable efforts to develop such standards.
The notion of a single set of criteria to evaluate the governance of publicly traded firms worldwide is undoubtedly appealing. Both investors and publicly traded firms are operating in increasingly integrated global capital markets.
But the quest for a single set of global governance standards is misguided.
Yes, over the last decade, there has been growing use of global governance standards, largely developed in the United States, to assess how countries and companies around the world protect minority investors.
But these efforts have overlooked fundamental differences between controlled companies, which have a controlling shareholder, and widely held firms that lack such a controller.
While widely held firms dominate the capital markets of the US and the UK, controlled companies dominate in most other countries.
Widely held and controlled companies differ considerably in the governance problems their investors face.
In widely held firms, the concern is about opportunism by managers, who exercise de facto control; in controlled firms, the concern is about opportunism by the controlling shareholder at the expense of minority shareholders.
Because the basic governance problems in the two types of firms are considerably different, arrangements that benefit investors in widely held firms might be irrelevant or even counterproductive in controlled firms, and vice versa.
As a result, applying a single standard for assessing investor protection worldwide is bound to miss the mark with respect to widely held firms, controlled firms, or both.
Consider, for example, the Corporate Governance Quotient system, developed by the US firm RiskMetrics, the world’s dominant shareholder advisory firm.
RiskMetrics’ system, which is used by institutional investors around the world, attaches considerable weight to the arrangements governing contests for control.
These arrangements are, indeed, important for investors in widely held firms.
When a company has a controlling shareholder, however, control contests are not possible, and the arrangements governing such contests are thus irrelevant.
Investors and public officials in countries where controlled companies dominate should stop using global governance standards based on the designers’ experience with widely held firms in the US. Rather, they should strive to develop standards appropriate for controlled firms.
Most obviously, assessments of controlled companies should not give significant weight to arrangements governing contests for corporate control.
Similarly, arrangements that make the firm’s board of directors more responsive to the wishes of a majority of shareholders, such as making it easier for shareholders to replace directors, can serve the interests of investors in widely held firms, but are counterproductive for investors in controlled firms.
In controlled firms, where the concern is diversion from minority shareholders, making directors even more responsive to the controller will likely make minority investors still more vulnerable.
Moreover, in countries that have many controlled firms, close attention should be paid to related-party transactions and to the taking of corporate opportunities – the main ways in which value may be diverted from minority investors in such firms. To address such problems, arrangements that enable a minority of shareholders to veto related party transactions – arrangements which are not warranted in widely held firms – could well be valuable.
Finally, when assessing controlled companies, the independence of directors should not be judged largely by looking at the extent to which they are independent of the company on whose board they serve. Rather, considerable attention should be given to their independence from the controlling shareholder.
To improve corporate governance and investor protection, public officials and investors in countries whose capital markets are dominated by controlled companies should be wary of global governance standards developed for US companies. They should focus on the special problems of controlled companies and on the rules that would work best for protecting smaller investors in such companies.
The False Promise of Private Pensions
One of the strangest claims made in the debates about social insurance now roiling the world’s richest countries is the that government-funded defined-benefit pension programs (such as America’s Social Security system) are outmoded.
These programs were fine, the argument goes, for the industrial economy of the Great Depression and the post-World War II generation, but they have become obsolete in today’s high-tech, networked, post-industrial economy.
Advocates of this argument propose a different model.
Just as corporations today are much happier supporting workers’ pensions by contributing to employees’ private accounts, so governments today should offer (or require) contributions to privately owned accounts.
The value of these accounts would fluctuate with the market rather than resting on a defined-benefit scheme that guarantees a fixed real sum of resources available upon retirement.
This argument is strange because it gets the economics of the situation backward.
When there are lots of companies offering workers long-term defined-benefit retirement pensions, there are fewer advantages to the government in setting up a parallel defined-benefit scheme and requiring workers to participate in it.
After all, in such a world, workers who set great value on a defined-benefit pension can go to work for firms that offer such pensions.
The major benefits that arise from the government’s requiring that workers also participate in a national Social Security system accrue to those workers who really ought to value a defined-benefit pension highly but have not been able to figure out what their true preferences are.
They also accrue to relatively poor workers who lack the bargaining power to induce bosses to offer the pensions they really want – and need.
But there aren’t a lot of companies today that are willing to offer long-term defined-benefit pension schemes.
One reason is that companies nowadays are much more aware of their own long-run fragility than they were in the post-World War II decades.
Not even America’s IBM – which prides itself on stability – wants to take the risk of offering defined-benefit schemes.
The risk from defined-benefit pensions used to be offset by two benefits for companies that offered them.
First, the fact that leaving the company usually meant cashing in one’s pension at a discount increased worker loyalty.
Second, complaisant accountants’ optimistic assumptions about returns on pension reserves, together with large firms’ greater risk-bearing capacity, brightened the financial picture that companies could report to investors.
Today, the risks are seen to be much greater, and the benefits are seen to be less.
As a result, an ever-smaller slice of employers are offering anything like defined-benefit pensions.
This fall-off in private defined-benefit pensions all across the rich core of the world economy is a bad thing, because the configuration of asset prices suggests that young and middle-aged workers value defined-benefit pensions extremely highly.
Historically, the gap between expected returns on low-risk assets like government or investment-grade bonds and high-risk assets like stocks and real estate has been very high.
To some degree, as economists like Harvard’s Robert Barro and mathematicians like Benoit Mandelbrot argue, this may be because high-risk investments are in reality much more risky than the theories and math of standard finance techniques suggest.
In my opinion, at least, this is partly because the memory of years like 1930 and 2000, when stocks performed very badly, occupies too large a place in investors’ minds.
Workers and other asset holders place a very high value on safety, security, and predictability, so a defined-benefit pension plan is extremely valuable.
But in today’s world, only national governments are large enough to be able to do so with any assurance that the pension assets will actually be there when workers retire.
I am enough of a social democrat to believe that if there is an economic service or benefit that citizens value extremely highly and that only the government can provide, then the government should provide it.
We economists know that there are many drawbacks to expanding government beyond its basic role of providing true public goods like defense, public safety, and justice, as well as providing citizens with incentives to counterbalance the effects of true market failures.
If the private market has the flexibility of two hands, government bureaucracy has at best two thumbs.
But the collection of payroll taxes from tens of millions of workers and the writing of tens of millions of pension checks is the kind of routine, semi-automatic task that government can do well.
With private companies backing away from defined-benefit programs, it is even more important and valuable that government do it in our post-industrial network-age society than it was in the past.
Balancing the Technocrats
ISTANBUL – A simplistic (actually, naive) view of markets is that they exist almost in a “state of nature,” and that the best of all worlds is one where they are free to operate without government interference.
An equally simplistic view of democracy is that it is a political system in which periodic competitive elections give the winner the right to govern without constraint.
The reality is far more complex, of course.
Markets can function only within an institutional and legal framework that includes property rights, enforcement of contracts, quality and information controls, and many other rules to govern transactions.
Similarly, while competitive elections are essential to any democratic system, a “winner-take-all” attitude to electoral outcomes, with the victor concentrating power, is incompatible with democracy in the long term.
Well-functioning democracies are embedded in complex constitutional and other laws that separate executive, legislative, and judicial power, and that protect freedom of speech, assembly, and peaceful dissent by those who lose elections.
Regulatory institutions – such as bank supervisory agencies and bodies that oversee the telecommunications, food, and energy industries – play a vital role by maintaining the always-delicate balance between “free” markets and the actions of elected governments and legislatures.
The central bank is perhaps the most important of these institutions, for it conducts monetary policy (and sometimes serves as the financial-sector regulator).
The policy and regulatory mistakes that contributed to the subprime mortgage crisis – and thus to the US financial system’s near-meltdown and the eurozone’s travails – have brought the issue of optimal economic regulation and its relation to democracy to the fore once again.
In the US, a significant share of the Republican Party favor abolishing not only the Department of Energy and the Environmental Protection Agency, but also the Federal Reserve!
In their view, markets and private initiative require no significant regulation.
The role of politics is to elect majorities that can abolish regulations and regulatory bodies.
Others around the world similarly oppose regulatory institutions, but for very different reasons.
They argue that politicians can regulate and supervise without intermediate bodies that have some degree of autonomy.
In their minds, these bodies merely impede and constrain realization of the people’s will.
If an elected government wants a bank to offer cheap credit to a group of enterprises so that they can hire more people, why should a supervisor be able to obstruct this democratic will?
If these enterprises are told to hire the governing party’s supporters as an implicit condition of obtaining subsidized credit, that, too, is the expression of electorally legitimized popular will.
At the other end of the spectrum are technocratic super-defenders of regulatory bodies who believe that politicians and electorates are hopelessly confused, uneducated, and often corrupt.
Management of the economy should be entrusted to competent and independent experts, a group of “Platonic Guardians” empowered to act in the state’s higher interests, regardless of electoral outcomes or public opinion.
The International Monetary Fund, the European Commission, and the European Central Bank are often viewed as such technocratic institutions – and as supporting the technocratic element within states and societies around the world.
At the height of the eurozone crisis, the IMF, the EC, and the ECB (not to mention financial markets) warmly welcomed the economists Mario Monti and Lucas Papademos as highly respected “technocratic” prime ministers for Italy and Greece, respectively.
Experience in recent decades has shown that a balanced and “moderate” approach is needed on these matters.
Electoral cycles (and the accompanying political pressures) are such that monetary policy, banking, and many other areas of policy and economic activity must be overseen by those with professional competence and a much longer time horizon than that of politicians.
Day-to-day politics cannot dominate the regulation that markets need.
The single most important institutional reform underlying price stability throughout the world has been the stronger independence of central banks.
But, if independent technocrats are allowed to determine long-term policy and set objectives that cannot be influenced by democratic majorities, democracy itself is in serious jeopardy.
I find it undemocratic, for example, that the ECB can set the eurozone-wide inflation target unilaterally.
How much inflation a society finds desirable or tolerable (taking into account other important variables, such as employment, GDP growth, or poverty) is an inherently political question that should be debated in parliament.
The central bank should be consulted, but its role should be to implement the objective without political interference: independence in terms of policy tools, not goals.
Globalization and the increasing complexity of financial and other markets make it imperative that the domains of private activity, political decision-making, and regulation be clarified.
The challenge is even greater because some regulatory agencies must be multilateral, or at least intergovernmental, given the global nature of much economic activity.
The difference and the distance between markets and politics must be clear –&#160;and, for the sake of both effectiveness and legitimacy, it must be based on rules that are well understood and on popular consent.
The Transparency Conspiracy
SOFIA – One of the most troubling outcomes of the ongoing financial crisis has been a collapse of trust in democratic institutions and politicians.
Indeed, in 2012, the global public-relations firm Edelman’s “Trust Barometer” survey registered the biggest-ever decline when it comes to government.
Can greater “transparency” – the new political mantra of civic activists and an increasing number of democratic governments – reverse this trend?
The hope is that a combination of new technologies, publicly accessible data, and renewed civic engagement can help people control their representatives more effectively.
But the idea that transparency will restore public trust in democracy rests on several problematic assumptions, primarily the belief that “if only people knew,” everything would be different.
Unfortunately, matters are not so simple.
The end of government secrecy does not mean the birth of the informed citizen; nor does more control necessarily suggest more trust in public institutions.
For example, after American voters learned that President George W. Bush had led the United States into a war with Iraq without proof of weapons of mass destruction, they re-elected him.
Likewise, Italians kept Silvio Berlusconi in power for more than a decade, despite a steady stream of revelations about his wrongdoings.
In politics, “knowing everything” still means knowing different things, which means that compelling governments to disclose information does not necessarily mean that people learn more or understand better.
On the contrary, as soon as government information is designed to be immediately open to everybody, its value as information declines and its value as an instrument of manipulation increases.
Consider how gangsters in crime movies talk when they know that the police are listening.
They speak clearly and offer banalities while exchanging notes under the table.
That is government in the age of transparency.
In his study of truth-telling in ancient Greece, the philosopher Michel Foucault pointed out that the act of truth-telling cannot be reduced to citizens learning something that they did not know before.
Paradoxically, truth in politics is something that everybody knows, but that few dare to express.
People hardly need additional data to recognize, say, a rise in inequality or mistreatment of immigrants.
The WikiLeaks cables did not teach us anything qualitatively new about America’s policies.
Living in truth cannot be reduced to having access to full information.
It is people’s willingness to take personal risks and confront the powerful by daring to speak the truth, not the truth itself, that ultimately leads to change.
Moreover, information never comes without interpretation.
Reading the same raw data, Republicans and Democrats in the US, or secularists and the Muslim Brotherhood in Egypt, will spin it differently, because policymaking cannot be divorced from decision-makers’ interests and values.
As the anthropologists Jean and John Comaroff put it, ours “is an age in which people almost everywhere seem preoccupied, simultaneously, with transparency and conspiracy.”
To see the ambiguity of the politics of trust, consider Russia’s recent experience.
In December 2011, the country’s parliamentary election triggered a civic explosion.
Hundreds of thousands of people poured into the streets of Moscow and other big cities to demand a fair vote and real choices in the subsequent presidential election.
The escalating crisis of legitimacy forced the government to invent imaginative ways to justify its power.
The central proposal was ingenious: the Kremlin proposed to guarantee the election’s fairness by installing webcams at all polling stations; every citizen could personally monitor the voting process.
As China’s Xinhua news agency enthusiastically reported: “From Kamchatka to Kaliningrad, and from Chechnya to Chukotka, more than 2.5 million net surfers registered to view live streaming from at least 188,000 webcams installed in more than 94,000 polling stations on Russian territory.”
In the words of one Finnish observer, it was “a landmark in the history of democracy and democratic elections.”
But, in a regime like Vladimir Putin’s, where the government decides who may be a candidate, the webcams would be farcical were they not also so intimidating.
Viewed from the West, they were perceived as a tool to keep the government under control by enabling people to watch what it was doing.
But, from the point of view of a post-Soviet voter living in the countryside, the webcam sent a different message: the government knows how you vote.
In a way, Putin succeeded twice: he looked transparent to the West and menacing to most of his own citizens.
The installation of the webcams was an act of simultaneous transparency and conspiracy.
The broader issue is transparency advocates’ insistence that open government can be reconciled with citizens’ privacy.
But might wholly transparent government imply a wholly transparent citizen?
As a rule, governments monitor people.
When that becomes transparent, so do those citizens who spoke with or were monitored by the government.
Contrary to the expectations of transparency advocates, greater disclosure of government information does not make public discourse more rational and less paranoid.
If anything, it fuels conspiracy theories (there is nothing more suspicious than the claim of absolute transparency).
Who can honestly say that public debate has become more rational and less paranoid when our governments have become more transparent?
Rather than restoring trust in democratic institutions, the transparency movement could accelerate the transformation of democratic politics into the management of mistrust.
In that case, one could imagine the replacement of representative democracy with political regimes that limit citizen control to the executive.
None of this is to deny that transparency in government is a worthy goal.
But let’s not fool ourselves by thinking that achieving it will restore citizens’ faith in their political institutions.
The End of Hunger and Malnutrition
ROME – Sometimes something happens that can have a fundamental impact on mankind, but passes largely unnoticed at the time.
Such an event occurred in December in Rome.
The Council of the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization decided that the FAO’s goal should no longer be merely to reduce hunger, but to eradicate hunger, food insecurity, and malnutrition.
The next step will be to confirm this change in June 2013 at the FAO Conference, in which all FAO member countries participate.
To many, this small change of wording must seem trivial.
Critics will also say that adopting such a goal without setting a target date for achieving it is largely meaningless.
Others may claim that even the idea of eradicating hunger is nonsense, because we lack the means to do it.
A “halving” goal has only slight political appeal, as it implicitly condemns the excluded half to a life on the fringes of society, exposed to illness and premature death.
Brazil’s Zero Hunger strategy, by contrast, has shown that adopting the absolute goal of hunger eradication provides a powerful means of galvanizing government departments into large-scale coordinated action, and of mobilizing society in a truly national effort to end one of the greatest injustices of our time.
Moreover, as people’s incomes rise, they might more easily be persuaded to adopt healthier and more environmentally friendly diets than those taken up in the developed world.
The double burden of malnutrition – with hunger existing alongside obesity, diabetes, and other diseases of overconsumption – clearly shows the increasing importance of global dietary rebalancing.
There is nothing really new about a commitment to hunger eradication.
Indeed, the FAO was created in 1945 to bring about a world in which there would be “freedom from want,” which, in the words of its founders, “means the conquest of hunger and the attainment of the ordinary needs of a decent, self-respecting life.”
Because of the widespread fear in the postwar years of emerging global food shortages, the FAO, and the international community as a whole, focused mainly on food production – a focus that remained essentially the same in the following decades.
Those investments yielded good returns: despite staggering global population growth, from 2.5 billion in 1945 to seven billion today, food availability per person has risen by more than 40%.
The problem is that hunger still persists on a vast scale; so, our focus must now shift to ensuring universal access to adequate food.
This should be a top priority for governments and a goal embraced by citizens everywhere.
Breaking the vicious cycle of hunger and malnutrition requires complementing the focus on agriculture and rural development (more than 70% of the food-insecure population lives in rural areas of developing countries) with investment in other social and productive programs, including modest but predictable financial transfers to the poorest families.
With the right policies in place, the incremental food demand created by these transfers, as well as by school meals programs and nutrition supplements for mothers and infants, could create opportunities for small-scale farmers to expand their output and improve their livelihoods.
In June, UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon launched the Zero Hunger Challenge at the Rio+20 Sustainable Development Conference.
The FAO has accepted this challenge, and is formally setting its sights on hunger eradication.
I look forward with confidence to a progressive expansion in the number of member governments that commit themselves to moving as quickly as possible toward ending hunger and malnutrition within their borders – and to helping other countries to achieve the same goal.
It is never the wrong moment for the world to set its sights on ending hunger, once and for all.
Now is the time.
The Vision and the Fantasy
JERUSALEM – Israel, an audacious vision that came true, is now celebrating its 65th anniversary with a sense of well-deserved satisfaction at its extraordinary domestic achievements.
In its relations with the outside world, however, the Jewish state still has a long way to go.
Historically, the Jewish experience in international relations has not been particularly edifying.
A Jewish state has existed for only short periods in Judaism’s history, and it twice committed political suicide.
The reasons were always the same: politico-religious fanaticism and the blunder of challenging the prevailing world powers – hence modern Zionism’s obsessive quest for a binding alliance with a superpower.
Ethnocentrism is bound to distort a people’s relations with the rest of the world, and Israel’s doctrine of power was drawn from the depths of Jewish experience, particularly the eternal, unforgiving hostility of a Gentile world.
The role of the Holocaust as the constituent myth of the Zionist meta-narrative reinforced Israel’s tendency to face “the world,” an amorphous but imposing construct with which the Jews wage a dispute that cannot be resolved through the traditional tools of international relations.
It was through Zionism, an essentially secular nationalist movement, that the Jews were returned to political action and developed the necessary diplomatic tools.
But, while early Zionism was blessed with pragmatism and diplomatic savoir-faire, the preponderance of the military ethos of the nation in arms has relegated Zionism’s extraordinary foreign-policy achievements to a remote corner of Israelis’ collective memory.
A crucial moment in the history of Israel’s oscillation between diplomatic and military “activism” took place on the eve of the 1967 war.
That crossroads exposed a deep cleavage between the young, self-confident Israeli-born generals, who were spiteful of the older generation’s “submissive” attitude, and the Diaspora-born politicians who, haunted by Holocaust memories and existentially fearful of international isolation, resisted making a break with the old politics of diplomatic Zionism.
The pragmatic wisdom of early Zionism is easily explained: in contrast to the anti-Semitic cliché about “Jewish power,” Zionism was the national movement of a weak people, decimated by oppression and genocide – a people that might face annihilation if it made the wrong choice at a moment of decision.
Admittedly, the Zionist leaders never really abandoned wider territorial dreams; but they would never have considered delaying the establishment of the Jewish state for the sole reason that it would not have access to the Western Wall or the Temple Mount.
The positive ethos of building a new society was supposed to compensate for the poverty of the territorial solution.
The 1967 war, however, represented an ominous watershed.
Israel’s lightning victory &#160;recalls Hegel’s dictum about “the impotence of the winners.”
Military victories are never final and definitive.
In 1980, in a famous open letter entitled “The Homeland Is in Danger,” the historian Jacob Talmon tried to share this simple lesson with Prime Minister Menachem Begin.
Talmon criticized the Israeli right’s belief that one major “event”would radically and permanently change the situation in Israel’s favor, and he repudiated the “religious sanction” used to justify unrealistic policies in the Occupied Territories.
He explained the Messianic illusions that were reborn with the Six-Day War as false compensation for the martyrdom of the Shoah.
There was nothing mysterious about Israel’s victory, he claimed; it was the result of a simple concatenation of circumstances.
A small country like Israel, lacking a serious demographic foundation or favorable geopolitical conditions, could never perpetuate its presence in occupied territories, Talmon argued.
Hence, the danger to Israel lay in the Sisyphean effort to subjugate the Palestinians.
“Blind is the leader who does not see that a war of races is what lies ahead,” he wrote.
Israel’s annexationist right would dismiss its “defeatist” detractors with the claim that the entire Zionist enterprise was an unrealistic dream that miraculously came true.
In fact, Israel materialized because historical and political conditions favored it, and because Zionist diplomacy successfully navigated the international-relations challenges that it encountered.
But the victory of June 1967 was not a license for Israel to set utterly unrealistic objectives for itself.
Not every fantasy is a vision.
The ethos of Israel’s far right consists in its insistence on blurring this distinction.
The right’s fatalism about the chances of peace is a useless adviser in foreign policy.
Political positions are not eternal; they are always susceptible to change.
Nor is it true that nothing can sway the Arab world from its hostility to Israel.
The Arabs might never accept the moral justice of Zionism, but, as the Arab Peace Initiative indicates, they would consider accepting the political legitimacy of a Jewish state.
Not even Israel’s staunchest allies will risk an indefinite confrontation with the entire international community by supporting Israel’s territorial ambitions.
Reasonable border modifications are one thing; legitimizing a Jewish empire is quite another.
Indeed, international acquiescence to the situation created by Israel’s victory in 1967 proved to be extremely short-lived.
When a war of salvation and survival turned into a war of conquest, occupation, and annexation, the international community recoiled and Israel went on the defensive. It has remained there ever since.
The Fear Factor in US-China Relations
Opinion polls indicate that one-third of Americans believe that China will “soon dominate the world,” while nearly half view China’s emergence as a “threat to world peace.”
In turn, many Chinese fear that the United States will not accept their “peaceful rise.”
Americans and Chinese must avoid such exaggerated fears.
Maintaining good US-China relations will be a key determinant of global stability in this century.
Perhaps the greatest threat to the bilateral relationship is the belief that conflict is inevitable.
Throughout history, whenever a rising power creates fear among its neighbors and other great powers, that fear becomes a cause of conflict.
In such circumstances, seemingly small events can trigger an unforeseen and disastrous chain reaction. 
Today, the greatest prospect of a destabilizing incident lies in the complex relationships across the Taiwan Strait.
China, which regards Taiwan as an integral part of its territory that has sheltered behind the US navy since the days of the Chinese civil war, vows that any Taiwanese declaration of independence will be met by force.
The US does not challenge China’s sovereignty, but it wants a peaceful settlement that will maintain Taiwan’s democratic institutions.
In Taiwan itself, there is a growing sense of national identity, but a sharp division between pragmatists of the “pan-blue alliance,” who realize that geography will require them to find a compromise with the mainland, and the ruling “pan-green alliance,” which aspires in varying degrees to achieve independence.
The two sides in Taiwan will face off in a presidential election on March 22.
Current polls suggest that former Taipei Mayor Ma Ying-jeou of the Kuomintang (KMT) leads Frank Hsieh of the ruling Democratic Progressive Party (DPP).
But some observers fear that the incumbent DPP President Chen Shui-bian will seek a pretext to prevent a defeat for the pro-sovereignty camp.
He is currently advocating a referendum on whether Taiwan should join the United Nations, which China views as provocative.
Chen replies that it is China “that is acting provocatively today.”
America is clearly concerned.
Recently, US Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice told a news conference that “we think that Taiwan’s referendum to apply to the UN under the name ‘Taiwan’ is a provocative policy.
It unnecessarily raises tensions in the Taiwan Strait and it promises no real benefits for the people of Taiwan on the international stage.”
She also reiterated the administration policy opposing “unilateral threat by either side to change the status quo.”
The same day, Secretary of Defense Robert Gates criticized China for unexpectedly curtailing American ship visits to Chinese ports because of American arms sales to Taiwan.
According to Gates, he had told Chinese officials that American arms sales were consistent with past policy and that “as long as they continued to build up their forces on their side of the Taiwan Strait, we would continue to give Taiwan the resources necessary to defend itself.”
Gates added, however, that despite China’s rising defense budget, “I don’t consider China an enemy, and I think there are opportunities for continued cooperation in a number of areas.”
In principle, the Taiwan issue need not lead to conflict.
With increasing change in China and growing economic and social contacts across the strait, it should be possible to find a formula that allows the Taiwanese to maintain their market economy and democratic system without a placard at the UN.
Thus far, the US has tried to allow for this evolution by stressing two bright lines: no independence for Taiwan and no use of force by China.
But, given the danger of incidents that could grow out of political competition in Taiwan or growing impatience in the Peoples’ Liberation Army on the mainland, the US would be wise to encourage more active contacts and negotiations by the two sides.
The US has a broad national interest in maintaining good relations with China, as well as a specific human rights interest in protecting Taiwan’s democracy.
The US does not have a national interest in helping Taiwan become a sovereign country with a seat at the UN, and efforts by some Taiwanese to do so present the greatest danger of a miscalculation that could create enmity between the US and China.
Already, some Chinese suspect the US of seeking an independent Taiwan as an “unsinkable aircraft carrier” for use against a future Chinese enemy.
They are wrong, but such suspicions can feed a climate of enmity.
If America treats China as an enemy today, it will ensure future enmity.
While we cannot be sure how China will evolve, it makes no sense to foreclose the prospect of a better future.
America’s current policy combines economic integration with a hedge against future uncertainty.
The US-Japan security alliance means China cannot play a “Japan card.”
But, while such hedging is natural in world politics, modesty is important for both sides.
If the overall climate is one of distrust, what looks like a hedge to one side can look like a threat to the other.
There is no need for the US and China to go to war in this century.
Both sides must take care that an incident concerning Taiwan does not lead in that direction.
Americans and Chinese must avoid letting exaggerated fears create a self-fulfilling prophecy.
The Fear Factor
LOS ANGELES – The debate over fiscal expansion versus consolidation continues to divide the developed world.
In response to the global recession of 2008, the United Kingdom embarked on an austerity program while the United States enacted an $800 billion fiscal stimulus.
Despite a softening economy, British Prime Minister David Cameron is promising to stay the austerity course.
Obama, too, is sticking to his guns with his recent proposal for an additional $450 billion of government expenditure and tax cuts to help boost employment.
Unemployment in the US has remained above 9% for 22 of the last 24 months.
While some are supporting additional stimulus, others are calling for UK-style austerity.
But would either of these approaches reduce unemployment most effectively, or would a new round of  “quantitative easing” (an unconventional form of economic stimulus by which the central bank purchases financial assets) work better?
With Nobel prize-winning economists on both sides of the current debate about how to solve the unemployment problem, the public is rightly confused.
Paul Krugman and Joseph Stiglitz are calling for an even larger fiscal stimulus to target government spending on education and infrastructure investment.
On the other side, Robert Mundell, Myron Scholes, and Reinhard Selten have called for “draconian measures” to tame debt levels.
The American Recovery and Reinvestment Act (ARRA) that Obama passed barely three weeks after his inauguration was disappointing.
An $800 billion stimulus did not have the effect for which its proponents hoped, largely because it was accompanied by a big increase in private savings.
Backers of the stimulus plan now claim that things would have been much worse without ARRA.
I am skeptical.
A better approach to reducing unemployment would be a new and expanded round of quantitative easing.
I am heartened by calls for this in the UK, and that the talk is now turning to the purchase of risky assets, such as corporate bonds or bundles of loans to the private sector, as opposed to long-term government securities.
This is a step in the right direction that I have been advocating for the past three years.
But I would go even further.
My work provides a new and coherent approach to macroeconomics that explains how a lack of confidence can lead to persistent unemployment.
It supports the purchase of equities by central banks to reduce asset-price volatility, restore the value of wealth, and prevent a future market crash.
When businessmen and women are afraid, they stop investing in real assets.
Lack of confidence is reflected in low and volatile asset values.
The environment of fear that arises has little to do with bad government policies, although bad policy may exacerbate the situation.
Businessmen and women become afraid that stocks, and the values of the machines and factories that back those stocks, may fall further.
Fear feeds on itself, and the prediction that stocks will lose value becomes self-fulfilling.
The 2008 recession was triggered by the collapse of a real-estate bubble.
Housing wealth in the US has fallen by 34% since its peak in 2006, and is still declining.
The stock market fell by almost 50% from its 2007 peak and remains down by nearly a third.
This enormous loss of wealth caused a large and persistent drop in consumption demand, which has led to an increase in unemployment.
Until we are willing to explore new solutions, the misery experienced by millions of unemployed workers will continue.
A quantitative-easing policy in which a central bank buys risky assets can prevent price fluctuations and restore the value of financial wealth.
These purchases would need Treasury support, since this tactic is in effect a fiscal policy, not a monetary policy.
And, by involving the Treasury, the purchase of risky assets could be financed by issuing debt, rather than by printing more money, thereby attenuating inflationary fears.
The Great Recession did not turn into Great Depression II because of coordinated action by governments around the world.
Although fiscal expansion may have played a role in this success, central bank intervention was the most important component by far.
Quantitative easing works by increasing the value of wealth.
In both the US and the UK, it reduced the real expected return on long-term government bonds, which in turn nurtured a recovery in the stock market.
We need not tolerate 9% unemployment as the new normal.
Confidence is a self-fulfilling prophecy, and we can, and should, manage it by direct intervention in asset markets.
The way ahead leads through science, not ideology, dogma, or failed theories.
The Triumph of Fear
PARIS – In May 1981, Pope John Paul II survived an assassination attempt.
Thirty years later, Osama bin Laden was killed by United States Special Forces.
But, looking at the world now, one could easily conclude that the inspirational leader whose credo was Franklin Roosevelt’s injunction to fear only “fear itself” has lost, and that the fanatic who wanted fear to dominate the world of the “infidels” has prevailed.
Today, fear is ubiquitous, and the bombings at the Boston Marathon must be understood in that context, for the attack both highlights and deepens our pervasive sense of insecurity.
The scale of the Boston attack was, of course, much smaller than that of September 11, 2001.
But Americans will remember this homegrown plot as a highly symbolic moment: an attack on a venerable international sporting event on Patriots’ Day.
The marathon is a cherished event, for it reflects the peaceful values of a democratic society that seeks to transcend its challenges through sheer endurance.
Will an attack on such a symbol reinforce the prevalence of fear in an American society that was once defined by hope?
Fear of terrorism is only one segment of what might best be described as a multi-level structure of dread.
Domestically, there is fear of “spontaneous” massacres like the slaughter in December of schoolchildren in Newtown, Connecticut.
Internationally, there is fear of civil wars in the Arab world; of social unrest in crisis-ridden Europe; and of war in Asia resulting from North Korea’s brinkmanship or the irresponsible escalation of territorial disputes in the South and East China Seas.
And then there are global fears linked to climate change, epidemics, cyber wars, and more.
The list seems endless.
Revisiting my 2009 book, The Geopolitics of Emotion: How Cultures of Fear, Humiliation, and Hope are reshaping the World, it seems clear that fear has gained the upper hand.
Does this mean that a fearful West has prevailed once again?