By amplifying such exemplars into a national project, Guinea could join the small group of commodity-rich countries that have bucked the curse of corruption and economic decay that often accompanies large natural-resource endowments.
History demonstrates the difficulty of avoiding the so-called “resource curse” – and that it does not plague only less-developed countries like Nigeria, as many assume.
In the 1980’s, the United Kingdom’s North Sea-driven oil and gas boom undermined the country’s broad-based economic competitiveness, while Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher’s government wasted much of the revenue on handouts that encouraged excessive consumption.
While a handful of commodity-rich countries have managed to buck the curse, including Botswana, Chile, and Norway, they have, nevertheless, failed to diversify their economies, remaining dependent on natural resource-based exports.
But history is not destined to repeat itself, and leaders of commodity-rich countries are seeking alternative futures.
Countries across Africa – including Ghana, Liberia, Mozambique, Rwanda, and Uganda – are showing early signs of success.
Zambia recently issued a $750 million inaugural ten-year bond at an annual interest rate of 5.375%.
Oversubscribed by 24 times, the issue will allow Zambia to borrow more cheaply than many European countries can.
Such developments reflect growing confidence in Africa’s economic prospects and, thus, in its ability to escape the resource curse.
But these countries still face significant obstacles to development.
First, governments must balance long-term goals with short-term achievements.
Given unlimited time, less-developed commodity-rich countries would first invest in human capital and institutions, then direct their growing commodity revenues into infrastructure, and move on to diversify their economies by strengthening the agriculture, manufacturing, and service sectors.
In the real world, of course, such countries’ political economies demand short-term gains, beginning with basic services like potable water and electricity.
If governments fail to respond to these basic demands, citizens take to the streets, often destructively.
This summer in Guinea, for example, citizens’ frustration with widespread poverty and weak institutions, memories of ethnic persecution, and distrust of unfamiliar democratic processes fueled violent protests.
Second, development requires both money and the right conditions.
But, in many cases, the conditions placed on funding create barriers to investment.
The International Monetary Fund and the World Bank lead the chorus of traditional players eager to help, offering debt write-offs and concessionary finance.
But the stringent institutional reforms that they demand, while beneficial in theory, might not stabilize, let alone enhance, the development process.
Newcomers, most notably China, have become a ready alternative source of cheap finance.
But, in exchange, the Chinese expect business opportunities and, to some extent, political influence.
Sovereign-wealth funds, too, are increasingly involved in financing development.
But, despite being state-owned and subject to policy decisions, they function as commercial enterprises (with the possible exception of Norway’s hydrocarbon-funded state-owned investment vehicles).
Financing for the most expensive projects – implementing green-energy systems, building transport infrastructure, and developing modern cities – must come from foreign institutional investors.
But high-quality private investors are resistant to financing lumpy, illiquid investments in fragile, volatile states.
Those who are willing to engage often demand steep risk premiums that dramatically increase the cost of capital, often to usurious levels.
Global mining companies like Rio Tinto are increasingly working alongside emerging-economy leaders like China’s Chalco to support development.
As the most heavily invested, they have the most experience using cheap debt to create value.
But, with commodity prices beginning to drop, even the most bullish companies are reassessing ambitious investment plans – a trend reflected in the Brazilian mining giant Vale’s recent decision to put its investment in Guinea on hold.
Bucking the resource curse requires, first and foremost, strong, legitimate domestic political leadership, underpinned by effective institutional arrangements.
But it also requires a global investment community – public, private, and mixed – that can move beyond short-term thinking, ideological bias, ignorance, and cynicism.
After all, bets on leadership, vision, and earnings potential should not be limited to investments in California-based technology start-ups.
Guinea, which is making progress despite annual per capita income of roughly $450, exemplifies the potential of the world’s poorest countries to surpass expectations.
Investors should take note.
Getting Prices Right
HONG KONG – Building and maintaining the infrastructure of property rights – the rules, laws, registers, and administrative and judicial structures that define, protect, and enforce such rights and regulate economic transactions – has traditionally been the responsibility of national governments.
But, as the world economy has become increasingly interconnected, a global property-rights infrastructure (PRI) has emerged – further raising the stakes of developing effective national PRIs and accurate price-discovery mechanisms.
The global PRI has arisen through countries’ widespread accession to the World Trade Organization, international accounting and regulatory criteria like the Basel Accords, standards established by the International Organization of Securities Commissions, and some aspects of international law.
As national economies and multinational companies compete for market share, global standards of market behavior become increasingly important.
Consider the smart-phone industry, in which corporations like Apple, Samsung, Sony, Nokia, and Huawei compete fiercely to secure their global market shares.
Given that companies cannot compete effectively in global markets without a sound domestic PRI, such firm-level competition has driven countries to improve the national PRI over the longer term.
Furthermore, establishing accurate asset-price levels is essential to a well-functioning market.
The state affects asset prices indirectly through its influence on inflation, interest rates, and the strength of the currency. Governments can directly influence the prices of key resources like energy, money, and public goods and services through taxation, customs duties, production quotas, and natural-resource ownership.
Government intervention in benchmark prices can be justified in the name of macroeconomic management or regulatory action to improve the provision of public goods and services. After all, the state determines the supply of fiat money and is responsible for energy and natural-resource conservation.
But there is a risk that the state can get important prices seriously wrong.
This is particularly true of money, which has two prices.
The government (the visible hand) sets the benchmark price for risk-free financial assets through monetary policy and control over fiscal deficits, while the market (the invisible hand) sets the risk premia of risky assets above the benchmark rate.
The distinction between the two prices is the foundation of modern finance theory.
But the system rests on the assumption that the government will set accurate benchmark interest rates for risk-free assets.
As the recent crises in advanced countries demonstrated, this is not a safe assumption: Unsustainable public debt and fiscal deficits forced central banks to expand their balance sheets massively, causing benchmark rates to turn negative in real (inflation-adjusted) terms.
In fact, lowering the benchmark rates for risk-free assets changes the distribution of the risk premia on risky assets, making it too low when asset bubbles are forming and too high when they burst.
This pattern was evident in the 1997-1998 Asian financial crisis, the 2008 global financial crisis, and the eurozone crisis that erupted in 2010.
The logic and the mechanism that the government uses to set benchmark prices are very different from those that the market uses to set risk premia.
The former implements policy decisions, based on economic, social, and political considerations, while profit-maximizing behavior – anchored by the state-determined price and requiring a robust PRI – determines the latter.
Thus, the role of the market in price discovery is inextricable from that of the government.
Indeed, there is a complex, non-linear feedback relationship between the two, so developing an accurate capital-pricing system depends on both actors.
Until recently, advanced-country markets predominated in setting risk premia, owing to their mature and well-functioning PRIs, which include clear rules and a high level of transparency in price formation.
But, even in advanced countries, the influence of vested interests can lead to collective-action failures and, in turn, to incorrect benchmark rates.
Last year’s LIBOR scandal, in which banks were found to be reporting inaccurate interest rates in order to manipulate the prices of financial instruments, epitomized this risk.
Meanwhile, given that many emerging economies have incomplete or immature PRIs, their influence over market-price discovery is relatively weak.
In state-dominated systems like China’s, developing an effective PRI – delineating market participants’ rights and responsibilities, ensuring the exchange platform’s transparency, and creating a fair and equitable process of dispute resolution – is particularly challenging, because the state acts as a regulator, asset owner, enterprise operator, and competitor in the market.
In such systems, the government directly controls the benchmark interest rates.
But setting the correct rate for risk-free assets is difficult when capital flows easily across borders, enabling market participants to exploit discrepancies between countries’ rates.
Herein lies the dilemma (one that China currently faces) of market-oriented reforms.
While cross-border capital flows and interest and exchange rates must be liberalized to maintain economic development, such reforms raise the risk of asset bubbles if implemented under distorted benchmark prices.
Emerging economies have watched the leveraged power of investors distort the price-formation process in crisis-stricken advanced economies.
Preventing this from occurring in emerging economies requires that these countries’ leaders balance monetary, fiscal, and macro-prudential policies in a way that enables correct pricing of risk-free assets.
Striking this balance is made even more complicated by the influence of advanced-country policies on emerging economies.
Exceptionally low interest rates and quantitative easing may be appropriate for advanced economies experiencing slow growth, but they can be problematic for emerging economies struggling to promote market-oriented price-discovery mechanisms.
In this environment, it may be appropriate to strengthen the global PRI further.
The Root of All Sovereign-Debt Crises
NEW YORK – The Greek debt crisis has prompted questions about whether the euro can survive without a nearly unimaginable centralization of fiscal policy. There is a simpler way.
Irresponsible borrowing by governments in international credit markets requires irresponsible lending. Bank regulators should just say no to such lending by institutions that are already under their purview.
Lending to foreign governments is in many ways inherently riskier than unsecured private debt or junk bonds.
Private borrowers often have to offer collateral, such as their houses. The collateral limits the lenders’ downside risk, and the fear of losing the pledged assets encourages borrowers to act prudently.
But governments offer no collateral, and their principal incentive to repay – the fear of being cut off by international credit markets – derives from a perverse addiction. Only governments that are chronically unable to finance their outlays with domestic taxes or domestic debt must keep borrowing large sums abroad.
A deep craving for the favor of foreign lenders usually derives from some deeply engrained form of misgoverance.
Commercial debt usually has covenants that limit the borrower’s ability to roll the dice.
Loan or bond covenants often require borrowers to agree to maintain a minimum level of equity capital or cash on hand.
Government bonds, on the other hand, have no covenants.
Similarly, private borrowers can go to prison if they misrepresent their financial condition to secure bank loans.
Securities laws require that issuers of corporate bonds spell out all possible risks.
By contrast, governments pay no penalties for outrageous misrepresentation or fraudulent accounting, as the Greek debacle shows.
When private borrowers default, bankruptcy courts supervise a bankruptcy or reorganization process through which even unsecured creditors can hope to recover something.
But there is no process for winding up a state and no legal venue for renegotiating its debts.
Worse, the debt that states raise abroad is usually denominated in a currency whose value they cannot control.
So a gradual, invisible reduction in the debt burden by debasing the currency is rarely an option.
The power to tax is thought to make government debt safer: private borrowers have no right to the profits or wages that they need to satisfy their obligations.
But the power to tax has practical limits, and governments’ moral or legal right to bind future generations of citizens to repay foreign creditors is questionable.
Lending to states thus involves unfathomable risks that ought to be borne by specialized players who are willing to live with the consequences.
Historically, sovereign lending was a job for a few intrepid financiers, who drove shrewd bargains and were adept at statecraft.
Lending to governments against the collateral of a port or railroad – or the use of military force to secure repayment – was not unknown.
After the 1970’s, though, sovereign lending became institutionalized.
Citibank – whose chief executive, Walter Wriston, famously declared that countries don’t go bust – led the charge, recycling a flood of petrodollars to dubious regimes.
It was more lucrative business than traditional lending: a few bankers could lend enormous sums with little due diligence – except for the small detail that governments plied with easy credit do sometimes default.
Later, the Basel accords whetted banks’ appetite for more government bonds by ruling them virtually risk-free.
Banks loaded up on the relatively high-yield debt of countries like Greece because they had to set aside very little capital.
But, while the debt was highly rated, how could anyone objectively assess unsecured and virtually unenforceable obligations?
Bank lending to sovereign borrowers has been a double disaster, fostering over-indebtedness, especially in countries with irresponsible or corrupt governments.
And, because much of the risk is borne by banks (rather than by, say, hedge funds), which play a central role in lubricating the payments system, a sovereign-debt crisis can cause widespread harm.
The Greek debacle jeopardized the well-being of all of Europe, not only Greeks.
The solution to breaking the nexus between sovereign-debt crises and banking crises is straightforward: limit banks to lending where evaluation of borrowers’ willingness and ability to repay isn’t a great leap in the dark.
This means no cross-border sovereign debt (or esoteric instruments, such as collateralized debt obligations).
This simple rule would require no complex reordering of European fiscal arrangements, nor would it require the creation of new supra-national entities.
It would certainly make it difficult for governments to borrow abroad, but that would be a good outcome for their citizens, not an imposition.
Moreover, curtailing governments’ access to international credit (and, by extension, inducing more fiscal responsibility) could actually help more enterprising and productive borrowers.
Such constraints wouldn’t solve the current crisis in Portugal, Ireland, Greece, or Spain.
But it is high time that Europe, and the world, stopped lurching from one short-term fix to the next and addressed the real structural issues.
The Rules of Reconstruction
Lebanon’s reconstruction, so painstakingly carried out in the 1990’s, is now at risk of being undone.
But Lebanon is not alone in that respect: according to the UN and several independent studies, countries in transition from war to peace face roughly a 50% chance of sliding back into warfare.
Indeed, in East Timor, Iraq, Afghanistan, Kosovo, and many other countries, the transition to peace seems to be failing.
Likewise, there is unfinished business in many other countries undergoing reconstruction.
These multiple tasks make economic reconstruction fundamentally different from “development as usual.”
To succeed, the transition to peace requires demobilization, disarmament and reintegration of former combatants, as well as reconstruction and rehabilitation of services and infrastructure.
To meet these goals, the objective of peace should prevail over that of development if the two come into conflict.
Often, optimal economic policies and best practices are not attainable – or even desirable.
This also means that peace-related programs should get priority in budget allocations.
Of course, the legitimacy of the government or other policymaking body will determine what is possible in economic policymaking.
A weak interim national government – or a United Nations or foreign occupying administration – should not attempt to implement policies such as privatizing national resources when doing so might incite political resistance.
Indeed, early privatization is likely to be destructive in its own terms, because property rights will remain in question for some time.
Thus, a new yardstick is needed to measure success.
Projects must be judged by whether they contribute to peace and reconciliation, rather than on purely economic grounds.
Effective demobilization and reconciliation in El Salvador, for example, ensured the consolidation of peace after that country’s brutal civil war of the 1980’s.
Elsewhere, however, disregarding the primacy of politics in a transition to peace has had tragic consequences.
The failure to demobilize and reconcile factions in Lebanon, where Hezbollah remained armed despite its transformation into a political party, meant that belligerency was always bubbling below the surface.
Likewise, the collapse of peace processes in Angola and Haiti and the various setbacks in Cambodia and Nicaragua during the 1990’s reflect a failure to demobilize and integrate.
On the surface, the UN seems ideally placed to lead reconstruction efforts because, unlike development institutions like the World Bank, it can integrate the political and economic objectives that are equal parts of a transition to peace.
Yet, time and again, the UN has shown itself to be incompetent in this role.
In Kosovo, for example, the transformation of the Kosovo Liberation Army into a civilian peace force has caused great insecurity over the years, which the UN administration might ultimately regret if the resolution of the province’s final status does not lead to independence.
Treating the transition to peace as “development as usual” has, moreover, led to new violence in East Timor, a country that the UN once trumpeted as a success story.
The commercial exploitation of rich oil and gas reserves in the Timor Gap could have facilitated reconstruction and created jobs for the 30% of the labor force that is unemployed.
Instead, with the strong approval of the IMF, East Timor created a Norwegian-style “petroleum fund” to save the money for a rainy day.
But in East Timor, that rainy day is now.
Iraq provides numerous examples of the dangers created by misplaced priorities.
Early efforts to privatize Iraq’s oil industry proved disastrous, confirming for many Iraqis that the occupying Americans were determined to “steal” the country’s wealth and thus fanning the flames of violent resistance.
Indeed, privatization was all the more bizarre as a policy choice because it was doomed in advance: investors clearly would not be attracted to buy assets where property rights might change once a legitimate Iraqi government took over – a huge impediment to investment in Kosovo as well.
But the United States has not learned its lesson.
On the verge of civil war, Iraq just announced a restructuring of its foreign debt.
Rather than improving services and living conditions in areas where it could have helped consolidate peace, the government, at America’s behest, will allocate hundreds of millions of dollars to pay investment banks, accounting firms, and legal advisors who assist with that refinancing.
Any transition to peace may well prove ephemeral unless policymakers make political reconciliation and integration – not optimal economic policies – the bedrock priority.
Despite its failures, the UN is probably still the best-placed organization to oversee such efforts.
But the complexity of the tasks that post-conflict countries face underscores the urgent challenge of providing the UN with the capacity to meet them.
The Russian Revival
Russia’s national revival and new assertiveness under President Vladimir Putin is not really home made but reflects highly auspicious international conditions.
Oil and gas prices are sky high, the United States is overwhelmed by serious problems in Iraq and the Middle East, and the West is divided about how it should deal with Russia.
Putin’s administration has been keen to take advantage of this favorable environment.
Yet, although some of the Kremlin’s moves seem clear and reasonable, others can scarcely be described as rational or forward-looking.
For example, Russia’s desire to take ownership stakes in Europe’s gas distribution markets makes perfect sense and is fully legitimate given Russia’s energy assets and pipeline capacity.
Likewise, Russia’s effort to expand its influence in the energy-rich countries of Central Asia is aimed at consolidating Russia’s stature as a major energy supplier.
Asserting itself as a major power outside the Western realm, Russia has boosted the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, which includes China and most Central Asian countries.
Indeed, Russia is increasingly attaching ever greater significance to its relations with China, something of a strategic shift in foreign policy, even if it is not yet clear how close Russia wants to be get to China.
But bullying Georgia and Moldova, demonstrating support for Hamas, or indulging North Korea do not seem to be guided by any strategic sense of Russia’s far-reaching interests.
They seem guided by pure and simple spite.
Russia’s heavy-handed pressure on Georgia and its support of secessionist movements in South Ossetia and Abkhazia, two unrecognized republics within Georgia, inflames passions and risks destabilizing the already tense Northern Caucasus.
Should instability ignite into open warfare, Russia will find it impossible to avoid the consequences.
Of course, Georgia’s President Mikhail Saakashvili may at times be thoughtless and arrogant. But if Russia’s policy toward him lets events in Georgia get out of control, Russia will be held accountable.
Because Russia claims the status of a world power, it is expected to show restraint and responsibility.
But the urge to project strength for the mere sake of doing so now seems overwhelming for the Kremlin.
This urge stems from a desire to make up for the years of Russia’s humiliation after the USSR collapsed, years when the West contemptuously disregarded Russia’s views and interests.
This lingering resentment may explain Putin’s somewhat uncivil behavior and dubious jokes when dealing with his Western counterparts.
It may also have been behind Russia’s irrational decision to renege on its promise to give Poland the files that document the massacre of thousands of Polish officers on Stalin’s orders in the forest at Katyn at the outbreak of WWII.
What possible benefits can Russia gain by breaking this pledge?
The motive seems to be brutally simple: “Precisely because you want it, we won’t deliver.
We can do what we like because we’re strong again.”
But this renewed vigor is too fresh for Russia to feel truly confident.
Putin’s irresistible urge to remind everyone that Russia has recovered its strength suggests underlying insecurity.
In an episode recently reported by The New York Times , at one of Putin’s informal meetings with Bush, Putin showed the US president his Labrador and said, “Bigger, tougher, stronger, faster, meaner than Barney” (Bush’s dog).
Though Putin barely implied that the dog’s superiority indicates Russia’s domination over the US, his remark appears to be in line with his general message: don’t you ever dare to doubt our high status.
Russia is by no means seeking to isolate itself.
Russia needs America and the West in order to realize its ambitious initiative to establish international centers of uranium enrichment, and it needs Western markets, which are the largest consumers of Russia’s gas and oil.
Moreover, it is in the West where the rich and powerful Russian elite likes to travel, go shopping, and send their kids to school.
But Russia’s muscle-flexing behavior leaves Western leaders perplexed and wary, which seems a dubious way for the Kremlin to secure Russia’s new stature.
Contentious foreign policy makes contacts uneasy and agreements difficult to reach.
It damages the trust needed for stronger trade relations.
As Russia’s conflict with Ukraine in early January over gas prices demonstrated, when Russia plays rough, the West grows apprehensive and suspicious rather than more amenable.
What will happen should crude strength and hard language prove inadequate to the task of insuring Russian national interests?
No one can say, but Russia’s history in this regard is not a source of hope.
The Russians are Coming – With Cash
MOSCOW – Russia’s government is sitting on a giant pile of cash that it plans to invest in foreign assets.
The glimpse of its economic muscle was revealed this week when the Prime Minister of Iceland announced that Russia may come with about $5 billion to save its troubled economy.
Who could have thought that, given the chaotic Russia of the 1990’s, only ten years later it would be in the position to bail out a developed country?
Even more surprising is the fact that the helping hand for Iceland comes at a time when the domestic stock market is in a free fall and trading on the Moscow stock exchange is routinely halted.
The Kremlin thinks that now is the time to buy assets cheaply, using the current financial crisis to emerge as a powerful global economic player.
As Prime Minister Vladimir Putin remarked at a recent meeting with the CEO of state-owned bank VTB, “Perhaps we should buy something [abroad]?
Something that is up for grabs?”
According to Arkady Dvorkovich, an economic aide to President Dmitry Medvedev, the government will support – both diplomatically and financially – the expansion of Russian companies abroad.
Following the Russian-Georgian war, the West is scared that Russia’s government will use its cash not just for economic purposes, but as an aggressive foreign policy tool.
Should the West really consider blocking Russian investments abroad as a way to influence Russia?
Trying to erect an Iron Curtain around Russian funds and businesses will prove counterproductive.
Indeed, a large-scale “invasion” of Russian business would be a positive development, because it would foster economic interdependence.
This is true even if the economic expansion is led by state-owned companies and by Russian sovereign wealth funds.
By investing in American and European assets, Russia’s government and business elites are buying a stake in the global economy.
This should bring better mutual understanding and a more rational and accountable foreign policy.
Paradoxically, despite recent hits to the Russian stock market, Russia remains awash with cash.
Russia’s government just rolled out a $130 billion bailout plan for the country’s banking system; as a percentage of GDP this would be equivalent to about $1.3 trillion in the US – almost double the Paulson plan.
Yet, even this package has not significantly eaten into Russia’s sovereign wealth funds and its world’s third largest currency reserves.
The government’s Reserve Fund, created to cushion the economy from a fall in oil prices, stands at $140 billion, and the National Welfare Fund, intended mainly to solve the coming pension crisis, holds another $30 billion.
The NWF, though not yet officially a “sovereign wealth fund,” is already among the 10 largest such funds, rivaling the Brunei Investment Agency.
A combined Russian Sovereign Wealth Fund (excluding the half-trillion dollars in foreign-exchange reserves) would rival Singapore’s Temasek Holdings (currently sixth in the world) and lag just behind the China Investment Corporation.
By design, these funds are intended to be invested outside Russia.
As today’s financial crisis has made many Western assets cheap, they are now within reach of Russia’s government and leading Russian companies.
Russian private and state-owned companies have already invested abroad extensively, often buying stakes in large foreign companies.
Overall, the top 25 Russian companies hold $59 billion in foreign assets and are the third largest investors in emerging economies, following Hong Kong and Brazil.
Even though the financial crisis has wiped out Russian stock market, some of the best-run companies are hit less badly than their Western counterparts and will therefore be shopping in the global market next year.
Russian corporations’ foreign investments have already generated a heated debate in both the United States and Europe – even when investment was done by a private company.
The largest controversy surrounded a merger that Russian steel giant SeverStal sought with Luxemburg-based Arcelor.
SeverStal was rejected in favor of Mittal Steel, with some commentators claiming that the decision was taken on political grounds.
But no investment by a private Russian company has, so far, been vetoed by Western governments.
Yet hostility towards investment by Russia’s government (and government companies) has been almost universal until recently.
US and European policymakers do not trust that foreign governments (and their sovereign wealth funds) invest solely on business grounds.
But the financial crisis is making the West happy to find “friends with cash.”
During his visit to Russia in June, US Treasury Secretary Henry Paulson emphasized that the US is interested in welcoming Russian investment, including investment by Russia’s sovereign wealth funds.
But Russia’s government still needs to set up a transparent and accountable structure to manage its sovereign wealth.
Doing so will also help to convince other countries that the government’s agenda is economic, not political.
Russian authorities may be advancing that goal by taking initial steps toward improving corporate governance in state-owned companies.
In an unprecedented move, the government replaced a large number of bureaucrats on the boards of these companies with independent directors (including a couple of foreigners).
While it is unlikely that Russian sovereign wealth funds and state-owned companies will change overnight, they will certainly become more transparent and efficient in the near future.
The key benefit of Russian foreign investment is not economic, but that it helps Russia become a global citizen.
Consider Russia’s elites, who buy houses in London, ski in the Alps, and educate their children in Switzerland.  They have too much to lose from a worsening political climate between Russia and the West.
It is time to make Russia’s big business – and its government – stakeholders in the world economy.
Managing Syria’s Meltdown
DENVER – As Russian and American diplomats prepare for a Syrian peace conference, the Middle East is experiencing convulsions not seen since the Arab Spring two years ago.
Syria, which at first seemed to be just another instance of internal change, has spawned a civil war that has spread beyond the country’s borders, affecting all of its neighbors.
In historical terms, the Syrian crisis, not the Arab Spring, will most likely be regarded as the Middle East’s seminal event in this decade – and the crucible of the region’s future.
The dimensions of the crisis demand focus, wisdom, and leadership from all parties, especially the United States.
Managing the historical forces that are being released requires going far beyond the desultory US debate about what kind of assistance to give to which participants in the conflict.
Gone is the simplistic view of a conflict pitting aspiring democrats against a grouchy dictator – the familiar (though not entirely accurate) narrative of the Arab Spring.
Would-be democrats, freedom fighters, jihadists, Sunni extremists, and Al Qaeda elements – all supported by Sunni Arab countries and groups, now man one side of the battle lines.
Against them are arrayed President Bashar al-Assad and his cronies, Shia militant groups fighting to protect their lifelines to Iran, religious minorities concerned about life after Assad, and, most ominously, Iran and its Lebanese proxy, Hezbollah.
With the stakes so high, the Russian-US initiative to organize a peace conference has not only been welcomed, but is seen as an indispensable initiative that must be planned with excruciating care.
We are likely to hear of delay after delay in the coming days, as various sides try to choose their representatives.
But patience is essential, because, once the conference begins, it must end in success.
There will be no medals for effort.
The public debate in America about whether and how to arm or equip the Syrian opposition is an interesting sideshow. But it has nothing to do with the significance and complexity of the tectonic historical forces now grinding their way forward, straining – and beginning to tear asunder – the region’s political landscape.
Similarly, America’s great suspicion concerning Iran’s role in this regional crisis should not be used to try to limit its participation at the conference.
Iran may be part of the problem, but, whether we like it or not, it may also be part of the solution.
Indeed, out of crisis can come opportunity: an Iranian role in resolving the Syrian conflict could bring a measure of cooperation that ultimately leads to progress in the moribund talks on Iran’s nuclear program.
To solve a problem, make it bigger, as Dwight D. Eisenhower once put it.
But we also need to understand that Iran’s nuclear aspirations do not exist in a vacuum.
They are part and parcel of a broader agenda, some elements of which are visible in the ongoing Syrian crisis.
The crisis has indeed spread to all of Syria’s neighbors – including, most recently, Turkey, which has witnessed the export of suicide bombings to what had been the peaceful city of Reyhanli.
US President Barack Obama was wise to have invited Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, a NATO ally, to Washington for talks on Syria and the impending peace conference.
Perhaps no country outside of Syria has shown greater concern about the crisis.
But it is Iraq (another country about which the US needs to show the utmost concern) that now faces the gravest spillover effects.
Some pretend that the rise in violence there – to levels not seen since 2008 – has nothing to do with Syria.
They lay all the blame for Iraq’s problems at the door of Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki, a tough-minded Shia politician who has led the venerable Dawa Party to the head of a broad Shia coalition that helped him win a second term in December 2010.
The Shia are the majority in Iraq, and the Sunnis need to become reconciled with that fact.
There is certainly good reason to be concerned about Maliki’s temperament, his small group of advisers, his tendency to exercise personal control in the use of state power, and his reputation, partly merited, of making empty promises.
But Sunni extremists have launched some 50 suicide attacks in the last month, killing 500 mostly Shia civilians.
In one instance, they killed 30 people and seized the Justice Ministry in downtown Baghdad, and have attacked Kurdish interests in Kirkuk and Mosul for good measure.
In other words, this is hardly a moment when any leader anywhere would be in a position to offer more concessions to the opposition.
Today, Sunnis in Iraq’s Anbar province, inspired by their brethren in neighboring Syria, are organizing “tribal armies” to do battle with the Iraq national army – a challenge to central authority that no leader could ignore.
The fate of the entire region may well depend on the outcome of the upcoming conference.
For the US, in particular, this is a moment when many interests are simultaneously engaged.
One hopes that it, too, will be properly prepared.
The Science of Acupuncture
Like many other traditional Chinese medicines, acupuncture has for many centuries been viewed suspiciously in the West.
It seems to work, but how?
Is a scientific answer possible?
Most Chinese doctors and patients have, for example, long regarded acupuncture as an effective treatment for stroke, using it to improve motor, speech, and other functions that have been destroyed.
One survey showed that 66% of Chinese doctors use acupuncture routinely to treat the effects of stroke, with 63% of the doctors surveyed believing it to be effective.
Some 36% of Chinese doctors think the effectiveness of acupuncture remains uncertain, perhaps because the scientific basis for it remains so new.
Recently, however, systematic scientific studies of acupuncture’s effects in such treatment has begun.
Almost all trials on acupuncture as a treatment for stroke conducted within China have been positive.
But another recent study done in the UK showed that research conducted in several countries was uniformly favorable to acupuncture as a treatment for the damage caused by stroke.
Indeed, all the trials performed before June 1995 in China, Japan, Hong Kong, and Taiwan were deemed positive by the British researchers.
The Cochrane Collaboration, an international non-profit organization providing healthcare information, conducted a systematic review of the benefits of acupuncture, including 14 trials, of which 10 were conducted in China, involving 1,208 patients.
Acupuncture started within 30 days of stroke onset, with control groups receiving a placebo – sham acupuncture – or no treatment.
Compared to patients who received sham acupuncture or no treatment, far fewer of those who received acupuncture died or became invalid within three months.
After three months or more of treatment, the numbers rose even more significantly in favor of those treated by acupuncture.
Oddly, when comparing acupuncture with sham acupuncture, the statistical difference concerning death or the need for institutional care was small.
Indeed, another analysis, including 14 randomized trials with 1,213 patients six months after a stroke, compared the effects of conventional stroke rehabilitation with and without acupuncture as a supplement.
Acupuncture was found to have no additional effect on motor recovery, but a small positive effect on disability, which may be due to a true placebo effect, or to the varied quality of the trials.
Indeed, the efficacy of acupuncture without stroke rehabilitation remains uncertain, mainly because of the poor quality of such studies—a problem that has affected most of trials undertaken so far.
For example, many trials did not describe their method of measuring statistical relevance, and only called themselves “randomized controlled trials.”
Only four trials, with 373 patients, could provide data on death or dependency (becoming dependent on others for activities of daily living).
And only three trials—all conducted in Europe—used sham acupuncture as a control, whereas no acupuncture trials controlled with placebos or sham acupuncture have been reported in China, owing to high cultural barriers.
Part of the problem in China is choosing the patients to be studied.
After all, patients come to hospitals that practice traditional Chinese medicine because they already believe in acupuncture and are likely to be using it to treat another illness.
Getting such patients to accept being put into a control group where no acupuncture is applied is almost impossible.
This difficulty makes random studies of the effects of acupuncture treatment on stroke patients particularly difficult in a traditional Chinese medicine hospital.
More fundamentally, however, Chinese doctors who use traditional medicine argue that outcome measures of acupuncture as a treatment for stroke should be different from conventional measures used in Western trials, because the theory of acupuncture is different.
But no one has yet specified what the appropriate outcome measures for acupuncture should be.
A recent study conducted in China, including 862 patients who were between the second and tenth day after onset of acute stroke, is the largest truly randomized trial using death or dependency as the primary outcome.
The patients were randomly allocated to an acupuncture group receiving acupuncture treatment plus routine treatment or a control group receiving routine treatment alone.
The results will be reported after analysis of the trial data and could prove useful for therapy of stroke patients.
At present, however, there is insufficient evidence for routine use of acupuncture in stroke.
More high-quality trials are needed.
We do know that acupuncture is a safe, inexpensive, widely accepted, and potentially effective therapy.
Particularly at a time when standard rehabilitation is not available for most Chinese stroke patients, few will wait to try acupuncture until its role is confirmed or refuted by reliable evidence.
The Scientific Road to Copenhagen
BERLIN – On June 10, 1859, six months before Charles Darwin published his 
 Origin of Species
 , the physicist John Tyndall demonstrated a remarkable series of experiments at the Royal Institution in London.
The meeting was chaired by Prince Albert.
An orphan who was educated by monks, Fourier was a professor at the age of 18, and became Napoleon’s governor in Egypt before returning to a career in science.
In 1824, Fourier discovered why our planet’s climate is so warm – tens of degrees warmer than a simple calculation of its energy balance would suggest.
The sun brings heat, and earth radiates heat back into space – but the numbers did not balance.
Fourier realized that gases in our atmosphere trap heat.
He called his discovery 
 l’effet de serre
 – the greenhouse effect.
It was Tyndall who then put Fourier’s ideas to the test in his laboratory.
He proved that some gases absorb radiant heat (today we would say long-wave radiation).
One of these gases was CO2.
In 1859, Tyndall described the greenhouse effect in beautifully concise words: “The atmosphere admits of the entrance of solar heat, but checks its exit; and the result is a tendency to accumulate heat at the surface of the planet.”
Then, in 1897, Svante Arrhenius, who earned a Nobel Prize for chemistry six years later, calculated how much global warming a doubling of CO2 in the atmosphere would cause.
His answer was 4-6 degrees Celsius (a little more than the 2-4 degrees that modern studies consistently find).
Arrhenius was not in the least troubled by the prospect of global warming.
Perhaps because he was Swedish, he proposed setting coal mines on fire to speed it up, since he thought a warmer climate was an excellent idea.
But it was all just theory in Arrhenius’s time, since nobody had measurements to prove that CO2 levels in the atmosphere were in fact increasing.
That changed only in the late 1950’s, when Charles Keeling started to measure CO2 with unprecedented accuracy in Antarctica and on Mauna Loa in Hawaii, far away from any sources.
By 1960, he was able to prove that CO2 was indeed on the rise.
It then took only a few years until, in 1965, an expert report – the first of many – to US President Lyndon B. Johnson warned of global warming: “By the year 2000, the increase in carbon dioxide will be close to 25%.
This may be sufficient to produce measurable and perhaps marked changes in climate.”
In 1972, a more specific prediction was made in the leading science journal 
 Nature
 , namely that temperatures would warm by half a degree Celsius by 2000.
And, in 1979, the US National Academy of Sciences issued a stark warning of impending global warming.
We did not have to wait until 2000 to find these predictions were correct: by the 1980’s, global warming became apparent in temperature measurements from weather stations around the world.
In 1988, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) was founded to analyze the issue in more detail, and in 1992 at the Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro world leaders signed a historic treaty: the Framework Convention on Climate Change.
Its goal: “stabilization of greenhouse gas concentrations in the atmosphere at a level that would prevent dangerous anthropogenic interference with the climate system.”
Unfortunately, little has been achieved in the 17 years since then.
In fact, CO2 emissions from fossil fuels were almost 40% higher in 2008 relative to 1990.
And even the rate at which emissions are increasing is now three times higher than in the 1990’s.
That is why Copenhagen is so important: it may well be our last to address climate change before it addresses us.
Tyndall’s measurements 150 years ago showed that carbon dioxide traps heat and causes warming.
And, 50 years ago, Keeling’s measurements showed that CO2 levels are increasing.
In the meantime, earth’s climate has been heating up, as predicted.
How much more proof do we need before we act?
The Scoundrels of Economic Patriotism
Samuel Johnson called patriotism “the last refuge of a scoundrel.”
If that is true, what should we think of today’s mounting economic nationalism, sometimes euphemistically described as “economic patriotism”?
Indeed, economic nationalism is exceptionally vigorous at the moment.
Vigorous popular opposition to a Dubai company’s plan to take over ports in the United States shocked the American government.
Poland is witnessing a populist backlash against foreign ownership of banks.
France is blocking the acquisition of French utilities by the Italian electricity company Enel.
Together with other European governments, France is also agitating against the takeover of the Luxembourg-based steel company Arcelor by a Netherlands company largely controlled by an Indian steel magnate.
Defenders of these ill-fated cross-border takeovers worry that a sinister whiff of the twentieth century’s worst moments is in the air.
An outraged Italian minister warned of a new mobilization of populist nationalism in an “August 1914” scenario.
The better analogy is from the 1930’s: in 1933, the year in which Hitler came to power, the world’s most famous economist, John Maynard Keynes, produced a plea for “national self-sufficiency.”
Both the 1914 and the 1933 analogies point to the most striking characteristic of the current debate: the key role of security worries in justifying protectionism.
Nobody worried about foreign ownership of US ports as long as the owner was a British company; the new fears reflect the belief that Dubai might be a channel for Islamic fundamentalism and terrorism.
Likewise, the deterioration of international relations before World Wars I and II was marked by governments’ increased propensity to use economics as a tool of power politics.
In 1911, the diplomatic crisis over Morocco was accompanied by a French speculative attack on German financial markets.
In the 1930’s, both France and Germany used this kind of technique as a way to bolster their own security.
The US tried to control Japanese expansion in Asia by limiting Japan’s energy (especially petroleum) imports.
The most obvious reason for increased worries about security in America is the challenge of meeting the threat of terrorism after the attacks of September 2001.
But that can scarcely explain European nervousness and the protectionist reaction.
In Europe’s case, two contrasting explanations exist. The first is that the new worries are a strange case of psychological transference.
People in places like France and Poland who worry about national decline seek to blame somebody outside the country.
There was certainly a great deal of this type of sentiment in the 1930’s, when the populist response to the Great Depression attributed it to the sinister forces of “international capital.”
The modern version of this explanation holds that the world is changing so quickly that national security and, indeed, national identity, are under threat.
An alternative scenario suggests that these fears emanate from a real problem.
Modern economic growth still depends in almost every advanced industrial country on imported energy (Norway is an exception).
Because of fears about pollution, or about the safety of nuclear energy, most countries neglected to build up their own capacity.
The resulting vulnerability was highlighted by the Russian reduction of gas supplies to Ukraine in January, which resulted in reduced flows to central and western Europe.
The experience made Poles particularly jittery, and pushed the country’s populist right-wing government down the road of economic nationalism.
But West Europeans remember their own traumas, including electricity grid failures and widespread blackouts.
Wouldn’t an Italian company facing grid failure prefer to shut down French rather than Italian consumers?
These two scenarios of the origins of economic nationalism, one irrational and the other not, are not real alternatives, but describe responses that intertwine: the more rational the fear, the more that fear can be used as an instrument of politics.
Fear creates a demand for state action.
Politicians like this because it increases demand for their services.
They point out the potential problem and then attempt to sell solutions that lie within their nationally defined spheres of competence.
One modern politician, in particular, has been effective in placing nervousness about energy supply at the center of a new political vision.
According to Vladimir Putin, the need to control and secure energy justifies a massive extension of state intervention in the economy.
Putin’s vision was apparently vindicated by the aftermath of the terrorist attacks on the US.
Since then, Putin has projected his vision of politicized energy in a way that makes all Europeans, not just Russians, nervous.
That bolsters his strength in the Russian setting.
But a Putin in one country has a tendency to produce Putin imitators elsewhere.
We should be concerned about the efficiency losses in markets where restrictions stemming from economic nationalism have so far been imposed.
But we should be far more worried that fear about the collapse or manipulation of markets creates a demand for action that makes such a collapse more rather than less likely.
Fear generates a demand for more security that is in the end paralyzing.
The Search for Quality on the Web
NEW YORK – In the not-so-distant future, students will be able to graduate from high school without ever touching a book.
Twenty years ago, they could graduate from high school without ever using a computer.
In only a few decades,amp#160;computer technology and the Internet have transformed the core principles of information, knowledge, and education.
Indeed, today you can fit more books on the hard disk of your laptop computer than in a bookstore carrying 60,000 titles.
The number of Web pages on the Internet is rumored to have exceeded 500 billion, enough to fill 10 modern aircraft carriers with the equivalent number of 500-page, one-pound books.
Such analogies help us visualize the immensity of the information explosion and ratify the concerns that come with it.
Web search engines are the only mechanism with which to navigate this avalanche of information, so they should not be mistaken for an optional accessory, one of the buttons to play with, or a tool to locate the nearest pizza store.
Search engines are the single most powerful distribution points of knowledge, wealth, and yes, misinformation.
When we talk about Web search, the first name that pops up is, of course, Google.
It is not far-fetched to say that Google made the Internet what it is today.
It shaped a new generation of people who are strikingly different from their parents.
Baby boomers might be the best placed to appreciate this, since they experienced Rock 'n’ Roll as kids and Google as parents.
Google’s design was based on statistical algorithms.
But search technologies that are based on statistical algorithms cannot address the quality of information, simply because high-quality information is not always popular, and popular information is not always high-quality.
You can collect statistics until the cows come home, but you cannot expect statistics to produce an effect beyond what they are good for.
In addition, statistics collection systems are backward-looking.
They need time for people to make referrals, and time to collect them.
Therefore, new publications and dynamic pages that change their content frequently are already beyond the scope of the popularity methods, and searching this material is vulnerable to rudimentary techniques of manipulation.
For example, the inefficiencies of today’s search engines have created a new industry called Search Engine Optimization, which focuses on strategies to make Web pages rank high against the popularity criteria of Google-esque search engines.
The underlying idea behind semantic technology is to teach computers how the world operates.
For example, when a computer encounters the word “bill,” it would know that “bill” has 15 different meanings in English.
When the computer encounters the phrase “killed the bill,” it would deduce that “bill” can only be a proposed law submitted to a legislature, and that “kill” could mean only “stop.”
By contrast, “kill bill” would only be the title of the movie by that name.
At the end, a series of deductions like these would handle entire sentences and paragraphs to yield an accurate text-meaning representation.
To achieve this level of dexterity in handling languages by computer algorithms, an ontology must be built.
Ontology is neither a dictionary nor a thesaurus.
It is a map of interconnected concepts and word senses that reflect relationships such as those that exist between the concepts of “bill” and “kill.”
Building an ontology encapsulating the world’s knowledge may be an immense task, requiring an effort comparable to compiling a large encyclopedia and the expertise to build it, but it is feasible.
Several start-up companies around the world, like 
 Hakia
 , 
 Cognition Search
 , and 
 Lexxe
 , have taken on this challenge.
The result of these efforts remains to be seen.
But how would a semantic search engine solve the information quality problem?
The answer is simple: precision.
Once computers can handle natural languages with semantic precision, high-quality information will not need to become popular before it reaches the end user, unlike what is required by Web search today.
Semantic technology promises other means of assuring quality, by detecting the richness and coherence of the concepts encountered in a given text.
If the text includes a phrase like “Bush killed the last bill in the Senate,”amp#160;does the rest of the text include coherent concepts?
Or is this page a spam page that includes a bunch of popular single-liners wrapped with ads?
Semantic technology can discern what it is.
Given humans’ limited reading speed (200-300 words per minute) and the enormous volume of available information, effective decision-making today calls for semantic technology in every aspect of knowledge refinement.
We cannot afford a future in which knowledge is at the mercy of popularity and money. 
The Second Coming of Barack Obama
WASHINGTON, DC – The race was tough, but US President Barack Obama has won re-election.
The question now, for the United States and the world, is what will he do with a fresh four-year term?
To win re-election with a still-weak economy and unemployment close to 8% was not easy.
Many leaders – Nicolas Sarkozy, Gordon Brown, and José Luis Rodríguez Zapatero come to mind – have been swept away by economic discontent in recent years.
Although the financial disaster erupted on George W. Bush’s watch, after eight years of a Republican presidency, Obama had to carry the burden of an anemic recovery.
Obama won not only because of his extraordinary personal resilience, but also because a sufficient number of middle-class voters, while unhappy with the pace of economic progress, sensed that an Obama presidency would help them more than the policies championed by his Republican challenger, Mitt Romney, which were perceived as tilted to the affluent.
Moreover, America’s ongoing demographic transformation makes it harder for candidates who are unable to reach out strongly to Latinos and other minority communities – something that Romney singularly failed to do – to carry the country.
Some aspects of the campaign, particularly the amount of money spent and its negative tone, struck many observers as objectionable.
But the competitiveness of American democracy – the fact that an alternative always exists, and that those in power have to fight hard to stay there – was on admirable display for the whole world to see.
Obama will embark on his second term with the global economy at a crossroads.
In the US, the uneven and weak recovery has been sustained by extraordinarily expansive monetary policies and ongoing large fiscal deficits.
While corporate coffers hold mountains of cash, private investment stagnates.
In Japan, solid economic performance remains elusive, while prime ministers succeed each other at a breathtaking pace.
Likewise, Europe is on life support, thanks to European Central Bank President Mario Draghi’s astute maneuvering and promises of unlimited intervention in sovereign-debt markets.
But unemployment is at its highest in decades and growth has essentially stalled, even in Germany, while the troubled southern economies are mired in deep recession.
The situation in Greece, moreover, has become socially unsustainable; Greece is small, but a total collapse there could have very negative financial and psychological effects elsewhere.
The world’s emerging-market economies are in better shape; but, while their underlying trend growth in potential output is much higher than that of the advanced economies, there is no cyclical de-coupling.
The world economy is an interdependent whole: trouble in any important part of it is transmitted globally.
That is true beyond the purview of narrowly macroeconomic problems as well: for example, the need to address climate change can no longer be ignored.
The US cannot determine the world economy’s future on its own, but the course taken by America nonetheless has huge global importance, given that it remains the largest economy and retains considerable influence in venues such as the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank, and the G-20.
American ideas continue to affect the policy debate worldwide.
So, what should Obama’s top economic-policy priorities be in his second term?
Despite the difficulties facing the global economy, there are huge investible resources in the US, China, Germany, and elsewhere.
While there are climate and resource constraints, we are still at the beginning of a technological revolution that holds tremendous potential for higher productivity and greater prosperity, along with challenging implications for labor and employment.
But sustainable economic growth requires that those with investible resources actually invest them.
And that will not happen unless and until a broad-based recovery of the middle- and lower-income groups in advanced economies, including the US, delivers the prolonged rebound in demand for which investors are waiting.
There are plenty of profits to be made – actual taxes on capital are not too high, and cheap finance is available to the corporate sector.
But the concentration of income at the top – more than 90% of the gains from US economic growth in 2011, for example, went to the top 1% – is constraining broad-based recovery and leaving macroeconomic policy caught between the need for continued “stimulus” and the dangers of growing public debt and asset bubbles inflated by record-low interest rates.
In other words, a more balanced income distribution is not only a social or ethical issue; it is crucial for macroeconomic and, indeed, long-term corporate success.
This is vital for many countries, above all the US and China.
Then there is the pressing need – in the US and globally – for education and appropriate skill formation.
Without the skills required by new and incipient technologies, too many workers will simply be unemployable.
A key benefit of prioritizing broad-based quality education is that it also helps to solve the income-distribution problem.
Finally, there is the need for effective international cooperation.
China’s current-account surplus has declined, but now northern Europe runs a $500 billion surplus, while demand in southern Europe is collapsing and the US is running a deficit that is close to $500 billion.
The longer-term challenge of climate change and extreme weather patterns also requires global cooperation and a post-election shift toward much stronger US engagement, which could unleash a multifaceted clean-energy revolution, fueling large job-creating investments and a new cycle of growth.
After America’s long, hard-fought election campaign, it is time for comprehensive policy reforms.
One hopes that the US Congress will recognize this as well, leading to support for measures that could help hundreds of millions of people in the US and around the world.
The Secret of Harvard’s Success
AHMEDABAD, INDIA – No country dominates any industry as much as the United States dominates higher education.
According to Shanghai Jiao-Tong University’s Academic Ranking of World Universities, for example, 17 of the world’s 20 best universities are American, with Harvard topping the list by a substantial margin.
The traditional explanation for this phenomenon – America’s wealth, large population, generous research funding, widespread private philanthropy, and ability to attract scholars from around the world – is incomplete.
Although the US boasts the world’s largest economy, it comprises only one-quarter of global GDP, and possesses roughly one-twentieth of the world’s population.
And its support for research is not unique.
Moreover, according to the accepted explanation, large countries such as France, Germany, Japan, and even China and India should also be represented at the top of global university rankings.
But they appear only sparsely anywhere in such rankings, if even at all.
In fact, these countries lack a crucial piece of the puzzle: America’s innovative governance model for higher education.
Harvard was established as a public institution in 1636 by the authorities of the Massachusetts Bay Colony.
Its value to Massachusetts is exemplified in the Commonwealth’s post-independence state constitution, ratified in 1780, which includes a section about the university’s function and boundaries.
When Harvard alumni dominated the Massachusetts legislature, the university was given support and consideration.
But, in the 1840’s, mass immigration, fueled by the Irish potato famine, altered the state’s demographic balance, enabling populists to gain control of the legislature.
Almost immediately, Harvard came under attack for being too elitist, too exclusive, and too expensive.
Even its curriculum was challenged.
Over the next two decades, the state increasingly impeded Harvard’s functioning by, for example, refusing to release funds and obstructing the appointment of professors.
This behavior culminated in 1862, when the legislature blocked a university president’s appointment.
In response, Harvard requested that it be placed “out of the reach of ordinary political strife and change” and into the “hands of alumni who have the interests of education most at heart.”
On April 29, 1865, this radical proposal scraped through the Massachusetts General Court (the state’s bi-cameral legislature), owing to intense lobbying and the goodwill generated by Harvard alumni’s distinguished service for the Union during the Civil War.
Since then, Harvard’s Board of Overseers, has been controlled exclusively by alumni.
Inspired by Harvard’s success, other universities – starting with Yale University and the College of William and Mary – took similar action.
This “genuine American method,” as Charles William Eliot, Harvard’s longest-serving president, called it, became the norm not only for private universities, but also for public institutions, such as the University of Michigan and Purdue University, and even religious institutions like the University of Notre Dame and Duke University.
Today, 19 of the top 20 American universities in US News and World Report’s much-watched rankings are controlled by alumni (defined as 50% or more representation on the Board of Trustees).
The only exception, the California Institute of Technology, has a board with 40% alumni representation.
Of the top five, three (Harvard, Yale, and Columbia) are managed entirely by alumni, and two (Princeton and Stanford) are under 90% alumni control.
Alumni run the show even at public institutions such as Purdue (90%) and Michigan (63%).
On average, alumni make up 63% of the boards of the top 100 US universities, both public and private.
In general, a higher percentage of alumni on the board is associated with a higher ranking, increased selectivity, and a larger endowment.
After all, no group cares more about a university’s prestige than its alumni, who gain or lose esteem as their alma mater’s ranking rises or falls.
Indeed, alumni have the most incentive to donate generously, and to manage the university effectively.
Given their intimate knowledge of the university, alumni are also the most effective leaders.
Through alumni networks, board members can acquire information quickly and act upon it without delay.
All great universities are nonprofit organizations, created to administer higher education, which benefits society as a whole.
But US universities found a way to integrate competition’s benefits into the European concept of nonprofit, or so-called eleemosynary, corporations.
The lack of profit does not diminish an alumni-dominated board’s incentive to compete for prestige by, for example, hiring distinguished faculty, accepting meritorious students, and striving for athletic or artistic achievement.
Using alumni to infuse the benefits of competition into nonprofit institutions exemplifies the genius of American adaptation.
Countries that aspire to compete with US universities should take note.
The Secret Policeman’s Fall
As Hungary’s Prime Minister Ferenc Gyurcsany found out when a recorded admission that his government was lying incited riots, openness in government doesn’t come easily in Eastern Europe’s new democracies.
Like Hungary, post-communist Romania has struggled to increase transparency and honesty in what was once one of the world’s most closed societies.
As we struggled, continued secrecy allowed an explosion of corruption and abuse of office.