The bulk of its efforts are dedicated to crisis prevention.
As Franklin D. Roosevelt said at the 1944 Bretton Woods Conference, where the IMF and the World Bank were established, “Economic diseases are highly communicable.
It follows, therefore, that the economic health of every country is a proper matter of concern to all its neighbors, near and distant.”
That is why the 44 countries in attendance, and the 188 that now belong to the IMF, agreed to “consult and agree on international monetary changes which affect each other… and they should assist each other to overcome short-term exchange difficulties.”
Operationally, this is expressed in so-called Article IV consultations.
These formal policy discussions between the IMF and member governments, typically carried out annually, are written up, reviewed by the Fund’s Board of Executive Directors (representing all 188 governments), and published for anyone to read online.
This is a standard of collective surveillance and transparency to which organizations addressing other issues should aspire.
The IMF has been instrumental in developing the tools with which countries measure, assess, and improve their current macroeconomic position: fiscal and monetary policy, as well as financial, currency, and price stability.
It helps countries find better ways to implement measures in all of these fields, and it seeks to identify broad lessons from the experience of many countries that may shed light on the options that any particular country has.
Through dialogue, research, advice, technical assistance, and training, the IMF has helped create a global community of practice.
Today, it is much easier to be a central bank president or a finance minister than it is to be a minister of health or justice.
This is not because the challenges are easier, but because the international community of practice, led by the IMF, provides a level of support that simply does not exist in other areas.
The IMF’s most controversial activities come during times of crisis management and resolution.
Countries ask for IMF financial assistance when they are in trouble and have lost or fear losing the ability to borrow on international markets.
The IMF can mobilize hundreds of billions of dollars of member countries’ money to give borrowers the time to get back on their feet.
Its resources dwarf the sums that the international community can mobilize for other issues, because its money is lent and is supposed to be paid back.
In exchange for its financial support, the IMF typically requires countries to address the imbalances that caused their problems, not only so that they can repay the money, but also for their own good, so that they can restore their creditworthiness (and hence their access to capital markets).
But it is too easy to confuse the pain caused by the crisis itself with that caused by the remedy.
To be sure, the IMF inevitably makes mistakes, partly because the questions and issues it must address are constantly changing, so that it never knows whether the current state of thinking is adequate to new challenges.
But it is a sufficiently open organization that it can and must be responsive to its critics.
Now consider the alternative.
A world without the IMF looks a lot like today’s Venezuela.
Hugo Chávez became the darling of IMF bashers, including Stiglitz, when he suspended Article IV consultations in 2004.
As a consequence, Venezuelans lost access to the basic economic information that the country is obligated to share, through the IMF, with the world.
The break prevented the international community from expressing its voice as the country undertook truly irresponsible policies, spending in 2012 as if the price of oil was $197 a barrel, not $107.
With the collapse in the price of oil since then, the economy has gone into a tailspin: GDP is contracting at a record pace, inflation is in excess of 200%, the currency has plunged to less than 10% of its previous value, and massive shortages have emerged.
Venezuela has tried to finance itself with the help of the China Development Bank, which does not impose the kind of conditionality that IMF bashers dislike.
Instead, the CDB lends on secret terms, for uses that are undisclosed and corrupt, and with built-in privileges for Chinese companies in areas like telecommunications (Huawei), appliances (Haier), cars (Chery), and oil drilling (ICTV).
The Chinese have not required that Venezuela do anything to increase the likelihood that it regains creditworthiness.
They merely demand more oil as collateral.
Whatever the IMF’s faults, the CDB is a disgrace.
The tragedy is that most Venezuelans (and many citizens of other countries) believe that the IMF is there to hurt, not help.
As a consequence, they eschew the massive resources and wisdom that the international community can offer at a time of economic crisis to lessen the pain and hasten recovery.
That has left them far worse off than the IMF bashers can bring themselves to admit.
What Is the International Community?
PARIS – Despite the frequency with which the phrase “international community” is invoked, its precise meaning – like its origins – is difficult to discern.
And, as France’s recent intervention in Mali has shown, this ambiguity lies at the root of many of today’s most urgent foreign-policy problems.
For some, an international community simply does not exist.
For others, the term refers, more pragmatically, to all countries when they decide to act together.
Still another, more accurate definition encompasses all countries with international influence – that is, any country whose identity and sovereignty is recognized, and that chooses to participate in global discussions and decision-making.
Beyond semantics lies the more consequential, but equally ambiguous, question of the international community’s role and responsibility.
Just as too broad a definition could undermine a country’s sovereignty, too narrow a definition – like that which seems to predominate today – allows violence and instability to proliferate.
For centuries, sovereign states have regulated their relations – from ending wars and demarcating borders to establishing diplomatic privileges and conducting trade – with treaties.
Together, these official agreements comprise international law, which compensates for its lack of specific penalties by establishing strict and unambiguous concepts and one overarching sanction – universal blame for its transgression – that matters to everybody.
And yet, throughout these centuries of treaty-making, violence between countries persisted.
So countries began to deepen and develop international law by building shared institutions.
The process began quietly, with the establishment in 1874 of the Union Générale des Postes (which later became the Universal Postal Union), and went virtually unnoticed by those in fields that lacked any need for global agreements.
The devastation of World War I, however, highlighted the need for stronger international cooperation on peace-keeping, leading to the establishment of the League of Nations.
But the organization was weak and inefficient, largely owing to the United States’ refusal to ratify its charter.
As a result, it failed to accomplish its primary objective of preventing another world war.
In the wake of World War II, a stronger and more influential institution – the United Nations – was established.
The UN, which has a specialized agency for each aspect of a humane society, has successfully supported decolonization, helped to build states, and averted the spread of regional conflicts, especially that between Israelis and Palestinians.
UN efforts have also led to the eradication of many infectious diseases; the adoption in 1982 of the Convention on the Law of the Sea, the principal framework for handling maritime disputes; and the establishment in 1988 of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, whose regular reports play an important role in assessing hazards related to climate change.
But the UN was unable to avert the Cold War, wars in Algeria, Vietnam, and Yugoslavia, or genocide in Cambodia and Rwanda.
Contrary to expectations, the collapse of communism did not bolster international cooperation.
On the contrary, all international negotiations – on global warming, financial regulation, and nuclear disarmament (despite the efforts of US President Barack Obama and former Russian President Dmitri Medvedev to conclude a bilateral nuclear-disarmament agreement) – launched since the end of the twentieth century have failed.
Another force – global public opinion – is needed to strengthen and expand the scope of international law.
Indeed, global public opinion, galvanized by the actions of NGOs, has pushed governments to sign treaties, such as the 1997 Mine Ban Treaty, and to establish international institutions, such as the International Criminal Court in 1998.
Global public opinion should be channeled more effectively in order to compel the international community to take responsibility in new areas.
This will require a more acute collective awareness of the violence and chaos threatening territories and people worldwide, including in Somalia, Haiti, Liberia, Sierra Leone, and, most recently, Mali.
In January, France, which no longer has strategic or economic interests in western Africa, responded to a request from Mali’s citizens and caretaker leaders to intervene to prevent Islamist rebels from Libya and Algeria from overrunning the country.
Four months after France’s military operation successfully expelled occupying forces from northern Mali, most French troops and equipment are headed home.
The intervention lacked the support of the international community, which, with the exception of the United Kingdom, failed to understand the sense of responsibility that underpinned France’s decision.
But, with French forces on their way out and Mali desperately in need of rebuilding, the international community must adopt a new perspective and offer its support.
The UN, which carries the mantle for the international community, has already deployed a peacekeeping force to Mali.
Moreover, in accordance with its regulations and practices, the UN has called for a presidential election, which has now been set for July 28.
But, given that Mali lacks political parties with popular support, candidates who command respect, and a permanent polling-station system, an election held so soon would probably bring an international civil servant to power – an outcome that could reignite internal conflicts.
Restoring security in Mali requires dialogues between village and tribal leaders.
Likewise, rebuilding the country’s infrastructure depends on talks between any remaining municipal authorities and village leaders.
Both processes will take time, and neither can be completed successfully without external support.
A country that lacks a government cannot rebuild after a crisis without help.
That does not mean forcing it to follow an unrealistic and potentially dangerous electoral ritual just because it is embedded in UN regulations.
The international community should support Mali’s gradual process of renewal where it counts – on the ground in the country’s conflict-battered communities.
And it is up to the global public to stand up for that idea.
Deflation and Democracy
PRINCETON – The history of finance is partly the history of a struggle for a stable, secure way to measure value.
And, like any quest for certainty in our unpredictable world, it was doomed to failure.
The latest financial crisis powerfully highlights this vulnerability, as it destroys any sense that we can put an accurate price on assets.
Most people are now convinced that this shortcoming is inherent in the financial system.
But uncertainties about value also expose deep problems in the political order.
In the past, metallic money provided an inconvenient and unsatisfactory solution to the question of value.
It was inconvenient because gold was awkward for everyday transactions, and silver had too little value for major transfers. 
Moreover, metallic money was prone to unpredictable shifts in value with the discovery of new supplies.
The arrival of silver from the New World in the sixteenth century triggered sustained inflation.
The discovery of gold in California in the mid-nineteenth century, and in Alaska, South Africa, and Australia 50 years later, also produced mild inflation, while the absence of such new discoveries in the 1870’s and 1880’s led to mild deflation.
Consequently, many economists and politicians concluded that paper money could be more easily controlled and more stable.
This innovation, which was dependent on high-security paper-making and printing techniques, transformed the twentieth century.
But it initially produced a much less stable outcome, because of the strong temptation of political abuse.
Instead of moderate inflation, most of the twentieth century was wildly inflationary, as governments over-issued currency.
In the last two decades of the twentieth century, however, an intellectual revolution occurred.
Entrusting monetary policy to an independent central bank promised to be a perfect way to counter the political pressure to print money.
At the United States Federal Reserve, Paul Volcker engineered a sustained and successful process of disinflation beginning in 1979.
Europe learned the same lesson with the move to monetary union and the creation of the European Central Bank to manage its new currency, the euro.
As a result, people assumed that the problem of monetary stability had been solved, and that they could pile up assets and then use them as collateral to borrow ever-larger sums.
But the large-scale destruction of financial assets because of underlying uncertainty about the extent of losses in the wake of the sub-prime crisis, and especially after the bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers, shook that assumption.
Deflation that emanates from the financial sector is lethal. It is more difficult to deal with than inflation, in part for the technical reason that interest rates can be reduced only to zero.
The closer to zero they fall, the more problematic monetary policy becomes.
The policy instruments no longer work.
Central banks have expanding balance sheets, but prices continue to fall and uncertainty rises.
There is a further reason why deflation is such a threat, and why policymakers setting out to eliminate it have a much tougher task than inflation fighters: all prices do not move down; in particular debts do not adjust because they are fixed in nominal terms. 
Inflation and deflation of debts produce very different outcomes.
Inflation reduces the value of debt, which for many people and companies feels like slowly sipping champagne, producing a nice buzz of light-headed excitement as they are unburdened.
Deflation, on the other hand, increases debt, and feels like being smothered by a lead blanket.
In the interwar Great Depression, the economist Irving Fisher accurately described the process of debt deflation, in which lenders, worried by the deterioration of their asset quality, called in their loans, pushing borrowers to liquidate assets.
That, in turn, merely drove down prices further, leading to more credit rationing, bankruptcies, and bank failures.
The political response to deflation is to call for a stronger state.
Dealing with deflation is impossible within the bounds of normal market operations.
Only the state is reliable enough to take on all debt, which private institutions are too risk-intolerant to hold.
But economists’ abstract description of the resulting state intervention as an expansion of “aggregate demand” conceals the fact that the government conducts specific expenditures and makes political decisions that rescue specific businesses and individuals.
In the climate of scarcity that characterizes debt deflations, the specificity of bailout operations inevitably leads to intense political debate.
We see this in the current discussion about the distributional effects of rescuing the automobile industry; or the worry that hedge funds, which are widely blamed for today’s financial malaise, should have access to the Fed’s emergency credit lines.
Currently, parallels are being drawn to Japan’s experience in the 1990’s – a “lost decade” in economic terms that also undermined the legitimacy of the ruling Liberal Democratic Party.
The Great Depression produced more alarming outcomes, as the political response to deflation throughout Central Europe and Latin America destroyed the prevailing order, including several democracies.
Statism has been a characteristically twentieth-century response to new uncertainty. Its inadequacy may lead to the formulation of a much older answer: revulsion against the market economy, accompanied by indiscriminate condemnation of debt and debt instruments.
Indeed, as governments scramble to respond to the current crisis, we should remember that deflation tends to produce not only radical anti-capitalism, but also a profound hostility to any kind of economic or political organization.
The Deflation Bogeyman
BRUSSELS – Central banks throughout the developed world have been overwhelmed by the fear of deflation.
They shouldn’t be: The fear is unfounded, and the obsession with it is damaging.
Japan is a poster child for the fear.
In 2013, decades of (gently) falling prices prompted the Bank of Japan to embark on an unprecedented monetary offensive.
But while headline inflation increased for a while, the factors driving that increase – a competitive depreciation of the yen and a tax increase – did not last long.
Now, the country is slipping back into near-deflation – a point that panicked headlines underscore.
But, contrary to the impression created by media reports, the Japanese economy is far from moribund.
Unemployment has virtually disappeared; the employment rate continues to reach new highs; and disposable income per capita is rising steadily.
In fact, even during Japan’s so-called “lost decades,” per capita income grew by as much as it did in the United States and Europe, and the employment rate rose, suggesting that deflation may not be quite as nefarious as central bankers seem to believe.
In the US and Europe, there is also little sign of an economic calamity resulting from central banks’ failure to reach their inflation targets.
Growth remains solid, if not spectacular, and employment is rising.
There are two key problems with central banks’ current approach.
First, they are focused on consumer prices, which is the wrong target.
Consumer prices are falling for a simple reason: energy and other raw material prices have declined by more than half in the last two years.
The decline is therefore temporary, and central banks should look past it, much as they looked past the increase in consumer prices when oil prices were surging.
Instead, central banks should focus on the rate of revenue increase, measured in nominal GDP growth; that is, after all, what matters for highly indebted governments and enterprises.
By this measure, there is no deflation: The GDP price index (called GDP deflator) in developed countries is increasing by 1-1.5%, on average.
In the eurozone, it is rising at 1.2%.
This may fall short of the European Central Bank’s target of “below but close to 2%,” but not by a margin substantial enough to justify the ECB’s increasingly aggressive use of monetary instruments to stimulate the economy.
Moreover, nominal GDP growth exceeds the long-term interest rate.
When, as is usually the case, the long-term interest rate is higher than the GDP growth rate, the wealthy may accumulate wealth faster than the rest of the economy – a point made by the economist Thomas Piketty.
But today, nominal GDP growth far exceeds average long-term interest rates (which, in some countries, include risk premia of up to 100 basis points) – even in the eurozone, where nominal GDP growth is expected to reach about 3% this year.
This means that financing conditions are as favorable as they were at the peak of the credit boom in 2007, and much better than they have been at any other point in the last 20 years.
One might expect this evidence to compel central bankers to rethink their current concerns about deflation.
But they remain committed to pursuing their inflation targets, convinced that even a slight bout of deflation could initiate a downward spiral, with falling demand causing prices to decline further.
This is their second mistake.
Of course, a deflationary spiral is possible, and its consequences could be serious.
If real interest rates were significantly positive, demand could plummet, pushing down prices to the point that it becomes impossible for borrowers to service their debts.
Such a spiral contributed to the Great Depression in the US in the 1930s, with prices falling, in some years, by some 20-30%.
But we are nowhere near such conditions today.
In fact, nominal interest rates are at zero, while the broadest price indices are increasing, albeit gently.
Given that financing conditions are so favorable, it is not surprising that domestic demand has remained robust, allowing unemployment to return to pre-crisis lows almost everywhere.
The eurozone is the only large developed economy where unemployment remains substantial, and thus the only economy where the case could be made for a downside risk of deflation.
But even in the eurozone, GDP growth is slightly above its (admittedly very meager) potential, so that the remaining output gap is being closed gradually.
Furthermore, the only reason why unemployment remains high in the eurozone is that the labor-force participation rate has continued to increase throughout the recession; and, indeed, employment is returning to pre-crisis levels.
This is the exact opposite of what the deflation hawks warn about.
The popular “discouraged worker” hypothesis holds that a slide into deflation is costly, because a long recession induces workers to leave the labor force altogether.
That is simply not the case in Europe today.
The evidence is clear.
Developed-economy central banks should overcome their irrational fear of a deflationary spiral, and stop trying desperately to stimulate demand.
Otherwise, they will find themselves with massively expanded balance sheets, and very little to show for it.
Deflation Doldrums?
CAMBRIDGE – The rate of inflation is now close to zero in the United States and several other major countries. The Economist recently reported that economists it had surveyed predict that consumer prices in the US and Japan will actually fall for 2009 as a whole, while inflation in the euro zone will be only 0.6%.
South Korea, Taiwan, and Thailand will also see declines in consumer price levels.
The prospect of falling prices reflects the collapse of industrial production, the resulting high level of unemployment, and the dramatic decline in commodity prices.
Industrial production is falling at double-digit rates in the negative-inflation countries, and the price index for all commodities is down more than 30% over the past year.
Deflation is potentially a very serious problem, because falling prices – and the expectation that prices will continue to fall – would make the current economic downturn worse in three distinct ways.
The most direct adverse impact of deflation is to increase the real value of debt.
Just as inflation helps debtors by eroding the real value of their debts, deflation hurts them by increasing the real value of what they owe.
While the very modest extent of current deflation does not create a significant problem, if it continues, the price level could conceivably fall by a cumulative 10% over the next few years.
If that happens, a homeowner with a mortgage would see the real value of his debt rise by 10%.
Since price declines would bring with them wage declines, the ratio of monthly mortgage payments to wage income would rise.
In addition to this increase in the real cost of debt service, deflation would mean higher loan-to-value ratios for homeowners, leading to increased mortgage defaults, especially in the US.
A lower price level would also increase the real value of business debt, weakening balance sheets and thus making it harder for companies to get additional credit.
The second adverse effect of deflation is to raise the real interest rate, that is, the difference between the nominal interest rate and the rate of “inflation.”
When prices are rising, the real interest rate is less than the nominal rate since the borrower repays with dollars that are worth less.
But when prices are falling, the real interest rate exceeds the nominal rate.
This is exacerbated by the fact that borrowers can deduct only nominal interest payments when calculating their taxable income.
Because the US Federal Reserve and other central banks have driven their short-term interest rates close to zero, they cannot lower rates further in order to prevent deflation from raising the real rate of interest.
Higher real interest rates discourage credit-financed purchases by households and businesses.
This weakens overall demand, leading to steeper declines in prices.
The resulting unusual economic environment of falling prices and wages can also have a damaging psychological impact on households and businesses.
With deflation, we are heading into unknown territory.
If prices fall at a rate of 1%, could they fall at a rate of 10%?
If the central bank cannot lower interest rates further to stimulate the economy, what will stop a potential downward spiral of prices?
Such worries undermine confidence and make it harder to boost economic activity.
Some economists have said that the best way to deal with deflation is for the central bank to flood the economy with money in order to persuade the public that inflation will rise in the future, thereby reducing expected real long-term interest rates.
That advice would lead central banks to keep expanding the money supply and bank reserves even after doing so no longer lowers interest rates.
In fact, the Federal Reserve, the Bank of England, and the Bank of Japan are doing just that under the name of “quantitative easing.”
Not surprisingly, central bankers who are committed to a formal or informal inflation target of about 2% per year are unwilling to abandon their mandates openly and to assert that they are pursuing a high rate of inflation.
Ironically, although central banks are now focused on the problem of deflation, the more serious risk for the longer term is that inflation will rise rapidly as their economies recover and banks use the large volumes of recently accumulated reserves to create loans that expand spending and demand.
Defusing Iran’s Oil Weapon
Like North Korea, the Iranian government will not shy from a showdown over its nuclear program.
Why should it?
A nuclear weapon is the ultimate guarantee that the United States can never do to Iran what it did to Iraq.
Moreover, this struggle with the US rallies much-needed domestic support.
What, then, can the US do to undermine Iran’s position?
As the world’s fourth largest oil exporter, Iran has profited mightily from the tripling of global oil prices over the last four years.
Its economic stability is dependent on oil revenues, so it is here that Iran’s rulers are vulnerable.
American diplomats are never going to persuade the UN Security Council to impose sanctions on Iran’s energy exports.
But the Bush administration can seek ways to contain global energy prices – and it should begin by refusing to be baited into escalating tensions whenever Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad pleases.
Ahmadinejad has proven resourceful in driving the diplomatic conflict.
His government has rejected international calls to halt uranium enrichment, ignored UN-imposed deadlines, armed Iraqi militias, supplied Hezbollah with weapons for attacks on Israel, denied the Holocaust, and staged military exercises near the Strait of Hormuz, through which 40% of the world’s sea-traded oil passes.
All these provocations add upward pressure on oil prices, enriching the Iranian government.
When Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei hinted that Iran could play the oil card, US Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice dismissed the idea.
“Let’s just remember that Iran is some 80% dependent on oil in its budget,” she said, so it is “not really able to live with a disruption.”
But if Iran pulls modest amounts of its oil from international markets, price increases are likely to offset (perhaps completely) any loss in revenue from the supply cut.
In addition, threats to the Strait of Hormuz would allow Iran to force prices up without any reduction in output.
It is not an accident that virtually every public move Iran’s government has made in the international arena over the past year has added risk to energy markets.
At times, the US has effectively – if unintentionally – undercut Iran’s position.
This summer, the Bush administration offered Iran direct talks.
In September, Bush made an unexpectedly low-key speech to the UN General Assembly.
Resistance to sanctions from Russia, China, and France has persuaded US officials to “allow more time for diplomacy” before pushing for punitive action in the Security Council.
All of these choices helped return slack to energy markets.
Oil prices have fallen from above $78 per barrel in mid-July to less than $60 in early October.
The drop – due in no small measure to an easing of tensions over Iran’s nuclear program – is costing the Iranian government money, compounding the regime’s domestic problems.
Inflation in Iran is rising, perhaps to as high as 20%.
On October 1, Khamenei called on Ahmadinejad to address the growing problem.
There are price freezes on certain subsidized goods and services, and rising inflation makes these subsidies even more expensive for the government.
Indeed, the government indicates that it may begin rationing gasoline.
Unemployment stands at about 12%, and is probably twice as high among young people.
The US can undermine the Iranian regime by avoiding statements and actions that help drive energy prices higher and bolster Iran’s economy.
Administration officials should lower the political temperature.
They should again offer Iran direct talks.
Bush should invite Ahmadinejad to Washington.
Better yet, invite him to Crawford.
Make him breakfast.
Washington can also press the Saudis, who control virtually all of the world’s spare capacity, to keep their output high to contain prices.
Saudi Arabia’s ruling Sunnis are more threatened than is the US by Iran’s support for a shift in the regional balance of power toward Shia Muslims.
Yes, Ahmadinejad will probably find a way to re-escalate the conflict.
No one can stop Iran from threatening the Strait of Hormuz.
But no one can blame the US for that when Bush is offering to talk.
Iran probably needs two or three years to develop a nuclear weapon.
How strong will Ahmadinejad’s domestic position be then?
If the US does not provide him with threats that help rally domestic support, his failure to revitalize Iran’s economy will erode his standing at home.
Lower oil prices would mean less money to spend on domestic projects that buoy his popularity – or on the nuclear program.
If cutting into Iran’s oil income fails to weaken Ahmadinejad, the US would retain military options.
But undermining his domestic standing by limiting Iran’s revenues stands a better chance of succeeding than diplomatic efforts to persuade the regime to suspend uranium enrichment voluntarily, or coercive sanctions.
Easing tensions will not win Bush points with those who prefer a muscular strategy.
But the administration’s confrontational approach is failing, because it is precisely what Iran’s rulers want.
Defusing Russia’s Energy Weapon
COPENHAGEN – As winter approaches, many people in Central and Eastern Europe remember the chill caused last winter by Russia’s deliberate cut-off of gas supplies.
That shutdown was a harsh reminder that gas is now the Kremlin’s primary political instrument as it seeks to re-establish its privileged sphere of interest in what it thinks of as Russia’s “near-abroad.”
If Russia is allowed to continue imposing Moscow rules on Europe’s energy supplies, the result will be costly – not only for Europe, but for Russia as well.
So it is past time that the European Union stopped treating energy as a bilateral issue, with some of the larger member states trying to protect their own narrow interests at the expense of the common European good.
The EU urgently needs to build a common energy policy and a single market for natural gas.
Until both are established, there is a grave risk that Russia will use new blockades to continue the kind of divide-and-rule policy that the world has witnessed since Vladimir Putin came to power.
The planned Nord Stream gas pipeline on the bottom of the Baltic Sea is a good example of the problems that everyone in Europe is facing.
The pipeline has been established as a Russian-German-Dutch consortium, but it is the Russian energy giant Gazprom that is in the driver’s seat with 51% of the shares.
Nord Stream will enable Russia to deliver natural gas directly to Germany without using the existing land-based connections.
At first glance, there seems to be no problem.
But the real reason Russia wants to build Nord Stream – which is more expensive than the existing gas-pipeline network – is that it will enable Russia to interrupt gas supplies to EU member countries like Poland, the Baltic states, and neighbors like Ukraine, while keeping its German and other West European customers snug and warm.
Countries that have good reason to fear a Russian manufactured chill have loudly proclaimed that Nord Stream is politically rather than economically motivated.
After all, it would be much cheaper to expand existing land pipelines than to build undersea.
Moreover, Russia’s ability to meet future gas demand from commercially viable reserves suggests that Nord Stream could be used to cut off gas sales to unfavored clients.
Yet these concerns have been pushed aside by the powerful pro-Nord Stream lobby, led by former German chancellor Gerhard Schröder, who, having approved Nord Stream while in office, was quickly hired by Gazprom after he left it.
In most democracies, such a move would have quickly received prosecutorial attention.
But no serious investigation of the propriety of Schröder’s dealings was ever launched, perhaps because of the scale and importance of German-Russian economic ties.
This November, Nord Stream was given a surprising go-ahead by three Scandinavian countries that will lend their seabed to the project: Denmark, Sweden, and Finland.
They seem to regard the case as a “technical issue,” and are now satisfied because environmental guarantees have been given.
But Nord Stream is no “technical issue.”
The concerns of countries that fear being left out in the cold must be addressed, which is why it is necessary to establish a single EU market for natural gas.
That way, no one would be left exposed to Russian pressure.
Europe undoubtedly needs Russian gas, but fears that this gives Russia a monopolistic stranglehold over Europe are exaggerated.
Russia’s share of total EU gas imports is just above 40% today, compared to 80% in 1980.
Moreover, Russian gas represents only 6-7% of the EU’s total primary energy supply.
So, in general, dependence on Russian gas should not be feared.
The problem is that some countries in the eastern part of the EU are much more dependent on Russian gas than the average figures suggest.
Thus, they must be guaranteed the kind of solidarity that is fundamental to EU membership.
Last year’s experience with interrupted gas supplies did have one benefit: new life was blown into plans for alternative routes, like the Nabucco pipeline that is to bring Azeri gas to Europe through Turkey.
An early warning system on potential supply cuts has also been agreed between Russia and the EU.
And it looks like Ukraine’s Prime Minister Yulia Tymoshenko has charmed Prime Minister Putin into concluding a new gas deal.
Yet anxiety remains high in the countries most exposed to new supply cuts.
It is in Russia’s own interest that the EU deal with it as a united entity.
Continued fear and uncertainty about Russian gas supplies would undoubtedly lead the most exposed EU countries to seek to protect themselves by blocking EU-Russia negotiations on new partnership and cooperation agreements.
In his State of the Nation speech this November, Russian President Dmitri Medvedev stressed the need for modernization of the Russian economy.
Closer cooperation with the EU is the most obvious way to make this possible.
But, so long as Russia is perceived as an energy blackmailer and not a partner, such cooperation will be impossible.
Northeast Asia on the Brink
TOKYO – China’s refusal to attend this year’s summit with Japan and South Korea as scheduled comes at a trying moment for all three countries.
Although Asia is the world’s most dynamic region, it has a paucity of institutional mechanisms for resolving – or at least mitigating – international disputes of the type that are ratcheting up tension across the region.
Because the now-annual trilateral summits offer real hope for creating an institutionalized dialogue among Northeast Asia’s “Big Three,” China’s unwillingness to participate this year does not bode well.
Of course, international summits are usually an occasion for countries to sign agreements, not for the hard bargaining that can begin to improve their relations with one another.
But with China, Japan, and South Korea due to meet at a time of growing tension among all three countries, the three leaders could have seized the moment to enhance strategic stability across Northeast Asia.
Instead, tensions are now likely to continue to fester.
The first step in putting relations on a more stable footing is for each leader to acknowledge –and emphasize for their citizens – the ever-increasing interdependence of the three economies.
Trade, investment, and production chains now link China, Japan, and South Korea in ways that no one could have imagined 20 years ago.
As European history since 1945 has demonstrated, shared economic interests can provide a solid foundation for building both regional security, and ushering in historic reconciliations.
Moreover, the region’s greatest threat – North Korea’s nuclear arsenal – endangers all three countries.
While the threat may not affect them equally, none can afford a misstep.
So even security interests can serve to foster greater cooperation, if the countries’ leaders discuss and develop a common approach.
The sad paradox, however, is that, as economic integration among China, Japan, and South Korea has deepened, and even as their security risks have sometimes merged, their diplomatic ties have deteriorated.
Of course, none can fully entrust their security to the word of the others – Japan’s alliance with the United States is perhaps the only time in history when a great power has ever done that.
Each will undoubtedly pursue – and find the means to secure – its own interests.
But that does not mean that clashes are inevitable.
In today’s Asia, it is impossible to manage rival ambitions through hegemony, given the size of the countries involved and the structure of their alliances.
So all three countries must learn to live together amicably.
Here the first step is relatively straightforward:&#160; all three countries must give greater weight to factoring into their diplomatic calculations the others’ national-security fears.
They also need to recognize that rhetoric and actions aimed at domestic audiences, no less than actual policies, can inflame suspicions.
Unfortunately, key groups in all three countries claim that the contest for regional mastery now underway means that talk about cooperation is not only naïve, but obsolete.
Some Japanese and Korean strategic thinkers believe that China is intent not only on displacing the US as Asia’s leading power, but also on economic domination of the region.
They see a China seeking to re-establish itself as “The Middle Kingdom,” with its neighbors reduced to vassal and tributary states.
While China’s military capacities are no match for America’s, its current military build-up is viewed as posing unacceptable risks nonetheless, because China also is seeking technological means to negate America’s military advantages.
Should China succeed, its neighbors – which are increasingly tied to its economy – might adjust their policies to appease Chinese preferences.
A Sino-centric Asia could emerge without a shot being fired.
But the region looks very different through Chinese eyes.
From this perspective, a declining US is doing everything that it can to thwart China’s rise.
America might speak the language of cooperation, but its real game is containment.
So any sustained cooperation with the US and its regional allies – Japan and South Korea – would only help America to shackle China.
Instead, China should openly confront those neighbors with which it has disputed claims.
Given these disparate visions of what Asia looks like, is there any point in seeking cooperation among Northeast Asia’s Big Three?
A China that balks at participating in a trilateral summit seems to think there is not.
If challenged, all three would undoubtedly do what they must to preserve their security.
But to adopt confrontation as their preferred strategy would be a serious mistake.
Any conflict among them would leave them all significantly worse off.
And, when peace was restored, they would find themselves back at square one, still needing to build a regional order in which the others would play a big part.
The current situation in Northeast Asia does not require any of the three countries to abandon cherished national claims.
But their leaders must distinguish between those that are aspirations and those that are realizable, and they must begin to explain to their citizens this distinction.
None should reduce their diplomatic and security relations to a zero-sum game over claims to this or that island, for example. Nor should China’s continued rise, Korea’s eventual reunification, or Japan’s renaissance be regarded by the others as a strategic threat.
Crisis management is no way to sustain relationships that are economically close but riddled by rival claims and bitterly contested historical narratives.
As long as China, Japan, and South Korea regard every encounter with one another as an opportunity to settle scores or gain some strategic advantage, brinkmanship will remain Northeast Asia’s fate.
Indeed, the main beneficiary of the current tensions among the Big Three is the region’s most reckless actor – North Korea.
That outcome is as frustrating as it is ironic.
None of the Big Three can be seriously threatened without triggering direct resistance and the security guarantees of allies.
For this reason, the leaders should find a way to meet soon and commit themselves to seeking genuine cooperation, as well as to building mechanisms that will enable them to reconcile their visions and interests with those of the others.
De Gaulle at the Barricades
LONDON – By coincidence, this is a busy year for round-number anniversaries for France’s greatest leader since Napoleon.
Charles de Gaulle was born 120 years ago in Lille.
He died 40 years ago at his home in Colombey-les-deux-Églises, expiring of a heart attack as he played solitaire one evening.
Seventy years ago, he delivered his celebrated call to resistance over the BBC after flying to London from France as it collapsed in June 1940.
This year also marks a much less noted anniversary, an occasion on which de Gaulle showed how his rare combination of determination, political skill, and rhetorical ability could be brought to bear to face down determined opposition.
It was a central moment in the establishment of the Fifth Republic, which continues to this day.
The war in Algeria played the key role in enabling de Gaulle to return to power in May 1958, at the age of 67.
Though his memoirs paint a characteristic portrait of a leader who knew what he was doing, research for my new biography shows that his policy towards the crisis across the Mediterranean combined hope and frustration.
He hoped that France could dominate the National Liberation Front (FLN) militarily, and was frustrated at the extremely messy political situation on the ground and the difficulty of persuading the settlers that maintaining the status quo was untenable.
In 1958, he told a crowd in Algiers made up mainly of pieds noirs Europeans “Je vous ai compris” (“I have understood you”).
But, by 1960, euphoria had given way to rancor among those whom he had used to regain office but who now saw him as a traitor to be neutralized along with the regime he had brought into being.
The catalyst for what came to be known as “Barricades Week” was an interview published in the German newspaper Sueddeutsche Zeitung with the parachute general Jacques Massu, in which he said that part of the army regretted having called de Gaulle back to power, did not understand his policy, and was disappointed that he had become “a man of the left.”
Massu, a convinced Gaullist, should have known better than to say such home truths publicly, whatever his own frustrations.
He was promptly sidelined to a command in provincial France.
After a stormy meeting with de Gaulle at the Élysée Palace, Massu telephoned his chief of staff, Colonel Antoine Argoud, who had been pressing for a coup.
A general strike was called, and militant students threw up barricades in the center of Algiers.
When police attacked with tear gas, pieds noirs opened fire.
In the ensuing gun battle, 14 members of the security forces and eight demonstrators were killed, and 200 people were wounded.
“The hour has come to bring down the regime,” the extremist ideologue, Jean-Jacques Susini declared.
“The revolution will start from Algiers and reach Paris.”
De Gaulle was at Colombey, but returned immediately to Paris.
An official who saw him in the corridor of the palace recalled him muttering: “What a business!
What a business!”
At a cabinet meeting, he insisted that the challenge to the new republic had to be put down.
The prime minister, Michel Debré, was sent to Algiers, but the rebels treated him contemptuously, and he flew back empty handed.
Rumors flew of the creation of a shadow government by extremists in Paris.
Members of the presidential military staff were told to carry handguns.
Summoning Massu’s successor, General Jean Crépin, de Gaulle told him, “The Europeans do not want the Arabs to make a choice, [but] the Muslims do not want to be Bretons.
If the army collapses, it is Algeria [and] France which collapses.”
The decisive moment came when de Gaulle, in military uniform, went on television to demonstrate his mastery of the new medium.
“Well, my dear and old country, here we are again facing a heavy test,” he said. Insisting that self-determination was the only way ahead, he called on the army to reject even passive association with the insurrection and instructed it to re-establish public order.
If the state bowed before the challenge it faced, “France would be no more than a poor, broken toy floating on an ocean of uncertainty,” he warned.
Within 15 minutes of the General’s face fading from the screen, 40 army units in Algeria declared their loyalty.
The men at the barricades were persuaded to leave their stronghold; the insurrectionary leaders were either detained or escaped to Spain.
The defeat of the military revolt was the first time that the republican authority of Paris had been asserted over the pieds noirs who had helped to bring down the Fourth Republic.
De Gaulle’s firmness and rhetoric – aided, it must be said, by the fumbling of the rebels – established the primacy of the state.
The next day, de Gaulle’s face was drawn, but he was resolute and full of energy.
Ministers who sympathized with the settlers, notably the long-time Gaullist Jacques Soustelle, were sacked.
The National Assembly granted de Gaulle the power to rule by decree for a year.
Trade unions held a symbolic one-hour strike to back the government.
An opinion poll gave the General 75% backing.
The Fifth Republic was safe, and a historic page had been turned.
The disdain felt by de Gaulle, a man of the north, for the emotional settlers across the sea had deepened.
Two years later, after de Gaulle’s steeliness repulsed a second uprising, the Evian peace agreements between France and the FLN brought Algeria’s independence.
Demand or Supply?
CHICAGO – Economics is all about demand and supply.
Typically, the two are equal, and, if not, powerful forces push them towards each other.
But, with high and persistent levels of unemployment in the United States, there is a real question about the nature of the problem: is aggregate demand too low, or are there problems with supply?
President Barack Obama’s administration seems to think that the problem is one of demand, and has passed stimulus measure after stimulus measure, reducing taxes and increasing transfers and government spending in order to boost consumption and investment.
The Federal Reserve is of a similar mind, not only maintaining rock-bottom short-term interest rates, but also embarking on an adventurous policy targeting long-term rates.
Some progressive economists want even more.
Why have these policies not worked thus far in bringing down unemployment, even though the growth recovery is well under way?
The progressive economist says that stimulus worked, staving off a much deeper recession – if not worse – but that the measures were too timid to generate a robust recovery.
The conservative economist responds that it is precisely because the government has become so free with taxpayers’ money that households, fearful of future taxes, are hunkering down and increasing savings.
Moreover, the increasingly activist government has left businesses uneasy about future regulatory and tax measures, and thus reluctant to invest.
The truth probably lies somewhere in between.
Government spending – especially on unemployment benefits, aid to states, and some construction projects – probably helped avert a more wrenching downturn, but continued red ink worries households, which are also trying to rebuild savings and reduce debt after a spending binge.
The regulatory uncertainty created in areas such as health care makes it difficult not only for the health-care industry to make long-term investment decisions, but also for businesses to make long-term hires.
Nevertheless, before rushing to judgment about current policy, we should recognize the trend in recent US recoveries of slow job growth.
From 1960 until 1991, recoveries from recessions in the US were typically rapid.
From the trough of the recession, the economy recovered the lost jobs in eight months on average.
The recoveries from the recessions of 1991 and 2001 were very different.
For instance, in 2001, it took just one quarter for output to recover, but 38 months for jobs to come back.
Explanations abound.
Some economists argue that, unlike past recessions, in which workers were temporarily laid off from an industry only to be rehired as the recovery picked up, job losses starting in 1991 were more permanent.
Matters were exacerbated by firms’ postponement until a recession of hard choices about closing unviable plants and shedding workers.
As a result, unemployed workers had to find jobs in new industries, which took more time and training.
Others suggest that the Internet has made it easier for firms to hire quickly.
So, rather than hire in a panic at the first sign of recovery, as they did in the past, for fear that they will be unable to do so later and lose sales, firms today would rather ensure that the recovery is well established before hiring.
Hence also the growth in temporary hires today.
Regardless of what the right explanation is, the history of recent recessions suggests that we should not be surprised that the job recovery is taking time.
There is, however, an aspect of the problem that is different this time: layoffs in construction.
Therein lies an additional explanation for tepid job growth, as well as a salutary lesson about policy.
In the last boom, construction jobs expanded significantly, with investment in housing as a share of GDP increasing by 50% from 1997 to 2006.
As my colleague Erik Hurst and his co-authors have shown, states that had the largest rise in construction as a share of GDP in 2000-2006 tended to have the greatest contraction in that industry in 2006-2009.
These states also tended to have the largest rise in unemployment rates between 2006 and 2009.
The unemployed comprise not only construction workers, but also ancillary workers, such as real-estate brokers and bankers, as well as all those who work on houses, such as plumbers and electricians.
So the job losses extend far beyond those in the construction industry.
It is hard to believe that any increase in aggregate demand will boost the housing market – which, remember, was buoyed by visions of steady price appreciation that few seem likely to hold today – sufficiently to re-employ all these workers.
Hurst estimates that this “structural” unemployment may account for up to three percentage points of total unemployment.
In other words, were it not for construction, the US unemployment rate would be 6.5% – a far healthier situation than today.
Policymakers should remember that the housing boom was fueled by easy monetary policy, which sought to expand job growth as the US recovered from the last recession.
Indeed, high-school graduation rates dropped in Las Vegas as people left school for readily available unskilled construction jobs.
Now those uneducated unemployed are experiencing more than three times the unemployment rate of college graduates.
It will be very hard for them to return to the workforce.
The lesson for policymakers is clear: instead of constantly trying to boost spending and potentially creating problems for the future, a more sustainable way to improve job growth is to facilitate the “re-skilling” of the unemployed, especially those who were in construction-related jobs.
Eventually, better labor-force supply will create healthier and more sustainable demand.
Demilitarizing Muslim Politics
ISLAMABAD – Can Muslim governments free themselves from their countries’ powerful militaries and establish civilian control comparable to that found in liberal democracies?
This question is now paramount in countries as disparate as Egypt, Pakistan, and Turkey.
To predict how this struggle will play out, it helps to understand the region’s past.
Since Islam’s founding in the seventh century, it has maintained a tradition of deep military engagement in politics and governance.
Indeed, Islam’s increasing military prowess helped it to spread rapidly around the world.
The military was responsible for Islam’s implantation throughout the Middle East, as well as in Persia, Southern Europe, and the Indian sub-continent.
And once a Muslim state was established in newly conquered lands, the military became integral to its governance.
The military’s incorporation into the state was most prominent in the Ottoman Empire, whose rulers created a new type of military force that drew its manpower mostly from Islamic-ruled parts of Europe.
These Janissaries (Christian boys conscripted to serve in Ottoman infantry units) were either recruited from Europe or abducted from countries under Ottoman control.
Janissaries were not allowed to marry or to own property, which prevented them from developing loyalties outside of the imperial court.
But, after these restrictions were removed in the sixteenth century, and up until their extermination in the nineteenth century, the Janissaries became extremely powerful in Istanbul (and even established their own dynasty in Egypt).
Military domination in Muslim countries survived right up to the fall of the Ottoman Empire in the early twentieth century.
The colonial powers that filled the vacuum left by the declining empire had their own militaries, and therefore did not need local forces to govern.
But when Europeans withdrew from the Muslim world in the twentieth century, these forces rushed back in to wrest control of politics.
The military rose to power in Egypt, Pakistan, and other Arab countries in the early and mid-twentieth century.
In Turkey, the military proclaimed itself the guardian of the secular Republic of Turkey, founded in 1923 by Mustafa Kemal Atatürk, himself a military man.
Today, the revolutions rocking much of the Muslim world are bedeviled by Islam’s military past.
In the first phase of these popular uprisings, those who had been politically and economically excluded began to demand inclusion and participation.
Now a second phase is underway, marked by a serious effort to divest the old military establishment of its power.
This struggle is manifesting itself in different ways in Egypt, Turkey, and Pakistan.
In Egypt, the military’s takeover of the political transition after the ouster of former President Hosni Mubarak is unacceptable to Muslim and secular forces alike.
Most Egyptians want the soldiers to leave politics and return to their barracks.
Essam el-Erian, whose Islamist Freedom and Justice Party recently won the most seats in Egypt’s parliamentary elections, recently said that the Muslim Brotherhood (to which the party is closely tied), does not expect the military rulers to relinquish power voluntarily.
They will have to be persuaded to leave, and, if that does not work, forced out.
The parliament’s first step in ultimately removing them would be to defend its authority to choose the members of a planned 100-person constitutional assembly.
Meanwhile, in Turkey, the Justice and Development Party, which has strong roots in the country’s Islamic tradition, is now seeking to limit the military’s role.
The armed forces, however, claim a constitutional mandate to protect the Republic’s secular traditions.
And Turkey’s generals have intervened in politics several times to defend Kemalism – Atatürk’s secular ideology of modernization that pushed Islamic Turkey towards European-style liberalism.
But, of the three countries, Turkey has most successfully demilitarized its politics.
The charismatic prime minister, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, having won three consecutive elections, has been able to exert his authority over the military.
Controversially, he has jailed the army’s top general, İlker Başbuğ, whom Turkish prosecutors have accused –&#160;many say implausibly – of plotting to overthrow the government.
Finally, Pakistan’s military, which has governed the country for half of its 64-year history, is fighting hard to retain influence over policymaking.
Humbled by its inability to control United States military operations, including the one that killed Osama bin Laden, the army is struggling to play a hand in the country’s evolving relations with India and the US.
Nevertheless, wary of provoking widespread hostility, military leaders have indicated recently that they have no intention of intervening in politics.
Since the Arab Spring began, four long-established regimes have been removed, while others are under increasing pressure, giving ordinary Arabs hope that their demands will no longer be ignored, and that those who govern will be mindful of citizens’ needs.
But that – the real revolution – will happen only when true representatives of citizens, rather than the military, begin to set their countries’ political course.
Syria’s No-Solution Solution
MADRID – Syria is a blood-soaked shambles.
Four years of civil war have left more than 200,000 dead, one million wounded, and 6.7 million people internally displaced.
Another 3.8 million are living as refugees outside the country, and 13 million (out of a pre-war population of 20 million) are in need of humanitarian assistance.
Two illustrious United Nations special envoys – Kofi Annan and Lakhdar Brahimi – have resigned in the face of Syria's self-perpetuating spiral of violence.
But, against this bleak background, there is reason for cautious optimism.
Kurdish forces recently succeeded, after months of heavy fighting, in expelling the Islamic State from the border town of Kobane.
Moreover, the new UN envoy, Staffan de Mistura, has initiated a pragmatic and determined “Aleppo first" strategy, which aims to freeze military operations in the shattered city and facilitate the entry of aid.
Could this mark a turning point for Syria?
When the crisis in Syria erupted, nobody predicted how serious, protracted, and complex it would turn out to be.
For starters, observers underestimated citizens' ever-deepening sense of hopelessness, which has driven them to support jihadi groups or the Assad regime.
The conflict is also unique in its asymmetry, stemming from the numerous and disparate actors involved.
There are only two conventional armies: the Kurdish fighters and the forces loyal to President Bashar al-Assad.
The opposition comprises factions dependent on foreign sponsors.
Indeed, the “nationalist" opposition is merely an assortment of factions responsible for protecting small territories, and the “Free Syrian Army" is little more than a fantasy.
The stark reality is that the best-organized groups are the jihadists: the Islamic State, Jabhat al-Nusra, and the Islamic Front.
De Mistura's plan aims to stabilize the situation by shifting the policy focus away from a relentless military campaign – an approach that is benefiting only the Islamic State.
The plan's emphasis on Aleppo – which is not only a commercial hub and Syria's largest city, but also represents a sort of microcosm of the country – distinguishes it from the shaky cease-fires that have been implemented in Homs and elsewhere in the country.
The strategy's main strength is that it is not, in itself, a peace project.
Instead of requiring that any or all factions surrender or relinquish their weapons, it calls only for the cessation of heavy fighting, to allow for the delivery of humanitarian aid and prevent Aleppo's total collapse.
Such a freeze – guaranteed by an effective enforcement mechanism – would present an important opportunity to make progress in confidence-building.
Recent talks in Cairo and Moscow produced small, but not negligible, steps in that direction.
The objective should be to initiate a productive dialogue – and, ultimately, achieve consensus – among relevant actors.
In this proxy war, no solution will be possible without the agreement of the factions' main sources of support – Iran, Saudi Arabia, and Qatar.
Likewise, Turkey must not only address the inflow of refugees, security concerns along its border with Syria, and its position as a transit country for jihadists; it must also develop a coherent policy toward the Islamic State that is not subsumed in official anxiety over demands by the country's Kurdish minority.
Other powers will also have a key role to play.
Support by the United States for de Mistura's initiative symbolizes a quiet – and constructive – shift by President Barack Obama's administration from its demand that Assad step down immediately.
The European Union's policy toward Syria, however, remains confused, with member states having managed to agree only to create a “regional trust fund" to address the crisis.
Given the EU's strong interest in a more stable Syria, rooted in its geographical proximity, it is time for European leaders to take an unequivocal stance on Syria.
But a lasting solution to the conflict ultimately comes down to the Syrians.
In fact, the foundations for the kind of Syrian-led political solution that is needed were laid with the 2012 Geneva I Communiqué.
At that time, successive rounds of negotiations failed, owing to an all-or-nothing mentality, based largely on the mistaken assumption that Assad, like Tunisia's Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali and Egypt's Hosni Mubarak, would be ousted relatively quickly.
But de Mistura has made it clear that he aims neither to build a lasting peace with Assad nor to establish Assad's departure from power as a precondition for peace.
The solution lies between these two options, and the West – especially Europe – must accept that.
Placing unrealistic demands on a Syrian peace process is a sure route to failure.
Pragmatism is essential, even if it means that some relevant actors, including the EU, have to swallow their pride.
The stability of the region and the lives (and what is left of the livelihoods) of the Syrian people depend on it.
A Democratic Hurricane
NEW YORK – Nothing concentrates the mind like a full-blown crisis.
Like millions of other people in New York City, I heard Hurricane Sandy rattling my windows and battering my doors.
I was luckier than many. Rattling is all it did.
For many years, experts have been warning that such storms would overwhelm the city’s antiquated urban infrastructure.
Salt water came streaming into open subways.
Damage to the power supply reduced a third of Manhattan to a pre-modern state of darkness.
And that was just New York.
In parts of New Jersey, many people fortunate enough still to have a house are cut off by rivers of raw sewage lapping at their doors.
No one can say with certainty that this particular storm was caused by global warming, but almost all experts agree that the effects of polar-ice melt and sea-level rise will make future storms worse. And yet neither candidate in the United States’ presidential campaign bothered to mention the potentially catastrophic consequences of climate change.
In this sense, Hurricane Sandy was like gun violence.
Throughout the campaign season – and despite several highly publicized mass shootings in this period – neither President Barack Obama nor his challenger, Mitt Romney, wished to discuss the problem of laws in many states that allow almost anyone to carry lethal weapons and spray death around at random.
The reason, of course, is that there are not enough votes to be gained in addressing these matters.
Even if a majority of Americans agree that climate change is real, future disasters seem a long way off, or might happen somewhere else, so why worry about them now?
Perhaps more should be done to protect New York, among many other places, against future flooding, but, as a former city official told an interviewer: “Until things happen, people aren’t willing to pay for it.”
Does this point to a serious weakness in the democratic system?
Most voters, after all, think about their immediate interests – less taxation, more jobs, lower gasoline prices, and so on – and not about planning for the future, which is, in any case, unpredictable.