More broadly, since 1946, supplies of copper, aluminum, iron, and zinc have outstripped consumption, owing to the discovery of additional reserves and new technologies to extract them economically.
Similarly, oil and natural gas were to run out in 1990 and 1992, respectively; today, reserves of both are larger than they were in 1970, although we consume dramatically more.
Within the past six years, shale gas alone has doubled potential gas resources in the United States and halved the price.
As for economic collapse, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change estimates that global GDP per capita will increase 14-fold over this century and 24-fold in the developing world.
The Limits of Growth got it so wrong because its authors overlooked the greatest resource of all: our own resourcefulness.
Population growth has been slowing since the late 1960’s.
Food supply has not collapsed (1.5 billion hectares of arable land are being used, but another 2.7 billion hectares are in reserve).
Malnourishment has dropped by more than half, from 35% of the world’s population to under 16%.
Nor are we choking on pollution.
Whereas the Club of Rome imagined an idyllic past with no particulate air pollution and happy farmers, and a future strangled by belching smokestacks, reality is entirely the reverse.
In 1900, when the global human population was 1.5 billion, almost three million people – roughly one in 500 – died each year from air pollution, mostly from wretched indoor air.
Today, the risk has receded to one death per 2,000 people.
While pollution still kills more people than malaria does, the mortality rate is falling, not rising.
Nonetheless, the mindset nurtured by The Limits to Growth continues to shape popular and elite thinking.
Consider recycling, which is often just a feel-good gesture with little environmental benefit and significant cost.
Paper, for example, typically comes from sustainable forests, not rainforests.
The processing and government subsidies associated with recycling yield lower-quality paper to save a resource that is not threatened.
Likewise, fears of over-population framed self-destructive policies, such as China’s one-child policy and forced sterilization in India.
And, while pesticides and other pollutants were seen to kill off perhaps half of humanity, well-regulated pesticides cause about 20 deaths each year in the US, whereas they have significant upsides in creating cheaper and more plentiful food.
Indeed, reliance solely on organic farming – a movement inspired by the pesticide fear – would cost more than $100 billion annually in the US.
At 16% lower efficiency, current output would require another 65 million acres of farmland – an area more than half the size of California.
Higher prices would reduce consumption of fruits and vegetables, causing myriad adverse health effects (including tens of thousands of additional cancer deaths per year).
Obsession with doom-and-gloom scenarios distracts us from the real global threats.
Poverty is one of the greatest killers of all, while easily curable diseases still claim 15 million lives every year – 25% of all deaths.
The solution is economic growth.
When lifted out of poverty, most people can afford to avoid infectious diseases.
China has pulled more than 680 million people out of poverty in the last three decades, leading a worldwide poverty decline of almost a billion people.
This has created massive improvements in health, longevity, and quality of life.
The four decades since The Limits of Growth have shown that we need more of it, not less.
An expansion of trade, with estimated benefits exceeding $100 trillion annually toward the end of the century, would do thousands of times more good than timid feel-good policies that result from fear-mongering.
But that requires abandoning an anti-growth mentality and using our enormous potential to create a brighter future.
The Economic Trend Is Our Friend
BERKELEY – These are days of grave disillusionment with the state of the world.
Sinister forces of fanatical, faith-based killing – something that we in the West, at least, thought had largely ended by 1750 – are back. And they have been joined by and are reinforcing forces of nationalism, bigotry, and racism that we thought had been largely left in the ruins of Berlin in 1945.
In addition, economic growth since 2008 has been profoundly disappointing. There is no reasoned case for optimistically expecting a turn for the better in the next five years or so.
And the failure of global institutions to deliver ever-increasing prosperity has undermined the trust and confidence which in better times would serve to suppress the murderous demons of our age.
Pessimism understandably comes easy these days – perhaps too easy.
In fact, enthusiastic and positive contrarianism is in order: if we look at global economic growth not just five years out, but over the next 30-60 years, the picture looks much brighter.
The reason is simple: the large-scale trends that have fueled global growth since World War II have not stopped.
More people are gaining access to new, productivity enhancing technologies, more people are engaging in mutually beneficial trade, and fewer people are being born, thus allaying any continued fears of a so-called population bomb.
Moreover, innovation, especially in the global north, has not ceased, even if it has possibly slowed since the 1880s.
And while war and terror continue to horrify us, we are not witnessing anything on the scale of the genocides that were a hallmark of the twentieth century.
Fortunately, these major trends are likely to continue, according to data from the Penn World Table research project, the best source for summary information on global economic growth.
The PWT data on average real (inflation-adjusted) per capita GDP show that the world in 1980 was 80% better off than it was in 1950, and another 80% better off in 2010 than it was in 1980. In other words, our average material wellbeing is three times what it was in 1950.
Tripling global material wellbeing may sound like a lot, but if anything it’s a low estimate.
The way we measure real GDP accounts for all the goods and services being produced, but it doesn’t properly account for value that exists but cannot be measured – such as the immense benefits that accrue to social-media users from services that cost them nothing.
More than ever before, we are producing commodities that contribute to social welfare through use value rather than market value.
Some would argue that this is nothing new, but that argument is unpersuasive, given the sheer bulk of time we now spend interacting with information-technology systems where the revenue flow is, at most, a tiny trickle tied to ancillary advertising.
The PWT data also allow us to sort by country, so let’s consider the cases of China and India, which comprise 30% of humanity.
China’s real per capita GDP in 1980 was 60% lower than the world average, but today it is 25% above it.
India’s real per capita GDP in 1980 was more than 70% below the world average, but India has since closed that gap by half.
This is indisputable progress of one kind; but, to avoid painting too rosy a picture, we should also consider global inequality. The world’s countries have shown no sign since 1950 of converging at a shared level of prosperity.
According to the PWT data, two-thirds of all countries in 1950 had real per capita GDP veering above or below the global average by at least 45%, and by as much as 225%.
By 1980, that spread had widened to at least 33% and as much as 300%; and today it is 28% and 360%, respectively.
Still, all told, the world economy is a more equal place for the average individual today than it was in 1980.
This is partly thanks to a series of strong leaders, such as those in China since Deng Xiaoping, and in India since Rajiv Gandhi.
But there are no more countries as big as China and India to stand up and make significant leaps in development, and few observers are confident that Chinese President Xi Jinping and Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi will match their predecessors’ growth legacies.
Indeed, such episodes of prolonged, rapid growth may become a thing of the past if the world economy has no more opportunities to accelerate technology transfer, and if more countries continue to mature from high-growth developing economies to more steady-state developed economies.
It may well be true that the engine of innovation itself will run more slowly.
But it will still run, and people will still adopt new technologies, and the world economy will still grow.
Short of a nightmare scenario like terror-driven nuclear war, you can expect my successors in 2075 to look back and relish that, once again, their world is three times better off than ours is today.
Beyond that, things are harder to predict.
If we fail to act now to slow and reverse global temperature trends, climate change will be the specter stalking the post-2080 world.
In that case, our great-grandchildren will have little to thank us for.
Economic Growth’s Many Recipes
CAMBRIDGE, MA. &#45;&#45; Development “big think” has always been dominated by comprehensive visions about transforming poor societies.
From the so-called “Big Push” to “Balanced Growth,” from the “Washington Consensus” to “Second Generation Reforms,” the emphasis has been on wholesale change.
Today’s fashion in development is no different.
The prevailing obsession with the “governance” agenda entails a broad-based effort to remold institutions in developing societies as a prerequisite for economic growth.
The United Nations Millennium Project involves a large-scale, coordinated big push of investment in human capital, public infrastructure, and agricultural technologies.
But there have also been iconoclastic dissenters from such comprehensive approaches, among whom Albert Hirschman was without doubt the most distinguished.
Indeed, Hirschman’s seminal contributions have now been recognized by the United States Social Science Research Council, which this year established a prize in his honor.
Hirschman’s interests shifted away from economic development over the course of his illustrious career.
But when he was still involved in development debates, he would frequently remind his contemporaries that any country that had the capacity to undertake comprehensive programs would not be underdeveloped to begin with.
Indeed, he once chided John Kenneth Galbraith for enunciating a long list of prerequisites for foreign aid to be effective.
If developing countries could meet these conditions, he wrote, they would be in a position to send foreign aid to the United States!
Hirschman believed that the possibilities for economic development are not nearly as constrained as comprehensive theories would lead us to believe.
The imbalances specific to underdevelopment create opportunities that policymakers can seize on.
Instead of relying on fads emanating from abroad, we need to experiment and look for the unique solutions that will allow us to circumvent ingrained social structures that inhibit growth.
Hirschman’s central insights on development have held up extremely well.
The key lesson of the last half-century is that policymakers must be strategic, rather than comprehensive.
They have to do the best with what they have instead of wishing they could transform their society wholesale.
They need to identify priorities and opportunities, and work on them.
They must seek sequential, cumulative change rather than a single, all-inclusive breakthrough.
Successful countries do share some common features.
They all provide some degree of effective property rights protection and contract enforcement, maintain macroeconomic stability, seek to integrate into the world economy, and ensure an appropriate environment for productive diversification and innovation.
But how these ends are achieved differs.
For example, greater integration with world markets can be achieved via export subsidies (South Korea), export-processing zones (Malaysia), investment incentives for multinational enterprises (Singapore), special economic zones (China), regional free trade agreements (Mexico), or import liberalization (Chile).
The best-designed policies are always contingent on local conditions, making use of pre-existing advantages and seeking to overcome domestic constraints.
That is why successful reforms often do not travel well.
Reforms, after all, are not hothouse plants that can be transplanted at will in any soil.
Moreover, generating economic growth requires hitting the right targets, not doing everything at once.
What matters at any point in time is to alleviate a society’s immediate binding constraints – another reason why different policies are needed for different places.
China was constrained by poor supply incentives in agriculture in the late 1970’s.
Today’s Brazil is constrained by inadequate supply of credit.
El Salvador is constrained by inadequate production incentives in tradable goods.
Zimbabwe is constrained by poor governance.
These problems all require different methods for unlocking growth.
What we need is selective, well-targeted reforms, not a laundry list.
Countries run into trouble when they do not use high-growth periods to strengthen their institutional underpinnings.
Two kinds of institutions in particular need shoring up: conflict management institutions to enhance economies’ resilience to external shocks, and institutions that promote productive diversification.
Growth collapsed in Africa in the late 1970’s because of the weakness of the former, and fizzled in Latin America after the first half of the 1990’s because of the weakness of the latter.
This line of thinking has vast implications for the design of appropriate global economic arrangements.
Hirschman would be aghast at the extent of intrusion into domestic policymaking that the World Trade Organization or the International Monetary Fund engage in nowadays.
As international bureaucracies with a penchant for “best practices” and common standards, these institutions are woefully unsuited to the task of seeking innovative, unique pathways suited to each country’s particular circumstances.
Dynamic models have become much more common, an economics of the “second-best” has flourished, political economy has become mainstream, and behavioral economics has thrown the “rational actor” into doubt.
As a result, Hirschman looks less and less the maverick that he fancied himself to be.
Conventional wisdom may finally be catching up with him.
Half-a-Loaf Growth
MILAN – At a time of lackluster economic growth, countries around the world are attempting to devise and implement strategies to spur and sustain recovery.
The key word is strategy: to succeed, policymakers must ensure that measures to open the economy, boost public investment, enhance macroeconomic stability, and increase reliance on markets and incentives for resource allocation are implemented in reasonably complete packages.
Pursuing only some of these objectives produces distinctly inferior results.
China provides a telling example.
Before Deng Xiaoping launched the policy of “reform and opening up” in 1978, the country had relatively high levels of public-sector investment.
But the centrally planned economy lacked market incentives and was largely closed to the global economy’s major markets for goods, investment, and technology.
As a result, returns on public investment were modest, and China’s economic performance was mediocre.
China’s economic transformation began with the introduction in the 1980s of market incentives in the agricultural sector.
These reforms were followed by a gradual opening to the global economy, a process that accelerated in the early 1990s.
Economic growth surged ahead, and returns on public investment soared, reaching an annual growth rate above 9% of GDP, shortly after the reforms were implemented.
The key to a successful growth strategy is to ensure that policies reinforce and enhance one another.
For example, boosting returns on public investment – critical to any growth plan – demands complementary policies and conditions, in areas ranging from resource allocation to the institutional environment.
In terms of effectiveness, the policy package is more than the sum of its parts.
Of course, the specific portfolio of policies varies depending on the stage of a country’s development; early-stage growth dynamics are distinctly different from those in middle-income and advanced countries.
But the imperative is the same.
Just as a developing China achieved rapid growth only when a comprehensive policy package was implemented, the advanced countries struggling to restore sustainable growth patterns today have found that incomplete policy packages produce slow recoveries and below-potential growth and job creation.
Consider the post-crisis performance of the European Union and the United States.
Though both have had their share of problems, the US is performing somewhat better (though it still faces major challenges in generating middle-income employment).
The difference is not that the US launched a large fiscal stimulus focused on public-sector investment; no such stimulus was implemented, though many economists, including me, believe that it would have generated a faster recovery and stronger long-term growth.
Nor is the difference greater political effectiveness; few would say that the US government is functioning well nowadays, given rising partisanship and sharp disagreement about its proper role.
The US economy has benefited from two factors: its greater structural flexibility and dynamism relative to Europe, and the broader mandate of the US Federal Reserve, which has pursued a far more aggressive monetary policy than has the European Central Bank.
Though analysts differ on the relative importance of these two factors – and, indeed, it is difficult to weight them – it is safe to say that both played a role in facilitating the US recovery.
Europe is now placing a large bet on an increase in public-sector investment, using a combination of EU-level funding and national investment programs, perhaps augmented by a modification of the EU’s fiscal rules.
Given that public-sector underinvestment is a common cause of subpar growth, this is a step in the right direction.
But public investment is not enough.
Without complementary structural reforms that encourage private investment and innovation – and thus enable economies to adapt and compete in a global, technology-driven economy – a public-investment program will have a disappointingly weak impact on growth.
Instead, debt-financed public investment will produce a short-run stimulus, at the cost of longer-term fiscal stability.
The problem is that structural reforms are notoriously difficult to implement.
For starters, they face political resistance from short-run losers, including the companies and sectors that existing rigidities protect.
Moreover, in order to ensure that such reforms ultimately benefit everyone, there must be a strong culture of trust and a determination to prevent more flexible arrangements from leading to abuses.
Finally, structural reforms require time to take effect.
This is particularly true in the eurozone, whose members abandoned a crucial tool for accelerating the process – exchange-rate adjustments to account for different economies’ productivity levels – when they adopted the common currency.
ECB President Mario Draghi recently argued that, because individual EU countries’ growth-retarding policies have negative external effects, perhaps they should not have unimpeded control in certain policy areas.
Though member countries’ financial supervisory authority is already being limited through centralization of bank regulation and resolution mechanisms, Draghi’s suggestion is more far-reaching.
One wonders if Draghi’s proposal is politically feasible in the EU context.
Even if it were, would it be necessary?
All economies have sub-units across which economic productivity, growth, and dynamism vary considerably.
Indeed, differentials in the quality of governance and policies seem persistent, even in economies that perform pretty well overall.
Perhaps part of the answer is to prevent sub-units – in the EU’s case, member countries – from falling short on reforms.
But centralization carries its own costs.
Given the risk inherent in betting on policy convergence, labor mobility – which enables highly valuable human capital, especially well-educated young people, to leave lagging regions for those that offer more and better employment opportunities – could prove to be a critical tool for adjustment.
As it stands, labor mobility is imperfect in the EU.
But, with language training and the implementation of something like the Lisbon strategy for growth and jobs (which aimed to create an innovative “learning economy,” underpinned by inclusive social and environmental policies), mobility could be enhanced.
But more fluid labor mobility is no panacea.
As with every other element of a growth strategy, mutually reinforcing efforts are the only way to achieve success.
Half a loaf may be better than none, but half the ingredients do not translate into half of the hoped-for results.
The Growth Conundrum
BERKELEY – The world faces a major dilemma.
While rapid economic growth, such as that realized over the past 50 years, is critical to support development, we now also know that it can have serious adverse consequences, particularly for the environment.
How can we balance the imperatives of growth and development with the need to ensure sustainability?
The unprecedented growth of per capita income during the last 20 years has lifted more than one billion people out of extreme poverty.
In developing countries, life expectancy has increased by 20 years since the mid-1970s, and the illiteracy rate among adults was almost halved in the last 30 years.
But rapid economic growth has placed enormous pressure on the environment.
Moreover, it has been accompanied by rising income inequality, which has now reached historic highs within many countries (though, across countries, such inequality has declined).
Given this, one might argue that slower growth would be good for the world.
In that case, the solution would be at hand.
According to a new report by the McKinsey Global Institute (MGI), aging populations and declining fertility rates in many parts of the world could dampen global growth considerably over the next 50 years.
Indeed, even if productivity were to expand at the same rapid rate as during the last half-century, global growth would fall by 40%, far below the anemic rate of the last five years.
Employment growth is also set to slow significantly.
As a result, even with slower population growth, per capita income growth would fall by about 19%.
To be sure, GDP would still triple, and per capita income would double, over the next 50 years.
Nonetheless this rate of long-term growth would constitute a sharp break with the six-fold GDP expansion and nearly three-fold increase in per capita income of the last 50 years.
Despite its potential benefits, especially for the environment, the impending growth slowdown carries significant risks.
While growth is not an end in itself, it enables the achievement of a broad set of societal goals, including the creation of economic and employment opportunities for millions of vulnerable and poor people and the provision of social goods like education, health care, and pensions.
So how do we ensure that these imperatives are fulfilled, despite demographic and environmental constraints?
The first step is to secure economic growth through productivity gains.
The needed acceleration in productivity growth – by 80% to sustain overall GDP growth and by 22% to sustain per capita income growth at the rates of the last half-century – is daunting.
But, based on case studies in five economic sectors, the MGI report finds that achieving it, though “extremely challenging,” is possible – and without relying on unforeseeable technological advances.
Three-quarters of the potential pickup in productivity could come from “catch-up” improvements, with countries taking steps – modernizing their retail sectors, consolidating automobile production into a smaller number of larger factories, improving health-care efficiency, and reducing food-processing wastage – that have already proven effective elsewhere.
The rest can come from technological, operational, and business innovations – for example, developing new seeds to increase agricultural yields, using new materials (such as carbon-fiber composites) to make cars and airplanes lighter and more resilient, or digitizing medical records.
Another significant growth opportunity lies in boosting the employment and productivity of women.
Today, only about half of the world’s working-age women are employed.
They earn about three-quarters as much as men in the same occupations, and are over-represented in informal, temporary, and low-productivity jobs.
MGI estimates that increasing women’s labor-force participation rate could contribute almost 60% of potential labor-force growth during the next half-century.
Realizing this potential will require efforts by both employers and governments to eliminate discriminatory practices that impede the recruitment, retention, and promotion of women, as well as credit, tax, and family support policies to help workers balance their responsibilities at work and at home.
Meanwhile, in order to mitigate the environmental impact of continued rapid growth, the world must improve its resource efficiency considerably.
MGI and others have identified numerous ecologically responsible growth opportunities emanating from the smarter use of limited resources.
Consider improvements in energy efficiency, which could halve projected energy demand between now and 2020.
As California – the world’s eighth-largest economy – has demonstrated, strict energy-efficiency standards can actually be good for growth and jobs.
Indeed, such policies have kept California’s per capita energy demand constant for the last three decades – even as such demand grew by 50% in the rest of the United States – without compromising growth.
There is a strong business and consumer case for improving resource productivity, as it could lead to substantial cost savings.
Fortunately, policies that support this goal are gaining momentum in developed and developing countries alike.
Even if gains in female labor-force participation and resource-efficient productivity growth sustain high rates of economic growth, one key challenge remains: income inequality.
In fact, there is no simple relationship between growth and income inequality; after all, inequality has been increasing in both slow-growing developed economies and fast-growing emerging economies.
According to the French economist Thomas Piketty, income inequality rises when the return on capital exceeds economic growth, meaning that, by itself, faster economic growth would reduce inequality.
Using a different approach, economists at the International Monetary Fund also find a positive relationship between lower income inequality and faster growth, concluding that policies that redistribute income can foster faster, more sustainable growth.
Growth still matters.
As demographic tailwinds turn into headwinds, and environmental challenges become ever more apparent, businesses and governments need to think carefully about how to improve resource efficiency while fostering more inclusive economic growth.
Trump’s Foreign Admirers
CAMBRIDGE – Donald Trump doesn’t like Latin Americans and advocates building a wall to separate them from the United States.
As usual with such snubs, Latin Americans tend to reciprocate the sentiment, as do Muslims and others who feel affronted by the Republican Party’s presidential nominee.
But many of those who dislike Trump share his passion for restrictive immigration policies.
There are probably few areas of public policy where something that is so good for society is portrayed as being so bad.
Of course, projecting a society’s problems onto foreign scapegoats is an old political tactic.
But the extent to which hostility to immigration goes against the evidence of its salutary effects is surprising.
Recent research on immigration shows very large positive effects on the welfare of locals.
Bill and Sari Kerr have shown that, while immigrants represent about 13% of the US population, they account for 26% of all entrepreneurs, and about 36% of new firms have at least one immigrant in the leadership team.
This suggests that immigration is a large part of the story behind American economic vitality and job creation.
This is not a uniquely American phenomenon.
On the contrary, it’s pretty universal.
In Chile, immigrants from non-neighboring countries are four times more likely to be entrepreneurs than natives.
In Venezuela, Italian, Spanish, and Portuguese immigrants, who moved there mostly in the 1950s and 1960s, and whose level of formal schooling was lower than that of the natives, were ten times more likely to be entrepreneurs.
Today, Albanians returning to their country from Greece after the 2010 crisis there became entrepreneurs and increased the employment and wages of those who never left, as shown by Harvard’s Ljubica Nedelkoska.
In ongoing research with Juan José Obach, we found that Panamanians who work in industries and regions with more foreigners earn significantly more than those who work where foreigners are less prevalent.
This indicates that it is in the interest of the locals to have more foreigners around.
Dany Bahar of the Brookings Institution and Hillel Rapoport of the Paris School of Economics have found that countries’ comparative advantage evolves toward that of their migrants’ countries of origin: the new country becomes good at producing what the old country successfully makes.
The difference is that, in general, many developing countries have more restrictive immigration and foreign employment policies than the US does.
Such policies also have larger negative effects on migration, because these countries are not the most attractive destinations to begin with.
Consider Chile, one of Latin America’s richest and arguably most successful countries, which likes to compare itself to Australia, New Zealand, and Canada, well-run countries that are rich in natural resources.
But now Chile is in a rut: it is not catching up with richer countries, and it is having trouble diversifying its economy.
As it ponders why, it would benefit from comparing itself to its role models in terms of the proportion of the population that is foreign-born.
In Chile, it is less than 2%.
In Australia, New Zealand, and Canada, it is 27%, 28%, and 20%, respectively, a consequence in part of these countries’ activist immigration policies.
Activist policies were also behind the almost one million Soviet Jews that Israel attracted in the early 1990s, representing 12% of the Israeli population.
Studies have shown that this huge experiment had very large positive effects on the economy and on skilled locals.
The missing immigrants in Chile can help explain the dearth of entrepreneurship, innovation, and diversification.
The few Koreans that Chile let in helped revive its textile industry.
Colombia is much worse than Chile in this regard.
There, foreigners represent less than 0.3% of the population; indeed, there are more than 15 Colombians living abroad for every foreigner living in the country.
Are the extremely low levels of immigration in Chile and Colombia a problem of low foreign demand or high domestic barriers?
This question can be answered by studying a very sad ongoing natural experiment: the massive emigration from Venezuela, owing to the country’s catastrophic economic and social implosion.
Venezuelans, including the most talented, have been trying to find places to go.
You would be mistaken if you imagined that bureaucrats in Chile and Colombia had more important things to do than restricting immigration.
Both countries have been letting very few Venezuelans enter, proportionally fewer than Costa Rica, Panama, Canada, Spain, Australia, and the United States, countries that are at both ends of Chile and Colombia in terms of income or skill level.
Colombia, for example, has suspended a Mercosur-based visa mechanism for Venezuelans on the grounds that Venezuela does not reciprocate.
This decision is not just heartless; it is patently self-destructive, for it assumes that Colombia is exchanging Venezuela’s access to its country for access by Colombians to Venezuela.
But the benefits to Colombia come from the skills, entrepreneurship, and diversity it attracts, not from the ones it lets go.
And who would want to go to Venezuela these days, anyway?
Invoking reciprocity is nonsense worthy of Trump.
The problem of bad immigration policies is not limited to Latin America.
South Africa, for example, would benefit enormously from relaxing its skills and entrepreneurship constraints through more liberal immigration policies.
But the country has instead moved in exactly the opposite direction.
The immigration policies that Trump wants for the US bear an eerie resemblance to the policies adopted in the countries he dislikes and that dislike him.
If adopted, Trump would most likely seek new scapegoats.
But the current scapegoats should learn to dislike their own immigration policies as much as they appear to dislike Trump.
Putting Economic Models in Their Place
BERKELEY – When policymakers turn to economists for guidance, they expect the advice they receive to be grounded in science, not academic factionalism or political presuppositions.
After all, the policies they will be putting in place will have real implications for real people.
Unfortunately, however, sound science is not always the driving force behind economic analysis and policy recommendations.
In a recent critique of what he calls the “mathiness” of modern economics, Paul M. Romer of New York University argues that economists should take measures to exclude academic factionalism and politics from the dismal science.
Romer grounds his case in an ongoing debate in his field about the role that ideas play in promoting economic growth.
Romer seems to be worried principally about some economists’ tendency to claim that what is true about certain types of theories is true of all theories and thus applicable to the real world.
As an example of this tendency, Romer cites the work of the University of Chicago economist Robert Lucas, who, in his 2009 paper “Ideas and Growth,” dismisses the role that books or blueprints can play in driving growth.
“Some knowledge can be ‘embodied’ in books, blueprints, machines, and other kinds of physical capital, and we know how to introduce capital into a growth model,” Lucas argued, “but we also know that doing so does not by itself provide an engine of sustained growth.”
The problem is that Lucas’s statement is true only for models of economic growth that are specified in such a way that the return on “embodied” capital drops to zero as capital accumulates.
As Romer notes, there are many models for which this is simply not true.
What Lucas makes out to be a general truth – that the path to economic growth cannot lie in creating and acquiring the kind of knowledge that is “embodied” in books, blueprints, and machines – rests on a barely examined decision to restrict attention to only a few kinds of models.
Lucas’s decision might be somewhat justifiable if the models he chose were the only ones that were correct.
But of course that is not the case.
In addition to criticizing those that draw general conclusions from specific cases, Romer takes aim at those who claim that economic models permit only one mode of interaction and only one mode of individual decision-making.
Romer’s principle objection is to the assumption that the only interaction allowable in economic growth models is what is known as “price taking,” the buying or selling of goods and services at the price currently offered by the market.
I would add to that my objection to the assumption that individual decision-making is always characterized by rational expectations.
Assumptions like these might be adequate as foundations on which to build models to help us understand the world, but only if market processes were structured exactly right, smoothing out at the aggregate level all the deviations from price-taking and rational expectations that are clearly evident at the individual level.
Asking whether, which, and when market processes meet such criteria is an empirical question.
Claiming that all market processes must be so structured is theoretical malfeasance.
And it is widespread.
In the field of growth theory, Romer sees the current generation of neoclassical economists grind out paper after paper imposing the theoretical restrictions necessary for a price-taking equilibrium.
As he correctly notes, such papers are useless for any purpose other than advancing their authors’ positions in academic status games.
Meanwhile, in my field, macroeconomics, I see economists, bankers, industrialists, technocrats, and politicians make the claim that the policies governments could implement to speed an economic recovery must be, if not counterproductive, at least too risky.
After all, that is what a model with a very restricted class of rational expectations would predict.
At the same time, we should recognize that the problem Romer pinpoints is not a new one.
Just the other day, I came across critiques of expansionary fiscal and monetary policy made by the Canadian economist Jacob Viner and the French economist Étienne Mantoux.
They both argued in the 1930s (in the middle of the Great Depression!) that government efforts to boost employment would always result in undesirable and unwarranted inflation, and would probably reduce output in the long run.
What is most depressing about Romer’s argument is how unlikely it is to be heeded.
Romer may be able to convince academic economists to be more cautious about making claims concerning the generality of theories of economic growth.
But it is less than clear that bankers, industrialists, technocrats, and politicians – who are responsible for the policies that impact people’s lives – will do the same.
A Year of Divergence
LAGUNA BEACH – In the coming year, “divergence” will be a major global economic theme, applying to economic trends, policies, and performance.
As the year progresses, these divergences will become increasingly difficult to reconcile, leaving policymakers with a choice: overcome the obstacles that have so far impeded effective action, or risk allowing their economies to be destabilized.
The multi-speed global economy will be dominated by four groups of countries.
The first, led by the United States, will experience continued improvement in economic performance.
Their labor markets will become stronger, with job creation accompanied by wage recovery.
The benefits of economic growth will be less unequally distributed than in the past few years, though they will still accrue disproportionately to those who are already better off.
The second group, led by China, will stabilize at lower growth rates than recent historical averages, while continuing to mature structurally.
They will gradually reorient their growth models to make them more sustainable – an effort that occasional bouts of global financial-market instability will shake, but not derail.
And they will work to deepen their internal markets, improve regulatory frameworks, empower the private sector, and expand the scope of market-based economic management.
The third group, led by Europe, will struggle, as continued economic stagnation fuels social and political disenchantment in some countries and complicates regional policy decisions.
Anemic growth, deflationary forces, and pockets of excessive indebtedness will hamper investment, tilting the balance of risk to the downside.
In the most challenged economies, unemployment, particularly among young people, will remain alarmingly high and persistent.
The final group comprises the “wild card” countries, whose size and connectivity have important systemic implications.
The most notable example is Russia.
Faced with a deepening economic recession, a collapsing currency, capital flight, and shortages caused by contracting imports, President Vladimir Putin will need to decide whether to change his approach to Ukraine, re-engage with the West to allow for the lifting of sanctions, and build a more sustainable, diversified economy.
The alternative would be to attempt to divert popular discontent at home by expanding Russia’s intervention in Ukraine.
This approach would most likely result in a new round of sanctions and counter-sanctions, tipping Russia into an even deeper recession – and perhaps even triggering political instability or more foreign-policy risk-taking – while exacerbating Europe’s economic malaise.
Brazil is the other notable wild card.
President Dilma Rousseff, chastened by her near loss in the recent presidential election, has signaled a willingness to improve macroeconomic management, including by resisting a relapse into statism, the potential benefits of which now pale in comparison to its collateral damage and unintended consequences.
If she delivers, Brazil would join Mexico in anchoring a more stable Latin America in 2015, helping the region to overcome the disruptive effects of a Venezuelan economy roiled by lower oil prices.
This multi-speed economic performance will contribute to multi-track central banking, as pressure for divergent monetary policies intensifies, particularly in the systemically important advanced economies.
The US Federal Reserve, having already stopped its large-scale purchases of long-term assets, is likely to begin hiking interest rates in the third quarter of 2015.
By contrast, the European Central Bank will pursue its own version of quantitative easing, introducing in the first quarter of the year a set of new measures to expand its balance sheet.
The Bank of Japan will maintain its pedal-to-the-metal approach to monetary stimulus.
Of course, there is no theoretical limit on divergence.
The problem is that exchange-rate shifts now represent the only mechanism for reconciliation, and the divide between certain market valuations and their fundamentals has become so large that prices are vulnerable to bouts of volatility.
For the US, the combination of a stronger economy and less accommodative monetary policy will put additional upward pressure on the dollar’s exchange rate – which has already appreciated significantly – against both the euro and the yen.
With few other countries willing to allow their currencies to strengthen, the dollar’s tendency toward appreciation will remain strong and broad-based, potentially triggering domestic political opposition.
Moreover, as it becomes increasingly difficult for currency markets to perform the role of orderly reconcilers, friction may arise among countries.
This could disturb the unusual calm that lately has been comforting equity markets.
Fortunately, there are ways to ensure that 2015’s divergences do not lead to economic and financial disruptions.
Indeed, most governments – particularly in Europe, Japan, and the US – have the tools they need to defuse the rising tensions and, in the process, unleash their economies’ productive potential.
Avoiding the disruptive potential of divergence is not a question of policy design; there is already broad, albeit not universal, agreement among economists about the measures that are needed at the national, regional, and global levels.
Rather, it a question of implementation – and getting that right requires significant and sustained political will.
The pressure on policymakers to address the risks of divergence will increase next year.
The consequences of inaction will extend well beyond 2015.
Messed-Up Macro
ITHACA – Until a few years ago, economists of all persuasions confidently proclaimed that the Great Depression would never recur.
In a way, they were right.
After the financial crisis of 2008 erupted, we got the Great Recession instead.
Governments managed to limit the damage by pumping huge amounts of money into the global economy and slashing interest rates to near zero.
But, having cut off the downward slide of 2008-2009, they ran out of intellectual and political ammunition.
Economic advisers assured their bosses that recovery would be rapid.
And there was some revival; but then it stalled in 2010.
Meanwhile, governments were running large deficits – a legacy of the economic downturn – which renewed growth was supposed to shrink.
In the eurozone, countries like Greece faced sovereign-debt crises as bank bailouts turned private debt into public debt.
Attention switched to the problem of fiscal deficits and the relationship between deficits and economic growth.
Should governments deliberately expand their deficits to offset the fall in household and investment demand?
Or should they try to cut public spending in order to free up money for private spending?
Depending on which macroeconomic theory one held, both could be presented as pro-growth policies.
The first might cause the economy to expand, because the government was increasing public spending; the second, because they were cutting it.
Keynesian theory suggests the first; governments unanimously put their faith in the second.
The consequences of this choice are clear.
It is now pretty much agreed that fiscal tightening has cost developed economies 5-10 percentage points of GDP growth since 2010.
All of that output and income has been permanently lost.
Moreover, because fiscal austerity stifled economic growth, it made the task of reducing budget deficits and national debt as a share of GDP much more difficult.
Cutting public spending, it turned out, was not the same as cutting the deficit, because it cut the economy at the same time.
That should have ended the argument.
But it did not.
Some economists claim that governments faced a balance of risk in 2010: Cutting the deficit might have slowed growth; but not committing to cut it might have made things even worse.
The Keynesian remedy, the argument went, ignored the effect of fiscal policy on expectations.
If public opinion believed that cutting the deficit was the right thing to do, then allowing the deficit to grow would annul any of its hoped-for stimulatory effect.
Expecting that taxes would have to rise to “pay for” the extra spending, households and companies would increase their saving.
Fearing sovereign defaults, bond markets would charge governments punitive interest rates on their borrowing.
And here was the clincher: By committing themselves to fiscal tightening, finance ministers gave themselves scope for some fiscal loosening.
Proclaiming fiscal virtue enabled them to practice fiscal vice.
They could create a fiscal illusion by cutting less than they promised.
Most finance ministers did exactly that.
This is part of the mess into which macroeconomics has gotten itself.
Once beliefs and expectations are introduced into economics, as is surely reasonable, the results of fiscal policy become indeterminate.
Too much depends on what people think the results of the policy will be.
In the economists’ lingo, policy results are “model-dependent.”
The Nobel laureate economist Paul Krugman has poured scorn on what he calls the “confidence fairy,” the claim that fiscal policy must command the support of the bond markets.
But to show that actual policy made things worse does not mean that a better policy was actually available.
The right policy’s success may depend on the public’s expectations of its effects.
The unanswered question is why the public should have the wrong expectations.
If fiscal policy is in a muddle, so is monetary policy.
Central banks have tried to avoid the confidence fairy by printing money – technically, by buying government bonds on the secondary market.
The extra money is expected to percolate through the economy, quickening activity.
The European Central Bank has just started a €1.1 trillion ($1.17 trillion) bond-purchase program to bypass the German veto on fiscal expansion.
But the effects of so-called quantitative easing also depend on expectations.
If giving businesses extra cash makes them more confident, they will spend more.
If they mistrust the policy, they will hoard the cash.
The results of quantitative easing in the United States and the United Kingdom have been equivocal.
Governments, it is true, could get their money cheaper as yields fell.
But banks were not lending the money made available to them, partly because they used it to pay down their own debts, and partly because of low demand for loans.
The main positive effect of quantitative easing was on asset prices – chiefly financial assets.
But greater wealth for the rich does not necessarily produce much extra spending. It does increase inequality and threaten asset bubbles, which could lead to a new financial crash.
So we enter the post-crisis era without any settled view on the right macro policy for either recovery or prevention of future meltdowns.
Great hopes are pinned on better financial regulation to stop excessive credit creation.
But what is “excessive”?
Will central banks continue to target 2% inflation?
Or should they rely on a “nominal income” target?
What should the new fiscal rules be, and how – in the eurozone – should they be enforced?
Economists debate whether market economies are naturally stable.
As a Keynesian, I firmly believe that market economies need to be stabilized by policy.
But Keynesians have to face the uncomfortable truth that the success of stabilization policies may depend on the business community having Keynesian expectations.
They need the confidence fairy to be on their side.
Economics in the Age of Abundance
BERKELEY – Until very recently, one of the biggest challenges facing mankind was making sure there was enough to eat.
From the dawn of agriculture until well into the Industrial Age, the common human condition was what nutritionists and public-health experts would describe as severe and damaging nutritional biomedical stress.
Some 250 years ago, Georgian England was the richest society that had ever existed, and yet food shortages still afflicted large segments of the population.
Adolescents sent to sea by the Marine Society to be officer’s servants were half a foot (15 centimeters) shorter than the sons of the gentry.
A century of economic growth later, the working class in the United States was still spending 40 cents of every extra dollar earned on more calories.
Today, food scarcity is no longer a problem, at least in high-income countries.
In the US, roughly 1% of the labor force is able to grow enough food to supply the entire population with sufficient calories and essential nutrients, which are transported and distributed by another 1% of the labor force.
That does not account for the entire food industry, of course.
But most of what is being done by the remaining 14% of the labor force dedicated to delivering food to our mouths involves making what we eat tastier or more convenient – jobs that are more about entertainment or art than about necessity.
The challenges we face are now those of abundance.
Indeed, when it comes to workers dedicated to our diets, we can add some of the 4% of the labor force who, working as nurses, pharmacists, and educators, help us solve problems resulting from having consumed too many calories or the wrong kinds of nutrients.
More than 20 years ago, Alan Greenspan, then-Chair of the US Federal Reserve, started pointing out that GDP growth in the US was becoming less driven by consumers trying to acquire more stuff.
Those in the prosperous middle class were becoming much more interested in communicating, seeking out information, and trying to acquire the right stuff to allow them to live their lives as they wished.
Of course, the rest of the world still faces problems of scarcity; roughly one-third of the world’s population struggles to get enough food.
And there is no guarantee that those problems will solve themselves.
It is worth recalling that a little over 150 years ago, both Karl Marx and John Stuart Mill believed that India and Britain would converge economically in no more than three generations.
There is no shortage of problems to worry about: the destructive power of our nuclear weapons, the pig-headed nature of our politics, the potentially enormous social disruptions that will be caused by climate change.
But the number one priority for economists – indeed, for humankind – is finding ways to spur equitable economic growth.
But job number two– developing economic theories to guide societies in an age of abundance – is no less complicated.
Some of the problems that are likely to emerge are already becoming obvious.
Today, many people derive their self-esteem from their jobs.
As labor becomes a less important part of the economy, and working-age men, in particular, become a smaller proportion of the workforce, problems related to social inclusion are bound to become both more chronic and more acute.
Such a trend could have consequences extending far beyond the personal or the emotional, creating a population that is, to borrow a phrase from the Nobel-laureate economists George Akerlof and Robert Shiller, easily phished for phools.
In other words, they will be targeted by those who do not have their wellbeing as their primary goal – scammers like Bernie Madoff, corporate interests like McDonalds or tobacco companies, the guru of the month, or cash-strapped governments running exploitative lotteries.
Problems like these will require a very different type of economics from the one championed by Adam Smith.
Instead of working to protect natural liberty where possible, and building institutions to approximate its effects elsewhere, the central challenge will be to help people protect themselves from manipulation.
To be sure, it is not clear that economists will have a comparative advantage in addressing these problems.
But, for now at least, behavioral economists like Akerlof, Shiller, Richard Thaler, and Matthew Rabin seem to be leading the field.
In any case, one need only glance at the headlines to comprehend that the issue has become a defining feature of our economic epoch.
China’s Narrowing Policy Horizons
BEIJING – Back in the last quarter of 2011, when the decline in China’s investment growth accelerated, concerns about a hard economic landing intensified, particularly given the authorities’ reluctance to pursue new expansionary policies.
By May 2012, however, the government had changed its mind, with the National Development and Reform Commission approving ¥7 trillion ($1.3 trillion) in new projects.
That, together with two ensuing interest-rate cuts by the People’s Bank of China (PBOC), guaranteed an end to the economic slowdown in the third quarter of 2012.
The Chinese economy’s performance has thus maintained the cyclical pattern familiar from the past two decades: rapid investment growth, supported by expansionary policy, drives up the economic-growth rate.
Inflation follows, so policy is tightened and growth slows.
But inflation remains high or rising, so more tightening is imposed.
Inflation falls at last, but growth slows more than desired, owing to the overcapacity that resulted from excessive investment in the earlier phase of the cycle.
At this point, policy becomes expansionary again, and the cycle begins anew: led by investment growth, the economy rebounds.
Thus, the acceleration of economic growth since the third quarter of 2012 should come as no surprise.
With the government still having room to wield expansionary monetary and/or fiscal policy, the economic revival was only a matter of time.
There is no reason to doubt that the Chinese economy in 2013 will follow the old growth pattern.
But China’s decision-makers should bear two things in mind. First, in the past, short-term macroeconomic stability was often achieved at the expense of structural adjustment and rational allocation of resources.
To achieve sustained growth, a balance between short-term and long-term objectives must be struck.
Striking that balance is the biggest challenge facing China.
Second, some financial vulnerabilities are embedded in the economy.
Unless they are defused in time, financial shocks may derail the economy from its normal growth path.
According to preliminary reports, annual investment growth in 2012 reached roughly 14% – significantly higher than the GDP growth rate, which accelerated in the fourth quarter as a result of a strong rebound in investment in real estate and infrastructure.
In 2013, it can be expected that, barring major disruptions, strong investment growth will push China’s GDP more than 8% higher year on year.
The timing of the inevitable policy shift back to tightening depends on overall inflation, particularly house prices.
The problem is that the investment share of China’s GDP is already about 50%, while double-digit investment growth in 2013 is expected to push that rate still higher.
Such a growth path is simply not sustainable.
The money supply has grown significantly faster than output for decades.
In 2012, the growth rate of M2 was about 14%, relatively low by historical standards, but still significantly higher than the nominal GDP growth rate.
As a result of this chronically rapid growth in broad money, China’s M2/GDP ratio has surpassed 180%, the highest in the world.
Though the full implications of this uniquely high ratio for macroeconomic stability need further investigation, it certainly implies financial fragility and a weakening of the PBOC’s ability to control overall liquidity in the economy.
Third, though China’s public debt/GDP ratio is officially still under 20%, since the onset of the global financial crisis in 2008, its fiscal position has deteriorated. If the government’s contingent liabilities are included, China’s debt/GDP ratio may be closer to 50%.
A worrying development in this regard is the rapid rise in enterprise debt, which, according to various studies, now surpasses 120% of GDP – much higher than the leveraging rates of nonfinancial enterprises in major developed countries.
Even if this does not trigger a crisis, it sharply narrows the government’s scope for using expansionary fiscal policy to stimulate the economy.
In 2011 and early 2012, there was much talk of a crash in China’s housing market, and a chain-reaction of defaults in underground credit networks and local-government finance platforms.
In 2013, the talk has changed to the danger of a resurgent housing bubble and the collapse of the shadow banking system, which consists mainly of wealth-management firms and trust companies.
According to market sources, total assets managed by the shadow banking system have risen exponentially since 2009, totaling ¥14 trillion, or one-third of GDP, in the third quarter of 2012.
With relatively slow growth, corporate profitability, upon which the returns of the shadow banking system’s asset pools are based, is low and falling.
Where, then, will the high returns of the financial products provided by the shadow banking system come from?
If the shadow banking system collapses, the consequences for the financial system will be much graver than the problems caused by underground credit networks and local-government finance platforms, which were much discussed in 2012.
No wonder, then, that one influential banker regarded as a possible successor to PBOC Governor Zhou Xiaochuan has warned of the possibility of a “Chinese-style subprime crisis.”
For now, the Chinese economy, having received its cyclical dose of stimulus, should be okay.
By the end of the year, however, the costs of the structural adjustment needed to shift China’s growth model away from investment demand could rise further.
A World of Underinvestment
MILAN – When World War II ended 70 years ago, much of the world – including industrialized Europe, Japan, and other countries that had been occupied – was left geopolitically riven and burdened by heavy sovereign debt, with many major economies in ruins.
One might have expected a long period of limited international cooperation, slow growth, high unemployment, and extreme privation, owing to countries’ limited capacity to finance their huge investment needs.
But that is not what happened.
Instead, world leaders adopted a long-term perspective.
They recognized that their countries’ debt-reduction prospects depended on nominal economic growth, and that their economic-growth prospects – not to mention continued peace – depended on a worldwide recovery.
So they used – and even stretched – their balance sheets for investment, while opening themselves up to international trade, thereby helping to restore demand.
The United States – which faced considerable public debt, but had lost little in the way of physical assets – naturally assumed a leadership role in this process.
Two features of the post-war economic recovery are striking.
First, countries did not view their sovereign debt as a binding constraint, and instead pursued investment and potential growth.
Second, they cooperated with one another on multiple fronts, and the countries with the strongest balance sheets bolstered investment elsewhere, crowding in private investment.
The onset of the Cold War may have encouraged this approach.
In any case, it was not every country for itself.
Today’s global economy bears striking similarities to the immediate post-war period: high unemployment, high and rising debt levels, and a global shortage of aggregate demand are constraining growth and generating deflationary pressures.
And now, as then, the level and quality of investment have been consistently inadequate, with public spending on tangible and intangible capital – a critical factor in long-term growth – well below optimal levels for some time.
Of course, there are also new challenges.
The dynamics of income distribution have shifted adversely in recent decades, impeding consensus on economic policy.
And aging populations – a result of rising longevity and declining fertility – are putting pressure on public finances.
Nonetheless, the ingredients of an effective strategy to spur economic growth and employment are similar: available balance sheets (sovereign and private) should be used to generate additional demand and boost public investment, even if it results in greater leverage.
Recent IMF research suggests that, given excess capacity, governments would probably benefit from substantial short-run multipliers.
More important, the focus on investment would improve prospects for long-term sustainable growth, which would enable governments and households to pursue responsible deleveraging.
Likewise, international cooperation is just as critical to success today as it was 70 years ago.
Because the balance sheets (public, quasi-public, and private) with the capacity to invest are not uniformly distributed around the world, a determined global effort – which includes an important role for multilateral financial institutions – is needed to clear clogged intermediation channels.
There is plenty of incentive for countries to collaborate, rather than using trade, finance, monetary policy, public-sector purchasing, tax policy, or other levers to undermine one another.
After all, given the connectedness that characterizes today’s globalized financial and economic systems, a full recovery anywhere is virtually impossible without a broad-based recovery nearly everywhere.
Yet, for the most part, limited cooperation has been the world’s chosen course in recent years, with countries believing not only that they must fend for themselves, but also that their debt levels impose a hard constraint on growth-generating investment.
The resulting underinvestment and depreciation of the global economy’s asset base are suppressing productivity growth and thus undermining sustainable recoveries.
In the absence of a vigorous international re-investment program, monetary policy is being used to prop up growth.
But monetary policy typically focuses on domestic recovery.
And, though unconventional measures have reduced financial instability, their effectiveness in countering widespread deflationary pressures or restoring growth remains dubious.
Meanwhile, savers are being repressed, asset prices distorted, and incentives to maintain or even increase leverage enhanced.
Competitive devaluations, even if they are not policymakers’ stated objectives, are becoming increasingly tempting – though they will not solve the aggregate-demand problem.
This is not to say that sudden “normalization” of monetary policy is a good idea.
But, if large-scale investment and reform programs were initiated as complements to unconventional monetary-policy measures, the economy could move onto a more resilient growth path.
Despite its obvious benefits, such a coordinated international approach remains elusive.
Though trade and investment agreements are being negotiated, they are increasingly regional in scope.
Meanwhile, the multilateral trade system is fragmenting, along with the consensus that created it.
Given the level of interconnectedness and interdependence that characterizes today’s global economy, the reluctance to cooperate is difficult to comprehend.
One problem seems to be conditionality, with countries unwilling to commit to complementary fiscal and structural reforms.
This is especially evident in Europe, where it is argued, with some justification, that, without such reforms, growth will remain anemic, sustaining or even exacerbating fiscal constraints.
But if conditionality is so important, why didn’t it prevent cooperation 70 years ago?
Perhaps the idea that severely damaged economies, with limited prospects for independent recoveries, would pass up the opportunity that international cooperation presented was implausible.
Maybe it still is.
If so, creating a similar opportunity today could change the incentives, trigger the required complementary reforms, and put the global economy on course to a stronger long-term recovery.
A Growth Pact for America
NEW YORK – America, once again, will have a divided government, with the Democrats holding the White House, and the Republicans controlling both houses of Congress.
But that does not necessarily mean that the final two years of Barack Obama’s presidency need to be defined by stalemate and mutual recrimination.
The electorate’s desire for change and fear of continuing slow growth, which pushed the Republicans to their victory in this week’s mid-term congressional election, will invariably prompt discussion about new policy options designed to raise growth, employment, and incomes.
Of course, America’s experience with divided government can leave one pessimistic about the two parties’ ability to compromise; but, as Mexico recently demonstrated when its three big parties agreed on a market-oriented “Pact for Mexico,” even bitterly opposed political parties can overcome their suspicions to embrace needed reforms.
The list of potential policy actions that could benefit the United States – trade liberalization, comprehensive regulatory reform, and immigration and education reform, among others – is long.
But only two policies are particularly promising for such a “Pact for America”: federal infrastructure spending and corporate-tax reform.
Enactment of these reforms would generate a win for each side – and for both.
But such a bipartisan consensus requires removing both the left and the right’s ideological blinders, at least temporarily.
On the left, a preoccupation with Keynesian stimulus reflects a misunderstanding of both the availability of measures (shovel-ready projects) and their desirability (whether they will meaningfully change the expectations of households and businesses).
Indeed, to counteract the mindset forged in the recent financial crisis, spending measures will need to be longer-lasting if they are to raise expectations of future growth and thus stimulate current investment and hiring.
The right, for its part, must rethink its obsession with temporary tax cuts for households or businesses.
The impact of such cuts on aggregate demand is almost always modest, and they are poorly suited for shifting expectations for recovery and growth in the post-financial-crisis downturn.
Politics complicates matters further, because the exclusively short-term focus on the fiscal impact of spending and revenues clashes with policies whose benefits accumulate over time.