That backlash should not have come as a surprise.
Traditional labor-market policies and training systems have not been equal to the task of dealing with the large-scale changes caused by the twin forces of globalization and automation.
The US needs concrete proposals for supporting workers caught up in structural transitions – and a willingness to consider fresh approaches, such as wage insurance.
Contrary to campaign rhetoric, simple protectionism would harm consumers.
A recent study by the US President’s Council of Economic Advisers found that middle-class Americans gain more than a quarter of their purchasing power from trade.
In any event, imposing tariffs on foreign goods will not bring back lost manufacturing jobs.
It is time to change the parameters of the debate and recognize that globalization has become an entirely different animal: The global goods trade has flattened for a variety of reasons, including plummeting commodity prices, sluggishness in many major economies, and a trend toward producing goods closer to the point of consumption.
Cross-border flows of data, by contrast, have grown by a factor of 45 during the past decade, and now generate a greater economic impact than flows of traditional manufactured goods.
Digitization is changing everything: the nature of the goods changing hands, the universe of potential suppliers and customers, the method of delivery, and the capital and scale required to operate globally.
It also means that globalization is no longer exclusively the domain of Fortune 500 firms.
Companies interacting with their foreign operations, suppliers, and customers account for a large and growing share of global Internet traffic.
Already half of the world’s traded services are digitized, and 12% of the global goods trade is conducted via international e-commerce.
E-commerce marketplaces such as Alibaba, Amazon, and eBay are turning millions of small enterprises into exporters.
This remains an enormous untapped opportunity for the US, where fewer than 1% of companies export – a far lower share than in any other advanced economy.
Despite all the anti-trade rhetoric, it is crucial that Americans bear in mind that most of the world’s customers are overseas.
Fast-growing emerging economies will be the biggest sources of consumption growth in the years ahead.
This would be the worst possible moment to erect barriers.
The new digital landscape is still taking shape, and countries have an opportunity to redefine their comparative advantages.
The US may have lost out as the world chased low labor costs; but it operates from a position of strength in a world defined by digital globalization.
There is real value in the seamless movement of innovation, information, goods, services, and – yes – people.
As the US struggles to jump-start its economy, it cannot afford to seal itself off from an important source of growth.
US policymakers must take a nuanced, clear-eyed view of globalization, one that addresses its downsides more effectively, not only when it comes to lost jobs at home, but also when it comes to its trading partners’ labor and environmental standards.
Above all, the US needs to stop retrying the past – and start focusing on how it can compete in the next era of globalization.
Mengkaji Ulang Prinsip “Robin Hood”
MADRID – Bantuan asing (luar negeri) bagi pembangunan diberlakukan berdasarkan prinsip Robin Hood: mengambil dari yang kaya dan memberi pada yang miskin.
Lembaga pembangunan dalam negeri, organisasi multilateral, dan LSM saat ini mentransfer lebih dari 135 miliar dolar AS per tahun dari negara-negara maju kepada negara-negara miskin yang beralaskan pada gagasan tersebut.
Istilah lebih formal yang merujuk pada prinsip Robin Hood adalah “cosmopolitan prioritarianism,” aturan etis yang menyatakan bahwa manusia itu dianggap setara, dimana pun mereka tinggal, dan lalu memfokuskan bantuan kepada negara atau kawasan yang bisa menghasilkan manfaat terbesar.
Negara-negara yang berkekurangan mendapatkan prioritas dibandingkan yang berkecukupan.
Filosofi tersebut secara tersurat dan tersirat mempedomani bantuan bagi pertumbuhan ekonomi, kesehatan, dan bantuan kemanusiaan dalam kondisi darurat.
Sekilas, cosmopolitan prioritarianism tampak masuk akal.
Penduduk di negara-negara miskin mempunyai kebutuhan yang lebih mendesak dan tingkat harga (price level) di negara tersebut jauh lebih rendah, sehingga harga satu dolar atau satu euro berlipat ganda atau bahkan tiga kali lebih tinggi dibandingkan di negara asalnya.
Pembelanjaan di dalam negeri tidak hanya lebih mahal tapi juga tersalurkan kepada warga yang relatif berkecukupan (dinilai dari standar global), sehingga kurang bermanfaat.
Saya sudah memikirkan dan mencoba mengukur kemiskinan dunia selama beberapa tahun dan pedoman ini selalu terkesan benar.
Tapi baru-baru ini saya pribadi semakin meragukannya.
Baik fakta-fakta maupun etika sama-sama menghadirkan permasalahan.
Tentu sudah banyak kemajuan yang diwujudkan dalam penurunan kemiskinan global, sebagian besarnya dicapai melalui pertumbuhan dan globalisasi daripada bantuan asing.
Jumlah warga miskin berkurang dalam 40 tahun terakhir dari awalnya lebih dari 2 miliar menjadi kurang dari satu miliar orang – kemenangan besar, mengingat tingginya kenaikan populasi penduduk dunia dan melemahnya pertumbuhan ekonomi global, terutama sejak tahun 2008.
Walau mengesankan dan disambut baik, pengentasan kemiskinan tidak terlepas dari biaya.
Globalisasi yang menyelamatkan banyak warga di negara-negara miskin telah membahayakan sejumlah kelompok di negara-negara maju, seiring dengan berpindahnya pabrik dan lapangan kerja ke tempat yang menyediakan tenaga kerja murah.
Hal ini dianggap sebagai konsekuensi yang wajar, sebab mereka yang merugi toh sudah jauh lebih kaya (dan sehat) dibandingkan mereka yang mendapat untung.
Penyebab utama kekhawatiran yang timbul sejak lama adalah kita atau kelompok yang membuat keputusan-keputusan tersebut tidak sepenuhnya layak menilai biaya-biaya yang ada.
Layaknya mayoritas akademisi dan praktisi di dunia pembangunan (development), saya merupakan salah satu penerima manfaat globalisasi yang terbesar – orang-orang yang bisa menjual jasanya di pasar yang lebih besar dan melimpah yang didambakan orang tua kami dulu.
Namun globalisasi tidak sebegitu megahnya bagi mereka yang kurang memperoleh manfaat, apalagi justru menderita akibatnya.
Kita sudah mengetahui bahwa penduduk Amerika yang kurang berpendidikan dan berpendapatan rendah, misalnya, hanya merasakan sedikit manfaat ekonomi selama empat dekade, dan bagian terbawah di pasar tenaga kerja AS adalah pasar yang keji.
Tapi seberapa parah penderitaan yang penduduk Amerika alami akibat globalisasi?
Apakah mereka lebih beruntung daripada penduduk Asia yang bekerja di pabrik-pabrik yang dulunya beroperasi di kota tempat mereka tinggal?
Jawabannya iya bagi sebagian besar orang.
Tapi jutaan warga AS – warga kulit hitam, putih, dan hispanik (keturunan Spanyol) – kini hidup dengan penghasilan per kapita kurang dari 2 dolar AS per hari, menurut standar yang diterapkan Bank Dunia untuk mengukur angka kemiskinan di India atau Afrika.
Untuk bisa mendapat pemukiman di Amerika Serikat dengan pendapatan tersebut sangatlah sulit sehingga hidup miskin dengan 2 dolar AS per hari hampir dipastikan jauh lebih buruk daripada hidup miskin dengan pendapatan harian yang sama di India atau Afrika.
Selain itu, adanya kesamaan peluang (equal opportunity) di Amerika yang selalu diagung-agungkan kini terancam.
Kota dan kabupaten yang kehilangan pabrik-pabrik akibat globalisasi juga kehilangan basis pajak dan kesulitan menjaga mutu sekolah – yang ibaratnya adalah jalur evakuasi bagi generasi masa depan.
Sekolah-sekolah elit menerima siswa-siswa dari keluarga kaya untuk membiayai pengeluarannya dan menarik kaum minoritas untuk menebus diskriminasi lampau; tapi ini tentu saja memupuk kebencian di kalangan pekerja berkulit putih, yang mana anak-anak mereka tidak mendapat tempat di dunia baru yang berani.
Karya saya bersama Anne Case mengungkapkan tanda-tanda kesulitan lainnya.
Kami telah mendokumentasikan kenaikan jumlah “deaths of despair” (kematian akibat kehilangan harapan) di kalangan warga kulit putih non-hispanik – akibat bunuh diri, penyalahgunaan alkohol, dan overdosis obat resep dan ilegal.
Angka kematian secara keseluruhan di Amerika Serikat lebih tinggi pada tahun 2015 dibandingkan 2014 dan angka harapan hidup berkurang.
Kita bisa berargumentasi tentang pengukuran standar kehidupan material, baik itu inflasi yang dilebih-lebihkan atau perbaikan standar kehidupan yang diremehkan, atau sekolah yang memang buruk dimana pun.
Tapi kematian tidak bisa dikesampingkan dan dianggap kecil.
Barangkali masih belum gamblang bahwa kebutuhan terbesar sebetulnya bertempat di belahan bumi lain.
Benar bahwa pada setiap kewarganegaraan melekat seperangkat hak dan kewajiban yang tidak dimiliki warga di negara lain.
Akan tetapi unsur “cosmopolitan” pada pedoman etis ini mengabaikan segala kewajiban khusus yang kita emban terhadap sesama warga negara.
Kita bisa memandang seperangkat hak dan kewajiban sebagai semacam kontrak asuransi/jaminan timbal balik. Kita menolak untuk mendiamkan bentuk-bentuk ketidaksetaraan tertentu terhadap sesama warga negara dan kita semua berkewajiban membantu – serta berhak meminta bantuan – dalam kondisi adanya ancaman bersama.
Tanggung jawab tersebut tidak membatalkan atau mengesampingkan tanggung jawab kita bagi orang-orang yang menderita dimana pun mereka berada, tapi itu berarti jika kita hanya menilai dari kebutuhan materialnya, khawatirnya kita melupakan pertimbangan-pertimbangan penting.
Ketika warga negara berkeyakinan bahwa para elite lebih memedulikan penduduk lain di seberang lautan dibandingkan warganya sendiri, asuransi/jaminan tersebut akan runtuh, kita terbagi-bagi atas faksi, dan mereka yang tertinggal akan merasa marah dan kecewa dengan sikap politik yang tidak lagi memihak.
Kita boleh tidak sepakat dengan ganti rugi yang mereka kehendaki, tapi pengabaian atas ketidakpuasan dan kebencian tersebut akan merugikan bagi mereka dan kita juga.
Globalization Marches On
LONDON – In a recent symposium in the Financial Times on globalization’s prospects in 2011, the columnist Gideon Rachman observed that, “When Barack Obama visited India recently, the US President warned his hosts that the debate about globalization has reopened in the West,” and that “a backlash…is forming…and growing in advanced economies.”
But Rachman’s alarmism is misplaced.
The fear of globalization in the West is nothing new.
Articulate intellectuals and groups such as labor unions and environmental organizations in the advanced economies have voiced anti-globalization fears and sentiments for at least a quarter-century.
The fear of globalization, however, began historically in the East, not the West.
After World War II, the West dismantled barriers to trade and investment flows, and worked to eliminate exchange controls and move to currency convertibility.
What was sometimes called the liberal international economic order was the order of the day, and it was embraced by public opinion as well.
By contrast, the East generally embraced the fearful view that, as the Chilean sociologist Oswaldo Sunkel put it, integration into the international economy would lead to disintegration of the national economy.
Many intellectuals shared this dark anti-globalization vision, and policymakers in much of the East were not far behind.
Indeed, the West accepted the view that globalization would result (as with trade) in mutual gain, embracing what I called in 1997 the notion of “benign neglect.”
In the case of foreign investment and aid flows, the West went further, viewing them as being motivated by altruism, or “benign intent,” whereas the East regarded globalization in a world of poor and rich nations as implying “malign impact.”
In some analyses, malign impact turned into a more sinister “malign intent.”
Thus, foreign aid was regarded as a plot to trap poor nations in a neo-colonial embrace.
What happened next was what I have called an “ironic reversal.”
As the benefits of globalization became manifest, and the damage wrought by autarkic policies also became evident, policymakers in the East began to appreciate that their anti-globalization stance had been a mistake.
But then fear of globalization moved to the West.
The East had feared that it could not gain from trade with the West, which had superior infrastructure and human capital; now, the West had come to fear that it would lose from trade with the East, which had abundant, cheap labor.
The longstanding stagnation in wages for unskilled labor was attributed to low-cost, labor-intensive imports, ignoring the corollary that Western workers’ consumption of labor-intensive Asian goods offset the effect on real wages.
To take another example, the East worried about a “brain drain” of professionals to the West, where opportunities seemed to be more plentiful.
Today, the West is witnessing anti-globalization opposition from members of professional groups, who fear the loss of their jobs to foreign counterparts.
Rudyard Kipling famously wrote in “The Ballad of East and West”:  “Oh, East is East, and West is West, and never the twain shall meet.”
Given the ironic reversal of globalization fears, Kipling is still right: convergence has continued to elude East and West.
The current crisis did not create the debate about globalization now heard in the West; it only made it slightly more salient.
Yet the crisis may be tilting Western policy outcomes in favor of globalization.
For example, on trade, there has been a remarkable commitment to efforts – largely successful – to avoid significant backsliding into protectionism.
Moreover, the G-20 leaders have continued to express the need to conclude the Doha Round of multilateral trade-liberalization negotiations.
There are also initiatives such as the appointment by the governments of Britain, Germany, Indonesia, and Turkey of a High-Level Expert Trade Group, with Peter Sutherland, former Director General of GATT and the WTO, and myself as co-chairs.
The four governments will report at this year’s World Economic Forum in Davos on how to conclude Doha this year.
In other words, Kipling could yet be proved wrong.
A reversal in the West is possible, perhaps even likely.
So the current crisis may thus, accidentally, establish a pro-globalization consensus that spans East and West.
Globalization and its New Discontents
NEW YORK – Fifteen years ago, I wrote a little book, entitled Globalization and its Discontents, describing growing opposition in the developing world to globalizing reforms.
It seemed a mystery: people in developing countries had been told that globalization would increase overall wellbeing. So why had so many people become so hostile to it?
Now, globalization’s opponents in the emerging markets and developing countries have been joined by tens of millions in the advanced countries.
Opinion polls, including a careful study by Stanley Greenberg and his associates for the Roosevelt Institute, show that trade is among the major sources of discontent for a large share of Americans.
Similar views are apparent in Europe.
How can something that our political leaders – and many an economist – said would make everyone better off be so reviled?
One answer occasionally heard from the neoliberal economists who advocated for these policies is that people are better off.
They just don’t know it. Their discontent is a matter for psychiatrists, not economists.
But income data suggest that it is the neoliberals who may benefit from therapy. Large segments of the population in advanced countries have not been doing well: in the US, the bottom 90% has endured income stagnation for a third of a century.
Median income for full-time male workers is actually lower in real (inflation-adjusted) terms than it was 42 years ago.
At the bottom, real wages are comparable to their level 60 years ago.
The effects of the economic pain and dislocation that many Americans are experiencing are even showing up in health statistics.
For example, the economists Anne Case and Angus Deaton, this year’s Nobel laureate, have shown that life expectancy among segments of white Americans is declining.
Things are a little better in Europe – but only a little better.
Branko Milanovic’s new book Global Inequality: A New Approach for the Age of Globalization provides some vital insights, looking at the big winners and losers in terms of income over the two decades from 1988 to 2008.
Among the big winners were the global 1%, the world’s plutocrats, but also the middle class in newly emerging economies.
Among the big losers – those who gained little or nothing – were those at the bottom and the middle and working classes in the advanced countries.
Globalization is not the only reason, but it is one of the reasons.
Under the assumption of perfect markets (which underlies most neoliberal economic analyses), free trade equalizes the wages of unskilled workers around the world.
Trade in goods is a substitute for the movement of people. Importing goods from China – goods that require a lot of unskilled workers to produce – reduces the demand for unskilled workers in Europe and the US.
This force is so strong that if there were no transportation costs, and if the US and Europe had no other source of competitive advantage, such as in technology, eventually it would be as if Chinese workers continued to migrate to the US and Europe until wage differences had been eliminated entirely.
Not surprisingly, the neoliberals never advertised this consequence of trade liberalization, as they claimed – one could say lied – that all would benefit.
The failure of globalization to deliver on the promises of mainstream politicians has surely undermined trust and confidence in the “establishment.”
And governments’ offers of generous bailouts for the banks that had brought on the 2008 financial crisis, while leaving ordinary citizens largely to fend for themselves, reinforced the view that this failure was not merely a matter of economic misjudgments.
In the US, Congressional Republicans even opposed assistance to those who were directly hurt by globalization.
More generally, neoliberals, apparently worried about adverse incentive effects, have opposed welfare measures that would have protected the losers.
But they can’t have it both ways: if globalization is to benefit most members of society, strong social-protection measures must be in place.
The Scandinavians figured this out long ago; it was part of the social contract that maintained an open society – open to globalization and changes in technology.
Neoliberals elsewhere have not – and now, in elections in the US and Europe, they are having their comeuppance.
Globalization is, of course, only one part of what is going on; technological innovation is another part.
But all of this openness and disruption were supposed to make us richer, and the advanced countries could have introduced policies to ensure that the gains were widely shared.
Instead, they pushed for policies that restructured markets in ways that increased inequality and undermined overall economic performance; growth actually slowed as the rules of the game were rewritten to advance the interests of banks and corporations – the rich and powerful – at the expense of everyone else.
Workers’ bargaining power was weakened; in the US, at least, competition laws didn’t keep up with the times; and existing laws were inadequately enforced.
Financialization continued apace and corporate governance worsened.
Now, as I point out in my recent book Rewriting the Rules of the American Economy, the rules of the game need to be changed again – and this must include measures to tame globalization.
The two new large agreements that President Barack Obama has been pushing – the Trans-Pacific Partnership between the US and 11 Pacific Rim countries, and the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership between the EU and the US – are moves in the wrong direction.
The main message of Globalization and its Discontents was that the problem was not globalization, but how the process was being managed.
Unfortunately, the management didn’t change.
Fifteen years later, the new discontents have brought that message home to the advanced economies.
Debunking America’s Populist Narrative
BERKELEY – One does not need to be particularly good at hearing to decipher the dog whistles being used during this year’s election campaign in the United States.
Listen even briefly, and you will understand that Mexicans and Chinese are working with Wall Street to forge lousy trade deals that rob American workers of their rightful jobs, and that Muslims want to blow everyone up.
All of this fear mongering is scarier than the usual election-year fare.
It is frightening to people in foreign countries, who can conclude only that voters in the world’s only superpower have become dangerously unbalanced.
And it is frightening to Americans, who until recently believed – or perhaps hoped – that they were living in a republic based on the traditions established by George Washington, Abraham Lincoln, and Teddy and Franklin Roosevelt.
But what is even more unsettling is the political reality this rhetoric reflects.
There can be no comparing Democratic presidential candidate Bernie Sanders’s policy-oriented critique of neoliberalism to the incoherent bluster of Donald Trump or Ted Cruz on the Republican side.
And yet, on both the right and the left, a common narrative is emerging – one that seeks to explain why the incomes of working- and middle-class Americans have stagnated over the past generation.
Unfortunately, this narrative, if used as a basis for policymaking, will benefit neither the US nor the rest of the world; worse, it has yet to be seriously challenged.
For decades, senior Republican politicians and intellectuals have been uninterested in educating the American people about the realities of economic policy.
And Democratic frontrunner Hillary Clinton has been too busy trying to fend off Sanders’s challenge.
Broadly, the narrative goes something like this.
American middle- and working-class wages have stagnated because Wall Street pressed companies to outsource the valuable jobs that made up America’s manufacturing base, first to low-wage Mexicans and then to the Chinese.
Moreover, this was a bipartisan effort, with both parties unified behind financial deregulation and trade deals that undermined the US economy.
First, the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) led to the export of high-quality manufacturing jobs to Mexico.
Then the US established permanent normal trade relations with China and refused to brand its government a currency manipulator.
The reason this narrative is wrong is simple.
There are good reasons why the US adopted policies that encouraged poorer countries to grow rapidly through export-led industrialization.
In helping Mexico, China, and other developing countries grow, the US is gaining richer trading partners.
Furthermore, there is a strong case that US national security will be improved if, 50 years from now, schoolchildren around the world learn how America helped their countries prosper, rather than trying to keep them as poor as possible for as long as possible.
It was not globalization that caused incomes to stagnate.
Trade with countries like China and Mexico is just one factor affecting income distribution in the US, and it is by no means the most important one.
The reason that incomes have stagnated is that American politicians have failed to implement policies to manage globalization’s effects.
As Steve Cohen and I argue in our book Concrete Economics, macroeconomic management requires the government to do what it always did before 1980: pragmatically adopt policies that promote equitable growth.
There were good reasons for the US to offload industries that required low wages to be globally competitive.
But there was little reason for the US to offload industries that had become important “technology drivers.”
Nor were there good reasons for a lot of other bad decisions, such as allowing the financial industry to profit by convincing investors to bear risks they should not and allowing health-care providers to profit from administration at the expense of the care and treatment of the sick.
Other bad decisions include incarcerating 2% of the country’s young men and concluding that America’s economic problems would be solved if only the rich could keep more of their money.
It is not difficult to see where the blame lies.
As Mark Kleiman of NYU’s Marron Institute points out, the Republican Party’s rigid and die-hard ideological opposition to “taxing the rich [has] destroyed, on a practical level, the theoretical basis for believing that free trade benefits everyone.”
It is difficult to argue for redistributing the benefits of globalization when you believe that the market channels gains to those who deserve them.
Nor can you ameliorate the painful effects of globalization if you believe that social-insurance programs turn their beneficiaries into lethargic “takers.”
It is not globalization, poor negotiation tactics, low-wage Mexicans workers, or the overly clever Chinese that bear responsibility for what is ailing America.
The responsibility lies instead with politicians peddling ideology over practicality – and thus with the citizens who elect them, as well as those who don’t bother to vote at all.
The West’s Decline Would Hurt China
HONG KONG – Official Chinese media are having a field day touting the dysfunction of Western democracies.
Between the British vote to “Brexit” the European Union and the nomination of Donald Trump as the Republican candidate for the US presidency, not to mention increasingly frequent terrorist attacks, they have plenty of evidence.
But the truth is that the West’s loss is not China’s gain.
The hope, of course, is that the current travails of democracies around the world could boost the credibility of the Chinese Communist Party.
And, indeed, a commentary in People’s Daily, the CCP’s official newspaper, portrayed the Brexit vote as a reflection of the fundamental flaws of Western democracies.
The same paper used Trump’s rise to show that, in the American system, political leaders are “helpless” to address “complex social conflicts” like racial tensions and other sources of popular discontent.
The Global Times, an ultra-nationalist tabloid affiliated with the People’s Daily, seemed to suggest that recent terrorist attacks in the West were a harbinger of some kind of democratic apocalypse.
The West may be facing some mysterious and unthinkable “change,” intoned the tabloid.
Given the CCP’s ideological hostility to the West, and its zero-sum geopolitical mindset, such gloating should come as no surprise.
Indeed, the CCP has long used challenges that arise in democratic countries as part of its never-ending effort to enhance its own legitimacy.
Claiming that democracy barely works in the West, the Party argues that it would be disastrous for China.
Moreover, so long as China’s government is delivering consistently rising standards of living, as it has been over the last few decades, there is no need, according to the authorities, even to consider alternative systems.
But there is little evidence that democratic tumult translates into autocratic legitimacy.
On the contrary, dictatorships have historically fallen, regardless of the fortune of Western democracies.
When the so-called third wave of democratization began in the mid-1970s, Western democracies were mired in stagflation and the political trauma of the Vietnam War.
The fall of communism in the former Soviet bloc coincided with the reinvigoration of Western democracies in the 1980s.
When the Arab Spring erupted in 2011, Western democracies were struggling with the consequences of the global financial crisis of 2008.
All of this suggests that autocrats in China should not be holding their breath for some Brexit-induced surge in support.
Though stories of democratic dysfunction can give people living under autocratic rule a negative impression of democracy, the effect is most likely short-lived.
As long as dictatorships mistreat their own people and fail to improve their lives, their legitimacy will be challenged.
Of course, China is no ordinary autocracy.
But what makes it unique – the link between the CCP’s authority and its ability to sustain economic growth – does not make its gloating any more rational.
After all, one of the keys to China’s economic success is its integration into a global economy dominated by the Western democracies, which buy roughly 60% of Chinese exports.
In other words, the CCP derives more legitimacy from Western democracies’ success than it would from their failure.
No good businessperson would hope their best customers go bankrupt.
It makes little sense that the CCP is so pleased about the struggles of China’s most valuable trading partners.
The factors driving the challenges facing the Western democracies today hold even worse implications for China.
Support for Brexit and Trump is rooted largely in voters’ rejection of globalization.
Regardless of how Brexit or the US election plays out, it is very likely that governments in Western democracies will respond to voter angst and take measures that imply a return to some degree of protectionism.
As the world’s largest exporter, China will not escape the damaging economic consequences of such efforts.
In that context, the legitimacy of the CCP, already challenged by China’s economic slowdown, could erode further.
Instead of gloating, China’s leaders should be watching developments in the Western democracies with concern – and start planning for their own difficult times ahead.
Globalization’s Political Fault Lines
NEW YORK – The United Kingdom’s narrow vote to leave the European Union had specific British causes.
And yet it is also the proverbial canary in the coalmine, signaling a broad populist/nationalist backlash – at least in advanced economies – against globalization, free trade, offshoring, labor migration, market-oriented policies, supranational authorities, and even technological change.
All of these trends reduce wages and employment for low-skill workers in labor-scarce and capital-rich advanced economies, and raise them in labor-abundant emerging economies.
Consumers in advanced economies benefit from the reduction in prices of traded goods; but low and even some medium-skill workers lose income as their equilibrium wages fall and their jobs are threatened.
In the “Brexit” vote, the fault lines were clear: rich versus poor, gainers versus losers from trade/globalization, skilled versus unskilled, educated versus less educated, young versus old, urban versus rural, and diverse versus more homogenous communities.
The same fault lines are appearing in other advanced economies, including the United States and continental Europe.
With their more flexible economies and labor markets, the US and the UK have recovered more strongly than continental Europe in terms of GDP and employment since the 2008 global financial crisis.
Job creation has been robust, with the unemployment rate falling below 5%, even if real wages are not growing much.
Yet in the US, Donald Trump has become the hero of angry workers threatened by trade, migration, and technological change.
In the UK, the Brexit vote was heavily influenced by fear that immigrants from low-wage EU countries (the proverbial “Polish plumber”) were taking citizens’ jobs and public services.
In continental Europe and the eurozone, however, economic conditions are much worse.
The average unemployment rate hovers above 10% (and much higher in the eurozone periphery – more than 20% in Greece and Spain) with youth unemployment over 30%.
In most of these countries, job creation is anemic, real wages are falling, and dual labor markets mean that formal-sector, unionized workers have good wages and benefits, while younger workers have precarious jobs that pay lower wages, provide no employment security, and offer low or no benefits.
Politically, the strains of globalization are twofold.
First, establishment parties of the right and the left, which for more than a generation have supported free trade and globalization, are being challenged by populist, nativist/nationalist anti-establishment parties.
On the left, the losers in the UK and the US, especially young people, found champions in traditional center-left parties: Jeremy Corbyn in the UK’s Labour Party, and Bernie Sanders in America’s Democratic Party.
The deepest fault lines emerged among center-right parties.
These parties – the Republicans in the US, the Tories in the UK, and center-right parties across continental Europe – confronted an internal revolt against their own leaders.
The rise of Donald Trump – anti-trade, anti-migration, anti-Muslim, and nativist – is a reflection of an uncomfortable fact for the Republican establishment: the party’s median voter is closer to those who have lost from globalization.
A similar revolt took place in the UK’s Conservative Party, with globalization’s losers coalescing around the party’s “Leave” campaign or shifting allegiance to the populist anti-EU UK Independence Party.
In continental Europe, where multi-party parliamentary systems are prevalent, political fragmentation and disintegration are even more severe than in the UK and the US.
On the EU’s periphery, anti-establishment parties tend to be on the left: Syriza in Greece, Italy’s Five Star Movement, Spain’s Podemos, leftist parties in Portugal.
In the EU core, such parties tend to be on the right: Alternative for Germany, France’s National Front, and similar far-right parties in Austria, the Netherlands, Denmark, Finland, Sweden, and elsewhere.
But, despite the growing number, organization, and mobilization of globalization’s losers, globalization itself is not necessarily doomed.
For starters, it continues to yield net benefits for advanced and emerging markets alike, which is why the losers still tend to be a minority in most advanced economies, while those who benefit from globalization are a large – if at times silent – majority.
In fact, even the “losers” benefit from the lower prices of goods and services brought about by globalization and technological innovation.
This also why populist and anti-establishment parties are still a political minority.
Even Syriza, once in power, backpedaled and had to accept austerity, as an EU exit would have been much costlier.
And Spain’s recent general election, held three days after the Brexit referendum, suggests that, despite high unemployment, austerity, and painful structural reforms, moderate, pro-European forces remain a majority.
Even in the US, Trump’s appeal is limited, owing to the demographic narrowness of his electoral base. Whether he can win the presidential election in November is highly doubtful.
This is also why pro-European center-right and center-left coalitions remain in power in most of the EU.
The risk that anti-EU parties may come to power in Italy, France, and the Netherlands – among others – is rising, but still remains a distant possibility.
Finally, economic theory suggests that globalization can be made to benefit all as long as the winners compensate the losers.
This can take the form of direct compensation or greater provision of free or semi-free public goods (for example, education, retraining, health care, unemployment benefits, and portable pensions).
For workers to accept more labor mobility and flexibility as creative destruction eliminates some jobs and creates others, appropriate schemes are needed to replace income lost as a result of transitional unemployment.
In the continental EU, establishment parties remain in power partly because their countries maintain extensive social welfare systems.
The backlash against globalization is real and growing. But it can be contained and managed through policies that compensate workers for its collateral damage and costs.
Only by enacting such policies will globalization’s losers begin to think that they may eventually join the ranks of its winners.
Globalization’s Assassin
The world’s first wave of economic globalization, led by the British Empire in the nineteenth century, came to an end literally with a bang on a Sunday afternoon in 1914, when Gavrilo Princip killed (with two uncannily well-aimed bullets) Austria’s Archduke Franz Ferdinand and his wife.
The years that followed witnessed pan-European carnage, instability throughout the 1920’s, and the rise of fascism and communism, culminating in the death of countless millions during World War II.
Is today’s globalizing era also coming to an end?
If so, it may not necessarily end with a repeat of the slaughters of the last century, but with an economic retrenchment that brings economic stagnation and consigns billions of people to grinding poverty.
Various candidates have been proposed for the role of globalization’s assassin.
But one little noticed, yet likely, aspirant has been sneaking up on the world economy: the growing tendency to limit the free circulation of people, to “fence in” the rich world.
We see the menace of this tendency constantly nowadays, but we perceive it in such a seemingly unthreatening way that we may well become accustomed to it rather than arresting it.
Globalization means free movement of capital, goods, technology, ideas, and, yes, people.
Any globalization that is limited to the first three or four freedoms but omits the last one is partial and not sustainable.
As soon as people cannot move, there will be little to stop governments from limiting the free movement of goods or other factors of production.
After all, if over-populated countries with high unemployment cannot export people, why not reach for higher tariff barriers to protect the jobs they have?
But what of the unemployed who become locked into their societies?
The war on terror has shown us the dangers that can arise from the social frustrations that often result.
Nevertheless, the “fencing-in” of the rich world continues apace.
The United States plans to construct a veritable “Mexican Wall” to keep poor people from crossing into Texas or California.
Likewise, hundreds, if not thousands, of Africans die every year trying to reach the shores of Fortress Europe.
Efforts to restrict people’s movement between countries expose the soft underbelly of globalization: the deepening gap between countries’ mean incomes.
Rather than poor countries growing faster than the rich (as we would expect from Economics 101), mainly the reverse is true.
Between 1980 and 2002, average annual per capita income growth in the rich world (defined as the “old” OECD members) was almost 2%, compared to just 0.1% in the 42 least developed countries.
Indeed, average income in Latin America is now barely above its 1980 level.
This huge gap spurs migration.
People nowadays know much more about conditions in different countries than they did in the past, and if moving across a border means that their income can be multiplied several-fold, they will try to do it.
This is why today’s most contentious borders separate economies where the income gaps between people on the two sides are the greatest.
There are four such global hot spots: the borders between the US and Mexico, Spain and Morocco, Greece (and Italy) and the southern Balkans, and Indonesia and Singapore (or Malaysia).
The income gaps range from more than seven to one in the latter case to 4.5 to one in the case of Spain and Morocco, 4.3 to one between the US and Mexico, and four to one between Greece and Albania.
Income differences were not always so huge.
In 1980, average income in the US was a little more than three times that of Mexico, the gap between Singapore and Indonesia was 5.3 to one, and the difference between Spain and Morocco 3.5 to one.
Even the gap between Greece and Albania, at three to one, was narrower than it is now.
So income gaps between all these contiguous countries have increased significantly during the last quarter-century.
So it is little wonder that it is in these places that most illegal immigration and human trafficking occurs – pirates in the Straits of Malacca, fast boats between Albania and Italy, and desperate human cargoes from Africa and Latin America.
If today’s globalization continues to widen income gaps, the waves of migration will grow.
So the rich world will, in a knee-jerk response, erect ever-higher barriers to stem the human tide.
If globalization, which has so enriched the world’s wealthiest countries, is to continue, governments must find ways to increase incomes more evenly.
Otherwise, today’s “fencing in” of the rich world will increase the risk of a backlash against free circulation of goods and capital, as well as of political instability punctuated by terrorism.
Global income redistribution by the rich countries should be viewed as a matter not of charity, but of enlightened self-interest.
Globalization’s Government
NEW YORK – We live in an era in which the most important forces affecting every economy are global, not local.
What happens “abroad” – in China, India, and elsewhere – powerfully affects even an economy as large as the United States. 
Economic globalization has, of course, produced some large benefits for the world, including the rapid spread of advanced technologies such as the Internet and mobile telephony.
It has also reduced poverty sharply in many emerging economies – indeed, for this reason alone, the world economy needs to remain open and interconnected.
Yet globalization has also created major problems that need to be addressed.
First, it has increased the scope for tax evasion, owing to a rapid proliferation of tax havens around the world. Multinational companies have many more opportunities than before to dodge their fair and efficient share of taxation.
Moreover, globalization has created losers as well as winners.
In high-income countries, notably the US, Europe, and Japan, the biggest losers are workers who lack the education to compete effectively with low-paid workers in developing countries.
Hardest hit are workers in rich countries who lack a college education. Such workers have lost jobs by the millions.
Those who have kept their jobs have seen their wages stagnate or decline.
Globalization has also fueled contagion.
The 2008 financial crisis started on Wall Street, but quickly spread to the entire world, pointing to the need for global cooperation on banking and finance.
Climate change, infectious diseases, terrorism, and other ills that can easily cross borders demand a similar global response. 
What globalization requires, therefore, are smart government policies.
Governments should promote high-quality education, to ensure that young people are prepared to face global competition.
They should raise productivity by building modern infrastructure and promoting science and technology. And governments should cooperate globally to regulate those parts of the economy – notably finance and the environment – in which problems in one country can spill over to other parts of the world.
The need for highly effective government in the era of globalization is the key message of my new book, The Price of Civilization.
Simply put, we need more government nowadays, not less.
Yet the role of government also needs to be modernized, in line with the specific challenges posed by an interconnected world economy.
I wrote The Price of Civilization out of the conviction that the US government has failed to understand and respond to the challenges of globalization ever since it began to impact America’s economy in the 1970’s.
Rather than respond to globalization with more government spending on education, infrastructure, and technology, Ronald Reagan won the presidency in 1980 by pledging to slash government spending and cut taxes.
For 30 years, the US has been going in the wrong direction, cutting the role of government in the domestic economy rather than promoting the investments needed to modernize the economy and workforce.
The rich have benefited in the short run, by getting massive tax breaks. The poor have suffered from job losses and cuts in government services.
Economic inequality has reached a high not seen since the Great Depression.
These adverse trends have been exacerbated by domestic politics. The rich have used their wealth to strengthen their grip on power.
They pay for the expensive campaigns of presidents and congressmen, so presidents and congressmen help the rich – often at the expense of the rest of society.  The same syndrome – in which the rich have gained control of the political system (or strengthened their control of it) – now afflicts many other countries.
Yet there are some important signs around the world that people are fed up with governments that cater to the rich while ignoring everyone else.
Start with the growing calls for greater social justice.
The upheavals in Tunis and Cairo were first called the Arab Spring, because they seemed to be contained to the Arab world.
But then we saw protests in Tel Aviv, Santiago, London, and now even in the US.
These protests have called first and foremost for more inclusive politics, rather than the corrupt politics of oligarchy.
Moreover, US President Barack Obama is gradually shifting toward the left.
After three years in which his administration coddled corporate lobbyists, he has finally begun to emphasize the need for the rich to pay more taxes.
This has come late in his term, and he might well continue to favor the rich and Wall Street in exchange for campaign contributions in 2012, but there is a glimmer of hope that Obama will defend a fairer budget policy.
Several European governments, including Spain, Denmark, and Greece, also seem to be moving in the same direction.
Spain recently imposed a new wealth tax on high-net-worth taxpayers.
Denmark elected a center-left government committed to higher government spending financed by new taxes on the rich.
And Greece has just voted for a new property tax to help close its yawning fiscal deficit.
The European Commission has also called for a new Financial Transactions Tax (FTT) to raise around $75 billion per year.
The Commission has finally agreed that Europe’s financial sector has been under-taxed.
The new FTT might still face political opposition in Europe, especially in the United Kingdom, with its large and influential banking sector, but at least the principle of greater tax fairness is high on the European agenda.
The world’s most successful economies today are in Scandinavia.
By using high taxes to finance a high level of government services, these countries have balanced high prosperity with social justice and environmental sustainability.
This is the key to well-being in today’s globalized economy.
Perhaps more parts of the world – and especially the world’s young people – are beginning to recognize this new reality.
Globalizing NATO
PRINCETON –&nbsp;Next week, NATO’s 28 members will meet in Chicago for their annual summit.
Sixty-two years after the North Atlantic Treaty was signed, binding the United States, Canada, and ten European states to consider an attack on one an attack on all, NATO is transforming itself into a twenty-first-century global security organization.
The result will be a safer world.
In 1949, the world was rapidly dividing into two principle political-military blocs, East and West, alongside a large “non-aligned movement.”
NATO faced off against the Warsaw Pact, created by the Soviet Union and its allies in 1955.
Within both blocs, smaller powers clustered around the superpower.
No flexibility existed within either bloc for smaller groups of members to deploy alliance assets.
Today, NATO is becoming, in the words of its secretary-general, Anders Fogh Rasmussen, “a hub of a network of security partnerships and a center for consultation on global security issues.”
It is a “globally connected institution,” with more than 40 individual country partners and growing ties to other international organizations.
Indeed, the country partners include all of Europe’s non-NATO countries, such as Austria, Switzerland, Finland, and Sweden, and aspiring and possible NATO members such as Bosnia, Serbia, Macedonia, Ukraine, Belarus, and even Russia.
Virtually all of the Central Asian countries – from Turkmenistan to Kazakhstan, as well as Armenia, Azerbaijan, Afghanistan, and Pakistan – are partners, as is the entire Maghreb, from Morocco to Egypt, as well as Israel, Jordan, Iraq, Bahrain, Qatar, Kuwait, and the United Arab Emirates.
Finally, Pacific partners include Japan, South Korea, Australia, New Zealand, and Mongolia.
On the organizational side, NATO describes itself as having developed “close working relations” with the United Nations, the European Union, and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe.
It also collaborates regularly with the African Union, the International Committee of the Red Cross, the International Organization for Migration, the World Bank, the International Civil Aviation Organization, and the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons.
If one draws links radiating outward from NATO to all of these different countries and organizations, the result is a security network that has multiple hubs and clusters – much like a map of the Internet or of planets and galaxies.
This world is no longer unipolar, bipolar, or even multipolar, because the actors that matter are not single states but groups of states that are more or less densely connected.
It is a multi-hub security network, in which the hubs are regional organizations of different sizes and strengths.
This structural shift has enormous practical significance.
For starters, it means that not only NATO’s military resources, but also its human capital and practical knowledge in combating many different kinds of threats are available globally.
NATO has created a Comprehensive Crisis and Operations Management Center that brings together civilian and military expertise on crisis identification, planning, operations, reconstruction, and stabilization capabilities in ways that are explicitly designed to connect NATO headquarters in Europe to “the networked world.”
Second, NATO’s own identity is becoming that of an alliance that exists to empower – to offer assistance and partnership – as much as to overpower.
NATO is no longer just a hammer; it is an entire toolbox of security options.
These options include developing counter-networks to meet networked security threats such as terrorism and proliferation of nuclear, chemical, or biological materials, as well as highly decentralized threats such as piracy.
As a result, when a crisis like the war in East Timor in 1999 or last year’s political stalemate in Côte d’Ivoire arises, NATO can backstop whichever country or group of countries chooses to take the lead in carrying out a UN mandate.
NATO members themselves also have much more flexibility to draw on NATO’s collective assets.
Even skeptics of NATO expansion and operations like the intervention in Libya now recognize that joint operations by member countries, operating under a UN mandate and in conjunction with regional partners, is likely to be a model for the future.
As General Brent Scowcroft, National Security Adviser for President George H.W. Bush, observed recently, the UN Charter originally envisioned a standing military force to enforce Security Council resolutions – a vision that the NATO partner model might ultimately realize.
Power in a network flows from connectedness, or what network theorists call “centrality.”
The most powerful member of a network is the node that has the most connections to others, which means that a node can increase its power not only by adding connections directly, but also by increasing the connectedness of nearby nodes.
In other words, the US can increase its own power both by connecting to other NATO members (and then ensuring that NATO is connected to as many other countries and organizations as possible) and by increasing the connectedness of those other countries and organizations.
If NATO connects with the African Union, for example, and increases the AU’s connectedness, then both NATO and the AU become more central to the network and hence more powerful in terms of their ability to exercise influence and marshal resources.
The logic of centrality as a source of power creates a virtuous circle, in which members of a network gain advantage by bringing more members into the network and connecting more densely to them.
That is exactly the logic behind NATO’s transformation.
The immediate topic on the agenda in Chicago next week will be getting NATO forces out of Afghanistan.
But the longer-term subject will be getting as many countries as possible into the global NATO security network.
Global Justice and Military Intervention
MELBOURNE – The world has watched in horror as Libya’s Colonel Muammar el-Qaddafi uses his military to attack protesters opposed to his rule, killing hundreds or possibly thousands of unarmed civilians. Many of his own men have refused to fire on their own people, instead defecting to the rebels or flying their planes to nearby Malta, so Qaddafi has called in mercenaries from neighboring countries who are more willing to obey his orders.
World leaders were quick to condemn Qaddafi’s actions.
On February 26, the United Nations Security Council voted unanimously to impose an arms embargo on Libya, urge member nations to freeze assets owned by Qaddafi and his family, and refer the regime’s violence to the International Criminal Court for possible prosecution of those responsible.
This is the first time that the Security Council has unanimously referred a situation involving human rights violations to the International Criminal Court, and it is remarkable that countries that are not members of the Court – including the United States, Russia, and China – nevertheless supported the referral.
The resolution can thus be seen as another incremental step towards the establishment of a global system of justice able to punish those who commit gross violations of human rights, regardless of their political or legal status in their own country.
Yet, in another way, the Security Council resolution was a disappointment. The situation in Libya became a test of how seriously the international community takes the idea of a responsibility to protect people from their rulers.
The idea is an old one, but its modern form is rooted in the tragic failure to intervene in the Rwandan genocide in 1994. A subsequent UN inquiry concluded that as few as 2,500 properly trained military personnel could have prevented the massacre of 800,000 Tutsis.
Former US President Bill Clinton has said that the mistake he most regrets making during his presidency was his failure to push for intervention in Rwanda.
Kofi Annan, who was then UN Under-Secretary-General for Peace-Keeping Operations, described the situation at the UN at the time as a “terrible and humiliating” paralysis.
When Annan became Secretary-General, he urged the development of principles that would indicate when it is justifiable for the international community to intervene to prevent gross violations of human rights. In response, Canada’s government established an International Commission on Intervention and State Sovereignty, which recommended that military intervention could be justified, as an extraordinary measure, where large-scale loss of life is occurring or imminent, owing to deliberate state action or the state’s refusal or failure to act.
These principles were endorsed by the UN General Assembly at its special World Summit in 2005 and discussed again in 2009, with an overwhelming majority of states supporting them.
The principle fits the situation in Libya today.
Whether these precautionary principles are satisfied in Libya requires expert judgment of the specifics of the situation. No one wants another drawn-out war like those in Iraq and Afghanistan.
But Libya is not Iraq or Afghanistan – its population is only about one-fifth of either country’s, and there is a strong popular movement for a democratic form of government. Assuming that foreign military forces rapidly overwhelmed Qaddafi’s troops, they would soon be able to withdraw and leave the Libyan people to decide their own future.
At the time of writing, it is arguable that other sanctions or threats, short of military intervention, would be sufficient to deter more widespread bloodshed.
Perhaps the rebels and the sanctions can overthrow Qaddafi unaided, without great loss of life.
NEW YORK – The world has yet to achieve the macroeconomic policy coordination that will be needed to restore economic growth following the Great Crash of 2008.
In much of the world, consumers are now cutting their spending in response to a fall in their wealth and a fear of unemployment.
The overwhelming force behind the current collapse of jobs, output, and trade flows, is even more important than the financial panic that followed Lehman Brothers’ default in September 2008.
There is, of course, no return to the situation that preceded the Great Crash.
The worldwide financial bubble cannot and should not be recreated.
But if the world cooperates effectively, the decline in consumer demand can be offset by a valuable increase in investment spending to address the most critical needs on the planet: sustainable energy, safe water and sanitation, a reduction of pollution, improved public health, and increased food production for the poor.
The United States, Europe, and Asia have all experienced a collapse of wealth due to the fall of stock markets and housing prices.
There is not yet an authoritative measurement of the wealth decline and of how it is distributed worldwide, but it is probably around $15 trillion lower than the peak in the US, and perhaps $10 trillion lower in both Europe and Asia.
A combined wealth decline of around $25 trillion would be roughly 60% of one year’s global income.
The decline in US wealth as a share of the US economy is even larger, around 100% of annual income, and perhaps 70% of annual income in Europe and Asia.
Yet this will occur too slowly to prevent a rapid rise in unemployment and a massive shortfall of production relative to potential output.
The world therefore needs to stimulate other kinds of spending.
One powerful way to boost the world economy and to help meet future needs is to increase spending on key infrastructure projects, mainly directed at transportation (roads, ports, rail, and mass transit), sustainable energy (wind, solar, geothermal, carbon-capture and sequestration, and long-distance power transmission grids), pollution control, and water and sanitation.
There is a strong case for global cooperation to increase these public investments in the developing economies, and especially in the world’s poorest regions.
These regions, including Sub-Saharan Africa and Central Asia, are suffering harshly from the global crisis, owing to falling export earnings, remittances, and capital inflows.
Poor regions are also suffering from climate changes such as more frequent droughts, caused by rich countries’ greenhouse-gas emissions.
At the same time, impoverished countries have huge needs for infrastructure, especially roads, rail, renewable energy, water and sanitation, and for improved current delivery of vital life-saving services, including health care and support for food production.
The G-20, which comprises the world’s largest economies, offers the natural setting for global policy coordination.
The next G-20 meeting in London in early April is a crucial opportunity for timely action.
The leading economies – especially the US, European Union, and Japan – should establish new programs to finance infrastructure investments in low-income countries.
The new lending should be at least $100 billion per year, directed towards developing countries.
The new financing would include direct loans from rich countries’ export-credit agencies to enable poor countries to borrow long term (for example, 40 years) to build roads, power grids, renewable energy generation, ports, fiber optic networks, and water and sanitation systems.
The G-20 should also increase the lending capacity of the World Bank, the African Development Bank, and other international financial institutions. 
Japan, with a surplus of saving, a strong currency, massive foreign exchange reserves, and factories without domestic orders, should take the lead in providing this funding for infrastructure.
Moreover, Japan can boost its own economy and those of the poorest countries by directing its own industrial production to the infrastructure needs of the developing world.
Cooperation can turn the sharp and frightening decline in worldwide consumption spending into a global opportunity to invest more in the world’s future well being.
By directing resources away from rich countries’ consumption to developing countries’ investment needs, the world can achieve a “triple” victory.
Higher investment and social spending in poor countries will stimulate the entire world economy, spur economic development, and promote environmental sustainability through investments in renewable energy, efficient water use, and sustainable agriculture.
Global Malaise in 2006?
The almighty American consumer had another banner year in 2005, helping sustain global economic growth, albeit at a slower pace than in 2004.
As in recent years, he consumed at or above his income level, and the United States as a whole spent well beyond its means, borrowing from the rest of the world at a feverish pace in 2005 – more than $2 billion a day.
A year ago, most pundits argued that this was unsustainable.
It evidently was sustainable, at least for one more year.
But it nonetheless remains true that whatever is unsustainable will not be sustained, which creates great risks for the US and global economy in 2006.
Two economic surprises prolonged the good times in 2005.
First, while the US Federal Reserve continued hiking short-term interest rates, long-terms rates did not increase in tandem, which allowed housing prices to continue rising.
This was centrally important to sustaining global growth, for the performance of world’s largest economy has been fueled by real estate in recent years, with individuals refinancing their mortgages and spending some of the proceeds, and with high prices leading to more construction.
But this is unlikely to continue.
Long-term interest rates almost certainly will eventually start to rise – and “eventually” increasingly looks like next year.
If so, Americans will have to spend more money on debt service, leaving them with less to spend on consumption of goods and services.
Moreover, real estate prices will most likely stop rising rapidly – indeed, they may even decline.
As a result, refinancing of mortgages will grind to a halt, leaving no money to draw out of housing to sustain Americans’ consumption binge.
On both accounts, aggregate demand will decline.
Is it possible that the cash-rich corporate sector will more than make up for the slack by increasing investment?
There may well be some increase in gross investment, as obsolete equipment and software are replaced. But there also is some evidence that innovation is slowing – perhaps the result of reduced investment in research in the past five years.
In any case, even if firms are cash-rich, they do not typically expand investment during periods when consumption is slowing.
Uncertainties about the economy are likely to insert an element of caution into companies’ investment decisions.
In short, it is more likely that moderating investment will exacerbate the consumer slowdown than that an acceleration of investment will offset it.
But this is not the only reason for bleaker prospects for America and the world in 2006.
The second surprise in 2005 was that while oil prices increased far more than expected, the economic dampening effect seemed somewhat muted in most places, at least until the last part of the year.
Because of higher oil prices, for example, America’s spending on oil imports has increased by roughly $50 billion a year – money that otherwise would have been spent mostly on goods made in America.
For most of 2005, Americans behaved as if they didn’t really believe that oil prices would remain high, at least for a while.
This is less startling than it may appear: econometric studies suggest that it takes a year to two before the full effects of oil-price increases are felt.
Now, with futures markets predicting that oil will be $50 to $60 a barrel for the next two years, demand for gas-guzzlers has evaporated, taking with it the prospects for America’s auto companies, whose corporate strategies have bet on low oil prices and America’s love affair with the SUV.
High oil prices are set to dampen economic performance in the rest of the world as well, although growth prospects look better than in the US.
China’s growth continues to astound the world; indeed, new GDP data suggest that its economy is 20% larger than previously thought.
Moreover, China’s surging growth will echo throughout much of Asia, including (in somewhat muted form) in Japan.
Europe continues to be a mixed picture, with the European Central Bank almost perversely raising interest rates even as Europe’s economy needs further stimulation to ensure its recovery.
As if that were not bad enough, Germany’s new government is promising to raise taxes.
Fiscal rectitude in the right place and the right time is to be commended; but this is the wrong place and the wrong time – and Germany’s recovery prospects will be dampened.
The main risk in 2006 is that America’s long-brewing problems come to a head globally: investors, finally taking heed of the large structural fiscal deficit, the yawning trade gap, and the high level of household indebtedness, may pull money out of the US in a panic.
Alternatively, rising interest rates and a downturn in the real estate market could so weaken consumer demand that the economy slips into recession, squeezing exporters in other countries that depend on the US market.
In either case, the US government, hamstrung by already-wide deficits, may feel powerless to respond with countercyclical fiscal policy.
With confidence in Bush’s economic management almost as low as confidence in his management of the Iraq war, there is every reason to worry that should one of these crises emerge, it will not be well managed.
But it is more likely that 2006 will just be another year of malaise: China’s significance within the global economy is still not large enough to offset weaknesses in the rest of the world.
America, too, will manage to muddle through again – leaving even higher levels of debt for the future.
In short, 2006 will be marked by mounting uncertainty about prospects for global economic growth, even as the distribution of the fruits of that growth remain dismally predictable.
In America, at least, 2006 is likely to be another year in which stagnant real wages freeze, or even erode, the living standards of those in the middle.
And, everywhere, it is likely to be another year in which the gap between the haves and the have-nots will widen.
A Global Marshall Plan
ROME – Despite ongoing efforts to catalyze global development cooperation, there have been significant obstacles to progress in recent years.
Fortunately, with major international meetings set for the second half of 2015, world leaders have an important opportunity to overcome them.
Such a turnaround has happened before.
At the turn of the century, international negotiations on economic development had also come to a grinding halt.
The Seattle ministerial of the World Trade Organization ended without decision, and after two decades of the Washington Consensus, developing countries were frustrated at the US-led international financial institutions.
Negotiations for the inaugural United Nations Financing for Development (FfD) conference in Monterrey, Mexico, seemed to be headed nowhere.
Then, on September 11, 2001, the United States was hit with major terrorist attacks – a tragic development that somehow catalyzed progress.
World leaders agreed to begin the Doha Development Round to ensure that trade negotiations would serve developing countries’ development aspirations.
And the 2002 Monterrey FfD conference produced major breakthroughs on foreign and domestic investment, foreign debt, international cooperation, trade, and systemic governance issues.
Of course, tragedy is not needed to kick-start progress.
This year’s major global meetings – the Conference on Financing for Development in July, the meeting at the United Nations to adopt Sustainable Development Goals in September, and the UN Climate Change Conference in Paris in December – should be sufficient.
And the efforts that have gone into preparing for these meetings suggest that there is a will to move forward.
But the right program is key.
The world needs a well-designed and far-reaching strategy to stimulate industrialization, modeled after the European Recovery Program – the American initiative that enabled Europe to rebuild after World War II.
The Marshall Plan, as it is better known, entailed a massive infusion of US aid to support national development efforts in Europe, and is still viewed by many Europeans as America’s finest hour.
The Marshall Plan’s impact was felt far beyond Europe’s borders, developing over the following decade into what is probably the most successful economic-development assistance project in human history.
Similar policies were introduced in Northeast Asia following the establishment of the People’s Republic of China and the Korean War.
Of course, there was a political motivation behind the Marshall Plan’s expansion.
By creating a cordon sanitaire of wealthy countries from Western Europe to Northeast Asia, the US hoped to contain the spread of communism at the start of the Cold War.
Developing countries that did not serve the same political ends were left out.
At its core, however, the Marshall Plan was an economic strategy – and a sound one at that.
Crucially, it represented a complete reversal of its predecessor, the Morgenthau Plan, which focused on de-industrialization – with poor results.
The plan’s aim – articulated by Treasury Secretary Henry Morgenthau, Jr., in his 1945 book Germany is Our Problem – was to convert Germany into a “principally agricultural and pastoral” country, in order to prevent its involvement in any new wars.
By late 1946, however, economic hardship and unemployment in Germany spurred former US President Herbert Hoover to visit the country on a fact-finding mission.
Hoover’s third report of March 18, 1947, called the notion that Germany could be reduced to a pastoral state an “illusion,” which could not be achieved without exterminating or moving 25,000,000 people out of the country.
The only alternative was re-industrialization.
Less than three months later, Secretary of State George Marshall made his landmark speech at Harvard University announcing the policy reversal.
Germany and the rest of Europe were to be re-industrialized, he stated, including through heavy-handed state interventions, such as high duties, quotas, and import prohibitions.
Free trade would be possible only after reconstruction, when European countries could compete in international markets.
Marshall made three other important points in his short speech.
First, in noting the role that the breakdown of trade between urban and rural areas played in Germany’s economic slowdown, he recalled a centuries-old European economic insight: all wealthy countries have cities with a manufacturing sector.
“The remedy,” Marshall explained, “lies in…restoring the confidence of the European people,” so that “the manufacturer and the farmer” would be “able and willing to exchange their products for currencies, the continuing value of which is not open to question.”
Second, Marshall argued that participatory institutions emerge from economic progress, not the other way around – the opposite of today’s conventional wisdom.
As he put it, the policy’s “purpose should be the revival of a working economy in the world, so as to permit the emergence of political and social conditions in which free institutions can exist.”
Third, Marshall emphasized that aid should be comprehensive and strategic, in order to foster real progress and development.
“Such assistance,” he declared, “must not be on a piecemeal basis as various crises develop.
Any assistance that this government may render in the future should provide a cure, rather than a mere palliative.”
Marshall’s vision offers important lessons for world leaders seeking to accelerate development today, beginning with the need to reverse the effects of the Washington Consensus on developing and transition economies – effects that resemble those of the Morgenthau Plan.
Some countries – including large economies like China and India, which have long protected domestic industry – have been in a better position to benefit from economic globalization.
Others have experienced a decline in economic growth and real per capita income, as their industry and agricultural capacity have fallen, especially over the last two decades of the last century.
It is time to increase poor economies’ productive capacity and purchasing power, as occurred in Europe in the decade after Marshall’s speech.
Marshall’s insight that such shared economic development is the only way to create a lasting peace remains as true as ever.
The Global Obesity Threat
LONDON/MELBOURNE – In 2010, humanity passed an important milestone.
According to the Global Burden of Disease Study, published in the British medical journal The Lancet, obesity became a bigger public-health problem than hunger.
Today, according to the latest edition of the study, more than 2.1 billion people – nearly 30% of the global population – are overweight or obese.
That is nearly two and a half times the number of adults and children who are undernourished.
Obesity is responsible for about 5% of deaths worldwide.
This crisis is not just a pressing health concern; it is also a threat to the global economy.
The total economic impact of obesity is about $2 trillion a year, or 2.8% of world GDP – roughly equivalent to the economic damage caused by smoking or armed violence, war, and terrorism, according to new research by the McKinsey Global Institute (MGI).
And the problem is likely to worsen.
If the current trend continues, almost half of the world’s adult population will be overweight or obese by 2030.