Neither strategic partnership with the US, nor membership in NAM, will divert India from safeguarding those interests.
America’s Neglected Financial Children
WASHINGTON, DC – This week, the US Congress again failed to approve a modest appropriation that would have shored up financing for the International Monetary Fund and given China and other emerging economies greater responsibility there.
Support for the IMF may seem arcane, but it has important implications for America’s global role – and the signs are not good.
Indeed, if there was ever a moment for Congressional approval of the IMF reform package, this was it: the measure would have greatly increased the IMF’s ability to support Ukraine, a key American objective, at a much lower cost than the alternative of a US bilateral credit guarantee.
The failed measure involved only a transfer of previous US commitments from a supplementary account to the IMF’s core funding source, at virtually no cost to taxpayers.
Congressional approval would have implemented a deal, concluded at the G-20’s Seoul Summit in 2010, to double the Fund’s lending capacity.
Under the agreement, which US President Barack Obama’s administration shepherded through tough negotiations, America would remain the IMF’s largest single shareholder, retaining its veto over major decisions.
But, fearing a backlash, the Obama administration tried to gain Congressional backing only at the last minute – and as quietly as possible.
A few years ago, the US displayed a similar lack of commitment to another US-dominated international institution: the World Bank.
After the global financial crisis, the Bank lacked enough capital to boost lending beyond pre-crisis levels.
But the US was not particularly interested in a larger World Bank; instead of using its considerable influence – reflected in its power to appoint the Bank’s president – to create a stronger institution capable of responding to new demands, it went along with what became a modest Bank recapitalization.
In fact, the US and its European allies are rumored to have rejected several major emerging economies’ quiet offers to provide additional funding, possibly to avoid diluting their own capital.
This contrasts sharply with the experience of two large regional multilateral lenders: the Inter-American Development Bank and the African Development Bank.
Whereas wealthy countries hold the most World Bank shares, borrowing countries hold a slight majority of the shares (and the presidency) at the regional banks.
Their leaders pressed hard – and successfully – for substantial capital increases.
America’s recent failure to champion the international financial institutions represents a reversal of its approach during the latter half of the twentieth century, when it invested heavily in securing and maintaining their effectiveness.
US leaders understood that these institutions enabled America to pursue its own foreign-policy preferences and commercial interests in a more open and stable global economy.
The end of the Cold War undercut the foreign-policy logic behind America’s backing, as increasing globalization of trade and investment made economic support for developing countries seem less necessary as a way to expand markets.
Moreover, the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, made non-state actors and so-called “failing” states with troubling sectarian and ethnic conflicts a new security concern.
In those settings, the US, reasonably enough, did not view traditional investment support from the IMF and World Bank as a high priority.
Finally, the global financial crisis put considerable strain on the US economy, intensifying pressure on lawmakers to undertake policies aimed at boosting domestic GDP growth and creating jobs.
To this end, the White House is investing enormous effort and political capital in two major trade deals – the Trans-Atlantic Trade and Investment Partnership and the Trans-Pacific Partnership – despite domestic opposition.
But, while America’s economic woes and hyper-polarized political climate have undoubtedly contributed to the decision to favor controversial trade deals over international financial institutions that the US created and nurtured, what is really driving the policy shift are fundamental geopolitical changes.
In short, an internationally diminished US is loath to relinquish its dominance of global institutions, yet unwilling to shoulder the associated financial and political costs.
By contrast, the US market’s enduring weight amplifies America’s bargaining power in plurilateral trade agreements, which also serve the country’s immediate commercial interests.
Indeed, such deals offer the promise of new export markets, “good” jobs, and rules that lock in US competitive advantages.
At the same time, they can help to contain China’s economic power and strategic influence in Asia.
As the issuer of the world’s dominant reserve currency, the US can manage without the IMF in the short run, using the Federal Reserve to provide liquidity to countries where it has core political interests, as it did after the 2008 crisis.
And World Bank lending is helping the middle-income countries that are increasingly competing with the US in global trade, while boosting demand for private – that is, American – capital.
The US is like an aging parent; it is no longer willing to invest much in the family business, but remains averse to ceding control to its increasingly mature children.
Resentful and restless, the children are seeking opportunities elsewhere – to the detriment of the family firm.
China has nearly two dozen currency-swap arrangements, which serve as an alternative to IMF liquidity support.
India just signed a $50 billion swap deal with Japan.
Over time, these arrangements will erode the US dollar’s role as the world’s leading reserve currency.
Furthermore, the major emerging economies – Brazil, Russia, India, China, and South Africa – plan to establish their own development bank, and many African countries now count on China to fund infrastructure investments.
In Latin America, the Andean Development Bank lends more to its members for infrastructure projects than the World Bank – at higher cost, but with less hassle.
The World Bank’s diminished role will ultimately undermine America’s ability to advance its view that development is a function of open markets and democratic accountability.
Strong and effective global financial institutions are still very much in America’s interest.
But, without US leadership, the global role of the IMF and the World Bank will erode gradually – as will their usefulness to the US.
In Defense of World Government
WASHINGTON, DC – Unlike in the past, there probably will not be large protests at the upcoming Annual Meetings of the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank, or at the subsequent World Trade Organization meeting of trade ministers in Bali.
But that is not because these international institutions are perceived as effective and legitimate.
It is because, compared to a decade ago, they are seen as too small and impotent in the face of larger market forces to bother about.
The 2008 global financial crisis and its aftermath have caused a loss of faith not only in markets, but also in the ability of democratic governments to ensure that the benefits of market-led growth are widely shared.
On economic, financial, tax, trade, and climate issues, many people around the world are fearful or angry, believing&nbsp; that a worldwide cabal of bankers, corporations, and G-20 elites uses insider deals to monopolize the benefits of globalization.
But few people – whether ordinary citizens or internationally oriented economists – recognize that our seemingly weak and ineffectual multilateral institutions are the world’s best hope for managing and democratizing the global market.
Only these institutions are capable of preventing the elite capture and insider rents that are putting global prosperity at long-term risk.
To be sure, a growing number of mainstream economists are paying attention to the costs of unfettered global markets.
There is greater concern that cross-border capital mobility makes it harder to collect taxes and enforce financial regulations at home; and that trade agreements, combined with global supply chains, are exacerbating job losses in developed economies.
Likewise, global integration means that eurozone distress threatens the US economy, while the US debt-ceiling standoff threatens financial markets everywhere.
Yet many economists are as ambivalent about “global” rules and institutions as ordinary people are.
They worry that international bodies, lacking democratic oversight, make it easier for the rich, powerful, and well connected to run things to their own advantage.
Dani Rodrik’s 2011 book The Globalization Paradox criticizes globalization enthusiasts for wanting full liberalization of foreign trade and capital movements; he argues that when democratically established social arrangements clash with the demands of globalization, national priorities should take precedence.
True, global “government” can go too far – for example, when WTO rules conflict with sensible local environmental safeguards, or when IMF requirements for developing-country borrowers narrow the scope for creative heterodoxy in growth and poverty-reducing policies.
It is also true that countries dependent on official aid and IMF loans can face unwarranted pressure to conform to outsiders’ wrongheaded policy views – from premature opening of capital markets in Asia in the 1990’s to force-fed austerity in Greece and Spain today.
But there is a more positive way to look at the issue.
Sometimes, even powerful sovereign states use global commitments to help them lock in sensible policies that might otherwise be difficult to initiate and sustain.
A 2009 G-20 agreement to refrain from protectionism in the aftermath of the global financial crisis helped to fend off protectionism.
Today, a G-8 or G-20 agreement on exchanges of tax information could help to shore up national revenue bases and the reputations of governments for tax fairness.
Less obviously, when governments provide funding for the IMF, they can side-step domestic political resistance to assisting countries in trouble and to rules that yield benefits only in the long term.
Indeed, embedding fair rules on trade, finance, development, climate change, and other issues in the major global institutions such as the IMF and the World Bank is more important than ever, given the rise of China and other emerging-market economies.
With these new powers seeking a place at the geopolitical table, they and the older powers can benefit from mutually agreed global “containment” of their domestic parochialism and short-sightedness.
In other words, global rules and institutions can make it easier and more likely that all involved will hew to their own citizens’ broader interests – and thus to the global commonweal as well.
For example, pledges to cut carbon emissions, while lacking any enforcement mechanism, may be helping countries to do the right thing for their own citizens’ children and grandchildren.
Moreover, fair global rules can help to “democratize” the global market, especially if they are embedded in institutions with a degree of autonomy for highly professional staff who can act with some independence from short-term political pressures.
It should come as no surprise that the anti-globalists’ erstwhile punching bags – the World Bank and, increasingly, the IMF and the WTO – are more open and transparent than many of their member states.
They thus provide a vehicle for ordinary people to lobby for fairer rules and policies, not only in their own countries but also in others.
One example of this was the citizen-based movement that fought WTO intellectual-property rules, adopted at the behest of the US and other rich countries, that were sustaining high prices for anti-AIDS drugs in Africa.
The campaign succeeded, resulting in changes that dramatically increased poor countries’ access to such drugs.
Ultimately, as I argue in greater detail in a paper for the Global Citizens Foundation, ordinary people are better off with global institutions, notwithstanding their weakness relative to their most powerful sovereign members and their lack of legitimacy relative to their democratic members.
Of course, a world “government” could never have democratic legitimacy; for this reason, it is a scary idea.
But, like a socialist utopia or pure libertarianism, the idea of world government can illuminate a sensible path for capturing the benefits of a more effective global polity.
Given a fully interdependent global market, we should worry less about the risk of bad rules and policies from imperfect global institutions and more about how to exploit these institutions’ potential to lock in policies at home and abroad that minimize risks and maximize opportunities for people everywhere.
India’s Fiscal Fortune
CAMBRIDGE – Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi's government must be feeling lucky.
The decline in world commodity prices, led by crude oil, has made managing the national budget easier.
No budget changes could generate such a marked, cost-free acceleration in growth.
It is fair to say that the usually staid statistics department stole the thunder from this year's budget.
Nonetheless, Finance Minister Arun Jaitley's budget succeeds on several fronts – not least in its alignment of vision and implementation.
Specifically, it advances the government's vision of a pro-growth agenda that enhances the ease of doing business in India, while targeting better delivery mechanisms for welfare schemes.
On the expenditure side, the budget is expansionary, scaling up investment spending dramatically, introducing new welfare programs, and increasing credit for various sectors.
While there is no significant effort to cap spending on some of the largest fiscal programs, including the National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (which guarantees 100 days of wages to rural households) or the fertilizer subsidy, measures to improve implementation and reduce leakage are being put in place.
Though the budget mentions disinvestment in loss-making public-sector units, the budget conveys no sense of urgency on this front.
With private investment remaining weak, owing to the corporate sector's heavy debt burden and banks' huge volume of bad assets, the government has clearly decided to jumpstart the process through infrastructure spending.
But India's infrastructure needs far exceed what the government can spend.
In this sense, the new “plug and play" scheme for public-private partnerships, whereby “all clearances and linkages will be in place before the project is awarded," is a major improvement over the previous PPP model.
The budget's success will be determined by how these public-sector investments play out, which in turn will depend on other policies, especially the Land Acquisition Bill (designed to enable industrial development in rural areas), which has already run into trouble.
Moreover, government investment and allocation of resources has long been tainted by corruption, and Modi's government has yet to show that it can implement the budget's promises in a transparent and sustainable manner.
On the tax side, there is one major announcement: a reduction of the corporate-tax rate from 30% to 25% over the next four years, thereby encouraging private-sector investment.
The implementation of the Goods and Services Tax – a form of value-added tax on which the government has made admirable progress – would be a major accomplishment and a huge boost for the economy.
Despite raising expenditure substantially, however, the budget relies mainly on growth and improved tax collection to keep the country's fiscal deficit within reasonable limits.
Of the budget's many proposed measures to boost inflows of foreign investment, one appears risky from a macro-prudential perspective.
The government would “do away with the distinction between different types of foreign investments, especially between foreign portfolio investments and foreign direct investments, and replace them with composite caps."
There are many reasons to treat the two types of investment differently.
Portfolio investment, often called “hot money" because of its volatile nature, can increase the economy's vulnerability to the vagaries of international finance.
Foreign direct investment, on the other hand, is far more stable and driven by domestic fundamentals.
With interest rates set to rise in the United States this year, volatility in international capital markets can be expected to increase.
In this context, it would be prudent to maintain the distinction between portfolio and FDI.
In general, the budget plan addresses the major issues facing India's economy.
But translating good intentions into desired outcomes will depend crucially on the government's ability to push through complementary and urgently needed reforms on hot-button regulatory issues like land, labor, and the environment.
In any case, the budget sends a clear signal about the Modi government's intentions.
At least in the near term, it is shifting its practice of “minimal government and maximum governance" to one of “moderate government and maximum governance."
The French Rally to the Republic
PARIS – Before the second round of France’s regional elections on Sunday, most predictions suggested that five, perhaps six, of the country’s regional governments would fall into the hands of the National Front (FN).
But the French people pulled themselves together and turned out to vote in much greater numbers than anyone expected.
The result is that a xenophobic, racist party, one hostile to everything essential to the spirit and greatness of France, was defeated in all of the contests that it was supposed to win.
Some will express surprise at this strange country, which is never so great as when it is on the edge of a cliff.
They will worry – and they are right to worry – that a situation of extreme peril, a veritable threat to the nation, was required before the French recovered their senses and took the path of reason.
And they will regret that the French are not the prosaic sort of people who know how to be themselves at normal cruising speed, without having to hear a cannonball whistle past.
But that is how it is.
And I, like many others, will not try to hide my satisfaction at seeing the smug scoundrels of the FN break down and resume speaking in their historic register, with their authentic voice, which is one of hatred and mob rage.
This, truly, was a victory for the republic – a triumph of popular resistance.
The French turned out, en masse, to say that they did not want to see the Le Pen gang take possession of their regions.
That is the most important lesson from Sunday’s vote, and it is a reassuring one.
But what caused the nation to right itself?
Obviously, nothing happened between the elections’ first and second rounds that addressed the “malaise” of the French people.
Nor was any particular promise made in response to the “hard questions” raised by FN voters just a week earlier.
No.
What we saw, instead, was a moral surge among the French – an act of self-defense by the body politic.
Between the two rounds, the following simple idea sank in among the electorate: The National Front can revamp its façade all it wants, but it has never been, is not, and can never be a normal party.
For how long have France’s moral and political authorities been telling us that “stigmatization” of the National Front doesn’t work, that it strengthens the party instead of weakening it?
Well, that was wrong 20 years ago, and it is still wrong.
It cannot be repeated often enough that when the moral left and right have been strong, when groups like SOS Racisme set boundaries that are bright and clear, the FN has been contained electorally.
But when those boundary lines are blurred, when the dikes crumble and the antiracist watchdogs allow themselves to be intimidated or lower their guard, the FN tries to make itself at home.
The same is true today.
The happy surprise of the regional vote owes absolutely nothing to accommodations with the FN by major parties that supposedly “heard the message” of “angry” voters (rhetoric that they relentlessly drummed into us).
On the contrary, a sufficient number of voters came to understand that in that very anger – in its spokespeople and in the words used to express it – lurked a threat to the republic, to democracy, and to the nation’s fundamental values.
That is the second lesson.
What awaits us tomorrow?
How can we be sure that the FN wave, having receded, will not regain strength and break with even greater destructive force in the upcoming presidential election?
Better “unemployment figures” will be required, no doubt.
Faster “growth,” certainly.
We will also need “efforts” and “gestures” directed toward the one-third of people under 30 and the nearly one-half of industrial and service workers who are said to have expressed their “frustration” and “anxiety” by voting for the FN.
Fine.
But none of that will ever be a substitute for leaders taking the moral high ground and restoring to our public discourse its lost luster.
No strategy will work if it is implemented by mediocrities who, in a political comedy as dishonorable as it is vain, rush to the television studios to declare, hand over heart, that they have heard the voters “loud and clear.”
The key will be for French leaders to say – as loudly as possible and as often as necessary – that there is no answer to the “hard questions” as the FN poses them.
And, like it or not, it must be said not only to the FN’s leaders, but also to its voters.
There have been other times in France’s history when entire segments of the electorate have ejected themselves from the game, without the rest of the players rushing over to beg them to get back on the field.
Georges Clémenceau, Jean Jaurès, and Raymond Poincaré, at the outset of the twentieth century, did not pander to the nearly half of the electorate that, during the Dreyfus Affair, had exiled themselves from the republic.
Nor did Charles de Gaulle have any qualms about telling the proponents of French Algeria that, in the end, he did not understand them.
Nor did Pierre Mendès France in the 1950s hesitate to tell the Communists that he didn’t want their votes to support his government.
France must now recall these great moments in its republican tradition and hold them up as a model for today’s leaders.
For what will be needed to hold the territory that the republic nearly lost to the FN is political courage of a sort that, for the moment, is in short supply.
Nationalism and Terrorism
BOSTON – September 11, 2001, may – at least at first – seem like an inappropriate addition to the history of nationalism, given Al Qaeda’s explicitly stated global pretensions.
In fact, now that the initial shock and confusion have given way to a more sober perspective, the terrorist attacks of that awful day are increasingly seen – as they should be – as one among numerous other nationalist milestones.
From this perspective, the attacks no longer appear, as they did to so many immediately afterwards, to reflect an incomprehensible, irrational, and uncivilized mentality, or a different civilization altogether – pre-modern, unenlightened, and fundamentally “traditional” (in other words, undeveloped).
It is in this unflattering sense that Islam, the dominant religion of an economically backward part of the world, was said to have motivated the attacks of September 11, 2001.
And, because those who believed this (virtually everyone whose voices were heard) belatedly perceived its insulting connotation, discussing the matter has caused considerable anguish in the years since.
There are no euphemisms that can inoffensively imply that one of the great world religions is a murderous, irrational ideology, unacceptable for modern, civilized human beings.
And yet two different American administrations have implied – and consistently acted upon – this assumption.
But, once we place the tragedy of September 11, 2001, and the broader political phenomenon of international terrorism, in the context of other historical tragedies in the past century, religion becomes an unlikely explanation.
It is here where the influence of nationalism becomes obvious.
Nationalism has been the major motive force in the West since the beginning of the modern period.
Historians have noted its influence in Elizabethan England (which produced the spirit animating the Puritan Rebellion and migration to America), and increasingly recognize it as the motive force behind the French and the Russian Revolutions.
Meanwhile, Chinese scholars are beginning to view it as the inspiration for Mao Zedong’s struggle against the Kuomintang (the openly self-named “Nationalist Movement”) and the policies of the People’s Republic.
And no historical acumen is needed to understand that nationalism was the source of Hitler’s National Socialism and, therefore, World War II.
In fact, it would be puzzling if this were not the case, given that nationalism is the cultural foundation of modernity – the framework of its social consciousness.
And, precisely because nationalism shapes the way we think, its role in phenomena that do not trumpet their nationalist motivation – like Al Qaeda’s attacks in 2001 – can easily be overlooked.
As a rule, most nationalists do not call themselves nationalists.
Like the rest of us, they believe that their nationalism is natural and does not have to be emphasized.
But a little self-examination should lead any thinking person to recognize that we all are nationalists – we feel, think, and react to the world as nationalism prescribes.
Nationalism is a temporal vision (and thus secular, even when using religion in its rhetoric) that divides people into sovereign communities of equal members.
The equality of national membership (which, at the same time, may be exclusively defined) elevates every member’s status to that of the elite, making it dependent on the dignity of the nation as a whole.
As a result, those who possess national consciousness become committed to and defensive of the dignity of the nation – measured by its standing, or prestige, vis-à-vis other nations.
That is why competition for national prestige has been the main motive in international politics since the beginning of the twentieth century.
Specifically, the aggressor in many international conflicts in this period has been motivated by perceived injury to national dignity.
Actual injury is not necessary: the perceived superiority of another nation is enough.
In an advanced modern society, such as Germany, intellectuals have no difficulty using openly nationalist language to convince a nationally conscious populace of threats to national prestige.
By contrast, in a society where national consciousness is limited to the better educated (for example, the Arab Middle East), they must resort to traditional means of mobilization.
In the case of the Middle East, that traditional mobilizer is Islam, and so threats to national prestige are presented as threats to Islam.
Some nations do not feel threatened by imaginary insults to national dignity – for various historical reasons, they believe themselves to be superior to others.
But, if their prestige is in fact at stake, the perception of a threat becomes decisive.
Why else would citizens across the developed world be so preoccupied with their economic competitiveness?
Is it not enough for us to be well off?
Why do we need to be better off than others?
Why, for example, do Americans feel so threatened by the peaceful economic rise of China (as they did by Japan’s economic success in the 1980’s)?
To no longer be “Number One” would offend America’s sense of dignity.
There is no more to it than that.
China is now also motivated by nationalism, and it will rise as high as a motivated population of 1.3 billion people can.
The threat to America’s international standing is real; but, blinded by it, Americans believe that they are still in a position to condescend to China as they would to an inferior power.
For the time being, the Chinese may be too preoccupied with their own backyard to pay attention to such insults, but it is foolish to offend them deliberately.
Because Americans misunderstood the motives behind the attacks of September 11, 2001, the United States fought two costly wars, which did not defeat its enemies and have left the Middle East more volatile than ever.
Being blind to the connection between nationalism and dignity in China – and in America’s own conduct when dealing with China – may cost the US even more.
The Paradox of Identity Politics
BARCELONA – The United Kingdom’s recent general election provided a clear example of how the question of national identity is reshaping Europe’s political landscape.
The Scottish National Party, embodying a left-wing version of identity politics, wiped out Labour in Scotland, allowing the Conservatives to gain an absolute majority in Parliament.
The government of Prime Minister David Cameron – who has focused on British identity, rather than the UK’s common destiny with Europe – will undoubtedly hold a referendum on the UK’s continued membership in the European Union, with unpredictable consequences.
For decades, political debate in Europe focused largely on economic institutions and policies.
Conservatives argued for a private sector-driven economy, unfettered markets, low taxes, reduced government spending, and limited public goods.
Liberals and social democrats supported a private-ownership economy, markets, European integration, and increased trade, tempered by substantially redistributive taxes and transfers, a strong social safety net, and some public ownership in areas such as infrastructure and finance.
In this bi-polar system, the parties differed on the nuances of economic policy, but broadly agreed on democratic values, the European project, and the need to adapt to and manage globalization, rather than reject it wholesale.
But, with the growing success of appeals to identity and renewed ethnic or religious nationalism, that is changing.
Are the ghosts of the early and mid-twentieth century returning?
The question is particularly relevant for Europe, but it also has global significance.
In the Middle East, for example, identity politics is manifesting itself in its most sinister form: a chaotic and violent clash between Sunni and Shia Muslims, exemplified by the rise of the Islamic State.
Loyalty to a perceived identity can have innocuous and enriching components, such as, say, the promotion of a regional language.
The problem with identity politics is that it places the “in” group at odds with the perceived “other” – an approach that can easily foster chauvinism, invidious discrimination, and open antagonism.
One major reason for the resurgence of identity politics in Europe is globalization, which has limited the capacity of countries or peoples to control their economies.
Indeed, the global economy has become so interconnected, and world markets so powerful, that there appears to be little scope for national policies to disrupt hyper-mobile capital flows.
While globalization has helped to boost overall prosperity, it has been most beneficial for those who form the new global elite.
Meanwhile, many people in Europe face greater economic insecurity, owing to new technologies or competition from lower-cost workers elsewhere.
Unless they can upgrade their knowledge and skills – and, in some cases, move to a new industry or location – they face constrained economic opportunities.
These disadvantaged groups are particularly large in the countries that were hit hardest by the recent global financial crisis and now struggle with high unemployment.
But even people who are relatively prosperous are frustrated by some features of globalization.
They may oppose the use of their taxes to “subsidize” poorer people who do not share their identity, such as immigrants, French-speaking Belgians, southern Italians, or Greeks.
When it comes to trade protectionism, European integration, and economic globalization, those on the far right and the far left often share the same views.
In France, for example, many supporters of the National Front voted communist 30 years ago.
And, indeed, the National Front’s economic program is rather similar to that of the Left Front (an electoral bloc comprising the French Communist Party and the Left Party).
Of course, when it comes to immigration and human rights, the internationalist ideological tradition of socialism prevents extreme nationalist and racist discourse on the far left.
But, given that these parties are competing with the far right for the same disenchanted voters, their humanism on these issues has become a severe political handicap, which may explain why the extreme right has lately been more successful electorally.
Meanwhile, the rise of identity-driven political movements presents a huge challenge for Europe’s traditional political parties.
Mainstream conservatives, widely perceived as being in thrall to the economic interests of the wealthy, must find ways to appear populist – but without sounding too much like their far-right competitors on immigration and human rights.
Cameron has succeeded in this delicate balancing act – and has been rewarded by voters.
Mainstream Republicans in the United States, pressured by the more extreme forces within their party, face a similar challenge.
For center-left parties, the task is even more daunting.
They must offer voters a realistic economic program that is market-friendly and open to international trade, while promising tangible benefits to the poorer 60-70% of the population who are understandably frustrated with their lack of economic progress.
If a left party’s economic policy is perceived as a weak copy of the right’s agenda, the poorest segments of the population will gravitate to chauvinist forces and their false promises of protection from the consequences of globalization.
The upcoming elections in Spain, Turkey, Denmark, and Portugal – not to mention next year’s US presidential election – will present their own versions of these challenges.
The left, in particular, will have to defend the principles of equality and democracy, while finding ways to manage irreversible globalization, including through international cooperation.
The great paradox is that if the rise of identity politics continues, governments will be even less able to address the problems that are fueling it.
Europe’s Dangerous Nostalgia
MADRID – The European Union has a dangerous case of nostalgia.
Not only is a yearning for the “good old days” – before the EU supposedly impinged on national sovereignty – fueling the rise of nationalist political parties; European leaders continue to try to apply yesterday’s solutions to today’s problems.
Everyone was supposed to benefit from European integration.
Whenever a new country joined, it received financial aid, while existing members gained access to a new market.
The advantages, it was expected, would be apparent not just from aggregate data, but also from individual citizens’ own experience.
But reality has been less clear-cut.
In the wake of the 2008 global financial crisis, the EU’s weaker economies faced skyrocketing unemployment, especially among young people, while its stronger economies felt pressure to “show solidarity” by bailing out countries in distress.
When the stronger economies provided those bailouts, they included demands for austerity that impeded the recipients’ economic recovery.
Few were satisfied, and many blamed European integration.
In this context, political parties and movements criticizing or opposing the EU have gained considerable traction, particularly in Western Europe.
While these movements are nothing new, support for them has grown at alarming rates during the crisis-induced turmoil.
Indeed, with every failed policy to aid economic recovery, Europeans have felt increasingly disenchanted, fueling populist sentiment and demands for a return to national sovereignty.
The political leaders channeling these demands do not just want to reassert national control in all areas; they are also spreading a message of indifference to ‒ and even outright rejection of ‒ foreigners, reflected in their response to Europe’s influx of refugees.
According to them, each country should defend its own by any means, even if the rule of law is tested along the way.
But, while the economic pain that many Europeans feel is certainly real, the nationalists’ diagnosis of its source is false.
The reality is that the EU can be criticized for the way it handled the crisis; but it cannot be blamed for the global economic imbalances that have fueled economic strife since 2008.
Those imbalances reflect a much broader phenomenon: globalization.
This does not mean that globalization is a bad thing.
Opening up societies and economies to the world obviously entails significant uncertainty; but it also provides abundant opportunities.
Not long ago, Europe was the world leader in openness.
In fact, the European project is, at its core, a mirror of the opening that is an inextricable consequence of living in today’s globalized world.
In 2004, when the EU formally welcomed eight formerly communist countries as member states, European openness reached its pinnacle.
A new age seemed to be dawning in Europe, in which the rule of law, democracy, and individual rights were unassailable.
Yet, just as West European countries have begun to resist openness, so have their Central and East European counterparts.
Indeed, in some countries – particularly Poland and Hungary – nationalism and anti-EU sentiment have surged.
Unfortunately, this has led to erosion of the rule of law.
Poland is the largest recipient of European funds and the only EU country that avoided recession during the crisis; indeed, it has experienced 23 years of uninterrupted growth.
Moreover, the Polish public has been broadly supportive of the EU since becoming members.
Even the latest Eurobarometer indicates that 55% of Poles view the EU positively.
Yet Poland’s government, led by the right-wing Law and Justice (PiS) party, is aiming to change that, by portraying European policies as a threat to Polish national identity.
Instead of discussing how to adapt specific policies to Poland’s national interests or amplify the country’s voice at the European level, PiS writes off all European measures and decisions as a direct challenge to what makes Poland Poland.
These claims, to some extent, echo those of the Hungarian government, led by the right-wing Fidesz party.
The constitutional reforms implemented in 2013, among other things, expanded the executive’s authority and created a new state council, stacked with Fidesz members, to regulate the media.
Some say that if Hungary sought admission to the EU today, it would be refused entry.
As for Poland, the European Commission has launched an unprecedented inquiry in response to recent legislation that, under the pretense of “protecting national sovereignty,” concentrates more power in the government’s hands.
This represents a disappointing reversal.
In my former professional roles, I witnessed as few others did the entry of Poland and Hungary into the Euroatlantic institutions.
I saw firsthand the eagerness and hope of their peoples at that momentous time.
That is why it is so hard for me to understand their position today.
Of course, it is not unreasonable that Poland and Hungary, whose sovereignty was largely usurped by the Soviet Union, are particularly sensitive to external efforts to shape their decision-making and have a stronger sense of national identity than other EU countries.
But rejecting the EU will not insulate them from the uncertainty resulting from globalization.
On the contrary, it will leave them far more vulnerable to the phenomenon’s myriad risks.
Some have used disenchanting experiences with globalization as an excuse for a return to protectionism and the supposedly halcyon days of strong national borders.
Others, wistfully recalling a nation-state that never really existed, cling to national sovereignty as a reason to refuse further European integration.
Both groups question the foundations of the European project.
But their memory fails them, and their yearnings mislead them.
Donald Trump and the New Economic Order
HONG KONG – Since the end of World War II, the hierarchy of economic priorities has been relatively clear.
At the top was creating an open, innovative, and dynamic market-driven global economy, in which all countries can (in principal) thrive and grow.
Coming in second – one might even say a distant second – was generating vigorous, sustainable, and inclusive national growth patterns.
No more.
In fact, a reversal seems to be underway.
Achieving strong inclusive national-level growth to revive a declining middle class, kick-start stagnant incomes, and curtail high youth unemployment is now taking precedence.
Mutually beneficial international arrangements governing flows of goods, capital, technology, and people (the four key flows in the global economy) are appropriate only when they reinforce – or, at least, don’t undermine – progress on meeting the highest priority.
This reversal became apparent in June, when Britons – including those who benefit significantly from the existing open economic and financial system – voted to leave the European Union, based on what might be called the sovereignty principle.
EU institutions were perceived to be undermining Britain’s capacity to boost its own economy, regulate immigration, and control its destiny.
A similar view has been animating nationalist and populist political movements across Europe, many of which believe that supra-national arrangements should come second to domestic prosperity.
The EU – which actually does, in its current configuration, leave its member governments short of policy tools to meet their citizens’ evolving needs – is an easy target.
But even without such institutional arrangements, there is a sense that emphasizing international markets and linkages can hamper a country’s capacity to advance its own interests.
Donald Trump’s victory in the United States’ presidential election made that abundantly clear.
In keeping with Trump’s main campaign slogan, “Make America Great Again,” it was his “America first” comments that were most revealing.
While Trump might pursue mutually beneficial bilateral agreements, one can expect that they will be subordinated to domestic priorities, especially distributional aims, and supported only insofar as they are consistent with these priorities.
Developed-country voters’ frustration with the old market-driven global economic architecture is not unfounded.
That order did allow powerful forces, at times beyond the control of elected officials and policymakers, to shape national economies.
It may be true that some of that order’s elites chose to ignore the adverse distributional and employment-related consequences of the old order, while reaping the benefits.
But it is also true that the old order, taken as sacrosanct, hampered elites’ capacity to address such problems, even if they tried.
This was not always the case.
In the wake of WWII, the US, motivated partly by the Cold War, helped to create the old order by facilitating economic recovery in the West and, over time, creating growth opportunities for developing countries.
For 30 years or so, the distributional aspects of the global growth patterns that these efforts underpinned were positive, both for individual countries and for the world as a whole.
Compared with anything that came before, the post-war order was a boon for inclusiveness.
But nothing lasts forever.
As inequality across countries has declined, inequality within countries has surged – to the point that the reversal of priorities was probably inevitable.
Now that the reversal has arrived, so have the consequences.
While it is difficult to say precisely what those will be, some seem fairly clear.
For starters, the US will be more reluctant to absorb a disproportionate share of the cost of providing global public goods.
While other countries will eventually pick up the slack, there will be a transition period of unknown duration, during which the supply of such goods may decline, potentially undermining stability.
For example, the terms of engagement in NATO are likely to be renegotiated.
Multilateralism – long enabled by the same sort of asymmetric contribution, though typically proportionate to countries’ income and wealth – will also lose steam, as the trend toward bilateral and regional trade and investment agreements accelerates.
Trump is likely to be a leading proponent of this tack; in fact, even regional trade deals may be ruled out, as his opposition to ratifying the 12-country Trans-Pacific Partnership suggests.
This creates an opportunity for China to lead the establishment of a trade pact for Asia – an opportunity that Chinese leaders are already set to seize.
In conjunction with its “one belt, one road” strategy and its creation of the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank, China’s influence in the region will expand significantly as a result.
Meanwhile, for developing countries that lack China’s economic might, the trend away from multilateralism could hurt.
Whereas poor and less-developed countries found opportunities to grow and prosper under the old order, they will struggle to negotiate effectively on a bilateral basis.
The hope is that the world will recognize its collective interest in keeping development pathways open for poorer countries, both for these countries’ benefit and for the sake of international peace and security.
Beyond trade, technology is another powerful global force that is likely to be treated differently in the new order, becoming subject to more national-level regulations.
Cyber threats will all but require some regulations and will demand evolving policy interventions.
But other threats – for example, the fake news that has proliferated in the West (and, in particular, in the US during the presidential campaign) – may also call for a more hands-on approach.
And the adoption of work-displacing digital technologies may need to be paced, so that the economy’s structural adjustment can keep up.
The new emphasis on national interests clearly has costs and risks.
But it may also bring important benefits.
A global economic order sitting atop a crumbling foundation – in terms of democratic support and national political and social cohesion – is not stable.
As long as people’s identities are mainly organized, as they are now, around citizenship in nation-states, a country-first approach may be the most effective.
Like it or not, we are about to find out.
The New Xenophobia
OXFORD – Democratic governments in the West are increasingly losing their bearings.
From the shift toward illiberalism in Poland and Hungary to the Brexit vote in the United Kingdom and Donald Trump’s victory in the United States’ presidential election, a particularly lethal strain of populism is infecting societies – and it is spreading.
The appeal of populism is straightforward.
Faced with stagnant wages and a declining quality of life, people feel frustrated – all the more so when their leaders keep telling them that things are getting better.
Then the populist appears and promises to shake things up, to defend the interests of the “people” (though really only some of them), and offers something arguably more attractive than feasible solutions: scapegoats.
At the top of the list of scapegoats are the “elites” – established political parties and corporate leaders.
Rather than protecting the “people” from economic pressure and insecurity, this group, the populist declares, thrives on the people’s pain.
By advancing globalization – by forcing ever-more openness down the people’s throat – they have accumulated massive wealth, which they then protect through tax avoidance, offshoring, and other schemes.
But it is not just the elites who are blamed.
Yes, they have betrayed the people.
But one way they do so is by foisting upon the people equal rights and opportunities for minorities, immigrants, and foreigners, who “steal” jobs, threaten national security, and undermine traditional ways of life.
Trump won the US presidency partly because of his pledges to deport millions of undocumented immigrants and ban Muslims from entering the country.
The Brexiteers promised to end free immigration from the European Union.
After the vote, Britain’s Home Secretary Amber Rudd suggested that firms hiring foreigners should be named and shamed.
Today’s populism advances a toxic new xenophobia, one that threatens to fracture our societies.
For politicians, it offers an easy means of quickly transforming people’s fear and powerlessness into an intoxicating mix of anger and authority.
It persuades intimidated (often elderly) voters that, in the parlance of the Brexiteers, they can “take back control” of their lives and their countries, primarily by rejecting foreigners.
Demography makes the new xenophobia particularly dangerous.
In much of the West, societies are becoming increasingly diverse.
Hispanics now account for 17.6% of the US population.
One-third of Londoners were born outside the UK.
In France, an estimated 10% of the population is Muslim.
And an estimated 20% of Germany’s population have some immigrant background.
In this context, when politicians campaign for votes by advancing antagonistic and divisive identity politics, they sow the seeds of animosity, mistrust, and violence within their own societies.
When candidates repeatedly call Muslims dangerous, for example, no one should be surprised by a surge in anti-Muslim hate crimes, as has occurred in the wake of both the Brexit vote and Trump’s victory.
Such divided societies require a rising level of coercion and force to control.
Diversity should be a strength, one that helps societies to flourish.
That is why it is so important to combat the new xenophobia.
One way is by encouraging and enabling social mixing, interaction, and deliberation among diverse groups.
Extensive psychological research shows that intergroup contact reduces people’s sense of threat, heightening the possibilities for building trust across society.
If community centers, schools, and public locations are places where people of different religions, cultures, and race meet, xenophobia is less likely to take root.
Even living in an area where others mix can help.
This is why the new xenophobia has largely been resisted in Europe’s most diverse cities.
A second way to combat the new xenophobia is to reinforce the protection of civil liberties.
This means upholding the rule of law, even in the face of terrorist threats, and ensuring the independence of judges.
Yet, lately, there have been ominous moves in the opposite direction.
Leaders in Hungary and Poland have been dismantling constitutional protections; France has used a lengthy state of emergency to suspend rights; and British and American politicians have publicly denigrated judges.
Democracy was toppled by xenophobes in the 1930s not because of the strength of the anti-democratic parties, but because of democratic leaders’ failure to uphold their countries’ constitutions.
A third way to fight the new xenophobia is through innovation.
For example, though the Internet is often viewed as a great equalizer, social media are contributing to fragmentation.
The content to which people are exposed is filtered, whether through self-selection or algorithms.
The result is echo chambers in which like-minded people reinforce shared convictions, creating increasingly polarized silos.
But, if social media platforms were reconfigured in innovative ways, they could have the opposite impact, creating spaces for citizens from diverse backgrounds to interact.
The threat posed by the new xenophobia should not be underestimated.
Today, no less than in the past, the rejection of diversity is tantamount to the rejection of democracy.
That is why it must be defended, before its opponents gain any more ground.
NATO after Riga
When the Soviet Union collapsed, many predicted the end of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO).
Yet a few weeks ago, NATO held its summit meeting in the Latvian capital of Riga, formerly part of the USSR.
NATO was created in 1949 as an alliance to contain Soviet power.
Its focus was on Western Europe, and, as one joke went, it was designed to keep the Russians out, the Germans down, and the Americans in.
But that Cold War world is long gone.
Germany is a democracy firmly anchored in the European Union, and there is no threat of Soviet tanks sweeping across the North German plains.
NATO survived by transforming itself.
While some Central European members that were formerly occupied by the USSR continue to see NATO as a political insurance policy against a revival of Russian ambitions, NATO is no longer aimed against Russia.
In fact, Russian officers are welcome to participate in military exercises and to visit NATO headquarters under the Partnership for Peace program.
Residual suspicions and Russian pride limit the NATO-Russia agreement, but the organization is no longer focused on Russia.
One major task that NATO performed in the first decade after the Cold War was to attract the newly freed countries of Central Europe toward the West, with the prospect of membership conditioned on meeting democratic standards.
Another important task was to help bring stability to the troubled Balkan region after the breakup of Yugoslavia and the resultant wars in Bosnia and Kosovo.
NATO peacekeeping operations have been a stabilizing factor in the region.
For example, NATO and EU diplomacy prevented ethnic conflict in Macedonia from erupting into a crisis.
While these actions were important, many observers argued that NATO would have to look beyond Europe.
A common quip was that NATO would have to go “out of area or out of business.”
This became particularly important after the Al Qaeda attacks on September 11, 2001, shifted the focus of American foreign policy toward transnational terrorism.
The European members of NATO responded by invoking the Article 5 mutual defense clause of the NATO charter and coming to the aid of the US in Afghanistan, where today there are 32,000 NATO troops.
Because they train together, NATO countries can operate effectively even when not all members of the organization are officially involved.
For example, NATO did not conduct the Gulf War in 1991 or the initial Afghan campaign, but NATO planning and training meant that members could cooperate effectively when called upon to do so.
At the same time, NATO after Riga faces a number of problems.
Europe split over the American invasion of Iraq, and there is no political will to involve NATO there.
The new relationship with Russia needs careful management, and rapid extension of membership to former Soviet republics like Ukraine and Georgia could prove difficult.
In military terms, European countries need to spend more on secure communications, airlift capabilities, special operations, and dealing with chemical and biological battlefields in order to be able to fight the war on terrorism effectively.
France is concerned that America’s influence in NATO is too large, and opposes a global role in which NATO establishes special partnerships with Australia, New Zealand, Japan, and other countries.
The French worry that NATO’s global ambition, particularly in East Asia, could produce friction with China.
But by far the biggest problem that NATO faces today is Afghanistan.
Hamid Karzai’s government remains weak, and the economy continues to be heavily dependent upon opium production.
The Taliban and Al Qaeda networks are re-emerging as political and military threats.
Many NATO countries with troops in Afghanistan have “national caveats” that restrict how their troops may be used.
While the Riga summit relaxed some of these caveats to allow assistance to allies in dire circumstances, Britain, Canada, the Netherlands, and the US are doing most of the fighting in southern Afghanistan, while French, German, and Italian troops are deployed in the quieter north.
It is difficult to see how NATO can succeed in stabilizing Afghanistan unless it is willing to commit more troops and give commanders more flexibility.
Success will also require more funds for reconstruction, development, and alternatives to opium poppy cultivation.
Governments in Europe and the US are concerned about budget problems, but in a larger perspective, providing significantly greater resources to Afghanistan now may turn out to save more funds later.
One of the great costs of the Bush administration’s mistaken Iraq policy has been to divert attention and resources away from the just war in Afghanistan.
If only a small portion of the money and forces invested in Iraq had been devoted to Afghanistan, the current threat of a resurgent Taliban and Al Qaeda might not be so great.
Unfortunately, Iraq is draining all the oxygen out of the policy process in Washington.
Few people are focused on saving NATO from a significant failure in its first major test outside of Europe.
Nato to Lebanon – but on one condition
The current discussion surrounding an international force for southern Lebanon has focused almost exclusively on which countries and organizations – NATO, the European Union, the United Nations – will provide the troops.
This is an important issue, to be sure, but the real question concerns the changes that Israel must undertake in exchange for this force being put in place and assuming the risk of such a mission.
No international force will simply protect Israel from Hezbollah rockets while Israel continues its current strategy.
After all, the recent military escalation in the region is at least partly due to that strategy.
If an international force simply allows Ehud Olmert’s government to pursue its plans further, the countries that provide troops for the international force will not only be seen as rubberstamping Israeli policy, but will also be dragged into its failure.
To criticize Israel’s strategy as flawed is not to condone the acts of Hamas or Hezbollah or to deny Israel’s right to self-defense.
It is merely to point out what should be obvious: Israel’s efforts to find a unilateral solution to its security problems – whether occupation, withdrawal, or separation – have failed.
Unilateral occupation without commitment to a viable Palestinian state has produced only the intifada and suicide bombers.
Unilateral withdrawal from Gaza without the prior establishment of a local authority to maintain order has only led to renewed intervention.
And the “security fence,” which was to allow for unilateral separation, may hold back suicide bombers but not modern missiles of the kind currently employed by Hezbollah.
So far, the only lesson Israel seems to have drawn from its failed strategies is that it must extend and intensify the use of unilateral force: re-invade Gaza, devastate Lebanon, and threaten Syria and, by implication, Iran, which the Israeli government hints, had a hand in orchestrating the recent crisis.
It takes little foresight, however, to predict that more force will not produce more security for Israel.
The policy, reminiscent of terrorist stratagems, of bombing civilians in order to force the hands of their leaders will only strengthen the radicals and boost their popular support.
It will not hide the fact that Israel has run out of unilateral options.
Israel has so far been unwilling to accept this fact.
Instead, its leaders hope that a robust international force in southern Lebanon will provide protection for northern Israel, leaving them with a free hand to deal unilaterally with Gaza and the West Bank, while committing the international community to Israel’s failed unilateralism.
To join such an international force under these conditions would be irresponsible.
Countries that contribute troops would appear to be siding unequivocally with Israel, thereby losing all credibility with Israel’s adversaries.
They would also risk being drawn into renewed Israeli operations against Hezbollah and its backers.
Most important, they would forego what may be the last chance to promote a consensual peace.
So the prior condition for setting up and joining an international force for Southern Lebanon must be that Israel renews its commitment to the “road map” and negotiations with the Palestinians for a viable Palestinian state.
With this aim in mind, it must enter into talks with democratically elected Palestinian representatives.
True, such talks will be difficult, and they may not succeed.
But that can no longer be an argument against diplomacy now that Israeli unilateralism has once again proven to be a strategic blind alley.
Only an Israel seriously willing to seek security through agreement, not one that wants to impose her security on her neighborhood by fiat, can be partner to an international effort to bring stability to Lebanon and beyond.
Of course, some countries, not least the US, would oppose making such a reversal in Israeli policy a condition of creating an international force and consensus in NATO, the EU, or the UN may not be found or, if it were to emerge, Israel might simply refuse to abide.
Both prospects would be reason enough for staying away from the project altogether.
Creating an international force for southern Lebanon makes sense only as an investment in regional peace, not as an appendix to Israel’s current strategy.
Alam vs. Perubahan Iklim
MARRAKESH – Lahan basah, hutan dan laut menyerap dan menyimpan karbon, hal ini yang menjadikan mereka aset penting bagi negara-negara yang berupaya mencapai target penurunan emisi CO2 dalam perjanjian Perubahan Iklim Paris.
Jadi bagaimana cara kita menggunakan mereka dengan lebih efektif?
Perjanjian Paris disetujui oleh 196 negara pada bulan Desember tahun kemarin, dan mulai belaku pada awal bulan ini.
Sekarang, negara-negara yang menandatangani perjanjian ini bertemu di Marrakesh, Maroko, untuk konferensi tahunan perubahan iklim PBB.
Beberapa acara konferensi secara khusus fokus pada bagaimana cara negara dapat menggunakan sistem alami untuk memenuhi target penurunan CO2 mereka.
Walaupun terdapat tantangan perubahan iklim yang besar, besar pula kesempatan untuk mempercepat pembangunan berkelanjutan dan memastikan masa depan yang lebih baik untuk semua orang di planet ini.
Berdasarkan perjanjian Paris, pemeritah telah berkomitmen untuk mengurangi emisi karbon mereka secara drastis, agar menjaga pemanasan global dibawah 2°C. Sebagian besar negara yang menandatangani perjanjian ini telah menyampaikan rencana aksi nasional mereka untuk mencapai tujuan ini, dan rencana-rencana ini akan menjadi lebih ambisius dari waktu ke waktu.
Kontribusi Nasional yang Ditentukan ini termasuk target energi terbarukan dan proposal untuk transportasi berkelanjutan, efisiensi energi, dan pendidikan.
Sebagai tambahan, negara-negara juga perlu mempertimbangan untuk mengadopsi pengelolaan modal alam yang lebih baik.
Perjanjian Paris sendiri mengakui pentingnya peran ekosistem alami dalam membatasi jumlah karbon di atmosfir, dan pemerintah harusnya tidak mengabaikan alat yang kuat tersebut. 
Pemerintah harus mengambil tindakan untuk melestarikan ekosistem yang ada sekarang – dan memulihkan serta memperluas ekosistem yang terdegradasi – dengan cara yang ramah terhadap masyarakat.
Hal ini terutama berlaku di lahan basah yang mencakup seluruh wilayah darat – seperti danau, dataran banjir, lahan gambut, hutan bakau, dan terumbu karang – yang tertutup dengan air, baik musiman atau secara permanen.
Lahan gambut sangat penting.
Meskipun mereka hanya menutupi 3% dari total permukaan dunia, mereka menyimpan dua kali lebih banyak karbon dibandingkan seluruh hutan.
Tanah di lahan gambut terdiri dari karbon – dalam bentuk materi tanaman yang membusuk – yang terakumulasi selama ratusan tahun; dan ketika lahan gambut dikeringkan atau dibakar, karbon tersebut dilepaskan ke atmosfir.
Faktanya, mengeringkan lahan gambut melepaskan dua kali lebih banyak karbon ke atmosfir daripada industri penerbangan.
Pada tahun 2015, terjadi kebakaran di hutan gambut Indonesia, hal ini meningkatkan kekhawatiran dunia mengenai seberapa banyak karbon yang dilepaskan ke atmosfir, selain dari dampak kesehatan yang ditimbulkan hal ini.
Pemerintah Indonesia memperkirakan kebakaran di lahan gambut dan deforestasi saja menyumbang lebih dari 60% total emisi gas rumah kaca di Indonesia.  
Melakukan konservasi dan memulihkan lahan gambut bisa menurunkan emisi global CO2 secara signifikan, oleh karena itu, pada tahun 2015, Dewan Menteri Nordik mengumumkan komitmen untuk melestarikan lahan gambut di daerah mereka.
Hampir setengah dari lahan gambut negara-negara Nordik telah hilang, dan degradasi ekosistem ini menyumbang 25% dari total emisi karbon mereka.
Perjanjian Paris mulai berlaku penuh kurang dari satu tahun.
Hal ini mengindikasikan bahwa ada momentum global untuk memfokuskan aksi untuk mengatasi penyebab perubahan iklim, dan juga dampaknya, seperti bencana banjir, kekurangan air, dan kekeringan yang telah melanda banyak negara.
Perasaan mendesak ini tidaklah mengherankan.
Menurut PBB-Air, 90% dari semua bencana alam berhubungan dengan air, dan akan terjadi peningkatan frekuensi dan intensitas seiring dengan memburuknya perubahan iklim.
Tapi sistem alami bisa menanggulangi hal ini: lahan basah berperan sebagai spons yang mengurangi banjir dan menunda timbulnya kekeringan; dan hutan bakau, rawa asin, dan terumbu karang berfungsi sebagai penyangga yang melindungi dari gelombang badai.
Dan lahan basah, laut dan hutan berperan lebih dari sekedar menyerap dan menyimpan karbon; mereka juga menyediakan air bersih, dan merupakan sumber makanan bagi hampir tiga milyar orang.   
Negara-negara telah memiliki platform yang bisa digunakan untuk upaya konservasi lahan basah di masa depan.
Konvensi Ramsar mengenai Lahan Basah, adalah perjanjian antar pemerintah dimana 169 negara berkomitmen untuk melestarikan dan mengelola secara berkelanjutan lahan basah mereka, merupakan alat yang ideal untuk membantu mereka mencapai target penurunan CO2, dan juga untuk memenuhi Target Pembanguanan Berkelanjutan PBB pada tahun 2030.
Tujuan jangka panjang perjanjian Paris adalah untuk mencapai netralitas iklim – tidak ada jumlah emisi gas rumah kaca yang disebutkan – pada paruh kedua abad ini.
Netralitas iklim diperlukan untuk menjaga pemanasan global dibawah 2°C; untuk mencapai hal ini, kita harus menurunkan emisi ke titik yang bisa diserap seluruhnya dan dengan mudah oleh alam.
Ini adalah siklus alami selama jutaan tahun sebelum dimulainya perubahan iklim antropogenik.
Netralitas iklim bisa dicapai melalui kemauan politik, kebijakan yang imajinatif, teknologi ramah lingkungan yang baru dan sumber energi bersih, dan pergeseran investasi senilai multi triliun dollar ke sektor ekonomi berkelanjutan dan infrastruktur.
Selain itu, keberhasilan upaya ini memerlukan investasi dengan pembiayaan efektif diupaya konservasi dan perluasan modal alami.
Hanya sistem berbasis alam seperti lahan basah dan hutan yang benar-benar bisa menjamin keberhasilan – dan masa depan yang bersih dan makmur. 
Sovereign Environmental Risk
NAIROBI – Until the global financial crisis erupted four years ago, sovereign bonds had traditionally been viewed as reliable, virtually risk-free investments.
Since then, they have looked far less safe.
And many observers within and outside the financial sector have begun to question the models upon which credit-rating agencies, investment firms, and others rely to price the risks tied to such securities.
At the same time, it is increasingly obvious that any reform of risk models must factor in environmental implications and natural-resource scarcity.
Indeed, a recent investment report underlined that the fall in prices in the twentieth century for 33 important commodities – including aluminum, palm oil, and wheat – has been entirely offset in the decade since 2002, when commodity prices tripled.
It is likely that growing natural-resource scarcities are driving a paradigm shift, with potentially profound implications for economies – and thus for sovereign-debt risk – worldwide.
Indeed, many countries are already experiencing an increase in import prices for biological resources.
Financial markets can no longer overlook how ecosystems and the multitrillion-dollar services and products that they provide – ranging from water supplies, carbon storage, and timber to the healthy soils needed for crop production – underpin economic performance.
In addition, we are living in a world in which over-exploitation of natural resources, unsustainable consumption, and the condition of many ecosystems have become incompatible with accelerating demographic growth, as the human population increases from seven billion today to well over nine billion by 2050.
Studies such as the The Millennium Ecosystem Assessment and The Economics of Ecosystems and Biodiversity (TEEB), conducted on behalf of the G-8, have improved our understanding of the economic, ecological, and social value of the goods and services provided by ecosystems, and have proposed better methods for pricing them.
Yet this new thinking has yet to influence significantly the behavior of bond investors and rating agencies.
Some might assume that bond markets are shielded from the effects of climate change, ecosystem degradation, and water scarcity.
With more than $40 trillion of sovereign debt in global markets at any given time, that is a very high-risk game.
In order to address the gap between reality and perception, the United Nations Environment Program Finance Initiative (UNEP FI) and the Global Footprint Network (GFN), together with a number of institutional investors, investment managers, and information providers, have launched E-RISC, or Environmental Risk in Sovereign Credit analysis.
The project will take center stage at a gathering of investors in London on November 19, providing an early glimpse of how environmental criteria can be factored into sovereign-risk models and hence into the credit ratings assigned to sovereign bonds.
E-RISC highlights the situation in several countries – including Brazil, France, India, Turkey, and Japan – demonstrating how importers and exporters of natural resources such as timber, fish, and crops are being exposed to the increasing volatility that accompanies rising global resource scarcity.
Indeed, the E-RISC report estimates that a 10% variation in commodity prices can lead to changes in a country’s trade balance amounting to more than 0.5% of GDP.
Meanwhile, the economic consequences of environmental degradation can be severe.
The report estimates that a 10% reduction in the productive capacity of soils and freshwater areas alone could lead to a reduction in the trade balance equivalent to more than 4% of GDP.
Clearly, environmental risks are potentially large enough to affect countries’ economies in ways that could influence their willingness or ability to repay sovereign debt.
In addition, these risks vary widely across countries, including countries whose current credit ratings suggest similar levels of sovereign risk.
This suggests that the findings and methodologies applied in the E-RISC project bring added value to traditional sovereign-risk analysis, by providing insights into relevant but currently unaccounted-for parameters.
Credit-rating agencies, institutional investors, and asset managers are encouraged to see how such factors can be incorporated into their own risk models.
The time has come for a better understanding of the connection between environmental and natural-resource risk and sovereign credit risk.
Only then will investors, rating agencies, and governments be able to plan over the medium to long term with the knowledge needed to ensure long-term economic growth and stability.
Navigating Lebanon’s Political Minefield
On the face of it, the donor conference of Western and oil-rich Arab nations in Paris this week merely continues the work of two previous multilateral conferences in 2001 and 2002, aimed at helping Lebanon to rebuild its infrastructure after years of civil war and Israeli occupation and to tackle its massive debt.
This time, donors will additionally help offset the $3.5 billion in direct and indirect losses caused by last summer’s war between Israel and Hezbollah, and the further rise of debt to $40.6 billion, a staggering 180% of Lebanon’s GDP.
The agenda appears straightforward, but “Paris III” has acquired a barely concealed political purpose: to bolster the government of Lebanese Prime Minister Fouad Siniora in the face of a powerful domestic challenge led by Hezbollah, and by extension to curb the influence of Hezbollah’s regional backers, Syria and Iran.
The West should tread carefully.
There is a real risk that it will become entangled as a partisan actor in Lebanese domestic politics.
Nor should it seek to play into the regional agendas of Saudi Arabia, Egypt, and Jordan – hardly paragons of democracy – which are anxious to confront what they portray as a menacing “arc” of Shi’a Muslim power extending from Iran to Lebanon via Syria, and in Iraq.