It is at least possible – maybe even likely – that Apple’s best long-term move would be to release a hefty portion of its unused cash to its shareholders, who would then plow it back into the economy.
Meanwhile, it can finance its next new thing from the cash that its great products will continue to generate.
What is being criticized as short-termism could well be a long-term financial strategy that is just right for Apple.
A recession twice as deep as the one we have had would have cost the US roughly $2 trillion – and cost the world as a whole four times as much.
In comparison, the bonuses at Goldman Sachs are a rounding error.
And any attempt to make investment bankers suffer more last fall and winter would have put the entire support operation at risk.
As Fed Vice Chairman Don Kohn said, ensuring that a few thousand investment bankers receive their just financial punishment is a non-starter when attempts to do so put the jobs of millions of Americans – and tens of millions outside the US – at risk.
The Obama administration’s fiscal stimulus has also significantly helped the economy.
Though the jury is still out on the effect of the tax cuts in the stimulus, aid to states has been a job-saving success, and the flow of government spending on a whole variety of relatively useful projects is set to boost production and employment in the same way that consumer spending boosts production and employment.
And the cost of carrying the extra debt incurred is extraordinarily low: $12 billion a year of extra taxes would be enough to finance the fiscal-stimulus program at current interest rates.
For that price, American taxpayers will get an extra $1 trillion of goods and services, and employment will be higher by about ten million job-years.
The valid complaints about fiscal policy over the past 14 months are not that it has run up the national debt and rewarded the princes of Wall Street, but rather that it has been too limited – that we ought to have done more.
Yet these policies are political losers now: nobody is proposing more stimulus.
This is strange, because usually when something works the natural impulse is to do it again.
They are as good as the decisions of mortgage companies and new homebuyers to spend more on new houses during the housing bubble of the mid-2000’s, or of the princes of Silicon Valley to spend more building new companies during the dot-com bubble of the late 1990’s.
Obama’s Republican opponents, who claim that fiscal stimulus cannot work, rely on arguments that are incoherent at best, and usually simply wrong, if not mendacious.
Remember that back in 1993, when the Clinton administration’s analyses led it to seek to spend less and reduce the deficit, the Republicans said that that would destroy the economy, too.
Such claims were as wrong then as they are now.
But how many media reports make even a cursory effort to evaluate them?
Those who claim that America has a debt problem, and that a debt problem cannot be cured with more debt, ignore (sometimes deliberately) that private debt and US Treasury debt have been very different animals – moving in different directions and behaving in different ways – since the start of the financial crisis.
What the market is saying is not that the economy has too much debt, but that it has too much private debt, which is why prices of corporate bonds are low and firms find financing expensive. The market is also saying – clearly and repeatedly – that the economy has too little public US government debt, which is why everyone wants to hold it.
Why Are Governments Paralyzed?
MILAN – It is no secret that the global economy is struggling.
Europe is in the midst of a crisis whose root cause is a structurally flawed monetary and economic union.
The United States, emerging slowly from a financial crisis and widespread deleveraging, is experiencing a growth slowdown, a persistent employment problem, an adverse shift in income distribution, and structural challenges, with little effective or decisive policy action.
Meanwhile, among the major emerging economies, China’s reform process is on hold, pending a leadership transition this fall that will clarify various internal interests’ goals and power relationships.
India, which has lost reform momentum, is experiencing an economic slowdown and a potential loss of investor confidence.
The negative effects of these problems are now interacting, feeding back on themselves, and spreading to the rest of the global economy.
And yet, despite a palpable sense of concern that something is very wrong, the prognosis for significant change is bleak –&nbsp;and deteriorating.
What accounts for the apparent lack of effective policy action across a broad range of countries and regions?
One line of thinking blames a “leadership vacuum” – a common diagnosis in Europe.
Elsewhere – especially in the US – polarization and ugly zero-sum politics are thought to discourage potentially capable political leadership.
But, absent further analysis, the leadership vacuum becomes a catchall explanation.
What we need to know is why new political leadership in democracies like France, Britain, Japan, and the US has produced so little change.
A second explanation addresses that question: While bold action is required, the complexity of economic conditions, and disagreement about the right policy responses, implies a risk of serious error.
For professional politicians and policymakers in such circumstances, less may be more.
On this view, risk aversion both reflects and reinforces a divergence between individual incentives (the desire to be reelected, reappointed, or promoted) and collective needs (fixing problems).
A third answer is that policy instruments are simply ineffective in today’s conditions.
There is some merit to this claim.
Economic deleveraging takes time.
The restoration of sustainable patterns of growth requires years, not months.
Expectations may be out of line with the underlying reality.
But the absence of a quick solution does not mean that nothing can be done to improve the speed and quality of recovery.
Vested interests may also play a role.
Technological innovation and global market forces have produced a decisive shift in income toward capital and the upper 20% of the income distribution, often at the expense of middle-income groups, the unemployed, and the young.
The beneficiaries of these trends may have accumulated enough political influence to maintain the status quo, highlighting distributional issues that have generally received too little attention in understanding policy responses or their absence.
There are structural explanations for policy inaction as well.
Governance systems and constitutional structures differ in the extent to which they require broad consensus for official action, or to change policy direction in response to shocks or shifting conditions.
Some argue that the more constraining political systems work well in stable times, but perform poorly under volatile conditions like those prevailing today.
Others support constrained government on the grounds that it protects everyone from waste, rent-seeking, and interference with freedom of choice, and that, when needed, inspired leadership can build the required consensus to address changing circumstances.
High hurdles to major shifts in policy direction force officials to make a convincing case.
That is an inherently difficult task at a time when rapid change in the global economy has left many still trying to understand what is happening and what it all means for growth, stability, the distribution of income, and employment.
In the face of such complexity, it is not surprising that genuine policy disagreements lead to extended debate and relatively little action.
Moreover, the technocratic elements of government must often be balanced against democratic accountability.
In every society, individuals with special training and expertise are appointed to perform technically complex functions.
Their freedom of action is constrained by time limits and reappointment procedures that determine the nature and degree of their accountability to elected officials and the public.
There can be too little freedom of action (populism) or too little accountability (autocracy).
The necessary balance may vary according to local conditions.
For example, many China observers believe that accountability there needs to increase at this stage of the country’s economic, social, and political evolution.
Others argue that Western democracies have the opposite problem: a surfeit of narrow, politically assertive interests leads to underinvestment and poor tradeoffs between present and future opportunities and performance.
This brings us to a crucial obstacle: Government, business, financial, and academic elites are not trusted.
Lack of trust in elites is probably healthy at some level, but numerous polls indicate that it is in rapid decline, which surely increases citizens’ reluctance to delegate authority to navigate an uncertain global economic environment.
Loss of trust probably has multiple causes, including analytical failure: central banks, regulators, market participants, rating agencies, and economists almost all failed to detect rising systemic risk in the years preceding the current crisis, much less to take appropriate corrective action.
But a more important cause is a suspicion that elites are placing their own interests above shared social values.
Claims that our leadership, institutions, analyses, or policy instruments are inadequate to the task at hand surely contain a kernel of truth.
But the deeper problem is a breakdown in precisely such values and goals – that is, a weakening of social cohesion.
Restoring it will require analysts, policymakers, business leaders, and civil-society groups to clarify causes, share blame for mistakes, pursue flexible solutions in which costs are shared equitably, and, most important, explain that hard problems cannot be solved overnight.
The Long Mystery of Low Interest Rates
CAMBRIDGE – As policymakers and investors continue to fret over the risks posed by today’s ultra-low global interest rates, academic economists continue to debate the underlying causes.&#160; By now, everyone accepts some version of US Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke’s statement in 2005 that a “global savings glut” is at the root of the problem.
But economists disagree on why we have the glut, how long it will last, and, most fundamentally, on whether it is a good thing.
Bernanke’s original speech emphasized several factors – some that decreased the demand for global savings, and some that increased supply.
Either way, interest rates would have to fall in order for world bond markets to clear.
He pointed to how the Asian financial crisis in the late 1990’s caused the region’s voracious investment demand to collapse, while simultaneously inducing Asian governments to stockpile liquid assets as a hedge against another crisis.
Bernanke also pointed to increased retirement saving by aging populations in Germany and Japan, as well as to saving by oil-exporting countries, with their rapidly growing populations and concerns about oil revenues in the long term.
Monetary policy, incidentally, did not feature prominently in Bernanke’s diagnosis.
Like most economists, he believes that if policymakers try to keep interest rates at artificially low levels for too long, eventually demand will soar and inflation will jump.
So, if inflation is low and stable, central banks cannot be blamed for low long-term rates.
In fact, I strongly suspect that if one polled investors, monetary policy would be at the top of the list, not absent from it, as an explanation of low global long-term interest rates.
The fact that so many investors hold this view ought to make one think twice before absolving monetary policy of all responsibility.
Nevertheless, I share Bernanke’s instinct that, while central banks do set very short-term interest rates, they have virtually no influence over long-term real (inflation-adjusted) rates, other than a modest effect through portfolio management policies (for example, “quantitative easing”).
A lot has changed since 2005.
We had the financial crisis, and some of the factors cited by Bernanke have substantially reversed.
For example, Asian investment is booming again, led by China.
And yet global interest rates are even lower now than they were then.
Why?
There are several competing theories, most of them quite elegant, but none of them entirely satisfactory.
One view holds that long-term growth risks have been on the rise, raising the premium on assets that are perceived to be relatively safe, and raising precautionary saving in general.
(Of course, no one should think that any government bonds are completely safe, particularly from inflation and financial repression.)
Certainly, the 2008 financial crisis should have been a wakeup call to proponents of the “Great Moderation” view that long-term volatility has fallen.
Many studies suggest that it is becoming more difficult than ever to anchor expectations about long-term growth trends.
Witness, for example, the active debate about whether technological progress is accelerating or decelerating.
Shifting geopolitical power also breeds uncertainty.
Another class of academic theories follows Bernanke (and, even earlier, Michael Dooley, David &#160;Folkerts-Landau, and Peter Garber) in attributing low long-term interest rates to the growing importance of emerging economies, but with the major emphasis on private savings rather than public savings.
Because emerging economies have relatively weak asset markets, their citizens seek safe haven in advanced-country government bonds.
A related theory is that emerging economies’ citizens find it difficult to diversify the huge risk inherent in their fast-growing but volatile environments, and feel particularly vulnerable as a result of weak social safety nets.
So they save massively.
These explanations have some merit, but one should recognize that central banks and sovereign wealth funds, not private citizens, are the players most directly responsible for the big savings surpluses.
It is a strain to think that governments have the same motivations as private citizens.
Besides, on closer inspection, the emerging-market explanation, though convenient, is not quite as compelling as it might seem.
Emerging economies are growing much faster than the advanced countries, which neoclassical growth models suggest should push global interest rates up, not down.
Similarly, the integration of emerging-market countries into the global economy has brought with it a flood of labor.
According to standard trade theory, a global labor glut ought to imply an increased rate of return on capital, which again pushes interest rates up, not down.
Surely, any explanation must include the global constriction of credit, especially for small and medium-size businesses.
Tighter regulation of lending standards has shut out an important source of global investment demand, putting downward pressure on interest rates.
My best guess is that when global uncertainty fades and global growth picks up, global interest rates will start to rise, too.
But predicting the timing of this transition is difficult.
The puzzle of the global savings glut may live on for several years to come.
Why Are Savings Patterns So Different?
BEIJING – Ever since the integration of emerging markets into the global economy began in the early 1990’s, three striking trends have emerged: a divergence in private savings rates between the industrialized core and the emerging periphery (the former experiencing a sharp rise, and the latter a steady decline); large global imbalances between the two regions; and a drop in interest rates worldwide.
But, while global imbalances have preoccupied many observers, few have sought to explain the divergence in world savings behavior.
In 1988, the household savings rate in China and the United States was roughly equal, at about 5%.
Yet, by 2007, China’s household savings rate had risen to a staggering 30%, compared to just 2.5% in the US.
The pattern is not uncharacteristic of other industrialized countries relative to emerging markets over the last two decades (Figure 1).
Savings behavior invariably reacts to changes in interest rates, which have fallen steadily over the last two decades to today’s record-low levels.
But how can savings patterns be so different – often opposite – in globalized economies that are well integrated into world capital markets?
The answer may be that credit markets are more developed in advanced economies than they are in emerging countries, particularly in terms of the degree to which households are able to borrow.
Of course, one might argue that Asian thrift and American profligacy merely reflect asymmetric demands for credit: Asians are intrinsically more reluctant to borrow.
In that case, however, the vast differences in household debt (Figure 2) – ranging from 25% of GDP in emerging Asia (Southeast Asia, China, India, Hong Kong, and South Korea) to more than 90% in the US and other Anglo-Saxon economies (including Australia, Canada, Ireland, New Zealand, and the United Kingdom) – would reflect only a dissimilarity in taste.
A more plausible explanation is that institutional differences in the ability to borrow dictate to some extent the disparity in savings rates across countries.
The argument is simple: All economies have both borrowers and savers, and changes in the cost of borrowing (or the return to saving) affect them differently.
When interest rates decline, borrowers are able to borrow more. Savers, on the other hand, may be compelled to save more in the face of shrinking interest income.
At the macro level, a less credit-constrained economy (with a large mass of effective borrowers) could then experience a fall in the savings rate as borrowing rose.
However, in a country with a large mass of effective savers, the savings rate can rise, rather than fall.
This asymmetry in savings patterns might thus reflect the simple fact that credit-constrained economies are less sensitive to drops in the cost of borrowing relative to less constrained economies.
In joint research with Nicolas Coeurdacier and Stéphane Guibaud, we show that economic data supports this view.
Borrowers and savers are naturally grouped by age.
The young normally face low, current wage income, but faster growth in future income, and would ideally borrow against future income to augment consumption today and to invest in education.
The middle-aged, preparing for retirement, are likely to be the economy’s savers.
If asymmetric credit constraints are indeed important, young borrowers and middle-aged savers will display distinct patterns in constrained versus less-constrained economies.
In fact, there was a remarkable contrast in savings behavior across age groups in China and the US in the period 1992-2009.
For young Americans (those under 25), the borrowing rate rose by ten percentage pointsmore than the borrowing rate of young Chinese, while the savings rate of the Chinese working-age population (ages 35-54) rose by about 17 percentage points more than the savings rate of their American counterparts.
Another implication of this view is that the steep rise in savings in China is largely driven by a rise in the savings rate of middle-aged Chinese (rather than a fall in the borrowing rate of the young).
Apart from accounting for the global divergence in savings rates, tight credit constraints in China might explain the country’s high, and rising, savings rate – especially as the large rise in national savings is attributable mostly to household savings.
This would mean that China’s much-publicized effort to boost domestic consumption might in fact call for appropriate credit-market reforms.
US Federal Reserve Board Chairman Ben Bernanke’s notion of a “global savings glut” is a commonly cited explanation for falling world interest rates.
Credit constraints in fast-growing developing economies may be the reason why the glut emerged in the first place.
Europe’s Path to Disunity
MUNICH – The motto of the United States of America is: “E pluribus unum” (Out of many, one).
The European Union’s motto is “In varietate concordia,” which is officially translated as “United in diversity.”
It is difficult to express the differences between the US and the European model any more clearly than this.
The US is a melting pot, whereas Europe is a mosaic of different peoples and cultures that has developed over the course of its long history.
That difference raises the question of whether it is worth striving for a United States of Europe – a concept that many refuse to accept, because they do not believe in the possibility of a unified European identity.
A single political system like that of the US, they insist, presupposes a common language and a single nationality.
Perhaps the idea of a United States of Europe, the dream of post-war children like me, can never be realized.
But I am not so sure.
After all, deeper European integration and the creation of a single political system offer solid, practical advantages that do not require a common identity or language.
These advantages include the right to move freely across borders, the free movement of goods and services, legal certainty for cross-border economic activities, Europe-wide transportation infrastructure, and, not least, common security arrangements.
Banking regulation is the most topical area in which collective action makes sense.
If banks are regulated at the national level, but do business internationally, national regulatory authorities have a permanent incentive to set lax standards to avoid driving business to other countries and to lure it from them instead.
Regulatory competition thus degenerates into a race to the bottom, since the benefits of lax regulation translate into profits at home, while the losses lie with bank creditors around the world.
There are many similar examples from the fields of standards, competition policy, and taxation that are applicable here.
So, fundamental considerations speak for deeper European integration, extending even to the creation of a single European state.
The danger of following such a path always lies in the fact that collective decision-making bodies not only provide services that are useful to everybody, but also may abuse their power to redistribute resources among the participating countries.
Even democratic bodies are not immune to this danger.
On the contrary, they make it possible for majorities to exploit minorities.
To counter this threat, democratic bodies invariably need special rules to protect minorities, such as the requirement of qualified majority voting or unanimous decision-making.
The decisions taken by the European Central Bank are a particularly dramatic example of this problem, taken as they are by a simple majority of a body that is not even democratically elected.
The ECB’s decisions lead to a massive redistribution of wealth and risk among the eurozone’s member states, as well as from stable countries’ taxpayers, who have little stake in the crisis, to global investors directly affected by it.
The ECB has been providing virtually all of its refinancing credit to the eurozone’s five crisis-stricken countries: Italy, Spain, Portugal, Greece, and Ireland.
All the money circulating in the eurozone originated in these five countries and was then largely used to buy goods and assets in the northern member countries and redeem foreign debt taken from them.
The US Federal Reserve would never be allowed to conduct such a regionally imbalanced policy.
The Fed cannot even provide credit to specific regions, let alone states on the verge of bankruptcy (for example, California).
And now European Council President Herman Van Rompuy, backed by most of the troubled eurozone countries, is again proposing Eurobonds and debt-mutualization schemes.
These ideas go well beyond the American system.
The kind of fiscal integration and centralized power that they would require do not even remotely resemble those in place in the US.
Van Rompuy’s proposals are extremely dangerous and could destroy Europe.
The path toward a union based on joint liabilities, against the wishes of large parts of its population, is not leading to a federal state in the true sense of the term –&#160;that is, to an alliance of equals, who freely decide to unite and promise to protect each other.
Nor can this path lead to a United States of Europe, simply because a large part of Europe refuses to follow it.
Europe is not identical with the eurozone.
It contains many more countries than those that use the euro.
As useful as the euro could be for Europe’s prosperity if its obvious flaws were corrected, the way that the eurozone is now developing will split the EU and undermine the idea of unity in diversity.
The assertion that the eurozone could be transformed into a United States of Europe is no longer convincing.
The path toward joint liability is far more likely to lead to a deep rift within Europe, because turning the eurozone into a transfer and debt union that can prevent the insolvency of any of its members would require more central power than currently exists in the US.
Austerity and Demoralization
NEW HAVEN – The high unemployment that we have today in Europe, the United States, and elsewhere is a tragedy, not just because of the aggregate output loss that it entails, but also because of the personal and emotional cost to the unemployed of not being a part of working society.
Austerity, according to some of its promoters, is supposed to improve morale.
British Prime Minister David Cameron, an austerity advocate, says he believes that his program reduces “welfare dependency,” restores “rigor,” and encourages the “the doers, the creators, the life-affirmers.”
Likewise, US Congressman Paul Ryan says that his program is part of a plan to promote “creativity and entrepreneurial spirit.”
Some kinds of austerity programs may indeed boost morale.
Monks find their life’s meaning in a most austere environment, and military boot camps are thought to build character.
But the kind of fiscal austerity that is being practiced now has the immediate effect of rendering people jobless and filling their lives with nothing but a sense of rejection and exclusion.
One could imagine that a spell of unemployment might be a time of reflection, reestablishment of personal connections, and getting back to fundamental values.
Some economists even thought long ago that we would be enjoying much more leisure by this point.
John Maynard Keynes, in his 1930 essay “Economic Possibilities for Our Grandchildren,” speculated that, within a hundred years, that is, by 2030, higher incomes would reduce the average workday to a mere three hours, for a total workweek of only 15 hours.
While there are still 17 years to go, it appears that Keynes was way off the mark.
So was Robert Theobald, who, in his 1963 book Free Men and Free Markets questioned the public’s repugnance toward high unemployment.
He asserted that “we can have meaningful leisure rather than destructive unemployment,” and that we do not need “a whirling-dervish economy dependent on compulsive consumption.”
But finding something satisfying to do with our time seems inevitably to entail doing some sort of work: “meaningful leisure” wears thin after a while.
People seem to want to work more than three hours a day, even if it is assembly-line work.
And the opportunity to work should be a basic freedom.
Unemployment is a product of capitalism: people who are no longer needed are simply made redundant.
On the traditional family farm, there was no unemployment.
Austerity exposes the modern economy’s lack of interpersonal connectedness and the morale costs that this implies.
Work-sharing might keep more people marginally attached to their jobs in an economic slump, thereby preserving their self-esteem.
Instead of laying off 25% of its workforce in a recession, a company could temporarily reduce workers’ hours from, say, eight per day to six.
Everyone would remain employed, and all would come a little closer to Keynes’s ideal.
Some countries, notably Germany, have encouraged this approach.
But work-sharing raises technical problems if increased suddenly to deal with an economic crisis like the one we are now experiencing.
These problems preclude the sudden movement toward the ideal of greater leisure that thinkers like Keynes and Theobald proclaimed.
One problem is that workers have fixed costs, such as transportation to work or a health plan, that do not decline when hours (and thus pay) are cut.
Their debts and obligations are similarly fixed.
They could have bought a smaller house had they known that their hours would be reduced, but now it is difficult to downsize the one that they did buy.
Another problem is that it may be difficult to reduce everyone’s job by the same amount, because some jobs scale up and down with production, while others do not.
In his book Why Wages Don’t Fall During a Recession, Truman Bewley of Yale University reported on an extensive set of interviews with business managers involved with wage-setting and layoffs.
He found that they believed that a serious morale problem would result from reducing everyone’s hours and pay during a recession.
Then all employees would begin to feel as if they did not have a real job.
In his interviews with managers, he was told that it is best (at least from a manager’s point of view) if the pain of reduced employment is concentrated on a few people, whose grumbling is not heard by the remaining employees.
Employers worry about workplace morale, not about the morale of the employees they lay off.
Their damaged morale certainly affects others as a sort of externality, which matters very much; but it does not matter to the firm that has laid them off.
We could perhaps all be happy working fewer hours if the decline reflected gradual social progress.
But we are not happy with unemployment that results from a sudden fiscal crisis.
That is why sudden austerity cannot be a morale builder.
For morale, we need a social compact that finds a purpose for everyone, a way to show oneself to be part of society by being a worker of some sort.
And for that we need fiscal stimulus – ideally, the debt-friendly stimulus that raises taxes and expenditures equally.
The increased tax burden for all who are employed is analogous to the reduced hours in work-sharing.
But, if tax increases are not politically expedient, policymakers should proceed with old-fashioned deficit spending.
The important thing is to achieve any fiscal stimulus that boosts job creation and puts the unemployed back to work.
End Austerity Now
EDINBURGH – In recent weeks, talk about a budding recovery in the eurozone has gained traction, with key indices pointing to expansion in the core countries – data that many are citing as evidence that austerity is finally working.
Money-market funds from the United States are returning, albeit cautiously, to resume funding of European bank debt.
Even Goldman Sachs is now bullishly piling into European equities.
But is a recovery really underway?
Cynics recall that a European recovery was supposed to take hold as early as the fourth quarter of 2010, and that every International Monetary Fund projection since then has predicted recovery “by the end of the year.”
Instead, GDP has collapsed, with the Spanish and Italian economies expected to contract by close to 2% this year.
Portugal’s economy is set to shrink by more than 2%, and Greece’s output will fall by more than 4%.
Moreover, unemployment in the eurozone has skyrocketed to an average rate of roughly 12%, with more than 50% youth unemployment in the periphery countries implying a long-term loss of talent and erosion of the tax base.
And, despite the spike in unemployment, productivity growth in the eurozone is decidedly negative.
More significant, over the last year, the public debt/GDP ratio rose by seven percentage points in Italy, 11 in Ireland, and 15 in Portugal and Spain.
If the sine qua non of recovery via austerity is the stabilization and reduction of debt, the cynics’ case appears to have been made.
For example, according to official estimates, Spain’s public debt, which amounted to only about 36% of GDP when the crisis began, has almost tripled – and the actual figure may be much higher.
More telling, the countries that cut expenditure the most experienced the largest bond-yield spikes and the most significant debt growth.
The explanation for this is simple.
When a country gives up its monetary sovereignty, its banks are effectively borrowing in a foreign currency, making them exceptionally vulnerable to liquidity shocks, like that which sparked turmoil in Europe’s banking system in 2010-2011.
The government, unable to print money to bail out the banks or increase export competitiveness through currency devaluation, is left with only two options: default or deflation (austerity).
Austerity’s underlying logic is that budget cuts, by reducing the debt burden and restoring confidence, ultimately enhance stability and support growth.
But, when countries pursue austerity simultaneously with their main trading partners, overall demand plummets, causing all of their economies to contract and, in turn, increasing their debt/GDP ratios.
But the problem with austerity in the eurozone is more fundamental: policymakers are attempting to address a sovereign-debt crisis, though the real problem is a banking crisis.
With Europe’s banking system triple the size and twice as leveraged as its US counterpart, and the ECB lacking genuine lender-of-last-resort authority, the sudden halt in capital flows to peripheral countries in 2009 created a liquidity-starved system that was too big to bail out.
As holders of euro-denominated assets recognized this situation, they turned to the ECB for insurance (which the ECB could not deliver under its previous president, Jean-Claude Trichet, whose leadership was defined by his commitment to maintaining price stability).
Investors’ subsequent efforts to price in the risk of a eurozone breakup – not the volume of sovereign debt – caused bond yields to spike.
But the financial-market turmoil fueled a panic among eurozone leaders, leading them to misdiagnose the malady and prescribe the wrong medicine, which has served only to generate new symptoms.
While Draghi’s promise, embodied by the ECB’s “outright monetary transactions” program – as well as its long-term refinancing operation and emergency liquidity assistance program – has bought time and lowered yields, the eurozone’s banking crisis persists.
Eurozone leaders must recognize that spending cuts will do nothing to stabilize the balance sheets of core-country banks that are over-exposed to peripheral countries’ sovereign debt.
Until Europe rejects austerity in favor of a growth-oriented approach, all signs of recovery will prove illusory.
Why Barack Obama?
NEW YORK – The winner of America’s presidential election will inherit a perfect storm of problems, both economic and international.
He will face the most difficult opening-day agenda of any president since – and I say this in all seriousness – the man who saved the Union, Abraham Lincoln.
But a more instructive precedent is 1933, when Franklin Roosevelt offered inspiring rhetoric and “bold experimentation” to a nation facing economic meltdown and a breakdown in public confidence.
For me, the choice is simple – and not only because I am, by temperament and history, a Democrat.
The long and intense political campaign has revealed huge differences in the two candidates’ positions, style, and personal qualities. And the conclusion seems clear.
Judgment .
John McCain has shown throughout his career a penchant for risk-taking; in his memoirs, he proudly calls himself a gambler.
His selection of Sarah Palin, a charismatic but spectacularly unqualified candidate, as his running mate, is just the most glaring of many examples of the real McCain.
His bravery in combat attests to his patriotism, courage, and toughness, but his judgment has been found sorely lacking time and time again over his career.
Barack Obama is tough, too, but in a different way.
No one should underestimate how difficult it was to travel his road, against incredible odds, to the cusp of the presidency.
But where McCain is impulsive and emotional, Obama is low-key and unemotional.
He makes his judgments in a calm and methodical manner; McCain’s impulsiveness is anathema to Obama, and rightly so – one cannot play craps with history.
Having seen so many political leaders falter under pressure, I prize this ability above most others.
And Barack Obama has it.
The economy .
The first priority of the new president will be the economy and the financial crisis.
Since the crisis hit, Obama has been calm and, indeed, presidential.
He consulted the best advisory team in the nation, weighed each course of action carefully, and then issued a series of precise, calm statements.
Meanwhile, McCain has veered bizarrely, issuing contradictory statements, “suspending” his campaign (while continuing to campaign), and urging that the first debate be canceled (when it was all the more needed).
Advantage Obama.
Foreign policy .
The most explicit disagreements between the candidates are over Iraq, Iran, and Russia.
But there are deeper differences.
McCain’s positions, with the notable exception of climate change, suggest that he would simply try to carry out George W. Bush’s policies more effectively.
Obama offers a different approach to foreign policy.
By starting to draw down combat troops in Iraq, Obama would change the image and policies of America immediately.
By engaging Iran in talks that would cover not only the nuclear issue but other aspects of Iran’s destabilizing role in the region, he would either reach agreements that lowered the dangers from Iran, or he would mobilize a stronger international coalition to isolate Iran.
Either way, engaging Iran is the right policy, and it is hard to understand why Bush and McCain have continued to hold out against such an obvious change of course, which, if carried out with firmness, will not compromise American or Israeli national security.
On Russia since its invasion of Georgia, Obama and his running mate, Joe Biden (who was the first member of Congress to visit Georgia after the invasion), emphasize helping Georgia rebuild its economy and maintain its independence in the face of a continuing Russian campaign against it.
McCain, on the other hand, wants to punish Russia by such actions as expelling it from the G-8.
Such measures may ultimately be necessary, but they will not help Georgia survive as an independent democracy.
Moreover, even after the outrage in Georgia, there are issues of common interest – such as energy, climate change, and Iran – on which the West and the Kremlin must cooperate.
This was true even during the Cold War, and remains true today, yet McCain seems not to recognize it.
Leadership .
In the end, all presidential elections come down to the intangibles of leadership.
The vote for a president is a sort of private contract directly between each voter and his or her preferred choice.
Who do you want to see on your television screen for the next four years?
To whom do you wish to entrust the nation’s fate?&
Here again, the contrasting styles of Obama and McCain offer a clear choice between a calm and confident man and a highly emotional one, between a major change in the nation’s direction and a minor one, between a conciliatory style and a more combative one.
Effectiveness .
Finally, in a year in which the Democrats are certain to increase their majority in both houses of Congress, an Obama victory would offer the Democrats control of both the legislative and executive branches for the first time since 1994, and with it the possibility of legislative achievement after years of stalemate.
After so many years of polarization at home and unilateralism abroad, the choice for president seems clear.
Why Big Banks Will Get Bigger
FLORENCE – Severe banking crises bring painful and long-lasting disruptions.
But they also lead to surprises.
The lessons learned in the immediate aftermath bear little relationship to the eventual outcome.
There are immediate and obvious answers to the question of who was to blame, but they rarely correspond with the new shape of the financial landscape that ultimately emerges.
The crisis that began in 2007 originated in the sub-prime mortgage sector in the United States, and in US banks that were “too big to fail,” prompting many observers at the outset to predict the end of American financial capitalism.
But the banks that were most affected were elsewhere, and the long-term winners will be a few American banks – including some of the most notoriously weak banks – which will get bigger as a result of the crisis.
Fueled by the injection of taxpayers’ money, American capitalism is back in force.
The explanation of why the obvious lessons of the crisis are being not drawn lies in the curious character of financial activity.
Banking is inherently competitive; but at the same time, it is not an industry where competition ever worked very well.
The core of financial activity depends on reputation, information networks, and the ability to make markets as well as trade on them.
The result is that there are indisputable advantages to being big, as well as the disadvantages that have become obvious over the past two years.
The market tends to be dominated by a relatively small number of firms.
In the old days, when banking was stable and regulated securely in a national setting, three or four leading banks tended to form an oligopoly: Barclays, Lloyds, Midland, and National Westminster in the United Kingdom; Commerzbank, Deutsche, and Dresdner in Germany.
There were always suspicions of formal or informal banking cartels, which would agree on conditions and interest rates.
Regulators generally turned a blind eye to these suspicions.
In the 1990’s and 2000’s, internationalization promised to produce a new landscape, in which a small handful of banks would once again divide up a single global market.
Banks maneuvered to get the best position to take advantage of financial globalization, which usually meant locating themselves where the regulatory regime was least restrictive.
Banks got much bigger very quickly, and bigness brought problems.
As they grew, banks found it difficult to manage the multiplicity of their divergent activities.
They were beset with incompatible computer software systems, rogue employees, and the need to account for the different national cultures in which they were now operating.
Almost inevitably, the biggest banks in the world got into trouble.
In the 1990’s, the largest banks were mostly Japanese. Who now remembers Daiichi Kangyo?
The financial crisis has produced a new answer to where the greatest competitive advantages lie.
From banks’ perspective, the most obvious lesson was the need for a strong national government to bear the potential costs of a rescue.
It is no longer best to be subject to the most favorable regulatory regime, but to be where the state has the deepest pockets.
Very large banks in small territories with small-scale governments are vulnerable.
The US is big enough to handle behemoths like Bank of America or Citigroup.
China can handle its large banks, even if they have large portfolios of poor credits.
European banks are in a more precarious situation.
Ireland and Iceland have become notorious cases where a financial sector metastasized and destroyed the host country.
Even in France and Germany, large and internationally active banks potentially exceed the government’s capacity to mount a rescue.
In addition, there is the complexity of disentangling which country is responsible for what part of a rescue, when, for instance, Central European banks are controlled by an Austrian bank that is bought by a German bank that is then bought by an Italian bank.
As a result, the big transnational institutions are lobbying hard for a pan-European approach to banking supervision and regulation (and implicitly for fiscal bailouts should that supervision and regulation fail).
In the case of the banks that required state rescues, European competition rules are requiring divestment and downsizing.
Institutions such as Royal Bank of Scotland, which for a time in 2009 headed the list of the world’s largest international banks, are being pruned by the EU’s Directorate General for Competition.
Even the stronger banks are being pressed to increase their capital reserves.
In most cases, this means that they will continue to cut back on lending, worsening the impact of the financial crisis on the rest of the economy.
By contrast, in the US, the government pushed big banks into buying up smaller and vulnerable banks, and is now doing everything it can to press them to lend more.
Government reactions are full of paradoxes.
The more we insist that a banking system should be competitive, the greater the risks that individual banks will take.
The more governments are prepared to step in, and the greater the resources of those governments, the more big banks and big countries will be favored.
The last 20 years of globalization saw the emergence of small, open economies as global leaders.
The next 20 years will see a different globalization, in which the winners are large, powerful countries that mobilize government resources in the interest of creating winners in the race for financial supremacy.
Why Bipartisanship is Good Politics
LONDON – Bipartisanship seems to have taken a drubbing in Washington since President Barack Obama got to the White House.
Like most recent American presidents, Obama campaigned on a promise to work with his political opponents for the greater good of the country.
Bill Clinton said much the same thing before he was elected, and then spent his first term in a knockdown fight with Newt Gingrich’s Republican majority in Congress, and his second term fighting off impeachment.
George W. Bush also said that he would reach out to those who disagreed with him.
He then turned into the most partisan and ideological president of modern times, egged on by his vice-president, Dick Cheney.
Obama already appears to have gone further in the pursuit of bipartisanship than his predecessors.
His selection of Republicans for key posts – including retaining Robert Gates as Secretary of Defense – has raised a few eyebrows among his supporters.
But, above all, he has tried hard to secure Republican support for his efforts to prevent the economy from disappearing into a deep recessionary hole.    
Only three maverick Republican Senators went along with Obama’s proposals to get the plan accepted.
And in the House of Representatives, the Republicans unanimously rejected every amendment, every compromise, and every courtesy that he offered.
Some commentators suggest that Obama made a bad mistake.
First, he promised bipartisanship, but got heavily rebuffed.
Second, he and his administration were so busy trying to build consensus that they watered down some of the vital ingredients of the stimulus package, and failed to defend it robustly from Republican attack.
There may sometimes be a downside in trying to woo your opponents.
When they are plainly wrong, why let them off the hook?
Here we have had Republicans criticizing an increase in America’s budget deficit after doubling America’s national debt in the Bush presidency’s eight years.
Moreover, Republicans’ belief that only tax cuts, not public spending, will delivery recovery is a sad example of blinkered ideology.
But there are more positive reasons for Obama effort at bipartisanship.
In any democratic system of checks and balances, leaders usually require coalitions in order to get what they want done.
Moreover, a consensual style is good politics.
Most voters – certainly swing voters, who usually decide elections – do not like partisan battles as much as some politicians and their supporters do.
After all, the wise, the moderate, and the floating voter do not switch on the radio to listen to archconservatives like the American broadcaster Rush Limbaugh.
When things get tough in politics, as will happen in most of the world as we struggle with the impact of the global recession, every sensible government will try to hang on to the benefit of doubt. It is the most important attribute in politics.
Citizens know that running a country, especially in a time like this, is tough.
They are prepared to spare governments from too much criticism, if they think they are trying to do what is right for everyone.
They bridle at a government that must do unpopular things and that also looks narrow and mean-spirited.
There is also a lot to be said for making political argument more civil.
Ronald Reagan had a strong ideological bent.
He reshaped American politics, pulling the center firmly to the right.
But he did so without ever seeming to despise his opponents or disparage their intentions.
Obama’s aides have confessed that he modeled his own election program on the sunny and optimistic decency of the Republican actor.
Civility in politics is not simply political confectionery.
A leader who respects his or her opponents is more likely to earn respect himself than one who doubts their patriotism and resents their criticism.
One reason for the widespread respect felt for Nelson Mandela is that years of imprisonment did not embitter him.
Jawaharlal Nehru was hugely popular because he was known to cherish free speech, take seriously the views of his critics, and defend their right to disagree with him.
His role in establishing enduring democracy in India, despite the tensions of caste, ethnicity, religion, and regional loyalties, made him one of the towering figures of the twentieth century.
So my own hope is that Obama will not be dissuaded from trying to work with his opponents, to build consensus, and to deal courteously even with those whose views he may thoroughly dislike.
Personally, I do not think that those whose philosophy deplores the whole idea of government, except when it is required to bail out businesses or banks, and who purport to offer a better future by stitching together the shreds and tatters of policies that helped produce today’s economic disaster, will have much respect or support from voters.
Even in Washington, there is not much to be said for being partisan, unpopular, and wrong.
Did the Bankers Do It?
NEW DELHI – Few areas of economic activity in the United States are more politicized than housing finance.
Yet the intellectual left has gone to great lengths to absolve regulators, government lending mandates, and agencies like Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac of any responsibility for the housing boom and the subsequent bust.
The rationale is clear: if these officials, institutions, and policies were held accountable, the reform agenda would necessarily shift from regulating greedy bankers and their bonuses to asking broader questions.
Might government mandates contribute to bad behavior by private players?
Can regulators be trusted to make appropriate trade-offs between financial stability and mandates that have wide political support?
Indeed, can central bankers be truly independent?
Unquestioning acceptance of a greater government role in taming markets would, in short, give way to asking whether that role can sometimes be part of the problem.
The left has had an easy task in dominating the debate, partly because the intellectual right’s attempt to place all the blame for the crisis on government is thoroughly implausible.
It is far more defensible and correct to argue that everyone – bankers, households, regulators, and politicians – contributed to (and took credit for) the boom while it lasted, only to point fingers at one another when it collapsed.
But bankers’ political tin ear in the aftermath of the crisis – first taking public bailouts and then paying themselves huge bonuses as if nothing had changed – ensured that they got the lion’s share of the blame, with everyone else willing to pose as their unwitting victims.
As a result, the public-policy response has been dominated by “the bankers did it” narrative.
The risk is that this approach is incomplete – and thus unlikely to be effective.
It is therefore refreshing to see a careful econometric study take on an assertion by Paul Krugman, perhaps the most influential left-leaning US economist, that “the Community Reinvestment Act of 1977 was irrelevant to the subprime boom.”
The CRA instructs federal financial supervisory agencies to encourage the institutions that they regulate to help the communities in which they are chartered to meet their credit needs, while also conforming to “safe and sound” standards.
In practice, regulators measure the volume of lending to CRA target tracts – poor areas with median income less than 80% of the median income of the local community – as well as to low-income and minority borrowers in non-CRA tracts to verify compliance with the Act.
The left has dismissed any claim that the CRA played a role in the housing boom by pointing out that it was enacted in 1977, while the subprime boom played out in the early 2000’s.
But this ignores the possibility that regulators may have started to enforce the CRA rigorously only later.
To enforce the statute, regulators periodically examine banks for CRA compliance.
To hone in on the “regulatory enforcement” effect, the recent study compares the behavior of banks that are undergoing examination (which takes place over several quarters) to that of banks that are not undergoing examination in a particular tract in a particular month.
The findings are clear.
Compared to banks that are not undergoing examination, the volume of loans by banks in the six quarters surrounding a CRA examination is 5% higher, and these loans are 15% more likely to be delinquent one year after origination.
In other words, banks undergoing examination lend more and make riskier loans – and these findings are even more pronounced in CRA-eligible tracts.
Good econometric studies examine secondary effects to persuade readers that the main effect is what it is.
Regulators’ primary tool to enforce compliance was their authority to reject non-CRA-compliant banks’ requests for new branches or mergers.
During the subprime boom, large banks were more likely to want to expand, and thus had greater incentive to comply.
The study finds that CRA lending by larger banks does indeed respond more to a CRA examination.
At the height of the lending frenzy (2004-2006), the study finds that banks loaned even more in response to an examination, and that the outcomes were even worse.
The authors speculate that easier loan securitization may have made risky CRA-compliant loans seem less costly.
Finally, like all good studies, this one explains why the authors more careful analysis produces results that differ from those in previous studies.
Because of the way it is structured, the study only suggests a lower bound on the effects of CRA compliance.
It focuses on the differential impact of the CRA on banks undergoing examination and those not undergoing examination.
In fact, all banks are likely to have upped their CRA-compliant lending.
The study cannot measure this increase.
There is room in economics for grand speculation – some part intuition, some part common sense, and some part ideology.
If economists were to wait for careful studies before offering opinions about policy, we would never have anything timely to say.
And it is certainly better to have some economic intuition guiding policy than none at all.
But there is a danger that the public mistakes speculation for truth, only because of the speculator’s credentials and assertiveness.
Studies like this one are useful in setting the record straight.
More broadly, the study suggests that we should move beyond blaming the bankers.
We must recognize that in the desire to broaden home ownership, essential checks and balances broke down.
Households, politicians, and regulators were also complicit.
As we go about the process of reform, we should bear in mind that the only thing worse than fighting the last war is fighting the wrong last war.
Why Border Walls Fail
HONOLULU – Call this the Year of Border Walls.
In 2015, Estonia, Hungary, Kenya, Saudi Arabia, and Tunisia all announced or began the construction of barriers on their frontiers.
We may live in an era of globalization, but much of the world is increasingly focused on limiting the free movement of people.
At the end of World War II, there were only five border walls around the world.
Today, according to Elisabeth Vallet of the University of Quebec at Montreal, there are 65, three-quarters of them built in the past 20 years.
And in the United States, Republican presidential candidates are promising more.
The Republican frontrunner, Donald Trump, has repeatedly proposed building a wall along the entire border with Mexico.
And on a Sunday morning talk show, another Republican candidate, Wisconsin Governor Scott Walker, described building a wall on the US-Canada border as “a legitimate issue for us to look at.”
And yet existing border walls are neither cheap nor effective.
Israel’s wall in the West Bank cost more than $1 million per mile to construct.
According to US Customs and Border Protection, building and maintaining the existing 670 miles of border fencing on the US-Mexico border would cost $6.5 billion over the barrier’s expected 20-year life cycle. At this price, fortifying the remaining 1,300 miles of the Mexico border would cost more than $12.6 billion.
Erecting a wall along the 5,525-mile border with Canada would cost almost $50 billion and would cut through an airport runway, an opera house, homes, and businesses that currently straddle the border.
Nor is there much evidence that border walls work as intended.
To be sure, prisons demonstrate that short, well-guarded walls can be extremely effective at preventing movement.
But even prison walls are only as effective as the guards who ensure that they are not breached, and guards can be susceptible to bribes.
The recent escape of the drug cartel leader Joaquin “El Chapo” Guzman from a Mexican prison highlights another vulnerability of border walls: tunnels.
Since 1990, the US Border Patrol has found 150 tunnels beneath the US-Mexico border.
Those with money will always be able to cross borders using fake documents, bribes, or innovative infrastructure.
Indeed, fortified frontiers are most effective at stopping poor migrants and refugees.
And even then, rather than preventing migrants from entering, fortifications all too often funnel them toward more dangerous crossing points.
The result is a mounting toll of predictable deaths.
The International Organization for Migration estimates that from 2005 to 2014, some 40,000 people died attempting to cross a border.
Unlike prison perimeters, borders can be thousands of miles long, which makes them difficult to monitor properly.
The US employs more than 20,000 Border Patrol agents; but even if they were all on duty at the same time, each would need to guard a 1,700-foot section of the border.
Of course, equipment like cameras, motion sensors, drones, helicopters, and vehicles allow agents to watch long sections of the border.
But the necessity of monitoring border walls points to one of the fundamental truths about them: historically, most have proved to be pretty useless.
The most famous sections of the Great Wall of China were overrun within a few decades of their construction.
When Germany invaded France in WWII, it simply went around the Maginot Line.
The Berlin Wall fell within 30 years of its construction.
Indeed, border guards and their equipment can be equally effective without a physical barrier.
At best, walls and fences only slow people down, making them a poor investment from a security standpoint.
They are similarly ineffective from a military perspective.
Missiles and airplanes can fly over them and tanks can smash through them.
And yet, despite their high cost and low efficacy, walls remain popular among policymakers and politicians.
They provide imposingly tangible evidence that something is being done about migration.
High-tech surveillance and boots on the ground may be more effective at preventing people from crossing a border, but a wall can be used as a political prop.
If Trump ever builds his wall, he should build a really nice one, like the Great Wall of China.
Then one day it might become a popular tourist attraction – and finally serve a useful purpose.
Football Fury
PARIS – Who would have thought it?
There they were, Brazilians, protesting outside football stadiums against their country hosting the World Cup in 2014 –&#160;and this even as their national team was thrashing Spain in the final of the Confederations Cup.
It was as if Catholics were to protest outside the Vatican against picking a new Pope.
What cuisine is to the French, soccer is to Brazilians: a matter of the highest national pride.
Regardless of their economic, racial, or political differences, all Brazilians are uplifted by having the best team in the world, winning the World Cup many times, and inventing and reinventing “the beautiful game.”
Staging the next World Cup in Brazil, as well as the Olympic Games in 2016, even though the football tournament alone will cost up to $13 billion, seems a logical move.
Rio de Janeiro is where soccer belongs.
So what possessed the 19-year-old Brazilian male who told reporters: “We don’t need the World Cup.
We need education, better health services, more humane police.”
Many people feel the same way.
Have millions of Brazilians suddenly lost their passion for the game?
If so, it is not the game itself that they have forsaken, but rather the kind of game that football has become: a billion-dollar business, a prestige object for louche plutocrats, and an extravagant showpiece for corrupt governments and international sporting organizations.
Football was once a popular sport, rooted in local communities.
But, regardless of the sponsorship or the location, fans felt close to most of the clubs, as well as to their national teams.
They were part of people’s “identity.”
This is still true to some extent, but something crucial has changed: football, like other types of commerce, has gone global.
Thanks to new ownership rules, cable television, product endorsements, and other business-related factors, there are probably more supporters of Manchester United in China than there are in the United Kingdom, let alone in the city of Manchester.
Football teams are now like multinational franchises, with coaches and players from all over the world.
But this alone does not account for the kind of alienation from the game expressed by the Brazilian protesters.
The worldwide reach of football was preceded by that of the Olympic Games, and it is here where we should turn to understand the corruption of globalized sports.
Unlike football, the Olympics were always closely associated with elites: amateur athletes recruited from universities, and so on.
The father of the modern Olympic Games, Baron de Courbertin, was a French aristocrat who promoted sports to reinvigorate the men of France after their defeat in the Franco-Prussian War of 1871.
His aim for the Olympic Games was to embody a noble ideal of world peace and brotherhood through athletic competition.
How easily this ideal could be corrupted by distinctly ungentlemanly politics was already clear in 1936, when Coubertin’s doddering speech about peace and fair play was played over the loudspeakers of the Olympic Stadium in Berlin, while Hitler and his henchmen raised their arms to salute the Nazi flag.
But even without noisome politics, the sheer amount of money required to stage the Olympic Games – the building contracts for stadiums, transport infrastructure, and hotels, together with all the other commercial razzmatazz – was bound to produce a culture of bribery and kickbacks.
An international elite of Olympic officials arose, living in a self-contained bubble of wealth and privilege.
I once had occasion to watch these men as they trooped in and out of first-class hotels in an Asian capital, sleek figures in gold-buttoned blazers.
It was striking to see how often the most prosperous-looking representatives came from the world’s poorest countries.
Football is now like the Olympics (or Formula 1 racing), except that even more money is involved.
Football clubs have become the status symbols of newly rich tycoons from Russia or the Middle East, and international competitions, especially the World Cup, have become occasions to bolster the prestige, and sometimes even the legitimacy, of national governments.
Such events reinforce the tendency of modern political regimes, dictatorships as well as democracies, to measure themselves in monumental building projects – giant new stadiums, gargantuan shopping malls, huge conference halls – which are sometimes needed, but often are not.
As a result, developers, architects, politicians, tycoons, and international sporting officials are now in charge of the beautiful game.
This adds to their power, wealth, and prestige.
But once they have staged their spectacles, at vast expense to the host country, they move on.
This is especially galling in countries where much of the population is poor and deprived of decent schools or proper medical services.
Millions of Brazilians have made clear where their priorities lie.
They haven’t fallen out of love with football.
On the contrary, by protesting against the grotesque manipulation of the modern game, they are trying to take it back.
BRICS Without Mortar
CAMBRIDGE – Last month, China’s new president, Xi Jinping, chose Moscow for his first foreign visit.
He and Russian President Vladimir Putin announced a number of agreements and then traveled to Durban, South Africa, for the fifth “BRICS” summit, where they joined with the leaders of India, Brazil, and South Africa to announce the creation of a new development bank that could challenge the dominance of the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund.
The five leaders’ speeches referred to a shifting world order, and Xi said “the potential of BRICS development is infinite.”
It looked as if the BRICS had finally come of age.
Three years ago, I was skeptical about the BRICS. And, despite the recent summit’s apparent success, I still am.
Nearly 12 years ago, Jim O’Neill, then the chief economist for Goldman Sachs, coined the term “BRIC” to describe the “emerging markets” of Brazil, Russia, India, and China.