Whether US investors had greater expertise in banking in emerging markets may be debatable; that they had greater expertise in tax avoidance is not.
The contrast between the IMF/US Treasury advice to East Asia and what has happened in the current sub-prime debacle is glaring.
East Asian countries were told to raise their interest rates, in some cases to 25%, 40%, or higher, causing a rash of defaults.
In the current crisis, the US Federal Reserve and the European Central Bank cut interest rates.
Similarly, the countries caught up in the East Asia crisis were lectured on the need for greater transparency and better regulation.
But lack of transparency played a central role in this past summer’s credit crunch; toxic mortgages were sliced and diced, spread around the world, packaged with better products, and hidden away as collateral, so no one could be sure who was holding what.
And there is now a chorus of caution about new regulations, which supposedly might hamper financial markets (including their exploitation of uninformed borrowers, which lay at the root of the problem.)
Finally, despite all the warnings about moral hazard, Western banks have been partly bailed out of their bad investments.
Following the 1997 crisis, there was a consensus that fundamental reform of the global financial architecture were needed.
But, while the current system may lead to unnecessary instability, and impose huge costs on developing countries, it serves some interests well.
It is not surprising, then, that ten years later, there has been no fundamental reform.
Nor, therefore, is it surprising that the world is once again facing a period of global financial instability, with uncertain outcomes for the world’s economies.
A Banker’s Revolution
KUALA LUMPUR – Financial regulators are generally known for taking a measured and cautious approach to change.
But in the developing world, that reputation is being turned upside down.
In some of the world’s poorest countries, central bankers have proved willing to make bold decisions – embracing innovative approaches in their quest to broaden participation in the formal financial system, increase financial stability, and put their countries on the path to inclusive, sustainable economic growth.
Increasing financial inclusion requires fundamentally rethinking how a country’s financial system is structured and operates.
It also frequently necessitates the use of instruments outside of the central bankers’ traditional toolkit.
In Kenya, for instance, officials altered the regulatory framework to allow for the growth of mobile money.
In Malaysia, the central bank took a lead role in raising the public’s level of financial literacy.
And in the Philippines, the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas helped double the number of access points where consumers could obtain financial services, supporting the opening of 517 micro-banking offices, many of them in municipalities with no traditional bank branches.
Likewise, in 2011, the Bank of Tanzania made a specific commitment to increase financial inclusion under the Alliance for Financial Inclusion’s Maya Declaration, a commitment by policymakers in the developing world to unlock the social and economic potential of the poor.
The result was dramatic and vastly exceeded expectations.
Tanzania reached its goal of providing 50% of its adult citizens with access to banking a year ahead of schedule, making the country a global leader in digital financial services.
While not technically banks, these institutions are able to accept customer deposits and payments electronically through mobile phones or at licensed locations like a post office.
The effort is part of a larger national strategy, launched in 2014, to provide 76% of adults with financial access and 56% with active savings accounts by the end of 2016.
And in the Pacific region, Fiji, Papua New Guinea, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Timor-Leste, Tonga, and Vanuatu have banded together to create the Pacific Islands Regional Initiative (PIRI), which will enable every Pacific Island state, even those without a central bank, to share knowledge on improving access, quality, and usage of financial services in geographically challenging environments.
Each of these efforts started as a country-led initiative, born of particular challenges and designed to meet the specific needs of the local population.
But the accumulation of experience is proving invaluable.
As lessons are shared and successes provide inspiration for others, the impact is becoming exponential, with even the smallest countries demonstrating that they have a significant contribution to make.
Meanwhile, as central banks change how they operate, retail banks are responding with new ways of doing business.
Kenya’s Equity Bank has grown enormously by explicitly targeting the financially excluded; in just six years, it has expanded from a half-million customers to almost six million.
Telecommunication companies are also pioneering new services.
Tigo, for example, now serves more than 56 million customers in 14 countries in Latin America and Africa with products such as cross-border mobile payments and cashless services for sales agents.
As with any period of great change, it is not easy to see what lies ahead.
As Stephen Kehoe, Head of Global Financial Inclusion at Visa, recently noted, “The last seven years provide absolutely no indication of what the next seven years will be.”
What is clear, however, is that there still remains much to be done – and that the opportunities are nearly limitless.
Bringing the world’s two billion unbanked people out of the shadows and into the mainstream financial system will require new partnerships among regulators, the private sector, non-profits, regional bodies, and international organizations.
That may seem like a tall order, but filling it would help build a brighter future for everyone.
Inklusi Keuangan dan Langkah Ke Depan
CAMBRIDGE – Layanan keuangan kebanyakan tidak dirancang untuk peminjam dan penabung kecil; sejumlah model yang tidak biasa mulai berkembang dengan pesat di pasar yang belum tergarap.
Akan tetapi, tanpa roadmap kebijakan strategi yang memandu perkembangan teknologi keuangan (financial-technology) atau biasa dikenal dengan fintech, layanan dari model-model “connector” terbaru ini akan terus terbatas.
Di Kenya, keberhasilan M-Pesa, sebuah aplikasi pembayaran seluler, mampu mengubah situasi dengan cepat.
PayPal memerlukan dua pencatatan di NASDAQ dan perlu hampir dua dekade untuk bergerak di dalam ekonomi terbesar dunia untuk merengkuh konsumen aktif sebanyak 188 juta dan $282 miliar pembayaran tahunan.
Walaupun M-Pesa baru saja berjalan kurang dari satu dekade dan di dalam pasar yang jauh lebih kecil, M-Pesa memiliki hampir sebanyak 17juta  pengguna aktif yang melakukan lebih dari $50 miliar transaksi non-tunai tahun yang lalu.
Mirip dengan M-Pesa, bKash sekarang mendominasi sistem pembayaran di Bangladesh sampai pada tahapan di mana “bKashing” telah menjadi istilah yang umum dalam Bahasa Bengali. Seperti halnya“Xeroxing,” “Hoovering,” dan “Googling” dalam Bahasa Inggris.
Model-model lain, seperti Microensure dan Bima, juga telah mendapatkan pasarnya, dengan menawarkan solusi-solusi asuransi mikro di negara-negara yang sedang tumbuh.
Jan Dhan Yojana, sebuah program pemerintah India dengan prioritas tinggi yang menyediakan akses sektor perbankan bagi masyarakat miskin, telah membuka 250 juta akun bank baru selama kurang dari dua tahun.
Produk-produk fintech yang baru harus menghadapi berbagai tantangan, bukan hanya peningkatan akses layanan keuangan.
Layanan-layanan yang meningkatkan keuangan inklusif harus menyediakan output dengan volume tinggi namun dengan nilai rendah, yang artinya bahwa mereka harus bergantung pada berbagai kemitraan untuk memenuhi permintaan-permintaan konsumen tertentu.
Masalah akan muncul saat mitra-mitra ini memiliki keterbatasan mereka sendiri atau prioritas yang berbeda.
Sebagai contoh, Microensure dan Bima telah menyediakan asuransi untuk jutaan orang; namun akhirnya pelayanan merkea tergantung pada para perusahaan asuransi untuk mengalokasikan modal dan menanggung kebijakan-kebijakan asuransi.
Begitu juga, saat ada lampu hijau pertumbuhan industri asuransi di kawasan-kawasan seperti Sub-Sahara Afrika, perusahaan-perusahaan asuransi global harus terus-menerus beradaptasi terhadap perubahan-perubahan peraturan di pusat atau pasar asal mereka, dan tidak jelas apakah mereka memiliki kemampuan untuk melebarkan sayap ke negara-negara berpenghasilan rendah.
Atau, kita bisa lihat M-Pesa itu sendiri.
Empat tahun yang lalu, M-Pesa melakukan kemitraan dengan Commercial Bank of Africa untuk menambahan sebuah alat peminjaman, M-Shwari, ke dalam produk-produknya.
Sejak saat itu, mereka telah mampu membuka akun pinjaman, bahkan lebih banyak dari bank-bank Kenya manapun.
Namun, akun-akun tersebut masih lebih kecil dari seperempat pengguna M-Pesa yang aktif, dan M-Shwari masih melakukan pelayanan untuk pinjaman 30 hari saja.
M-Shwari bukanlah bagian utama dari bisnis mitra-mitra tersebut.
Produk-produk di atas bukanlah satu-satunya pemain pasar.
Kompetitor terbaru yang menantang M-Pesa adalah mVisa, sebuah kemitraan antara Visa Inc. dan dua bank Kenya lainnya.
Dengan $400 juta penghasilan pada tahun 2016, Safaricom – induk perusahaan M-Pesa – kemungkinan akan fokus untuk mempertahankan penawaran pokoknya sebelum berusaha memperkenalkan produk-produk baru.
Di dalam daftar terbaru Safaricom mengenai produk-produk prioritas baru untuk memperluas keuangan inklusif, produk-produk simpan pinjam hampir berada di peringkat terakhir.
Inovasi dan kewirausahaan yang tak kenal lelah diperlukan untuk menghubungkan masyarakat miskin dengan sistem keuangan formal; namun, dari sudut pandang kebijakan dan pembangunan, kita perlu mengubah upaya kita menjadi peningkatan ekosistem yang lebih besar agar potensi produk-produk fintech yang baru dapat diwujudkan.
Contohnya, transaksi-transaksi non-tunai M-Pesa’s disokong oleh uang tunai yang dikontribusikan oleh para konsumen, yang held in trust atau digunakan untuk kepentingan kreditor kapan saja.
Pendapatan bunga dari dana-dana yang saat ini saat ini disalurkan melalui Yayasan M-Pesa.
Dengan sistem yang dibuat secara hati-hati, uang ini akan digunakan untuk penggunaan produktif yang lebih besar.
Program Jan Dhan Yojana di India telah menggerakkan kira-kira $6 miliar dari konsumen-konsumen yang baru saja didapatkan, yang dapat digunakan untuk menyediakan produk-produk tambahan yang bisa disesuaikan dengan masing-masing konsumen.
Layanan-layanan fintech yang sedang berkembang dapat belajar dari perusahaan perdagangan elektronik Tiongkok, Alibaba, yang cepat memperluas wadah pembayarannya, Alipay.
Setelah Alibaba meluncurkan dana pasar uangnya, Yu’e Bao, pada bulan Juni 2013, mereka mulai berinvestasi lagi pada simpanan-simpanan mikro yang tidak produktif yang dimiliki oleh para konsumen Alipay-nya.
Pada akhir tahun 2015, manajer dana Yu’e Bao telah mengawasi aset sebesar $165 miliar dan telah mengubah jutaan nasabah tabungan Alipay yang kecil dan secara keuangan tidak tinggi menjadi para penanam modal yang dapat mengumpulkan keuntungan yang layak.
Untuk membangun wadah mereka, Alibaba bergantung pada data yang besar untuk mengatur dinamika unik dari likuiditas dana tersebut; dan mereka diuntungkan oleh kerangka peraturan di Tiongkok yang belum ditetapkan, walaupun ini dapat berubah di masa depan.
Konteks Tiongkok mungkin unik; dan, memang, ada kekhawatiran yang makin berkembang mengenai resiko-resiko di dalam model Yu’e Bao.
Namun, para pembuat peraturan dan firma-firma fintech harus mencatat contoh-contoh seperti Alipay untuk membangun kemungkinan-kemungkinan strategis yang masuk akal untuk sektor yang sedang berkembang ini.
Yang paling penting, mereka harus ingat bahwa akses terhadap keuangan bukanlah akhir yang ingin dituju. Akses terhadap keuangan adalah cara untuk meningkatkan kesejahteraan manusia.
Sebuah investigasi India Express baru-baru ini menunjukkan apa yang akan terjadi jika layanan-layanan keuangan disediakan dalam ruang hampa.
Koran tersebut menemukan beberapa contoh di mana para pekerja di bank-bank pemerintah India memasukkan satu Rupee ke dalam akun nasabah tanpa sepengetahuan nasabah.
Para pegawai ini tampaknya ditekan untuk mengurangi jumlah akun dengan neraca nol, yang mana, semuanya ternyata berkaitan dengan program Jan Dhan Yojana.
Penipuan yang sama, sekarang kita tahu, adalah praktik yang biasa di bank Amerika Serikat, Wells Fargo.
Perbedaannya adalah bahwa para konsumen di bagian bawah piramida memiliki alternatif-alternatif perbankan lainnya.
Akses layanan keuangan adalah awal yang diperlukan, namun hal ini harus membawa kita ke titik yang lain.
A Hacker’s Market?
NEW YORK – Never in the history of written communication could 140 characters have the impact that they can have now.
Two weeks ago, after gaining access to the Associated Press’s main Twitter account (@AP), the Syrian Electronic Army (SEA) posted a fake tweet reporting two explosions in the White House and the injury of President Barack Obama.
Within seconds, US financial markets dropped by about 1%.
Minutes later, Twitter was abuzz with refutations.
Reporters at the White House tweeted that they felt no explosion, and AP reporters and the AP Politics Twitter account announced that @AP had been hacked.
At his afternoon briefing, White House press secretary Jay Carney confirmed that Obama was indeed unharmed.
Financial markets returned to their pre-hoax level.
The @AP Twitter hoax represents systemic risk that cannot be eliminated, for it arises from the interaction of highly integrated financial markets and increasingly democratized news delivery.
Given strong incentives for malicious parties to perpetrate such hoaxes, we should expect to see an increase in incidents.
Financial markets are vulnerable to manipulation, because they are not in the business of evaluating the truth.
Trading often favors first movers, so being fast but wrong can still be profitable.
Imagine that a sophisticated trading firm has invested significant resources to develop an algorithm that quickly evaluates the potential market impact of news, and then automatically sends orders to trade based on that predicted impact.
When that algorithm parses a tweet from the AP containing important keywords (explosion, White House, and Obama), it will send orders to sell with the expectation that the market will drop as others – first, slower algorithms, then even slower humans – start to process the same news.
The first mover is happy to make such trades without verifying that the news is true.
If it is true, the market will stay down or continue dropping, and the first mover will profit from the sales that it has made.
If the story is a hoax, the market will probably return to its earlier, fairly valued level, and the first mover will break even on its sales, and possibly profit from any position purchased as a hedge when the market was down.
The first mover’s algorithm worked, regardless of the story’s veracity.
The likely losers in the @AP Twitter hoax were later movers who did not react quickly to the news, but reacted instead to the market’s movement.
These late movers were also likely to have been sophisticated electronic or institutional traders; some were probably using arbitrage-based strategies that relied on the futures market for a calculation of the fair price.
The market’s vulnerability to hoax stories is thus difficult to eliminate, for it is inherent in its structure.
It cannot be regulated away or fixed by technology or surveillance.
Even if markets moved more slowly, there would still be a first mover who responded before such a news story was revealed as a hoax.
This dynamic is similar to that of an asset bubble, albeit faster.
In a bubble, valuations are based on collectively evaluated evidence, and those who enter the market earliest often benefit.
Whether evaluating an assumption about the rise of house prices or whether a news story is true, the market does not provide a definitive answer instantaneously.
If protecting against hoaxes is not the market’s purview, can news agencies or new media entities like Twitter prevent such deception?
To be sure, they have suffered reputational damage from this fiasco and will likely try to improve.
But their efforts will not be enough.
Twitter’s vulnerabilities were technically understood before this event, and the service was already moving toward a more sophisticated authentication model (a password paired with a one-time key from a text message or other device).
Twitter will likely implement this soon.
It should also consider adding an optional “two-key” system, in which an independent signoff from a separate account is required before a proposed tweet is broadcast.
But, while such measures would increase the difficulty of hacking the system, no technological fix can make it impenetrable.
What about the AP’s vulnerabilities?
Attackers launched a “phishing” attempt against the AP’s emails shortly before the hoax tweet was sent.
Phishing attacks, in which an employee is duped into sending a password to a third party or clicking an untrusted link that installs malicious software, represent a hybrid of cultural and technological failures.
As attackers become more sophisticated, they send better-crafted emails, sometimes impersonating trusted sources that lure unwary users.
Crafting a culture of security is difficult and often at odds with the dynamic and decentralized work environment of a fast-moving newsroom.
As technologies change, so must awareness of vulnerabilities, and this awareness must be disseminated through means other than corporate memos that are disconnected from day-to-day business realities.
Empirically, few firms get this right: America’s National Public Radio and the BBC were both recently hacked by the SEA, while McDonald’s and Burger King recently had their Twitter accounts compromised.
The proliferation of security lapses means that people are more likely to shrug their shoulders than to cast the first stone at a company that is breached.
Finally, the AP is unlikely to face financial penalties for this mistake.
A lawsuit for losses stemming from the hoaxed tweet would face nearly insurmountable obstacles.
Because few mechanisms can prevent the proliferation of hoaxed tweets, and given the high-profile response that successful hackers can expect, Twitter will remain a vehicle of malicious hoaxes, even as technological barriers make attacks more challenging.
Indeed, the SEC recently approved the use of social media like Facebook and Twitter for publicly traded companies’ disclosures to investors.
Imagine what might happen if @BP_America tweets: “#Explosion reported at Gulf well.
Details to follow.”
The incentives to try to hack such accounts are obvious: not only significant publicity for hackers, but highly lucrative profit opportunities from the almost inevitable stock-market movements that will result.
On Twitter, as elsewhere, caveat emptor.
Who’s Right on US Financial Reform?
CAMBRIDGE – Eight years after triggering a crisis that nearly brought down the global financial system, the United States remains plagued by confusion about what reforms are needed to prevent it from happening again.
As Americans prepare to choose their next president, a better understanding of the policy changes that would minimize the risk of future crises – and which politicians are most likely to implement them – is urgently needed.
What Americans are sure about is that they are angry with the financial sector.
This is reflected in the success of recent Hollywood movies such as The Big Short (which has been rightly praised for making complex instruments like derivatives broadly understandable).
And it is reflected in the current presidential campaign – most notably, in remarkable support for Senator Bernie Sanders’s leftist bid for the Democratic nomination.
At the center of Sanders’s campaign is a proposal to break up the big Wall Street banks into little pieces, thereby ensuring that no bank is so big that its failure would endanger the rest of the financial system.
The appeal of that goal is understandable.
But achieving it would require a massive sledgehammer.
Though the American banking system historically featured thousands of small banks, the “too big to fail” phenomenon is not exactly new.
The first bank that was declared “too big to fail” was Continental Illinois, which received a bailout in 1984 from President Ronald Reagan.
With banks now bigger than ever – America’s four largest each held more than $1 trillion in assets in 2011 – breaking them down to the point that no segment is systemically important would be a long and complex process, to say the least.
Merely turning the deregulatory clock back 30 years would not do the trick.
But even if Sanders did somehow manage to break up the banks sufficiently, it would not solve the problem.
After all, the US experienced a run on depositary institutions in the 1930s, when its financial system still comprised thousands of small banks.
Yet Canada, with a financial system dominated by just five large banks, sailed through the global financial crisis of 2008-2009 more easily than almost any other country.
Yet Sanders has indicated that he would even prohibit anyone with past experience on Wall Street from serving in his administration.
Such blanket statements and superficial judgments do not belong in the selection of individuals for important positions.
Consider Gary Gensler, a former co-head of finance at Goldman Sachs, whose appointment as Chair of the Commodity Futures Trading Commission Sanders tried (and failed) to block in 2009.
In that position, to the consternation of many former Wall Street colleagues, Gensler spent five years working vigorously to implement financial-reform legislation, including pursuing the aggressive regulation of derivatives.
Gensler also supported the prosecution of five financial institutions that had colluded to manipulate the London Interbank Offered Rate (Libor, the benchmark rate that some major banks charge one another for short-term loans).
Attacking banks is emotionally satisfying.
But it won’t prevent financial crises.
In fact, the financial industry’s biggest problems lie elsewhere: hedge funds, investment banks, and other non-bank financial institutions that face less regulatory oversight and restrictions (such as on capital standards and leverage) than commercial banks.
Recall that Lehman Brothers was not a commercial bank, and AIG was an insurance company.
Former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton – Sanders’s opponent for the Democratic nomination – recognizes the need to place a high priority on regulating non-banks, and she has proposed specific measures to do so.
For example, she is calling for a small tax targeting certain kinds of high-frequency trading prone to abuse.
Clinton also aims to close the “carried interest” loophole that currently allows hedge-fund managers to pay lower tax rates on their incomes than almost everyone else, and she proposes imposing a “risk fee” on big financial institutions that would rise as they grow.
Clinton’s proposed risk fee resembles one advanced by President Barack Obama’s administration in 2010 in order to discourage risky activity by the largest banks, while helping to recoup some revenue from bailouts.
But that plan was thwarted by three Republican senators who would support critical financial-reform legislation – the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act – only if the fee was dropped.
Even without the risk fee for large banks, the Dodd-Frank legislation was a step in the right direction.
Among other things, it increased transparency for derivatives, raised capital requirements for financial institutions, imposed additional regulations on “systemically important” institutions, and, per the suggestion of Senator Elizabeth Warren, established the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB).
But Dodd-Frank was far from complete.
Making matters worse, many in Congress have spent the last six years chipping away at it, such as by exempting auto dealers from the CFPB and restricting the budgets of the regulatory agencies.
Those who worked to undermine the financial regulatory-reform legislation – mostly Republicans – appear to have paid no political price for it.
Meanwhile, those who, like Gensler, worked tirelessly to implement the reforms are judged according to superficial criteria by the very politicians who should support them.
There is a place in political campaigns for bumper-sticker slogans.
And there is definitely a place for ambitious goals.
But the danger is that those who are attracted to inspirational rallying cries and sweeping proposals will lack the patience required to identify which side to support in the numerous complex battles over financial regulation that take place every year.
To get the details of financial regulation right, the US needs leaders with the wisdom, experience, and perseverance to identify the right measures, push for their enactment, and then implement them effectively.
If such people are not the ones who receive political support, we should not be surprised if the financial sector again escapes effective regulation and crises recur.
Fighting the Next Global Financial Crisis
NEW HAVEN – What do people mean when they criticize generals for “fighting the last war”?
It’s not that generals ever think they will face the same weapon systems and the same battlefields.
They certainly know better.
The error, to the extent that the generals make it, must operate at a more subtle level.
Generals are sometimes slow to get around to developing plans and ordnance for those new weapon systems and battlefields.
And, just as important, they sometimes assume that the public psychology and narratives that influence their soldiers' morale are the same as in the last war.
That is also true for regulators whose job is to prevent financial crises.
For the same reasons, they may be slow to change in response to new situations.
They tend to adapt only gradually to changing public psychology.
The need for regulation depends on public perceptions of the last crisis, and, as George Akerlof and I argued in Animal Spirits, these perceptions depend heavily on changing popular narratives.
The latest progress reports from the Financial Stability Board (FSB) in Basel outline definite improvements in stability-enhancing financial regulations in 24 of the world’s largest economies.
Their “Dashboard” tabulates progress in 14 different regulatory areas.
For example, the FSB gives high marks for all 24 countries in implementing the Basel III risk-based capital requirements.
But the situation is not altogether reassuring.
These risk-based capital requirements may not be high enough, as Anat Admati and Martin Hellwig argued in their influential book The Bankers New Clothes.
And there has been much less progress in a dozen other regulatory areas that the FSB tabulates.
Consider, for example, regulations regarding money market funds, which, according to the FSB, only a few countries have developed since 2008.
Money market funds are an alternative to banks for storing one’s money, offering somewhat higher interest rates, but without the insurance that protects bank deposits in many countries.
As with bank deposits, investors can take their money out at any time.
And, like bank deposits, the funds are potentially subject to a run if a large number of people try to withdraw their money at the same time.
On September 16, 2008, a few days after the run on the US bank Washington Mutual began and the day after the Lehman Brothers bankruptcy was announced, a major United States money market fund, Reserve Primary Fund, which had invested in Lehman debt, was in serious trouble.
With assets totaling less than it owed to investors, the fund seemed to be on the verge of a run.
As panic rose among the public, the federal government, fearing a major run on other money market funds, guaranteed all such funds for one year, starting September 19, 2008.
The reason why this run was so alarming as to require unprecedented government support stems from the narratives underlying it.
In fact, the Reserve Primary Fund did not lose everything.
It merely “broke the buck,” meaning that it couldn’t pay one dollar for a dollar on the books; but it could still pay $0.97.
So why a crisis?
After all, bank depositors regularly lose more when unexpected inflation erodes their savings’ real purchasing power (only the nominal value of those deposits is insured).
But the narratives don’t focus on that.
The loss of real value due to inflation hasn’t been a prominent theme of the public narrative in the US for decades, because sustained price stability has caused people to forget about it.
But they hadn’t forgotten about the Great Depression of the 1930s, even though most people alive today weren’t alive then.
In 2008, the Great Depression narrative was being recycled everywhere, with all its colorful stories of financial panic and angry crowds forming around closed banks.
Moreover, trusted authorities had seemed to say again and again that such events were historically remote and could not happen again.
In the 2008 angry zeitgeist, the public reaction to a relatively minor event took on stunning proportions.
It took almost six years after the crisis for the US Securities and Exchange Commission to reduce money market funds’ vulnerability, by requiring in 2014 a “floating NAV” (net asset value), which means that prime money market funds no longer promise to pay out a dollar for a dollar’s nominal value.
They will pay out whatever the depositor’s share in the accounts is.
This does not insure the funds’ investors against losses.
Yet this plausibly will help prevent runs because it means sudden withdrawals by some won’t damage the accounts of others who did not withdraw.
The international regulatory framework has changed for the better since 2008, but no such changes can anticipate all the kinds of change in narratives that underlie public animal spirits.
Regulators could have imposed a floating NAV decades ago; they didn’t because they didn’t foresee a narrative that would make money market funds unstable.
Regulatory authorities could not have been expected to predict the sudden public attention to the newly discovered risk of runs on nonbank financial companies.
As long as we have an economic system that produces growth by rewarding inspired actors and investors, we will face the risk that adverse talk and stories can suddenly and temporarily overwhelm the inspiration.
Regulators must counter the risks implied by structures that are intrinsically destabilizing, as the money market funds were.
But the most urgent regulations will always be time- and context-specific, because narratives change.
And how these narratives resonate with the public may once again reveal chinks in our financial armor.
Is Financial Repression Here to Stay?
LONDON – There are several definitions of financial repression – and the repressors and the repressed tend to see things differently.
But what financial repression usually involves is keeping interest rates below their natural market level, to the benefit of borrowers at the expense of savers.
The borrowers are often governments, and in many emerging economies the state has funded its extravagances by paying bank depositors derisory rates of interest.
But in the last seven years, since central banks in developed countries pushed down their base rates almost to zero, we have seen a First-World version of financial repression.
A recent research report from the insurer Swiss Re describes who has won and lost as a result, and questions the sustainability of the policies pursued by institutions such as the United States Federal Reserve, the European Central Bank, and the Bank of England.
The report’s argument is that while the stated motivation for ultra-loose monetary policy might be to guard against deflation and promote economic growth at a time when demand is weak, low interest rates also help governments fund their debt very cheaply.
Moreover, as we enter the eighth year of aggressive easing, unintended consequences are starting to appear – notably asset-price bubbles, increasing economic inequality (as wealthier investors able to hold equities benefit at the expense of small savers), and the risk of higher inflation in the future.
The jury may be out on the last point, but the first two are well established.
Many countries now have over-heated property and equity markets; in the US, the S&amp;P 500 index since 2009 has closely tracked the expansion of the Fed’s balance sheet.
As a result, price-earnings (P/E) ratios, which reflect investors’ enthusiasm for equities, are now high by historical standards (Swiss Re has a Financial Market Excess index, which has returned to its 2007 level).
Moreover, according to the Swiss Re report, “monetary policy and central bank asset purchases have aggravated economic inequality via equity price inflation.”
The top 1% of US households have enjoyed a 50% gain in their financial wealth, while the bottom 90% have registered only a 12% profit.
The bottom 20% have probably not benefited at all.
Not surprisingly, central banks do not like this argument.
Fed Chair Janet Yellen insists that years of near-zero interest rates and quantitative easing were not intended to make it easier for the US government to fund its deficit.
She argues that focusing on asset prices ignores the role – helpful for all income groups – of the Fed’s monetary policy in maintaining growth and thus warding off the threat of a wholesale depression.
But central banks accept that their policies have led to distortions in financial markets.
For example, institutional investors, especially insurance companies and pension funds, have suffered badly.
They are major holders of fixed-interest securities, and their investment income has fallen sharply.
The returns they can provide to investors and pensioners have similarly fallen.
Logically, therefore, individuals need to save much more to guarantee their income in retirement.
That in itself may have a depressing effect on the economy, partly offsetting the monetary stimulus.
Indeed, it may be one reason why highly expansionary policies by the Fed and other central banks have taken so long to generate growth.
A further distortion stems from the prudential regulation adopted in reaction to the global financial crisis.
The imposition of higher capital requirements on riskier investments has pushed financial institutions into holding government debt, which in turn means that they have less money available to lend for productive investment.
Most countries have yet to see investment recover to pre-crisis levels.
On this analysis, a return to “normal” interest rates cannot come soon enough.
The alternative is further financial repression and, with it, low investment, rising economic and social tensions, and the emergence of a generation of impoverished pensioners.
Like Monty Python’s city-terrorizing “Hell’s Grannies,” tomorrow’s elderly will surely make their voices heard.
But can we really expect the old normal – positive long-term interest rates on government bonds – to return?
Maybe it is unreasonable for investors to expect positive rates on safe assets in the future.
Perhaps we should expect to pay central banks and governments to keep our money safe, with positive returns offered only in return for some element of risk.
One reason is that investment may never reach its previous levels.
If a service-based economy simply has less need for expensive fixed capital, why should we expect a return to the days when business investment was a strong component of demand?
Apps are cheap.
Furthermore, excess savings could be more than just a cyclical phenomenon.
Individuals may have come to value future consumption, in retirement, over current consumption – the reverse of the traditional relationship.
We are beginning to appreciate that in our productive years we must work harder, because our retirement years will be longer and healthier, and the income support provided by our governments and employers will be far less generous than they used to be.
In other words, it is rational to save more now.
In the long run, such a brave new world might not be an intolerable place.
But the transition from here to there will be very challenging for financial firms, be they banks, asset managers or, particularly, insurers.
The types of products that the latter offer to their customers will need to change, and the mix of assets in which they invest will be different, too.
The question for regulators is whether, in responding to the financial crisis, they have created perverse incentives that are working against a recovery in long-term private-sector investment.
The Quiet Financial Revolution Begins
LAGUNA BEACH – Steadily and indisputably, the financial services industry – with which we all interact, whether as borrowers, savers, investors, or regulators – has embarked on a multiyear transformation.
This process, slow at first, has been driven by the combined impact of two sets of durable forces.
On one hand, top-down factors – regulatory change, unusual pricing, and what Nouriel Roubini has cleverly termed the “liquidity paradox” – are at work.
Then there are disruptive influences that percolate up from below: changing customer preferences and, even more important, outside visionaries seeking to transform and modernize the industry.
Beginning at the top, the regulatory pendulum is still swinging toward tighter supervision of traditional financial institutions, particularly large banks and insurance companies deemed “systemically important.”
Moreover, re-designed regulatory frameworks, phased implementation, and stepped-up supervision will gradually extend to other segments, including asset management.
This will contribute to further generalized de-risking within the regulated sectors, as part of a broader financial-sector movement toward a “utilities model” that emphasizes larger capital cushions, less leverage, greater disclosure, stricter operational guidelines, and a lot more oversight.
The pricing environment compounds the impact of tighter regulation.
Like utilities, established financial institutions are facing external constraints on their pricing power, though not of the traditional form.
Rather than being subjected to explicit price regulations and guidelines, these institutions operate in a “financial repression” regime in which key benchmark interest rates have been held at levels below what would otherwise prevail.
This erodes net interest margins, puts pressure on certain fee structures, and makes certain providers more cautious about entering into long-term financial relationships.
As a result of these two factors, established institutions – particularly the large banks – will be inclined to do fewer things for fewer people, despite being flush with liquidity provided by central banks (the “liquidity paradox”).
And banks and broker-dealers can be expected to provide only limited liquidity to their clients if a large number of them suddenly seek to realign their financial positioning at the same time.
But this is not just about them.
The fact is that providers of all long-term financial products, particularly life insurance and pensions, have no choice these days but to streamline their offerings, including a reduction of those that still provide longer-term guarantees to clients looking for greater financial security.
The impact on the financial-services industry of these top-down factors will gradually amplify the importance of the bottom-up forces.
Over time, this second set of factors will fuel more direct and efficient provision of services to a broader set of consumers, contributing to a reconfiguration of the industry as a whole.
For starters, customer expectations will evolve as the millennial generation increasingly accounts for a larger portion of earning, spending, borrowing, saving, and investing.
With many of these newer clients favoring “self-directed” lives, providers of financial services will be pressed to switch from a product-push mindset to offering more holistic solutions that allow for greater individual customization.
Market-communication functions will also be forced to modernize as more clients expect more credible and substantive “any place, any time, and any way” interactions.
Then there is the influence of outside disruptors.
Jamie Dimon, the CEO of JPMorgan Chase, expressed it well in his 2015 shareholder letter, observing that “Silicon Valley” is coming.
These new entrants want to apply more advanced technological solutions and insights from behavioral science to an industry that is profitable but has tended to under-serve its clients.
Airbnb and Uber have demonstrated that disruption from another industry is particularly powerful, because it involves enabling efficiency-enhancing structural changes that draw on core competencies and strategies that the incumbent firms lack.
Many other companies (for example, Rent the Runway, which provides short-term rentals of higher-end fashion) are in the process of doing the same thing.
Be it peer-to-peer platforms or crowd-funding, outside disruptors already are having an impact at the margin of finance, particularly in serving those who were previously marginalized by traditional firms or had lost trust in them.
The end result will be an industry that serves people via a larger menu of customizable solutions.
Though traditional firms will seek to adjust to maintain their dominance, many will be challenged to “self-disrupt” their thinking and operational approach.
And, while emerging firms will offer better services, they will not find it easy to overcome immediately and decisively the institutional and regulatory inertia that anchors traditional firms’ market position.
As a result, a proliferation of financial providers is likely, with particularly bright prospects for institutional partnerships that combine the more agile existing platforms with exciting new content and approaches.
Failure at the Financial Stability Board
WASHINGTON, DC – At least since the fall of 2008, leading economies’ officials have agreed – in principle – that something must be done about financial firms that are “too big to fail.”
Great efforts, including countless international meetings, working papers, and communiqués have been devoted to this end.
Earlier this month, the Basel-based Financial Stability Board (FSB) announced, to some fanfare, the completion of a major stage in this project.
But the announcement only served to underscore how little progress has been made.
The world’s largest banks remain too big to fail, and this is likely to have dire consequences in the near future.
The problem of too big to fail is not new – the phrase was first used in the United States in the 1980s.
It refers to any firm – usually in the financial sector – whose failure would have major negative spillover effects for the rest of the financial system and for the real (non-financial) part of the economy.
Prior to September 2008, there was some doubt as to whether large non-bank financial firms would be regarded as too big to fail.
Bear Stearns came close to failing earlier that year, before the Federal Reserve stepped in to facilitate a purchase by JPMorgan Chase.
Bear Stearns’ shareholders did not do well and much of its management immediately left the scene, but creditors were fully protected (in fact, ensuring this protection was a central motivation for the Fed’s intervention).
When Lehman Brothers came under severe pressure in September 2008, uncertainty reigned in financial markets (and at the top of Lehman): perhaps the Fed would help out again in some fashion.
By all accounts, the US Treasury and the Fed did indeed consider providing assistance, but then held back, worried about overstepping their legal authority and sufficiently confident that permitting Lehman to fail would not have dire consequences for the broader economy.
The second view proved to be spectacularly wrong.
Within 24 hours of Lehman’s failure, the US authorities were scrambling to prevent asset fire sales, a run on money market mutual funds, the collapse of other investment banks (such as Merrill Lynch, Morgan Stanley, and Goldman Sachs), and even the demise of large, integrated, global banks (such as Citigroup).
While deploying an unprecedented amount of financial firefighting equipment, officials and lawmakers – on both sides of the Atlantic – were clear that this was a “never again” situation.
As soon as the fires were out, they pledged, they would work diligently to ensure that the “next Lehman” could fail in a government-managed “resolution” process that would not cause panic and a collapse of credit.
This task was taken up at the international level by the FSB, established after the G-20 summit in London in April 2009.
After many years of working closely with leading national authorities (including in the US and Europe), on November 9 the FSB published “Removing Remaining Obstacles to Resolvability,” along with a number of related technical papers.
Unfortunately, there are three flaws in the FSB’s framework that will prevent it from being effectively applied to large global banks.
First, by definition, global banks operate across borders, and there is no agreement among different national authorities regarding how to respond in a crisis.
There is, arguably, better communication than there was before 2008, but when the chips are down, this will be worth little.
The countries involved have different legal rules, different procedures for protecting local assets, and different court systems.
A major international treaty could address all of this, but the immediate prospects for one are nonexistent.
Second, the FSB proposes to require a Total Loss Absorbing Capacity for all large banks.
But TLAC is just jargon for saying that these banks should fund themselves with both equity and “bail-in-able debt” – debt that can be converted to equity (or wiped out) when there is an official resolution event.
All this really means is that some debt can fall dramatically in value when government officials pull the trigger.
This may seem elegant in theory, but it is completely unworkable in practice.
In any real crisis, the authorities’ real fear is that the fall in one asset price (the equity value of big banks) will cause other asset-price declines – leading to a broader contraction of credit.
The idea of “loss-absorbing debt” is an oxymoron.
Third, what really matters for financial systems is the extent of equity financing – including how much equity banks are required to have.
Current levels are so low – debt funds around 95% of total credit exposure in most big US banks (and a slightly higher share in big European banks) – that banks’ equity can be substantially wiped out by even moderate negative shocks.
The good news is that the Fed increasingly seems to be taking this point on board – and inching toward higher capital requirements for the biggest banks.
Unfortunately, the failure of the international FSB approach means that the Fed must largely go it alone.
The Spider of Finance
LONDON – The global system of financial regulation is extraordinarily complex.
Partly for that reason, it is little understood.
In order to explain it to my students at Sciences Po in Paris, I have devised a kind of wiring diagram that shows the connections among the different bodies responsible for the various components of oversight.
It makes a circuit board look straightforward.
Many people show some spark of recognition at the mention of the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, which sets capital standards for banks.
They may also have heard of the Bank for International Settlements, the central banks’ central bank, in which the Basel Committee sits.
And the International Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO), which sets standards for exchanges and securities regulators, has name recognition in some quarters.
But when you get to the International Association of Insurance Supervisors, brows furrow.
There are many other groupings.
The International Accounting Standards Board does roughly what you might expect, though the Americans, while members, do not in fact use its standards – which are now confusingly called International Financial Reporting Standards.
But the IASB has spawned other committees to oversee auditing.
There is even – reminiscent of Hermann Hesse’s last novel, The Glass Bead Game – an international body that audits the bodies that audit the auditors.
The Financial Action Task Force sounds dynamic, like a rapid-response team one might send to a troubled country.
In fact, it is the part of the OECD that monitors the implementation of anti-money-laundering standards.
Why it is part of the OECD when its remit is global is a mystery few can explain.
This elaborate architecture (and there is a lot more) was assembled piecemeal in the 1980s and 1990s.
Until the Asian financial crisis, it was a web without a spider at its center.
When Hans Tietmeyer, a former head of the Bundesbank, was asked by G-7 finance ministers to review its effectiveness, he recommended a new spider, known as the Financial Stability Forum (FSF), which would examine the financial system as a whole and try to identify vulnerabilities that might cause future trouble.
I was a member of the FSF for five years.
I confess that I am rather afraid of spiders, but even an arachnophobe like me found little reason to be worried.
The FSF was not a scary creature, and the individual regulators, national and international, were largely left to their own devices, with all of the unhappy consequences with which we have become acquainted.
Before 2007, there was little political interest in tougher global standards, and individual countries resisted the idea that an international body might interfere in their sovereign right to oversee an unsound banking system.
So when the next crisis hit, the FSF was found wanting, and in 2009 the G-20 governments decided that a tougher model was needed – the Financial Stability Board.
The FSB has now been in operation for five years, and is currently working on some new proposals to deal with too-big-to-fail banks, which will be on the menu of the forthcoming G-20 meeting in Brisbane (along with surf and turf, Pavlovas, and other Australian delicacies).
There is not (yet) an international group that audits the FSB’s effectiveness.
But if there were, what would it say about the FSB’s performance so far, under the leadership of Mario Draghi and then of Mark Carney, each of whom did the job in his spare time, while running important central banks?
On the asset side of the balance sheet, the auditors would be bound to note that the Board has done much useful work.
Its regular reports to the G-20 pull together the diverse strands of regulation in a clear and comprehensible way.
There is no better source of information.
They would also record that pressure from the FSB has accelerated the work of sectoral regulators.
The second Basel accord took more than a decade to conclude; Basel 3 was drawn up in little more than 24 months (though implementation is taking quite long).
The performance of the IOSCO and the IAIS has similarly been sharpened by the need to report progress through the FSB.
The Board has also issued some valuable warnings in its so-called “vulnerabilities” assessments.
It has pointed to emerging tensions in the system, without falling into the trap of forecasting ten of the next three crises.
And its peer review mechanism is prodding individual countries to strengthen their regulatory institutions.
Nonetheless, a frank assessment would acknowledge that this spider has so far caught few flies.
To switch animal metaphors, it is a watchdog without teeth.
It can neither instruct the other regulators what to do (or not do) nor force member countries to comply with new regulations.
Indeed, the entire edifice of global financial regulation is built on a “best endeavors” basis.
The FSB’s charter, revised in 2012, says that signatories are subject to no legal obligations whatsoever.
Unlike the World Trade Organization, for example, no international treaty underpins the FSB, which means that countries cannot be sanctioned for failing to implement the standards to which they are ostensibly committed.
So a fair verdict would be that the FSB has done no more and no less than what its political masters have been prepared to allow it to do.
There is no political will to create a body that could genuinely police international standards and prevent countries from engaging in competitive deregulation – and prevent banks from engaging in regulatory arbitrage.
It seems that we must await the next crisis for that resolve to emerge.
In the meantime, the FSB, with all of its weaknesses, is the best we have.
The Debtor Prisoner’s Dilemma
PRINCETON – Any economic slowdown increases debt burdens, whether for households or for states.
Today, both are looking for ways to reduce the weight of debt – and some would prefer to escape it.
Deeply frustrated and angry people – especially in southern Europe – frequently hold up Argentina’s defiance of the international community in 2001 as a model.
Argentina then used a mixture of coercion and negotiation to get out from under the mountain of debt that it incurred in the 1990’s, effectively expropriating foreign creditors, who were viewed as dangerous and malign.
In the 1990’s, Argentina tied its hands with a dollar-pegged currency in order to enhance its credibility as a borrower.
The strategy worked too well: the large credit inflows that it attracted triggered an inflationary boom that reduced the country’s competitiveness.
By 2001, a combination of devaluation (exit from the currency straitjacket) and partial default was inevitable.
Default was followed by nominally voluntary restructurings in which creditors were invited to take some losses.
Up to now, the Argentine model has seemed successful, yielding substantial economic growth for the country since 2001.
That is what has made the model so appealing to debt-burdened southern Europeans.
But a recent New York court ruling against Argentina in a case brought by a holdout hedge-fund creditor has dramatically raised the stakes of sovereign default and bankruptcy.
When holdouts are rewarded by court decisions, and the rights of recalcitrant creditors are recognized in other jurisdictions, efforts at “voluntary” restructuring become unsustainable.
More and more parties will resist writing down some debt in favor of trying to seize whatever assets they can.
For Argentina, the writing is now on the wall.
One of the creditors favored in the New York case, Elliott Capital, had already successfully requested the seizure in Ghana of the Argentine Navy’s three-mast sailing ship ARA Libertad.
If the fallout of the New York decision is an extensive Argentine default on other obligations, foreign trade will become practically impossible, many goods will become scarce, and domestic inflation will increase further.
In short, the Argentine model of debt reduction in the 2000’s has collapsed as completely as its borrowing model in the 1990’s did.
Two fundamental facts have created an apparently insoluble dilemma for the global economy, and have turned countries like Argentina and Greece into victims of an impossible logic.
First, debt continually grows; second, there is no really satisfactory way of getting rid of it.
The financial sector’s explosive growth over the past two decades has fueled the accumulation of exceptionally large volumes of debt.
In the absence of some positive shock – such as an acceleration of GDP growth – servicing that debt becomes impossible for at least some borrowers.
Real debt defaults are historically rare.
For both borrowers and creditors, the risks and costs are enormous.
The borrower is cut off from international markets, and essential imports can no longer be purchased, while large-scale defaults threaten to plunge creditors into insolvency.
The consequence is a complicated game – currently exemplified by the saga of Greek voluntary restructuring – in which both sides stare into the abyss and then turn away from the out-and-out conflict that would send them plummeting into it.
Latin America experienced this dilemma in the 1980’s, when its debt arithmetic had become unsustainable.
At the outset of that crisis, major US financial institutions’ capital exposure to Latin America was near 200%, making candid recognition of debt unsustainability the surest route to wiping out the global financial system.
Most of the big Latin American debtors took extraordinary pains to avoid an explicit default.
The only sustained exception was Peru, which defaulted in 1985 and became an international pariah.
Of the largest borrowers, only Brazil, in 1987, formally defaulted – and only briefly.
As President José Sarney, backing down, admitted, “The fact is that we cannot destroy the international system.
We can scratch it, but it can destroy us.”
Instead, banks in the 1980’s offered new money in an attempt to extricate themselves from the crisis.
Managing modern debt crises always involves the extraordinary logic of throwing good money after bad in the hope of masking the underlying unsustainability.
The same logic has been applied in the euro crisis, with official money taking the place of private-sector exposure.
The emergence of inextinguishable debt replicates other troubling aspects of contemporary life.
Governments, businesses, and individuals all face the build-up of other sorts of liabilities in the form of accumulations of information that cannot be deleted.
E-mail, Facebook, and Twitter accounts all produce a permanent record that perpetually accompanies users, even when their circumstances change.
The legacy of the past continually resurfaces to constrain action in the present.
Just as countries might want to wipe out their debt and start anew, individuals might like to erase their electronic past in a dramatic act of liberation.
But that would destroy the useful together with the embarrassing or irrelevant.
If a clean start is impossible, the best that can be done is to try to bury the old information with such an inflationary flood of new data that it simply dwindles into insignificance.
The analogue in the world of debt negotiation is that a new start that allows borrowing to begin all over again is also impossible.
A cleanup is impossible. That leaves only one solution: pile on new claims to such an extent that old debts appear paltry.
Those who cannot forget the past are condemned to inflate it.
The Harm of Regulatory Disharmony
LONDON – In the alphabet soup of institutions involved in the regulation of global financial markets, the FMLC – the Financial Markets Law Committee – is not very prominent.
Given that it is based only in London, having grown out of an initiative by the Bank of England 20 years ago, and that most of its members are lawyers, most banks have not even heard of it (though some of them are represented on its Council).
But the services provided by the FMLC have never been more necessary.
The FMLC’s mission is to identify and propose solutions to issues of legal uncertainty in financial markets that might create risks in the future.
As a recent FMLC paper showed, the wave of new regulations implemented since the global financial crisis – many of which were poorly planned or inconsistent across countries – has left a jumbled landscape of legal uncertainties.
Consider banks’ capital requirements.
The Basel 3 Accord, adherence to which increased the liquidity of all banks and decreased their leverage, is viewed as a firm standard in some parts of the world.
But, in others, it is regarded as a minimum to which additional rules may be added.
Such “super-equivalence” or, more colloquially, “gold-plating” creates inconsistencies across jurisdictions, thereby facilitating regulatory arbitrage.
Likewise, the European Union, in contrast to the United States, regards the leverage ratio as a supervisory optional extra, known as a “Pillar 2 measure” (which permits supervisors to add additional capital buffers to address a particular bank’s idiosyncratic risks).
And, though both the US and the EU prohibit proprietary trading, they each define it differently.
There are also inconsistencies between the US and the EU in derivatives-market reform, which the Financial Stability Board has warned could undermine the objectives, set out by the G-20, of greater standardization of contracts and enhanced transparency.
And, whereas the Basel standards continue to refer extensively to credit ratings as the basis for assessing the creditworthiness of borrowers, the Dodd-Frank Act in the US moves away from reliance on ratings.
Such differences – and the FMLC Council lists many more – reflect a dangerous shift in the world’s approach to regulation.
The early post-crisis enthusiasm for new, globally agreed regulatory standards has given way to a range of national initiatives, driven by domestic political agendas, with little regard for cross-border compatibility.
More problematic, the peer-review procedures that have been introduced so far will do little, if anything, to resolve the problem.
Nor do the memoranda of understanding drawn up by national financial regulators offer hope of salvation.
According to the FMLC paper, “they are usually the subject of interpretative disagreement, are not legally binding, do not benefit from any binding dispute-resolution mechanisms, and do not prevent national authorities from acting unilaterally.”
So what can be done?
The FMLC makes four important recommendations.
First, the Financial Stability Board should help to reduce avoidable inconsistencies across countries by propagating a set of high-level principles to which all member countries would be expected to conform when introducing new regulations.
Indeed, the need for such principles should have been recognized in 2009, when the wave of re-regulation began.
Second, to address existing regulatory conflicts, the FMLC recommends establishing a “conflict of regulation” framework to determine which legal regime – that of a global firm’s home country or that of its local subsidiary’s host country – has jurisdiction in a specific cross-border dispute.
The alternative of relying on a third-party multilateral organization to act as mediator in such disputes, the report explains, has little support from G-20 countries.
Third, the FMLC proposes expanding the Financial Stability Board’s mandate.
That body, which emerged from the old Financial Stability Forum in 2009 with few powers and no formal status, has only recently become a separate legal entity.
Strengthening its powers – to include, for example, the establishment of principles for addressing cross-border legal inconsistencies – could go a long way toward addressing the problems raised by regulatory disparities.
Finally, the FMLC calls for the establishment of a permanent G-20 secretariat to improve continuity and coordination across G-20 presidencies.
As it stands, political priorities are constantly in flux, with individual dossiers losing their centrality, and even vanishing, from year to year.
Regulatory uncertainty may not seem like the most exciting topic, which is probably why the FMLC report has attracted so little attention.
But, as the 2008 global financial crisis starkly demonstrated, it can render markets dysfunctional, with ambiguity about different regulators’ responsibilities making it difficult, even impossible, to address the problems caused by failing firms.
(Former US Treasury Secretary Tim Geithner’s crisis memoir makes that point painfully clear.)
When I chaired the United Kingdom’s regulatory body, the Financial Services Authority, I believed in the idea that lawyers should be on tap, not on top.
But they should always be heard.
The FMLC’s influential lawyers have spoken.
The world should listen.
The Overselling of Financial Transaction Taxes
CAMBRIDGE – However November’s presidential election in the United States turns out, one proposal that will likely live on is the introduction of a financial transaction tax (FTT).
While by no means a crazy idea, an FTT is hardly the panacea that its hard-left advocates hold it out to be.
It is certainly a poor substitute for deeper tax reform aimed at making the system simpler, more transparent, and more progressive.
As American society ages and domestic inequality worsens, and assuming that interest rates on the national debt eventually rise, taxes will need to go up, urgently on the wealthy but some day on the middle class.
There is no magic wand, and the politically expedient idea of a “Robin Hood” tax on trading is being badly oversold.
True, a number of advanced countries already use FTTs of one sort or another.
The United Kingdom has had a “stamp tax” on stock sales for centuries, and the US had one from 1914 to 1964.
The European Union has a controversial plan on the drawing boards that would tax a much broader array of transactions.
The presidential campaign of US Senator Bernie Sanders, which dominates the intellectual debate in the Democratic Party, has argued for a broad-based tax covering stocks, bonds, and derivatives (which include a vast array of more complex instruments such as options and swaps).
The claim is that such a tax will help repress the forces that led to the financial crisis, raise a surreal amount of revenue to pay for progressive causes, and barely impact middle-class taxpayers.
So far, Hillary Clinton, the likely Democratic nominee, has embraced a narrower version that would target mainly high-speed traders, who account for a large percentage of all stock transactions, and whose contribution to social welfare is open to question.
Clinton, however, may well shift closer to Sanders’s position over time, as she has on other issues.
Donald Trump, the presumptive Republican nominee, has not yet articulated a coherent position on the topic, but his views often come down remarkably close to those of Sanders.
The idea of taxing financial transactions dates back to John Maynard Keynes in the 1930s and was taken up by Yale professor and Nobel laureate James Tobin (who, incidentally, was my undergraduate professor) in the 1970s.
The idea, in Tobin’s words, was to “throw sand in the wheels” of financial markets to slow them down and make them hew more closely to economic fundamentals.
Unfortunately, this rationale has not held up particularly well either in theory or in practice.
Particularly misguided is the idea that FTTs would have significantly muted the buildup to the 2008 financial crisis.
Centuries of experience with financial crises, including in countries with FTTs, strongly suggests otherwise.
What is really needed is better regulation of financial markets.
The unwieldy and deeply imperfect 2010 Dodd Frank legislation, with its thousands of pages of provisions, is a stopgap measure; few serious people view it as a long-term solution.
A far better idea is to force financial firms to issue much more equity (stock), as Stanford University’s Anat Admati has proposed.
The more banks are forced to evaluate risks based on shareholder losses rather than government bailouts, the safer the system will be.
(On this score, Boston University professor Laurence Kotlikoff’s more radical ideas for taking leverage out of the financial system merit serious attention, even if his own quixotic presidential campaign otherwise goes unnoticed).
The fundamental problem with FTTs is that they are distortionary; for example, by driving down stock prices, they make raising capital more expensive for firms.
In the long run, this lowers labor productivity and wage levels.
True, all taxes are distorting, and the government has to raise money somehow.
Yet economists view FTTs as particularly troublesome because they distort intermediate activity, which amplifies their effects.
A modest tax that is narrowly targeted, like the UK’s, does not seem to cause much harm; but the revenue is modest.
To get more revenue requires casting the net much wider.
For this reason, the Sanders plan covers derivative instruments that would circumvent the FTT (for example, by allowing people to trade income streams on assets without trading ownership).
But extending the tax to derivatives is a messy business, because their complexities make it difficult to define precisely what should be taxed.
And as the impact of the tax expands, it becomes hard to know what the ultimate effects on the real economy will be.
It is certainly difficult to determine whether the outsize revenue estimates of the Sanders campaign could be realized; many studies suggest otherwise.
The claim is that the US can collect more than five times the amount the UK collects on its narrow tax – an amount equal to more than 10% of revenue from personal income tax.
The problem is that trading will likely collapse in many areas, and many financial trades will be executed in other countries.
If economic growth is affected, eventually other tax revenues will fall, and if government bonds are covered, borrowing costs will rise.
The US desperately needs comprehensive tax reform, ideally a progressive tax on consumption.
In any case, a properly designed FTT can be no more than a small part of a much larger strategy, whether for reforming the tax system or for regulating financial markets.
Financing Education for All
NEW YORK – Of all of the investments needed to achieve sustainable development, none is more important than a quality education for every child.
In a knowledge-based world economy, a good education is vital for finding decent work; achieving good health; building functioning communities; developing the skills to be a dependable parent; and growing up to be an engaged and responsible citizen.
Indeed, it is no surprise that the most brutish and violent groups in the world, such as Nigeria’s Boko Haram, attack education.
And it was right on the mark to award the 2014 Nobel Peace Prize to Malala Yousafzai, the Pakistani teenager shot by the Taliban for her brave advocacy of girls’ education.
When the world’s governments launch the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) this September, they will rightly put education for all children at the forefront, alongside ending extreme poverty, hunger, and death from preventable and treatable causes.
Yet, while many poor countries have increased domestic financing for education, the international community has not yet done its part.