For starters, it will not apply to the huge losses incurred during the current crisis.
The ECB will directly supervise bigger eurozone banks starting in November (the first step of the banking union), and now it is assessing the strength of their balance sheets.
If this exercise is conducted properly – a big if – undercapitalized banks that are viable would be forced to raise additional equity, from bondholders if necessary, while unviable ones would be wound down.
But EU rules on national bank resolution will not yet be in force, while the eurozone’s single resolution mechanism will be initiated only in 2015.
So banks in northern Europe that are still backed by creditworthy governments would be treated differently than those in cash-strapped southern Europe: Germany can afford to bail out its banks; Italy cannot.
More likely, the ECB will fudge the exercise, owing to fear of reigniting the financial crisis and pressure from national governments.
Small countries will be singled out to make the exercise look tough, while bigger problems will be swept under the carpet: German banks have already succeeded in excluding many of their assets from the assessment.
One argument for making the ECB the watchdog for eurozone banks was that it was less captured by the banks than national supervisors were.
But its behavior throughout the crisis suggests otherwise.
It has repeatedly prioritized the interests of banks in “core” countries and proved more pliable to political pressure from Berlin and Paris than from Madrid or Rome, let alone Dublin or Athens.
Even after the new banking union framework is fully in place, it will be full of holes.
At Germany’s insistence, the ECB will supervise only the eurozone’s 130 or so biggest banks.
That will leave the smaller Ländesbanks (state-owned regional banks), many of which made spectacularly bad lending decisions in the bubble years, and Sparkassen (smaller savings banks) in the hands of local politicians and Germany’s pliable financial supervisor.
The argument that smaller lenders are not a systemic threat is spurious: consider Spain’s cajas.
In any case, there will not be a level playing field.
Above all, the single resolution mechanism is a mirage, because national governments retain a veto over closing down any bank.
The mechanism is deliberately complex to the point of being unworkable; it is inconceivable that a bank could be wound down over a weekend to avert market panic.
And the collective funds that eventually will be at its disposal are meager: a mere €55 billion ($76 billion).
In practice, then, rescuing banks will remain in the hands of national governments, all of which are captured by “their” banks but whose capacity to bail them out varies: French and German banks will be rescued; Cypriot banks will not.
To increase their chances of a bailout, banks in the eurozone periphery will doubtless borrow as much as they can from politically connected banks and investors in the core countries.
Thus, national taxpayers will remain on the hook for bankers’ losses.
The upshot is that the eurozone as a whole is likely to struggle with a zombie banking system, with only patchy efforts to restructure banks decisively and fairly.
Worse, the north-south, core-periphery divide will harden, with taxpayer-backed banks on one side and banks that must fend for themselves on the other.
That is a bonus for struggling southern taxpayers, but it implies that even sound banks could have higher funding costs than dubious northern European banks for the foreseeable future. Southern businesses would then face higher borrowing costs than northern businesses, hindering growth.
The bogus banking union is thus a recipe for entrenching economic and political division.
Disaster and Development
NEW YORK – When Typhoon Hagupit made landfall in the Philippines on December 6, memories of Typhoon Haiyan, which killed more than 6,300 people, were fresh in people’s minds.
Some 227,000 families – more than a million people – were evacuated ahead of Hagupit’s arrival, according to the United Nations.
The typhoon, one of the strongest of the season, killed some 30 people.
All deaths from disasters are a tragedy, but the fact that this number was not much higher attests to the efforts that the Philippines has made to prepare for natural disasters.
As Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme, I have seen firsthand the devastation and heartbreak caused by disasters around the world.
Since the beginning of the century, more than a million people have died in storms like Hagupit and other major disasters, such as the 2010 Haitian earthquake, with economic damage totaling nearly $2 trillion.
These losses are tragic, but they are also avoidable.
They serve as a reminder that disaster preparedness is not an optional luxury; it is a constant, intensive process that is necessary to save lives, protect infrastructure, and safeguard development.
The argument for investing in disaster preparedness is simple.
If countries expect to experience natural hazards, such as violent storm seasons or major earthquakes, then investing time and resources in preparing for shocks will save lives and protect communities from other losses.
Unfortunately, governments often put different priorities ahead of disaster preparation.
Other investments often take precedence, and donors have historically funded emergency relief much more readily than pre-disaster preparedness.
The measures that are implemented tend to be stand-alone and piecemeal, rather than part of a larger, systematic risk-reduction plan.
That needs to change.
Countries like the Philippines continue to demonstrate the benefits of investing in preparedness, especially when done as part of a larger risk-mitigation effort.
Typhoon Hagupit is just the latest event to showcase this.
The Philippine government’s quick, effective response saved many lives.
But it is important to note that its efforts were not simply an overnight reaction to the oncoming storm.
They were part of a national, comprehensive effort that was long in the making.
Officials were wise to acknowledge their country’s vulnerabilities and to commit the resources and capital needed to build resilience.
The Philippines includes preparedness as a core component in its overall strategy for reducing disaster risk.
Over the last decade, the country’s authorities have raised awareness, established and strengthened disaster-management institutions, and worked on recovering from past disasters, including Typhoon Haiyan.
National and local disaster plans have been improved, standard operating procedures have been developed, and early warning systems have been put in place.
The end result has been nothing short of a transformation of how the Philippines reacts to disasters.
The UNDP, and the wider UN system, is supporting governments as they place greater emphasis on disaster-risk reduction, including preparedness, by strengthening their institutional capacity to plan and act when needed.
In addition to assisting with emergency relief, it is crucial that the international community help to introduce basic procedures for responding long before disaster strikes.
First responders, for example, need training and tools.
Emergency shelters and evacuation routes must be planned and established using risk assessments and actual simulations.
If communities are to be expected to make use of available resources, they need to be involved in the design and development of emergency plans.
Risk reduction, including preparedness, is also, first and foremost, rooted in responsive governance.
In March 2015 a new global framework for disaster reduction will be agreed in Sendai, Japan.
It is crucial that delegates push for transformational change that enables preparedness and saves lives.
Furthermore, risk reduction needs to be integral to sustainable-development strategies.
The Philippines can serve as an example.
The archipelago will always be in the path of tropical storms.
There is little officials can do about that.
But what they can do – and have done – is emphasize risk reduction and strengthen preparedness, thereby saving lives and building greater resilience.
That is a lesson that all of us must learn.
Physics Confidential
PRINCETON – Each February, I begin the introductory electricity and magnetism course at Princeton University by telling my students that the material we will cover during the semester provides the basis for modern civilization.
Who could quibble with such an innocent statement?
Without the discoveries of nineteenth-century physicists and their successors, we could hardly imagine today’s world: no electrical power grid, no televisions, no satellites, no iPads.
Physicists are justly proud of the many ways that their achievements have benefited humankind.
But building a light bulb or a telephone doesn’t mean that you understand its basic principles (Thomas Edison and Alexander Bell certainly didn’t).
Unfortunately, many of my colleagues – particularly those who write textbooks – present physics as a towering, seamless basilica, ignoring the gaps in our hodge-podge of skewed models.
In fact, what is presented as a shimmering cathedral often more closely resembles a hastily erected shantytown.
For example, one needs only first-semester equations to describe reasonably well the behavior of a gyroscope; engineers can then go off and build gyrocompasses that guide aircraft or missiles to their destinations.
But if you merely ask, “At what, exactly, is the gyroscope pointed?” you are plunged headlong into one of physics’ deepest questions, one that led Einstein to develop his general theory of relativity – and that, even today, has no definitive answer.
I know of no undergraduate textbook that acknowledges the question.
On a more blatant, if less exalted, level, the force of friction makes its appearance in the first days of any first-year course.
We declare, as if there can be no doubt, that friction impedes the motion between two bodies, and we invoke sophisticated microscopic models that show how the soles of running shoes bind to a track.
Yet friction produces heat and thus an increase in entropy – which measures the amount of energy that cannot be used to perform work – and it therefore distinguishes past from future.
The increase in entropy – the second law of thermodynamics – is the only law of nature that makes this fundamental distinction.
If Newtonian mechanics is at the bottom of everything, then one should be able to derive the second law of thermodynamics from Newtonian physics.
But this has never been accomplished satisfactorily: the incompatibility of the second law with the other fundamental laws is perhaps the greatest paradox in all of physics.
Still, we brazenly drop this enigma into the first days of a first-year course without batting an eye.
We write down equations that show how friction slows the motion of sliding objects or dampens the vibrations in springs, but, ultimately, the math merely reproduces our observations while disguising our ignorance of what underlies them.
After decades – indeed, centuries – of employing such tricks, physicists have forgotten that they are modeling phenomena, not necessarily uncovering Divine Truth.
For instance, we can easily write down the equations for a ball on a swinging spring, but if we stretch the spring enough and swing the ball hard enough, we can’t solve those equations.
The motion becomes chaotic, making an exact mathematical solution impossible.
Nowadays, with computers, we can approximate the trajectory as closely as we want.
But that is the point: most physicists and students have lost sight of the distinction between the approximate and the exact.
We can certainly learn something about chaotic systems without actually solving the equations, but if an old-fashioned mathematician demanded that a student predict where that ball was heading, the student would inevitably fail.
Even something as fundamental as Newton’s law of gravity is ultimately an approximation.
Textbook authors dutifully write down the famous law without remarking that it results in infinite forces when the two attracting objects get infinitely close together.
Never mind that infinite forces are a sure sign that your theory has gone up in smoke: in the current crop of textbooks sitting on my desk, not one mentions the obvious pathology.
Our Princeton text compounds the oversight by declaring that, “strictly speaking” Newton’s law of gravity is valid only for particles.
Well, particles are exactly where Newton goes awry – and not just in first-semester physics.
The basic equation of electricity is “Coulomb’s law,” which governs the electrical attraction or repulsion between charged particles and looks exactly like Newton’s law of gravity.
Now, we always tell students to imagine electrons as point particles, in which case they really do need to worry about those infinite forces.
The problems that arise from modeling particles as vanishingly small points infect all advanced areas of physics.
Central to any quantum mechanics course is the concept of electron “spin,” but what, exactly, is spinning is never made clear.
Wolfgang Pauli, one of the concept’s originators, at first rejected the idea, because if the electron has a finite radius, then the surface would be spinning faster than the speed of light.
On the other hand, if you view the electron as a point particle, how are you to imagine something without a radius spinning?
To cure the point-particle pathologies, physicists invented modern field theories, with impressive names such as quantum electrodynamics.
But these theories turned out to be as riddled with infinities as their grandparents, and elaborate ad hoc schemes were invented to deal with the new problems encountered.
And so, despite headline-grabbing advances such as string theory, it goes to this very day.
One can hardly challenge the predictive success of modern physics, but one should remember that one is describing nature, and not always understanding it.
Pigs, Calves, and American Democracy
Amidst all the headlines about the Democrats gaining control of the United States Congress in the November elections, one big election result was largely ignored.
Although it illuminated the flaws of America’s political system, it also restored my belief in the compassion of ordinary Americans.
In Arizona, citizens can, by gathering a sufficient number of signatures, put a proposed law to a direct popular vote.
This year, one of the issues on the ballot was an act to prohibit tethering or confining a pregnant pig, or a calf raised for veal, in a manner that prevents the animal from turning around freely, lying down, and fully extending his or her limbs.
Those who know little about modern factory farming may wonder why such legislation would be necessary.
Under farming methods that were universal 50 years ago, and that are still common in some countries today, all animals have the space to turn around and stretch their limbs.
Today, however, about 90% of US breeding sows – the mothers of the pigs that are raised and killed for pork, bacon, and ham – spend most of their lives locked in cages that measure about two feet by seven feet (0.6 meters by 2.2 meters).
They are unable to turn around, lie down with their legs fully extended, or move more than a step forward or backward.
Other sows are kept on short tethers that also prevent them turning around.
Veal calves are similarly confined for all their lives in individual stalls that do not permit them to turn around, lie down, or stretch their limbs.
These methods are, essentially, labor-saving devices – they make management of the animals easier and enable units with thousands or tens of thousands of animals to employ fewer and less skilled workers.
They also prevent the animals from wasting energy by moving around or fighting with each other.
Several years ago, following protests from animal welfare organizations, the European Union commissioned a report from its Scientific Veterinary Committee on these methods.
The committee found that animals suffer from being unable to move freely and from the total lack of anything to do all day.
Common sense would, of course, have reached the same conclusion.
Following the report, the EU set dates by which close confinement of these animals would be prohibited.
For veal calves, that date, January 1, 2007, is almost here.
Individual stalls for sows, already outlawed in the United Kingdom and Sweden, will be banned across the entire EU from 2013.
Measures to improve the welfare of laying hens, which are typically kept crammed into bare wire cages with no room to stretch their wings, are also being phased in.
In the US, no such national measures are anywhere in sight.
In the past, when my European friends have asked me why the US lags so far behind Europe in matters of animal welfare, I have had no answer.
When they pressed me, I had to admit that the explanation could be that Americans care less about animals than Europeans.
Then, in 2002, animal welfare advocates put a proposal to ban sow stalls on the ballot in Florida.
To the surprise of many, it gained the approval of 55% of those voting.
Last month in Arizona, despite well-funded opposition from agribusiness, the ban on small cages for sows and veal calves also passed, with 62% support.
Neither Florida nor Arizona are particularly progressive states – both voted for George W. Bush over John Kerry in 2004.
So the results strongly suggest that if all Americans were given a chance to vote on keeping pregnant pigs and calves in such tight confinement, the majority would vote no.
Americans seem to care just as much about animal welfare as Europeans do.
So, to explain the gap between Europe and the US on farm animal welfare, we should look to the political system.
In Europe, the concerns of voters about animal welfare have been effective in influencing members of national parliaments, as well as members of the European Parliament, resulting in national legislation and EU directives that respond to those concerns.
In the US, by contrast, similar concerns have had no discernible effect on members of Congress.
There is no federal legislation at all on the welfare of farm animals – and very little state legislation, either.
That, I believe, is because agribusiness is able to put tens of millions of dollars into the pockets of congressional representatives seeking re-election.
The animal welfare movement, despite its broad public support, has been unable to compete in the arena of political lobbying and campaign donations.
In US electoral politics, money counts for more than the opinions of voters.
Party discipline is weak, and Congressmen must themselves raise most of the money that they need for re-election – and that happens every two years for members of the House of Representatives.
In Europe, where party discipline is strong and the parties, not the individual candidates, finance election campaigns, money plays a smaller role.
In the US, a nation that prides itself on its democratic traditions, pigs and calves are hardly the only losers.
The Invention of Inequality
LONDON – Everyone seems to be talking about – and condemning – today’s rising level of economic inequality.
Fueled by jarring statistics like Oxfam’s recent revelation that the world’s richest 62 people own as much wealth as the poorest 3.6 billion, popular support for left-wing figures like America’s Bernie Sanders and Britain’s Jeremy Corbyn is rising.
But today’s ideology-driven debates oversimplify an issue that is exceedingly complex – and affected by processes that we do not fully understand.
Many of those engaged in the debate on inequality nowadays cite the French economist Thomas Piketty’s 2014 book Capital in the Twenty-First Century, which makes three key points.
First, over the last 30 years, the ratio of wealth to income has steadily increased.
Second, if the total return on wealth is higher than the growth in incomes, wealth is necessarily becoming increasingly concentrated.
Third, this rising inequality must be reversed through confiscatory taxation before it destroys society.
The points might seem convincing at first glance.
But the first statement is little more than a truism, and the second is falsified by Piketty’s own data, making the third irrelevant.
Piketty observes a rising wealth-to-income ratio from 1970 to 2010 – a period divided by a significant change in the monetary environment.
From 1970 to 1980, the Western economies experienced rising inflation, accompanied by interest-rate hikes.
During that period, the wealth-to-income ratio increased only modestly, if at all, in these countries.
From 1980 on, nominal interest rates fell dramatically.
Not surprisingly, the value of wealth rose much faster than that of income during this period, because the value of the assets that comprise wealth amounts essentially to the net present value of their expected future cash flows, discounted at the current interest rate.
The most straightforward example is a government bond.
But the value of a house is determined in a similar manner: according to the rent it is expected to generate, capitalized at the current nominal interest rate.
Equities, too, are valued at a higher multiple of earnings when interest rates fall.
In determining the value of total wealth, Piketty included both the income generated by assets and their appreciation.
Meanwhile, incomes were capitalized at declining interest rates for more than a generation.
By this approach, his finding that wealth grew faster than incomes makes perfect sense – it is a direct consequence of falling interest rates.
What impact do lower interest rates have on measured inequality?
If I own one house and my neighbor owns two, and falling interest rates cause the value of those houses to double, the monetary inequality between us also doubles, affecting a variety of statistical indicators and triggering much well-intended concern.
But the reality is that I still own one house and my neighbor still owns two.
Even the relative affordability of houses doesn’t change much, because lower interest rates make larger mortgages possible.
For further evidence of this phenomenon, consider Piketty’s own data.
In Europe, Piketty singles out Italy as the country where the wealth-to-income ratio rose the most, to about 680% in 2010, compared to 230% in 1970.
Germany appears to be a more “virtuous” country, with a wealth-to-income ratio of 400%, up from 210% in 1970. What Piketty fails to highlight is that, over this period, interest rates fell much more in Italy (from 20% to 4%) than in Germany (from 10% to 2%).
The real-world impact of this dynamic on inequality is precisely the opposite of what Piketty would expect.
Indeed, not only are Italians, on average, much richer than Germans; Italy’s overall wealth distribution is much more balanced.
A 2013 study of household finances in the eurozone, conducted by the European Central Bank, showed that in 2010 – the last year in Piketty’s research – the average Italian household was 41% richer than the average German household.
Moreover, whereas the difference between mean and median household wealth is 59% in Italy, it is a whopping 282% in Germany.
This difference can be explained largely by the fact that 59% of households in Italy own homes, compared to only 26% in Germany.
A larger share of Italians has thus benefited more from a larger drop in interest rates.
This example highlights how household investment decisions shape wealth outcomes.
Complicating wealth measurements further is the fact that, as Martin Feldstein recently pointed out, for the vast majority of households, a large proportion of wealth is in the form of unaccounted future social benefits.
Then there are the numerous factors affecting incomes, such as demand for particular skills.
For those whose skills are not in demand, the availability of skills upgrading or training opportunities will have a significant impact on income prospects.
At the same time, above certain income levels, a person might require a substantial monetary incentive to take the quality-of-life hit associated with increased work responsibilities.
Clearly, economic inequality is a highly complex phenomenon, affected by a wide variety of factors – many of which we do not fully understand, much less control.
Given this, we should be wary of the kinds of radical policies that some politicians are promoting today.
Their impact is unpredictable, and that may end up doing more harm than good.
Perhaps a new approach is not necessary at all.
After all, globally, standards of living are continuously improving and converging.
That is something that everyone, from the emerging populists to the hardened capitalists, should be able to agree on.
Ping-Pong and Political Economy
PRINCETON – For the last century, economic-policy debate has been locked in orbit around the respective roles and virtues of the state and the market.
Does the market control the state, in the sense that it sets a limit on governments’ ability to borrow?
Or does the state take charge when the market fails to perform socially necessary functions – such as fighting wars or maintaining full employment?
This old debate is at the core of today’s profound divisions over how Europe should respond to its debt crisis.
The same question is dividing American politics in the lead-up to November’s presidential and congressional elections.
During the two decades prior to the financial crisis, most people – including most politicians – assumed that the market was supreme.
Now the intellectual pendulum may be swinging back to the belief that state action can mop up markets’ messes – just as veneration of the state in the 1930’s followed market worship in the 1920’s.
Two decades ago, judicious European politicians looked for a “third way,” steering a zigzag course between the importance of market mechanisms and that of other social priorities, according to which the market needed to be directed.
For example, when the Delors Committee prepared its report in 1988-1989 on how a monetary union could be established in Europe, experts devoted considerable attention to the issue of whether market pressure would suffice to discipline states.
Many warned that it would not – that bond yields might converge at the outset, permitting spendthrift countries to borrow more cheaply than they otherwise could.
The result of the debates of the early 1990’s was a set of rough and ready rules on deficits and debt levels that was never taken quite seriously.
Economists mocked them and Romano Prodi, the president of the European Commission at the time, called them “stupid.”
Until the second half of 2008, Europe seemed to have reached fiscal Paradise: the market did not differentiate between eurozone governments’ bonds.
Some assumed an implicit debt guarantee, but that was always implausible, given that the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union explicitly ruled it out.
Rather, investors’ undivided confidence in all eurozone borrowers reflected something else – a general belief in the capacity of rich countries’ governments.
According to this view, advanced countries have a greater degree of fiscal sophistication.
They are always able to raise tax rates in order to service their debt.
In poor countries, by contrast, powerful vested interests often resist higher taxes on the wealthy, and widespread poverty makes it difficult to impose universal consumption taxes on the poor.
That lesson was reinforced by the experience of countless debt crises in peripheral countries, the most destructive of which hit Latin America exactly 30 years ago, after ecstatic borrowing fueled economic booms.
Sometimes these were simply consumption booms – whether for households or for military outlays and presidential palaces – and sometimes they were investment booms, though much of the investment had been misallocated as a result of political priorities.
The novelty of the world since 2008 is that, for the first time in more than a generation, advanced countries are experiencing debt crises – and starting to look like poor countries with weak institutions.
Was this just a peculiarity of the eurozone, in which sovereign countries did not control their own currencies?
Europe’s debt crisis has produced a profound division of political – and also economic – opinion.
Those who emphasize the historical uniqueness of Europe’s monetary solution insist that other countries – which control their own monies – could not possibly fall into such a predicament.
Here the statist thesis is reflected in its boldest form: there cannot be a bond strike in the United States or the United Kingdom, because their central banks have at their disposal the full panoply of policy tools – including unconventional operations – needed to ensure that debt is monetized.
That theory runs counter to much historical experience, as well as to the prevailing approach to central banking that emerged in the 1990’s.
According to that view, investors punish profligate states by demanding higher interest rates to hedge against the likelihood of inflation; so the best way to ensure low borrowing costs is to give central banks as much independence from politicians as possible, and then make price stability their primary mandate.
The European Central Bank is probably the most perfect expression of this philosophy.
Its independence was secured not only by national legislation within the member states, but also by a treaty between them.
Treaties are more binding than national legislation, because they are more difficult to revoke, amend, or repeal.
Because the debts of the large industrial borrowers – the UK and the US – are externally financed, the argument that their governments can always monetize debt is not convincing.
A moment may come when foreign investors do not believe that their sterling or dollar assets are protected against inflation, and at that point their willingness to hold low-yield sterling and dollar assets will end.
The thinking behind the 1990’s approach to monetary policy is still fundamentally valid, but it requires institutional strengthening.
It would be better to stop the twentieth-century ideological pendulum and return to some older precepts.
Both states and markets work well only when adequately enforced legal rules provide the necessary certainty.
Planting the Seeds of Africa’s Growth
WEST LAFAYETTE, INDIANA – After decades of bad news, at least three major trends are turning Africa’s way: agricultural policies, rural demography, and farm productivity all promise improved opportunities for farm families across the continent.
These trends move too slowly to make headlines, but cumulatively they offer a whole new world of bigger payoffs from public and private investment in agriculture and rural development.
Each country in every year faces a unique set of circumstances.
Novelties get the most attention, like the possibility that outside investors might control large areas of farmland.
Spatial diversity is also important, because it ensures that each place differs from the aggregate average.
For Africa as a whole, however, at least three slow trends have recent turning points that offer game-changing new incentives for entrepreneurs and governments.
The first turning point is political.
New data from a World Bank study that compares farm policies around the world since 1955 shows for the first time just how far today’s African governments have gone to reduce the cost to farmers of the export taxes, marketing boards, and other interventions imposed by previous regimes (www.worldbank.org/agdistortions).
Africa’s policy-induced price distortions peaked in the late 1970’s, and reforms since then have removed about two-thirds of that burden, greatly facilitating productivity growth and poverty alleviation.
Further reforms could yield additional benefits, but much of the handicap imposed on African farmers by post-colonial governments has now been removed.
The second transition is demographic.
Census data compiled in recent revisions of United Nations population projections reveal the slowly unfolding implications of African history.
African households obtained access to modern medicine much later and more suddenly than people in other regions.
The resulting improvement in child survival rates and population growth during the 1970’s and 1980’s were faster than those seen earlier in Asia or Latin America.
Africa’s towns and cities have been growing at some of the world’s fastest rates, but their absolute size is so small that they can absorb only a fraction of all new workers.
Consequently, Africa’s rural population has been growing faster and for longer than any other in human history, with a correspondingly rapid and prolonged decline in per-capita endowments of land and other natural resources.
Moreover, post-independence improvements in child survival triggered a rise in child dependency rates, which also reached historically unprecedented levels in the 1970’s and 1980’s.
Africa’s demographic burdens began to lighten in the 1990’s, thanks to gradual reduction in fertility rates and continued urbanization.
As seen earlier in Asia, the slowdown in rural population growth and the reduced burden of childcare creates a window of opportunity for new investment to bring larger year-on-year increases in output per capita.
The third turning point in this sequence is technological: national estimates of cereal crop productivity show how, after decades of stagnation during the Asian green revolution, African yields have grown steadily over the past decade, so that estimated cereal grain output per capita now equals that of South Asia.
The start of this turnaround could be associated with the other two trends, as the cumulative result of more favorable policies and increased labor per hectare, but it could also reflect the gradual spread of improved crop varieties that resulted from earlier investment in agricultural technology.
The inflow of foreign aid to boost agricultural production did not rise until after the world food crisis of the 1970’s, and it peaked in the late 1980’s, yielding payoffs some years later.
Taken together, African politics, demography, and the delayed arrival of new technologies imposed severe headwinds against per-capita growth of agricultural output in the last quarter of the twentieth century.
But, looking forward, as these headwinds fade, faster growth and poverty alleviation are becoming easier to achieve.
Of course there is no guarantee of further progress.
The engines of growth include public and private investment, particularly for the new technologies needed to raise farm productivity.
Past efforts have been victims of their own success: as the burst of worldwide agricultural research and development in the 1970’s and 1980’s led to global food abundance in the 1990’s and 2000’s, foreign-aid donors turned to other priorities, and their per-capita support for African agriculture fell to a historical low in 2006 of around one dollar per year.
The global food crisis of 2007-2008 brought a brutal end to that complacency, and many investors have pledged a renewed focus on agriculture, but the proof will be in the spending.
African agriculture continues to face serious challenges.
Soil nutrients are being depleted, soil moisture is falling, temperatures are rising, and disease pressures are worsening.
Fortunately, a growing arsenal of solutions is available through local innovations that are increasingly well adapted to Africa’s unique needs.
Generalizations and predictions rarely survive for long on a continent as diverse and volatile as Africa is.
But African countries do have some things in common: widespread improvements in farm policy, improved demographic conditions, and the availability of new technologies create new opportunities for the decade ahead.
These three mega-trends put African farmers in a better position than ever before to take advantage of increased public and private investment.
As the obstacles created by previous government policies and past population growth are gradually removed, adopting successful innovations will yield increasingly large payoffs and faster per-capita growth over time.
For investors, the deepest obstacles are informational: what works best, and under which circumstances?
New data sources about relative impacts are becoming available, and are desperately needed.
Governments, donors, and other investors can still make bad choices, but there are unprecedented opportunities for high-payoff growth.
If funders take notice, farmers are poised to respond – and 2010 could mark the start of a bright new era in African agriculture.
Playboy and the Mullah
Indonesia recently witnessed a pair of dramatic releases: one a radical Muslim cleric from prison, the other a saucy men’s magazine from its editors.
Both Abu Bakar Ba’asyir and Playboy are now out on the streets and in the public eye, but neither is as significant as its opponents claim.
Their releases and the public debate to which they have contributed, however, cut straight to the heart of the ongoing struggle for Indonesia’s self-identity – a struggle which has taken a dramatic turn of late.
Abu Bakar Ba’asyir is a radical Muslim cleric who was convicted of blessing the original 2002 Bali bombing, and suspected by some of providing much more.
His name is on a UN list of terrorists, and undoubtedly Indonesia and the rest of the world would be safer if he were still in prison.
But his release in itself is not, as some charge, evidence that Indonesia is becoming more radicalized.
Ba’asyir was released for the simple reason that the law required it: he had completed his 30-month sentence.
Indonesia’s government would undoubtedly prefer to see Ba’asyir languish in jail, but without any legal measure to justify continued detention, it had little option but to release him.
Having done so, the government has been quick to impose a travel ban, freeze his bank accounts, and make clear that it will monitor his activities closely.
Ba’asyir’s release is undeniably unfortunate and possibly dangerous – but it is the consequence of legal proceedings, not any sudden radicalization of Indonesia.
The case of Playboy is a much more accurate barometer of the state of religious radicalism in Indonesia.
When Playboy unveiled plans for a nudity-free Indonesian edition early this year, it was denounced by politicians and conservative religious leaders as a threat to traditional values.
The national parliament introduced an “Anti-Pornography Bill,” which turned out to be a vaguely-worded document with the potential to outlaw not only pornography, but also certain traditional dances, sunbathing, and public kissing.
The proposed bill attracted support from moderate Muslim leaders, but its most vocal advocates were a collection of radical religious groups with a predilection for violence, led by the Islamic Defenders Front (known by its Indonesian acronym, FPI).
This year alone, these self-appointed moral vigilantes have ransacked bars and nightclubs, attacked the American and Danish embassies, and stoned the offices of Playboy after its first edition – all with only occasional protests from the police.
The FPI and its brethren took up the anti-pornography bill with vigor, organizing demonstrations in support and denouncing anyone who dared oppose it.
In the months following Playboy’s announcement, the public backlash against the magazine appeared to have pushed the Indonesian mainstream firmly to the right, an impression only furthered by the high visibility and loud belligerence of radical groups.
Moderate Muslim activists and intellectuals tried valiantly to counter the radicals, but seemed unable to gain traction.
Late this spring, something changed, and within a few weeks moderates made dramatic public advances.
The most striking demonstration of this political shift came after an incident in central Java, in which a speech by former President Gus Dur was interrupted by FPI members who denounced him for supporting pluralism and opposing the anti-pornography bill.
It was a public attack on a respected national and religious leader, and it was answered quickly by the leaders of the two most important Muslim organizations in the country.
Representing a combined membership of more than sixty million Indonesians, they called directly upon the government to act against groups who engage in violence in the name of Islam, and denounced the behavior of such groups as un-Islamic, criminal, and a threat to national unity.
Newly emboldened, the government pledged to crackdown on groups that engage in violence, and announced plans to empower authorities to disband organizations that threaten ‘security and order.’
The Jakarta police have begun acting with new vigor: they charged one prominent radical leader with defamation for publicly calling women opposed to the anti-pornography bill “evil, wretched, and immoral,” and then arrested the chairman and twenty members of FPI for attacking a group of cafes.
A national dialogue about fostering pluralism is now in progress, and has inspired renewed public interest in Pancasila, the national philosophy discredited during the Suharto years but now seen by some as a symbol of Indonesia’s historic pluralism.
Meanwhile, legislators have said they will work to transform the controversial anti-pornography bill into a more targeted anti-smut ordinance.
As for the Playboy , it has been met with the expected criticism – but no attacks and indeed, not even any demonstrations.
In sum, a remarkable shift in the national debate &#45;&#45; from how to make Indonesia more conservatively Islamic, to how to sustain Indonesia’s tradition of religious pluralism into the future – has taken place.
The releases of Ba’asyir and publication of Playboy , however controversial, will not themselves alter this new discourse, but they offer an insightful glimpse into just how dramatically things are changing in Indonesia.
The moderate agenda has gained important ground this month – but the struggle to establish Indonesia’s political and religious identity is far from over.
Playing Defense in Europe
LONDON – The most frightening periods in history have often been interregnums – moments between the death of one king and the rise of the next.
Disorder, war, and even disease can flood into the vacuum when, as Antonio Gramsci put it in his Prison Notebooks, “the old is dying and the new cannot be born.”
The dislocation and confusion of 2016 do not rival the turmoil of the interwar period, when Gramsci wrote, but they are certainly symptoms of a new interregnum.
After the end of the Cold War, the world was held together by an American-policed security order and a European-inspired legal order.
Now, however, both are fraying, and no candidates to replace them have yet emerged.
Indeed, unlike in 1989, this is not a crisis of a single type of system.
Countries as different as Brazil, China, Russia, and Turkey are coming under heightened political and economic pressure.
Even if the nightmare of a President Donald Trump is avoided, as appears increasingly likely, the United States can no longer be the world’s policeman.
Powers such as Russia, Iran, and China are probing US reactions in Ukraine, Syria, and the South China Sea.
And US allies like Turkey, Saudi Arabia, Poland, and Japan are forging independent and assertive foreign policies to make up for a US that cannot and will not carry its previous burdens.
Meanwhile, the European Union’s declining cohesion is undermining its moral authority on the world stage.
Many of the global institutions that reflect European values and norms – from the World Trade Organization and the International Criminal Court to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change – are gridlocked.
Regionally, the three strands of the European order are unraveling: the US is seeking to reduce its investment in NATO, the EU is de-emphasizing enlargement, and the chaos in the Middle East and Ukraine is making a mockery of the European Neighborhood Policy.
The rise – and rapprochement – of illiberal forces in Russia and Turkey mean that the EU is no longer the only pole of attraction in the region.
Worse, EU integration has gone into reverse, with member states seeking to insulate themselves from the outside world, rather than trying to export their shared values.
As a result, the biggest threats to free trade and the open society stem from domestic sources, not external enemies.
Even in Germany, which had long seemed immune to such pressures, the interior minister talks of banning burkas (a policy that would affect 300 people), while the vice-chancellor has declared the death of the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP) between the EU and the US even before the body is cold.
The EU proved over the last few decades that it could be a force for globalization – tearing down barriers between peoples and nations.
But today its survival depends on showing that it can protect citizens from the very forces it has promoted.
Maintaining the four freedoms at the heart of the European project – the free movement of people, goods, capital, and services within Europe – will be possible only if EU governments have credible policies to protect the most vulnerable in their societies.
That will mean improving protection of the EU’s external borders, compensating domestic losers from migration and free trade, and soothing public fears about terrorism.
The danger is that much of what the EU rightly pushed for during the good times could hasten its unraveling now, during the current interregnum.
For example, given so much uncertainty about the future state of Europe and the world, debating enlargement or the TTIP seems pointless – or worse, because even opening such discussions is certain to play into the hands of Euroskeptics.
The EU needs to distinguish between core and peripheral priorities.
For issues such as EU relations with Russia and Turkey (and these two countries’ relations with each other), member states need to agree on a policy that recognizes the interests of all.
But much greater flexibility is advisable in other areas, including commitments to refugee re-allocation and eurozone rules, where excessive rigidity could cause European unity to buckle and snap.
In addition to preventing an alliance between Russia and Ankara, the EU should rethink its goals in its neighborhood.
Although the Balkan countries that are outside the EU will remain there for many years, they are in the European security space already, and Europeans should be prepared to intervene militarily if outbreaks of violence recur.
Moreover, EU leaders should pursue a broader definition of peace than the absence of war, including political and social stability and preventing radicalization in Bosnia and Kosovo.
For Georgia, Ukraine, and Moldova, the goal should be to promote stable and predictable governments.
For the next few years, the EU should view them as independent buffer states rather than as member-states-in-waiting.
It will be particularly important not to set red lines that the EU is not willing to defend.
In the troubled Middle East, the EU cannot hope to be the central actor.
But EU countries cannot protect their populations from instability if they are only spectators.
Particularly in Syria and Libya, the EU needs to playing a more concerted role with regional powers – as well as with the US and Russia – to advance political processes that could help reduce violence, provide humanitarian aid, and stem the flow of refugees.
One of the EU’s main challenges is to define success in a defensive era.
During the heyday of enlargement, the goal was to deepen integration and broaden its reach across Europe.
Now, however, success means preventing countries from leaving the EU or hollowing out its institutions.
History moves in cycles.
The interregnum will eventually end and a new order will be born.
What is certain is that the survivors and inheritors of the old order will write the rules of the new one.
The EU’s goal, achievable only with flexibility and courage, must be to remain a viable project – and thus be one of the authors.
Playing for Human Rights
PRAGUE &#45;&#45; The selection of Beijing to organize and host the 2008 Olympic Games was accompanied by the Chinese government’s pledges of visible progress on respect for human rights.
We understood these as a condition whose fulfillment the International Olympic Committee would demand.
That is how this year’s Olympics could contribute to a greater openness and respect for international standards of human rights and liberties in the host country.
If the words of the Olympic Charter, stating that it is a goal of Olympism to “place sport at the service of the harmonious development of man, with a view to promoting a peaceful society concerned with the preservation of human dignity,” are to be fulfilled, it is necessary for all Olympians to be able to learn about the real situation in China and to point out human rights violations freely whenever and wherever in line with their conscience.
We call on the International Olympic Committee to make that possible.
An interpretation of the Olympic Charter according to which human rights would be a political topic not to be discussed in the Olympic venues is alien to us.
Human rights are a universal and inalienable topic, enshrined in international human rights documents that China has also signed onto, transcending international as well as domestic politics, and all cultures, religions and civilizations.
To speak of the conditions of human rights therefore cannot be in violation of the Olympic Charter.
To speak of human rights is not politics; only authoritarian and totalitarian regimes try to make it so.
To speak of human rights is a duty.
We are concerned that the Beijing Olympics might simply become a giant spectacle to distract the attention of the international public from the violations of human and civil rights in China and in other countries with the Chinese government’s significant influence.
Therefore, we see a dignified celebration of the Olympic ideals not only in sporting performances, but also in the opportunity to express one’s civic attitudes.
We call on all participants of the summer Olympic Games in Beijing to use this liberty to support those whose freedoms, even at the time of the Olympics, are denied by the Chinese government.
Plugging the Leaks
MUNICH – With pain and misgiving, the United States Congress bailed out Wall Street in order to prevent a meltdown of America’s financial system.
But the $700 billion to be used may flow into a leaky bucket, and so may the billions provided by governments throughout the world. 
The US financial institutions that went bankrupt in 2008 – or that would have gone bankrupt without government help – were in trouble because they lacked equity capital.
They did not lack that capital because they never had it, but because they paid out too much of their abundant earnings in previous years to shareholders, leveraging their operations excessively with debt capital.
If no measures are taken to increase the minimum equity requirements for banks and other financial institutions, financial crises like the current one could recur.
Anglo-Saxon financial institutions are known for their high dividend-payout ratios.
From a European perspective, the hunger for dividends and the emphasis on short-term performance goals that characterize these institutions is both amazing and frightening.
Investment banks, in particular, are known for their minimalist equity approach.
While normal banks need an equity-asset ratio of at least 7%, investment banks typically operated on a ratio of only 4%.
The lack of equity resulted largely from the concept of “limited liability,” which provided an incentive for excessive leveraging.
Earnings left inside a financial institution can easily be lost in turbulent times.
Only earnings taken out in time can be secured.
Lack of equity capital, in turn, made risk-averse shareholders hire gamblers to manage their limited-liability investment companies.
The managers chose overly risky operations, because they knew that the shareholders would not participate symmetrically in the risks.
While upside risks would be turned into dividends, downside risks would be limited to the stock of equity invested.
Claims against the personal wealth of shareholders would be blocked by the limited liability constraint.
The banks’ creditors or governments ultimately would bear any losses.
The mutual interaction between the incentive to minimize equity capital and the incentive to gamble in order to exploit the upside risks caused America’s crisis.
In theory, bank lenders and the government could anticipate the additional risks they encounter when a company chooses a high-leverage strategy.
Lenders may charge higher interest rates, and the government may charge higher taxes or fees.
But this theory fails to match reality.
Governments do not tax the return on equity less than debt interest, and lenders do not sufficiently honor the benefits of high equity with lower interest rates, owing to a lack of information about the true repayment probability.
This is why equity capital held by financial institutions typically is more than twice as expensive as debt capital and why these institutions try to minimize its use.
The provision of limited liability not only turned Wall Street into a casino, but so-called “Main Street” also was induced to gamble, because homeowners enjoyed a limited liability similar to that of the companies.
When low-income borrowers took out a loan to buy their homes – often 100% of the purchase price – they typically could use the home as collateral without warranting the repayment with additional wealth or even their income.
Thus, they were protected against the downside risk of falling house prices and profited by speculating on the upside risk of appreciation.
Such homeowners knew that with rising prices they would be able to realize a gain by either selling their homes or increasing their debt, while in the case of falling prices they could simply hand over the keys to their banks.
Given the uncertainty about future house prices, they could reasonably expect gains, which induced them to pay even more in the first place.
Gambling by Main Street caused the sub-prime crisis.
The crisis spread because the banking system was not sufficiently risk-averse – and in some cases even seemed to relish risk.
Mortgage banks kept some claims on their books, but sold most of them to investment banks as “mortgage-backed securities.”
The investment banks blended these securities into “asset-backed securities” and “collateralized debt obligations” (CDOs) and sold them on to financial institutions throughout the world.
These institutions, attracted by the high rates of return that were promised, invariably neglected the downside risks.
The buyers of the CDOs were often misguided by rating agencies that performed badly and did not provide reliable information.
As private rating agencies live on the fees they collect from rated companies, they cannot easily downgrade important clients or the assets they sell.
The big American investment banks received excellent ratings up to the last moment, and so did the CDOs with which they betrayed the world.
All of this explains why the US had such a formidable period of growth in recent years, despite the fact that household savings were close to zero, and why foreigners were willing to finance a record US current-account deficit of more than 5% of GDP – higher than it has been since 1929.
That period is now over.
The US must carry out fundamental reforms of its financial system to plug the equity leaks and recover investors’ confidence.
But even then it will have a hard time continuing to sell financial assets to the rest of the world.
American households will need to learn to accumulate wealth by cutting consumption rather than speculating on real estate.
A painful decade of stagnation for America lies ahead.
Stopping the Child Killers
SEATTLE – In far too many places around the world, the biggest child killers are caused by the smallest of organisms – the viruses, bacteria, and single cell parasites that cause diarrhea and pneumonia.
Given the monumental advances that have been made in public health – both diseases are preventable and curable – this is inexcusable.
It is imperative that all children, especially those most at risk, have access to life-saving health-care services.
According to UNICEF, pneumonia and diarrhea kill a full one-quarter of the 5.9 million children under the age of five who die each year.
And a new report from the International Vaccine Access Center shows that nearly three-quarters of pneumonia and diarrhea deaths occur in just 15 countries.
In these countries and elsewhere, such deaths are most prevalent within the poorest and most marginalized communities.
While the figures do reflect progress in recent decades, the tragedy is that the improvement could have been much larger, had governments not consistently succumbed to the temptation to focus on only one or two interventions at a time.
To end child deaths from these diseases once and for all, governments must commit to scaling up simultaneously the full suite of interventions identified by the World Health Organization and UNICEF two years ago, in their integrated Global Action Plan for Pneumonia and Diarrhea.
One critical – and extraordinarily cost-effective – intervention is the promotion of exclusive breastfeeding for the first six months of life, a practice that helps supports the development of a baby’s immune system.
As it stands, in 12 of the 15 countries suffering the most child deaths from pneumonia and diarrhea, exclusive breastfeeding rates fall short of the WHO’s 50% global target.
Furthermore, governments must ensure that all children have access to life-saving vaccines.
Though a vaccine for pneumococcal infection – a leading cause of pneumonia – was developed at the turn of the century, it is not included in routine immunization programs in five of the countries where pneumonia is most pervasive (Chad, China, India, Indonesia, and Somalia).
This must change.
As for diarrhea, a comprehensive global study found that moderate to severe cases are caused primarily by rotavirus, making that virus the leading killer of infants and toddlers worldwide.
But, though rotavirus vaccines have been rolled out in 79 countries – a significant accomplishment – a staggering 74% of the world’s infants remain unlikely to be inoculated this year.
The vaccine’s introduction for Indian infants next year will be a major milestone.
But other Asian countries, such as Bangladesh and Pakistan, have not yet decided whether to do the same.
When children contract diarrhea, they need access to the right treatments.
Oral rehydration salts and zinc supplements not only drastically reduce mortality rates; they are also inexpensive to scale up.
In treating pneumonia, access to antibiotics is essential.
The common denominator among these interventions is the need for sufficient well-trained health workers serving impoverished communities.
Indeed, health workers are needed to guide mothers as they attempt to breastfeed – which is not always as easy as it sounds – and reinforce the importance of the practice.
They are needed to deliver vaccines and treatments. And they are needed to dispense advice to families on how to protect their children from death by pneumonia, diarrhea, and other diseases, including through information about when to seek care if they do.
Governments have a pivotal role to play in ensuring that the poorest and most marginalized communities have access to critical health services, by providing the right training, tools, supervision, funding, and logistical support for health workers.
This – together with other critical interventions, such as the provision of clean water and effective sanitation facilities – will require a strong and sustained political commitment, one that civil society and the media, by keeping their governments accountable, can help to secure.
There are still far too many children around the world who do not have access to the essential health services they need to survive and thrive.
Accelerating the discussion of proven, low-cost methods to prevent, treat, and cure pneumonia and diarrhea is critical to give all children the chance they deserve.
Where you live should not determine whether you live.
Poland’s Successful Losers
WARSAW – How can a government with the best economic record in Europe (indeed in the entire OECD) be humiliated at the polls by a Euroskeptic, nationalistic, and economically illiterate opposition – one deemed unelectable only a year ago?
That is the question many Poles, and friends of Poland, are now asking, following the defeat on October 25 of the Civic Platform government.
If creating jobs and boosting incomes can’t get you re-elected, what can?
One reason for the opposition’s victory is, of course, universal: after a time, people everywhere want change, and Civic Platform had been in power since 2007.
And impatience with the status quo is arguably stronger in the post-communist countries of Central and Eastern Europe, where much of the social, political, and economic order is yet to be generally accepted.
Indeed, Civic Platform’s Donald Tusk was Poland’s first post-communist prime minister to win successive terms.
Moreover, as parties govern longer, their strongest personalities tend to be replaced by weaker ones.
Civic Platform contested this election after replacing Tusk with Ewa Kopacz, and has had the same problem with a number of other “substitutions.”
What is specific to Poland is that the past eight years have apparently created a pronounced case of cognitive dissonance.
Annual GDP growth averaged 3.2% over this period; and, unlike in the rich West, both inequality and unemployment have actually fallen, with growth mainly benefiting the middle three quintiles of the income distribution.
This segment of the population – usually politically crucial – enjoyed a 28% rise in per capita real income from 2007 to 2014.
At one level, Poles are aware of this, with large majorities describing financial conditions in their own families, workplaces, and social environments as either “good” or “very good.”
The dissonance is that equally large majorities also describe Poland’s economic situation and the “direction in which the country is moving” as either “bad” or “very bad.”
Poland’s transformation is visible not only in the form of new motorways, local roads, airports, hospitals and stadiums, but also in the appearance of vast numbers of new and refurbished housing units, supermarkets, and modern factories.
And this has not been achieved by mortgaging the future.
Poland has recorded the fourth lowest increase in public debt (as a percentage of GDP) in the European Union.
And yet the disconnect between this reality and the Poland “in ruins” or “on the verge of catastrophe” perceived by many voters was too strong to ignore.
Even Kopacz admitted the contrast between the “public affluence” that everyone sees and the “private penury” that many feel persists (at least relative to Germany, the preferred benchmark for Poles).
In today’s Poland, it is harder to accept wages – nominally about a third of those in Germany – that had seemed perfectly adequate in 2007, when they were only a quarter of the German level.
But, unsurprisingly, Kopacz’s campaign slogan, “A strong economy – higher wages,” and her implicit promise to address the issue in one parliamentary term, did not appear credible.
Although the problem faced by Kopacz and Civic Platform was specifically Polish, it contains a universal truth: to win, politicians must define the context in which they operate.
During Tusk’s premiership, the government was perversely reluctant to claim credit for Poland’s economic success.
Tusk praised Poles themselves for their hard work, but neglected to emphasize that without the government’s effective macroeconomic policies, that work would have been wasted.
He never even reminded voters that the government’s choices in managing the fallout from the 2008 global financial crisis – which were neither obvious nor easy, because they required rejecting the EU’s austerity consensus – was the right one.
Given that most voters do not consider themselves able to judge competence in government, they base their choice of party on the general direction in which it intends to take the country and the overarching principles by which it intends to govern.
Civic Platform came to power in 2007 with a strongly pro-business and free-market ethos.
During the financial crisis, it had to moderate these views considerably, taking steps that ran counter to its ideology: increasing deficits in the trough of the crisis (2009-2010) and raising taxes once growth resumed (2011).
And then, when the government reduced the size of the absurdly expensive, but popular, funded pension system (2011-2014), Tusk attempted to compensate voters by pumping all additional free resources into family benefits.
Although this was justified, given Poland’s very low birth rate, it was also intended to appeal to his urban electorate.
But, to many voters, it seemed that Civic Platform, which had identified itself in 2007 as socially conservative and economically liberal, was drifting to the economic (as well as the cultural) left.
By 2014, the government was perceived as being so pragmatic as to be almost value-free.
That perception naturally raised the suspicion that self-interest had become Civic Platform’s main motivation.
As the party’s narrative became an endless litany of the good social things it had done (or was about to do), Poles came to view the campaign as a cynical attempt to buy their votes – and to do so with their own money.
Even the fact that these promises, though plentiful, were mostly inexpensive (certainly compared to those of the opposition) was not used to convey a commitment to fiscal responsibility.
Elections are a choice, not an auction between competing lists of promises, with victory simply going to the highest bidder.
Civic Platform lost because it failed to explain to Poles its own view of that choice.
It hardly mattered that the opposition’s program lacked credibility: Civic Platform had already become the architect of its own defeat.
Poland’s Double Trouble
Much of the world seems fascinated by the fact that Poland is now governed by a set of identical twins who first became famous as child movie actors: President Lech Kaczynski and Prime Minister Jaroslaw Kaczynski.
They are indeed intriguing, but the political forces they represent are even more interesting – and worrying.
Since the fall of 2005, the Kaczynskis have led a conservative-populist coalition, with a dose of nationalism – represented by the small League of Polish Families (LPR) – thrown in.
The Polish right was last in power in 1997, having previously governed in the years 1990-1993.
The post-communist Party of the Democratic Left (SLD) was voted out in 1997, despite a five-year streak of economic prosperity and rapidly falling unemployment.
Although the SLD’s popularity remained high, the previously fragmented right prevailed due to temporary unity.
In 1998, however, prosperity vanished.
So the right’s turn in government was followed by years of stagnation and exploding unemployment.
Unable to cope with the downturn, the right was replaced by another SLD-led government in 2001.
During this period, the right disintegrated.
Among the splinter groups that arose were the conservative Law and Justice (PiS) and the nationalist LPR.
As they emerged on the political stage, the left was failing: the economy did not improve, unemployment remained high, and the SLD, which attracted all kinds of riffraff, became mired in corruption scandals.
The scandals provided the right with an opportunity to deliver a coup de grace to the SLD in the form of parliamentary investigative commissions.
The hearings, reminiscent of Joe McCarthy’s witch hunts in 1950’s America, humiliated the SLD and, in large part, compromised the entire post-1989 period.
But the large swings in Polish politics are not merely the result of political shenanigans.
They reflect the instincts of Polish voters.
People vote for all kinds of parties, from the far right all the way to the left, so long as they are convinced that the parties will deal with their social concerns and grievances.
The fusion of an irresponsible right-wing campaign and economic stagnation made Poland’s “wandering” electorate shift in the direction of the PiS, whose success was mostly due to its leader, Jaroslaw Kaczynski, currently the right’s most prominent politician.
Kaczynski presented this fluid electorate with a credible vision of a state concerned with social solidarity (with no one’s refrigerator standing empty) and opposed to heartless liberalism (which brings empty refrigerators for the poor and full ones for the rich).
This contrast, and a strong attack on the liberal Civic Platform, made it impossible to create a moderate right-wing coalition.
Having rejected Civic Platform as a partner, Kaczynski decided to ally his minority PiS with the populist Self-Defense party and the nationalist LPR.
The stated goal of the new alliance was to establish what Kaczynski calls the “Fourth Republic” (implying a constitutional break with the supposedly compromised post-1989 Third Republic).
The Kaczynskis want to destroy the “corrupt system composed of careerist politicians, post-communists, former secret service functionaries, and criminal organizations,” who, according to the twins, have ruled Poland since 1989.
The Fourth Republic is supposed to be republican, rather than liberal, with greater state involvement in the economy.
It is to be a democracy steered from above, with only a limited division of power and a streak of authoritarianism, guided by a mixture conservatism, populism, and nationalism.
It is to be assertive in its dealings with the EU – perhaps not so much Euro-skeptical as “Euro-difficult” – aping Margaret Thatcher’s Britain of the 1980’s, despite Poland’s being much poorer and less politically influential than Thatcher’s Britain was.
The notion of a Fourth Republic incites heated opposition.
President Lech Kaczynski’s approval ratings, are dramatically lower than those of his predecessor, the SLD’s Aleksander Kwasniewski.
His brother, Jaroslaw, has always evoked popular mistrust.
Most Poles did not vote for the Kaczynskis and still do not want to follow them.
But they did not see the risk in letting them gain so much power, and so did not mobilize to block them.
New elections are not due until 2009.
To be sure, a political crisis can bring the coalition down, but this can happen only if Poland’s “wandering” electorate decides that the PiS has let it down.
That looks unlikely.
The coalition took power at the start of what seems to be a new period of prosperity, underpinned by large EU subsidies.
As a result, there will be room for myriad favors for special interests and for boosting social benefits, which may buy time for the PiS and its vision of a Fourth Republic.
How far will the twins push their idea?