The Abandonment of Progress
PARIS – Margaret Thatcher and Ronald Reagan are remembered for the laissez-faire revolution they launched in the early 1980s.
They campaigned and won on the promise that free-market capitalism would unleash growth and boost prosperity.
In 2016, Nigel Farage, the then-leader of the UK Independence Party (UKIP) who masterminded Brexit, and US President-elect Donald Trump campaigned and won on a very different basis: nostalgia.
Tellingly, their promises were to “take back control” and “make America great again” – in other words, to turn back the clock.
As Columbia University’s Mark Lilla has observed, the United Kingdom and the US are not alone in experiencing a reactionary revival.
In many advanced and emerging countries, the past suddenly seems to have much more appeal than the future.
In France, Marine Le Pen, the nationalist right’s candidate in the upcoming presidential election, explicitly appeals to the era when the French government controlled the borders, protected industry, and managed the currency.
Such solutions worked in the 1960s, the National Front leader claims, so implementing them now would bring back prosperity.
Obviously, such appeals have struck a chord with electorates throughout the West.
The main factor underlying this shift in public attitudes is that many citizens have lost faith in progress.
They no longer believe that the future will bring them material improvement and that their children will have a better life than their own.
They look backward because they are afraid to look ahead.
Progress has lost its shine for several reasons.
The first is a decade of dismal economic performance: for anyone below the age of 30, especially in Europe, the new normal is recession and stagnation.
The toll taken by the financial crisis has been heavy.
Furthermore, the pace of productivity gains in the advanced countries (and to a large extent in emerging countries) remains disappointingly low.
As a result, there is very little in the way of income gains to distribute – and even less in aging societies where fewer people are at work and those out of work live longer. This grim reality may not last (not all economists agree that it will); but citizens can be forgiven for taking reality at face value.
The second reason progress has lost credibility is that the digital revolution risks undermining the middle class that formed the backbone of the post-war societies of the world’s advanced economies.
As long as technological progress was destroying unskilled jobs, the straightforward policy response was education.
Robotization and artificial intelligence are destroying medium-skilled jobs, leading to a polarized labor market, with jobs created at the two ends of the wage distribution.
For those whose skills have lost value and whose jobs are threatened by automation, this hardly counts as “progress.”
A third, related, reason is the massively skewed distribution of national income gains that prevails in many countries.
Social progress rested on the promise that the benefits of technological and economic advancement would be shared.
But recent path-breaking research by Raj Chetty and his colleagues shows that whereas 90% of US adults born in the early 1940s earned more than their parents, this proportion has steadily declined ever since, to 50% for those born in the mid-1980s.
Only one-quarter of this decline is due to slower economic growth; the remainder is attributable to an increasingly unequal distribution of income.
When inequality reaches such proportions, it erodes the very basis of the social contract.
It is impossible to speak of overall progress when children have an even chance of being worse off than their parents.
Fourth, the new inequality has a politically salient spatial dimension.
Educated, professionally successful people increasingly marry and live close to one another, mostly in large, prosperous metropolitan areas.
Those left out also marry and live close to one another, mostly in depressed areas or small towns.
The result, reckon the Brookings Institution’s Mark Muro and Sifan Liu, is that US counties won by Trump account for just 36% of GDP, whereas won by Hillary Clinton account for 64%.
Massive spatial inequality creates large communities of people with no future, where the prevailing aspiration can only be to turn back the clock.
Faith in progress was a key provision of the political and social contract of the post-war decades.
It was always a part of the left’s DNA; but the right embraced it as well.
After what happened in 2016, support for a concept forged in the Enlightenment can no longer be taken for granted.
For anyone who believes that progress should remain the compass guiding societies in the twenty-first century, the priority is to redefine it in today’s context and to spell out the corresponding policy agenda.
Even leaving aside other important dimensions of the issue – such as fear of globalization, growing ethical doubts about contemporary technologies, and concerns about the environmental consequences of growth – redefining progress is a challenge of daunting magnitude.
This is partly because a sensible agenda must simultaneously address its macroeconomic, educational, distributional, and spatial dimensions.
It is also because yesterday’s solutions belong to the past: a social compact designed for an environment of high-growth, equalizing technological progress won’t help address the problems of a low-growth world of divisive technological innovation.
In short, social justice is not a matter only for fair-weather environments.
For several decades, growth has served as a substitute for sensible social cohesion policies.
What advanced societies need now are social compacts that are resilient to demographic shifts, technological disruptions, and economic shocks.
In 2008, US President Barack Obama campaigned on “hope” and “change we can believe in.”
The substantive response to the reactionary revival must be to give content to this largely unfulfilled promise.
The Geopolitics of Populism
SINGAPORE – The big question in Asian countries right now is what lesson to take from Donald Trump’s victory in the United States’ presidential election, and from the United Kingdom’s Brexit referendum, in which British voters opted to leave the European Union.
Unfortunately, the focus is not where it should be: geopolitical change.
Instead, for the most part, economic narratives have prevailed: globalization, while improving overall wellbeing, also dislocates workers and industries, and generates greater income disparity, creating the anxious electorates that backed Brexit and Trump.
An alternative narrative asserts that technological advances, more than globalization, have exacerbated economic inequalities, setting the stage for political disruptions in developed countries.
In either case, policymakers in emerging countries have identified inequality as a major problem, and rallied around efforts to improve social mobility, lest globalization and new technologies displace their middle and working classes, and clear a path for their own versions of Trump and Brexit.
For Asian countries, the policy prescription is clear: take care of disadvantaged populations and provide retraining and new employment opportunities for displaced workers.
Of course, all societies should look out for their poorest members and maximize social mobility, while also rewarding entrepreneurship and challenging people to improve their lot.
But focusing on such policies would not address the public disaffection underlying the populist uprising, because inequality is not its root cause.
Feelings of lost control are.
Even if countries closed their domestic income and wealth gaps and ensured social mobility for all their citizens, the forces fueling public dissatisfaction around the world today would remain.
Consider the US, where the inequality narrative’s poster child has become the displaced, older, less-educated, white working-class male.
Many people credit these voters for Trump’s victory, but the poster-child cohort did not actually have the biggest impact on the election outcome.
According to exit polls, Trump won 53% of white male college graduates, and 52% of white women (only 43% of the latter group supported Clinton); he won 47% of white Americans between the ages of 18 and 29, compared to 43% for Clinton; and he beat Clinton by 48% to 45% among white college graduates overall.
These Trump supporters do not fit the stereotype at the center of the economic narrative.
Meanwhile, more than half of the 36% of Americans who earn less than $50,000 annually voted for Clinton, and of the remaining 64% of voters, 49% and 47% chose Trump and Clinton, respectively.
Thus, the poor were more favorable toward Clinton, and the rich toward Trump.
Contrary to the popular narrative, Trump does not owe his victory to people who are most anxious about falling off the economic ladder.
A similar story unfolded in the UK’s Brexit vote, where the “Leave” campaign asserted that the EU’s supposedly burdensome regulations and exorbitant membership fees are holding back the British economy.
This hardly amounts to an agenda to fight economic inequality and exclusion, and it is revealing that rich businessmen wrote the largest checks to support Leave.
Moreover, the street-level emotions that contributed to Leave’s victory were not rooted in income inequality or “the 1%”: alienated poor voters directed their anger at other alienated poor people – particularly immigrants – not at the rich. The Mayor of London’s office reported a 64% increase in hate crimes in the six weeks after the referendum, compared to the six weeks before it.
So, while income equality may have been a part of the Brexit campaign’s background noise, it was not the first issue on Leave voters’ minds.
What unites Trump and Leave supporters is not anger at being excluded from the benefits of globalization, but rather a shared sense of unease that they no longer control their own destinies.
Widening income inequality can add to this distress, but so can other factors, which explains why people at all levels of the income distribution are experiencing anxiety.
Indeed, many people in Eastern Europe felt a sense of lost control during the harsh socialist experiments of the post-war era, as did many Chinese during the Cultural Revolution, and these societies had minimal visible income inequality.
Paradoxically, Brexit and Trump supporters might be feeling the effects of globalization because overall inequality has actually declined.
Globalization’s largest effect has been to lift hundreds of millions of people in emerging economies out of poverty.
Throughout the 1990s, emerging countries’ combined GDP (at market exchange rates) amounted to barely one-third of the G7 countries’ combined GDP.
By 2016, that gap had essentially vanished.
Low international income inequality, rather than growing income inequality in individual countries, is putting unprecedented stress on the global order.
There is a growing mismatch between what Western countries can provide, and what emerging economies are demanding.
The power of the transatlantic axis that used to run the world is slipping away, and the sense of losing control is being felt by these countries’ political elites and ordinary citizens alike.
Trump and the Leave campaign appealed to voters by raising the possibility that transatlantic powers can reassert control in a quickly changing world order.
But with the geopolitical rise of emerging economies, especially in Asia, that order will have to achieve a new equilibrium, or global instability will persist.
Closing the income gap can help the poor; but, in the developed countries, it will not alleviate their anxiety.
Populism, Past and Present
MADRID – It seems that practically no Western democracy nowadays is immune to right-wing populism.
While populist rhetoric seems to be reaching fever pitch, with far-reaching consequences – most notably the United Kingdom’s vote to “Brexit” the European Union – the reality is that the strain of nativism that it represents has long bedeviled democratic politics.
Populist movements tend to focus on blame.
Father Charles Coughlin, the 1930s-era Roman Catholic priest from Detroit who promoted a fascist agenda for America, consistently sought to root out the culprits for society’s problems.
Likewise, today’s right-wing populists have eagerly turned on the “establishment” and the “elites.”
In Europe, this has meant blaming the EU for everything that goes wrong.
Addressing the complex roots of current economic and social challenges – the UK and France, for example, suffer substantially from hereditary privilege and frozen class systems – is a lot harder than decrying the EU as a villainous behemoth.
Beyond blame, populist ideology relies heavily on nostalgia.
Much of the current upheaval in Europe evokes Edmund Burke’s repudiation in 1790 of the French Revolution as the product of a misguided faith in ideas that defied people’s attachment to history and tradition.
For the UK’s Brexiteers, the borderless world that the EU, with its commitment to globalization, represents is destroying the nation-state, which better protected their interests.
In their referendum campaign, they recalled a past when jobs were secure, neighbors were familiar, and security was assured.
Whether that past ever really existed was irrelevant.
The last time European democracies were overtaken by radical political movements, in the 1930s, demagogues based their support largely on the old lower middle class, whose members feared being dispossessed and pushed into poverty by uncontrolled economic forces.
In the wake of the protracted euro crisis, and the painful austerity that followed, today’s populists have been able to play on similar fears, again primarily among older workers and other vulnerable groups.
Of course, Europe is not alone in being swept up by populism.
The United States, where Donald Trump has secured the Republican nomination to be president, is also in serious danger.
Trump paints a bleak picture of life in the US today, blaming globalization (specifically, immigration) and the “establishment” leaders who have advanced it for the struggles of ordinary American workers.
His slogan, “Make America Great Again,” is the ultimate display of false populist nostalgia.
Moreover, just as Brexiteers want to withdraw from Europe, Trump wants to withdraw the US from international arrangements of which it is a part, if not the linchpin.
He has suggested dispensing with NATO, declaring that US allies should have to pay for America’s protection.
He has also launched tirades against free trade and even the United Nations.
As elsewhere, Trump’s protectionism and national narcissism are sustained by the anxiety of those hit by the impersonal dark forces of the “market.”
The turn toward populism constitutes a revolt against intellectual orthodoxy, embodied by cosmopolitan professional elites.
In the Brexit campaign, “expert” became a slur.
This is not to say that challenging the establishment is entirely without merit.
The establishment is not always in touch with the people.
Populism can sometimes be a legitimate channel for aggrieved voters to make their frustrations known, and to call for a change of course.
And in Europe, there are plenty of legitimate grievances: austerity, widespread youth unemployment, a democratic deficit in the EU, and an overloaded bureaucracy in Brussels.
But, rather than focus on real solutions, today’s populists are often appealing to people’s basest instincts.
In many cases, they are emphasizing feelings over facts, stoking fear and hate, and relying on nativist appeals.
And, in fact, they are less interested in tackling economic grievances than they are in using those grievances to win support for an agenda that would roll back social and cultural openness.
This is most apparent in the immigration debate.
In the US, Trump has won support with proposals to block Muslims from entering the US and to build a wall to keep out those crossing the border from Mexico.
Likewise, in Europe, populist leaders have capitalized on the influx of refugees fleeing conflicts in the Middle East to convince people that EU-imposed policies threaten not just Europeans’ security, but also their culture.
The fact that nearly all of the regions in Britain that voted for Brexit received massive EU subsidies supports this interpretation.
So do circumstances in Germany.
Though the arrival of a million largely Muslim immigrants last year has not hurt the economy – which remains at full employment – many people are rejecting Chancellor Angela Merkel’s vision of a new, more multicultural Germany.
Simply put, for many Europeans, immigrants represent less a threat to their livelihoods than a challenge to their national and tribal identities.
Populist leaders like the UK Independence Party’s Nigel Farage have not hesitated to capitalize on this cultural anxiety, leading British voters ultimately to vote against their own interests.
And yet the grievances which populists like Farage and Trump manipulate are real.
To preserve the principles of openness and democracy on which continued social and economic progress depends, those grievances must be understood and addressed.
Otherwise, populists will continue to win support, with potentially severe consequences, as the Brexit debacle shows.
Fortunately, there is also precedent for escaping populist takeovers.
In the 1930s, as Europe drifted into the hands of either tyrants or banal democratic leaders, America’s Coughlins and others were overshadowed by President Franklin Roosevelt’s New Deal.
And a new deal – one that corrects the EU’s yawning democratic deficit and puts an end to self-defeating austerity policies – is precisely what will save Europe today.
Pulling Europe Back from the Brink
DAVOS – In 2007, the United States caught a serious – and highly contagious – economic cold.
Eight years later, it is finally making a convincing recovery – so convincing that last month the US Federal Reserve raised the country’s base interest rate for the first time in almost a decade.
Europe, however, remains in bad shape.
Not only has it not recovered from its post-2008 cold; beset by multiplying crises, it is now on the verge of developing pneumonia.
The best defense against pathogens is a strong immune system.
And that is what Europe lacks today, in the form of political leaders who provide an inspiring and forward-looking vision to their people.
With political disenchantment reaching levels not seen since the continent’s darkest times in the 1930s, the risk that Europe will succumb to the destructive forces of populism looms ever larger.
But it is too soon to give up hope; on the contrary, Europe is well positioned to succeed in the long term.
To secure that future, Europe’s political class, rather than struggling to cope with crises as they arise, must begin to look at the big picture, anticipate and address challenges, and inspire people once again.
Is this too much to ask?
History tells us that the answer is an emphatic no.
Sixty years ago, with Europe’s economy reeling from the destruction caused by World War II, Europe’s leaders lifted their eyes above daily hardships to shape a more hopeful future, underpinned by European integration.
That same vision and foresight is needed today, and the European Union, with its unmatched ability to facilitate regional cooperation, will remain essential.
Of course, there are some key differences between the circumstances that drove the EU’s creation and those that Europe’s leaders face today.
Most notably, thanks to the EU, Europeans today have largely not endured war and absolute economic deprivation.
With the dangers of demagoguery not embedded in their living memories, they are far more vulnerable to fear-mongering and false promises – illustrated in the growing influence of nationalist narratives and populist movements.
Even worse, faced with an erosion of their voter base, many mainstream parties are playing catch-up with these destructive forces, engaging in EU-bashing of their own.
Clearly, the EU needs a new impetus that reflects twenty-first-century challenges and opportunities.
But this will be virtually impossible to establish – and use to inspire people – until the EU and its member governments get a handle on the crises that are threatening to overwhelm them.
That is why it is so urgent that Europe puts its economic house in order once and for all.
Such a reckoning will not be quick or easy, not least because it will require us to address the many issues that have been swept under the carpet over the years, as half-baked projects were foisted on the EU to implement.
The foremost example of this is the partial economic and monetary union that has been around for nearly two decades, and that must now become a full union if it is to be successful and deliver results.
It is time for Europe’s leaders to break the decades-old habit of pursuing half-baked projects that blunt the symptoms of crises, and to implement real reforms that address the root causes.
Only with a new approach – and tangible progress – can solidarity within Europe be regained.
My call for a renewed commitment to the EU does not stem from some federalist mantra.
I would be the first to emphasize that political actors at all levels have a role to play in Europe, to the extent that they are able to implement policy effectively.
And I would also recognize that EU institutions need reform, so that they manage the big picture, instead of the details.
Nonetheless, the EU and its institutions remain integral to efforts to respond to challenges that require a united front – challenges like those that Europe faces today.
If Europe’s leaders are to inspire their people to build a shared future, they must demonstrate an understanding of what that future has in store – and how to make the most of it.
They should start by changing their attitudes and committing to working together to face present and future crises head-on.
While we cannot know for certain what the next 10-20 years will bring, we have a few important clues.
For one thing, there is the Fourth Industrial Revolution, which promises to transform our economies and societies in fundamental ways.
Plenty of other transnational challenges – from addressing the root causes of the Middle East refugee crisis to implementing last month’s Paris agreement to mitigate climate change – are also in the cards.
It would be ironic if Europeans, enthralled by illusory promises of blissful national self-containment, threw away 60 years of deep cooperation at a moment when such cooperation is needed more than ever.
Of course, self-destructive national behavior is not new. But, more often than not, leaders have managed to pull back from the brink.
The key for Europe will be to deliver a coherent and compelling vision that justifies our need for cooperation in the decades ahead.
Populism for the Rich
BUCHAREST – I recently joined a tour in Bucharest of the Palace of Parliament, the gigantic folly built in the 1980s on the orders of the late Romanian dictator Nicolae Ceauşescu, who was executed before he could see it finished.
The statistics rehearsed by our guide were staggering: the third biggest edifice in the world, 220,000 square feet of carpet, one million cubic meters of marble, 3,500 tons of crystal.
The enormous marble stairways had to be rebuilt several times to match exactly the steps of the dictator, who was a small man.
To construct this neoclassical monstrosity, an entire swath of the city, a beautiful area of eighteenth-century houses, churches, and synagogues, was razed, displacing 40,000 people.
More than a million people worked on the project non-stop day and night.
It pretty much bankrupted the state, even as Ceauşescu’s subjects had to do without heat and electricity for much of the time.
It still costs more than $6 million a year to maintain the palace, which now houses the Romanian parliament and an art museum, leaving 70% of the building unused.
Ceauşescu’s folly is a monument to megalomania.
But it is by no means unique, except in its size (though Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan has tried to rival it in scale with his new palace in Ankara).
It is indeed remarkable how megalomaniacs of a certain kind think alike, or at least share a similar taste in architecture.
Hitler’s plans for the reconstruction of Berlin reflected the same neoclassical gigantism.
And the interior of the palace in Bucharest, a kind of Louis XIV style on steroids, is just a more extravagant version of Donald Trump’s living quarters in Florida and New York.
These places are what you get when socially insecure outsiders dream of being the Sun King.
To mention Trump in the same breath as Hitler and Ceauşescu is perhaps unfair.
Trump is not a murderous tyrant.
And his social background is more complicated.
Hitler was the son of a minor customs official, and Ceauşescu was of poor peasant stock.
Both men felt small and provincial in their capital cities.
Their way of dominating the more sophisticated urban elites was to oppress them violently and rebuild the cities according to their own grandiose dreams.
Trump, too, wants everything bearing his name to be bigger and shinier than everything else.
But he was born in New York and inherited a considerable amount of money from his father, Fred Trump, a real-estate developer with a somewhat shady reputation.
And yet he, too, appears to seethe with resentment against the elites who might look down on him as an uncouth arriviste, with his absurd golden skyscrapers and rococo mansions full of gilded chairs and massive chandeliers.
Modern populism is often described as a new class war between the beneficiaries of a globalized world and those who feel left behind.
Supporters of Trump in the United States and of Brexit in the United Kingdom are, on the whole, less educated than the “establishment��� they oppose.
But they could never have gotten as far as they have on their own.
The Tea Party in the US would have been relatively marginal without powerful backers and demagogues.
And these are often newly rich men who share their followers’ bitterness.
This was clearly the case in Italy, where former Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi, whose background is almost identical to Trump’s, managed to tap into the dreams and resentments of millions of people.
Populist movements in other countries show a similar pattern.
In Thailand, the Sino-Thai business tycoon Thaksin Shinawatra, the son of a nouveau-riche father like Berlusconi and Trump, ran against Bangkok’s social and political elites, becoming Prime Minister with the backing of provincial and rural voters, before being ousted in a military coup.
In the Netherlands, a newly rich class of real-estate moguls backed the right-wing populist Pim Fortuyn and his cruder successor, Geert Wilders.
The newly rich are as important a force in the rise of populism as the poorer and less educated people who feel neglected by the elites.
Despite huge inequalities of wealth, they share a deep anger at those whom they suspect of looking down on them.
And they are not entirely wrong.
No matter how many palaces or yachts new money can acquire, old money will continue to despise the acquirer.
Likewise, the educated urban class tends to dismiss the voters who supported Brexit or back Trump as stupid and ill-bred.
It is the fusion of resentments, felt by the newly rich as much as by the left behind, that drives right-wing populism.
In extreme circumstances, this can result in dictatorship, with the tyrant free to indulge bizarre fantasies at the expense of millions under their control.
So far, in Europe and the US, the demagogues can only serve up dreams: taking back our country, making it great again, and so on.
To stop such dreams from becoming political nightmares, something more is needed than technocratic expertise, or calls for civility and moderation.
Angry people cannot easily be persuaded by luminous reason.
They must be offered an alternative vision.
The problem today, all over the world, is that such an alternative is not readily at hand.
The French Revolution happened more than two centuries ago.
“Liberty, Equality, and Fraternity” is only a historic slogan today.
But this might be a good time to update it.
Mengendalikan Efek Nasionalisme terhadap Perekonomian
LAGUNA BEACH – Hasil referendum Inggris bulan Juni lalu yang memutuskan hengkang dari Eropa masih dipantau dengan ketat.
Komunitas internasional – terutama penduduk Eropa – senantiasa menantikan perkembangan Brexit, tidak hanya untuk mengendalikan akibatnya tapi juga memperoleh gambaran tentang kemungkinan kejadian apabila hasil pemungutan suara berikutnya memihak agenda gerakan nasionalis.
Agenda politik mereka adalah kemunculan kembali.
Di Jerman, yang menyelenggarakan pemilihan umum tahun 2017, dukungan terhadap gerakan sayap kanan Alternative for Germany (AfD) terus bertambah, diperkuat dengan keberhasilan partai tersebut pada pemilihan umum negara bagian baru-baru ini.
Di Perancis, pimpinan the National Front, ingin memenangkan agenda nasionalisme pada pemilihan presiden tahun mendatang.
Tren tersebut tidak hangat di Eropa saja.
Di Amerika Serikat, calon presiden dari Partai Republik Donald Trump menjanjikan pemberlakuan trade tariff terhadap Cina, membangun tembok pembatas dengan Meksiko, dan melarang warga muslim memasuki negaranya.
Lalu apa konsekuensi ekonomi yang mungkin dilahirkan dari dukungan terhadap gerakan nasionalisme?
Belajar dari referendum Brexit, efek seketika ialah gejolak pada pasar keuangan dan kejutan bagi konsumen dan kepercayaan investor.
Namun ini bisa mengarah pada ketenangan finansial dan ekonomi.
Pertanyaan sebenarnya adalah apa yang terjadi setelahnya.
Tentu ketenangan yang berlangsung di Britania Raya masih lemah.
Prediksi pra-referendum bahwa dukungan untuk hengkang akan menyebabkan ketidakstabilan finansial dan kerugian ekonomi yang besar masih banyak kemungkinan terjadi.
Seberapa parah efeknya bergantung pada bagaimana Inggris dan sejawatnya di Eropa mendiskusikan perpisahan mereka, terutama mengenai hak/kapasitas passporting yang ditegakkan dalam perdagangan bebas.
Tetapi sejauh ini, ketidakstabilan bisa dikendalikan.
Ini berkat pemerintah baru di bawah Perdana Menteri Theresa May, yang dengan sengaja menerapkan pendekatan gradual dalam proses Brexit.
Theresa May juga menegaskan bahwa ia dan kabinetnya tidak berkewajiban untuk menerbitkan laporan kemajuan secara berkala.
Bank of England juga berkontribusi melalui suntikan dana secara cepat.
Selain itu, Bank of England juga meyakinkan pelaku pasar dengan tegas bahwa instansinya berkomitmen untuk menjaga kestabilan keuangan dan mencegah kekacauan yang bisa disebabkan oleh kegagalan pasar.
Kewaspadaan BoE dilengkapi dengan fakta bahwa kesepakatan-kesepakatan ekonomi dan keuangan dengan Eropa belum diganti, memberi keyakinan pada perusahaan dan warga untuk menunda perubahan sikapnya.
Kini mereka menunggu apakah Inggris akan melakukan perundingan rencana Brexit yang “lunak” atau “keras” sebelum melakukan sepak terjang apapun.
Kemampuan Inggris memulihkan ketenangan di tengah ketidakpastian finansial dan masa depan perekonomian menunjukkan betapa aktor-aktor politik bisa mengendalikan segala guncangan dan kejutan melalui pendekatan yang tepat.
Jikalau pemimpin Inggris terburu-buru membubarkan sistem perdagangan dan semua perjanjian ekonomi dan keuangan yang berlaku dengan Eropa, sebelum membangun penggantinya yang solid dan komprehensif, kondisinya mungkin lebih buruk.
Setiap orang atau gerakan yang mengusung kepentingan inward-looking yang serupa – baik itu partai nasionalis di Eropa yang ingin membatasi konektivitas internasional atau calon presiden di Amerika Serikat yang mengusulkan bea masuk/pajak yang memicu timbal balik dari mitra dagangnya – harus memperhatikan hal ini.
Tentu saja dalam kondisi sekarang, ada keterbatasan atas efek positif kepemimpinan Inggris yang kuat.
Ketika rincian perceraian Inggris dengan Uni Eropa akhirnya diumumkan, perusahaan dan warga akan bereaksi, terutama apabila semua hubungan dagang, perekonomian, dan keuangan dengan Uni Eropa mengalami perubahan signifikan.
Reaksi tersebut, hampir dipastikan, akan melukai pertumbuhan ekonomi dan menyulut ketidakstabilan keuangan.
Akan tetapi, pendekatan bertahap dan penuh kehati-hatian sangat diperlukan.
Pemerintah Inggris harus sedapat mungkin melaksanakan perundingan urusan-urusan paling sensitif dengan mitra-mitranya di Uni Eropa secara rahasia.
Ketika tiba waktunya mengumumkan perubahan-perubahan, pemerintah harus melakukannya dalam konteks program reformasi dalam negeri lebih luas yang menargetkan pertumbuhan inklusif dan penguatan kestabilan keuangan yang kuat.
Tidak mudah memang menerbangkan pesawat dengan lancar sembari mengganti mesinnya.
Itu adalah cerminan tantangan yang dihadapi pemerintahan di bawah Theresa May.
Pemerintah Inggris tengah menyiapkan manuver khusus dengan mengenali dan mengatur komponen-komponen mesin baru sekaligus merencanakan gerakan cepat; dengan cara itu lah mereka mampu mengganti mesin perdagangan Eropa tanpa berisiko mengalami guncangan berat atau bahkan kecelakaan yang membahayakan.
Meskipun dilengkapi dengan rencana bertahap secara mendalam, pemerintah di bawah kepemimpinan Theresa May harus menunjukkan ketahanan dan ketangkasan lebih tinggi dibandingkan pendahulunya, untuk mengelola transisi tanpa menghentikan pertumbuhan dan menghambat kestabilan.
Sama halnya dengan tokoh atau partai politik nasionalis manapun yang berkuasa nantinya.
Apakah mereka sanggup mengatasi kendala yang sedemikian rumitnya, itu adalah isu yang perlu disikapi.
The Blind Alley of Monetary Populism
SWARTHMORE – In the United States and elsewhere nowadays, populist politicians often claim that easy monetary policy is hurting ordinary workers, thereby exacerbating income inequality.
But while inequality is a problem, raising interest rates is no way to address it.
To say otherwise is a strange claim for anyone to make, especially populists.
After all, low interest rates benefit debtors and hurt creditors, as does the inflation that can be spurred by monetary easing.
Throughout most of US history, for example, populists have supported easy monetary policy as a way to help the little guy against distant bankers with hard hearts devoted to hard money.
That was why the Andrew Jacksons of the nineteenth century fought the efforts of the Alexander Hamiltons to establish a national bank.
It was also the argument William Jennings Bryan made during his 1896 presidential campaign, when he promised easier money to his core constituency: Midwestern farmers who had been hit hard by high interest rates and declining commodity prices.
And it was the argument made by supply-siders who opposed US Federal Reserve Chair Paul Volcker’s high-interest-rate policy in the early 1980s – an argument that spurred President Ronald Reagan to appoint two Fed governors to challenge Volcker in 1985.
Today, however, the script has switched – and not only fringe populists are working from it.
British Prime Minister Theresa May, for example, declared earlier this month that low interest rates were hurting ordinary working-class people, while benefiting the rich.
Falling interest rates help push up the prices of securities – both stocks and bonds – which are disproportionately held by the wealthy.
“People with assets have gotten richer,” said May.
“People without them have suffered.”
In a sense, May has a point.
In the US, stock prices have reached near-record highs.
And the Fed’s 2008 decision to reduce the policy interest rate virtually to zero, together with the subsequent economic recovery, surely contributed to the strong stock-market rebound that began in early 2009.
But there is little evidence that low interest rates have been behind the continued rise in equity prices from 2012 to 2015 – a period when markets were anticipating an interest-rate hike.
Populist arguments against easy monetary policy are flimsy, at best.
But so are populist arguments for tightening monetary policy – in the US, Donald Trump, following Ted Cruz and other Republican leaders, has advocated a return to the gold standard.
The truth is that monetary policy – which aims to promote overall economic growth, while maintaining price and financial stability – is not an appropriate lever for addressing income inequality.
That is a job for progressive taxation, universal health insurance, financial reform, and other such tools.
This is not to say that monetary policy cannot affect inequality.
An economy running hot enough to create jobs at a rapid rate – what some, most recently Fed Chair Janet Yellen, have called a “high-pressure economy” – will eventually lead to higher real wages and incomes for workers.
This happened in the late 1990s, with a high-pressure economy eventually pushing the unemployment rate below 4%.
And it is happening now.
Since early 2010, US employment growth has been running well above the natural rate of labor-force growth, with the economy adding more than 15 million private-sector jobs in the longest continuous series of monthly employment increases on record.
This job growth brought the unemployment rate down to 5% last year, from above 9% in 2009-10, and is now pulling previously discouraged workers back into the labor force.
Thanks to increased demand for labor, workers’ real wages – up 2.5% in the last year – have risen in this business cycle at the fastest rate since the early 1970s.
It was not until last month, however, that the full extent of these gains came to light, with the Census Bureau’s annual economic statistics showing that median household income had increased by a record 5.2% ($2,800) in 2015.
These gains were felt at every level of the income distribution, with the largest percentage gains going to those in the bottom tier and the smallest gains going to those at the top.
These are big changes, and offer important confirmation that lower-income families are finally sharing in the economic recovery.
The unconventional monetary policies of recent years may also have some new effects.
Low interest rates have lately been squeezing banks’ profits.
In Europe, this has become particularly pronounced, because banks are unable to pass negative interest rates on to depositors.
Any self-respecting populist should like this squeeze on banks, especially one who is still angry about the 2008 global financial crisis.
Ultimately, easy money probably does more to reduce income inequality than to exacerbate it – an observation supported by econometric estimates.
Nonetheless, it is not a particularly reliable tool for balancing income distribution.
That should not be surprising: ensuring a more equitable distribution of income is not a central bank’s job.
The Fed and other central banks are balancing rapid growth not against equality, but against the dangers of future overheating and financial instability.
They view their jobs as managing the overall economy.
They are right to do so.
Putting the Populist Revolt in Its Place
CAMBRIDGE – In many Western democracies, this is a year of revolt against elites.
The success of the Brexit campaign in Britain, Donald Trump’s unexpected capture of the Republican Party in the United States, and populist parties’ success in Germany and elsewhere strike many as heralding the end of an era.
As Financial Times columnist Philip Stephens put it, “the present global order – the liberal rules-based system established in 1945 and expanded after the end of the Cold War – is under unprecedented strain.
Globalization is in retreat.”
In fact, it may be premature to draw such broad conclusions.
Some economists attribute the current surge of populism to the “hyper-globalization” of the 1990s, with liberalization of international financial flows and the creation of the World Trade Organization – and particularly China’s WTO accession in 2001 – receiving the most attention.
According to one study, Chinese imports eliminated nearly one million US manufacturing jobs from 1999 to 2011; including suppliers and related industries brings the losses to 2.4 million.
As the Nobel laureate economist Angus Deaton argues, “what is crazy is that some of the opponents of globalization forget that a billion people have come out of poverty largely because of globalization.”
Even so, he adds that economists have a moral responsibility to stop ignoring those left behind.
Slow growth and increased inequality add fuel to the political fire.
But we should be wary of attributing populism solely to economic distress.
Polish voters elected a populist government despite benefiting from one of Europe’s highest rates of economic growth, while Canada seems to have been immune in 2016 to the anti-establishment mood roiling its large neighbor.
In a careful study of rising support for populist parties in Europe, the political scientists Ronald Inglehart of the University of Michigan and Pippa Norris of Harvard found that economic insecurity in the face of workforce changes in post-industrial societies explained less than cultural backlash.
In other words, support for populism is a reaction by once predominant sectors of the population to changes in values that threaten their status.
“The silent revolution of the 1970s appears to have spawned an angry and resentful counter-revolutionary backlash today,” Inglehart and Norris conclude.
In the US, polls show that Trump’s supporters are skewed toward older, less-educated white males.
Young people, women, and minorities are under-represented in his coalition.
More than 40% of the electorate backs Trump, but with low unemployment nationally, only a small part of that can be explained primarily by his support in economically depressed areas.
On the contrary, in America, too, there is more to the resurgence of populism than just economics.
A YouGov poll commissioned by The Economist found strong racial resentment among supporters of Trump, whose use of the “birther” issue (questioning the validity of the birth certificate of Barack Obama, America’s first black president) helped put him on the path to his current campaign.
And opposition to immigration, including the idea of building a wall and making Mexico pay for it, was an early plank in his nativist platform.
And yet a recent Pew survey shows growing pro-immigrant sentiment in the US, with 51% of adults saying that newcomers strengthen the country, while 41% believe they are a burden, down from 50% in mid-2010, when the effects of the Great Recession were still acutely felt.
In Europe, by contrast, sudden large influxes of political and economic refugees from the Middle East and Africa have had stronger political effects, with many experts speculating that Brexit was more about migration to Britain than about bureaucracy in Brussels.
Antipathy toward elites can be caused by both economic and cultural resentments.
The New York Times identified a major indicator of Trump-leaning districts: a white-majority working-class population whose livelihoods had been negatively affected throughout the decades in which the US economy shed manufacturing capacity.
But even if there had been no economic globalization, cultural and demographic change would have created some degree of populism.
But it is an overstatement to say that the 2016 election highlights an isolationist trend that will end the era of globalization.
Instead, policy elites who support globalization and an open economy will have to be seen to be addressing economic inequality and adjustment assistance for those disrupted by change.
Policies that stimulate growth, such as infrastructure investment, will also be important.
Europe may differ because of heightened resistance to immigration, but it would be a mistake to read too much about long-term trends in American public opinion from the heated rhetoric of this year’s election campaign.
While the prospects for elaborate new trade agreements have suffered, the information revolution has strengthened global supply chains and, unlike in the 1930s (or even the 1980s), there has not been a reversion to protectionism.
In fact, the US economy has increased its dependence on international trade.
According to World Bank data, from 1995 to 2015, merchandise trade as a percentage of total GDP has increased by 4.8 percentage points.
Moreover, in the age of the Internet, the transnational digital economy’s contribution to GDP is rapidly increasing.
In 2014, the US exported $400 billion in information and communication technologies (ICT)-enabled services – almost half of all US services exports.
And a poll released last month by the Chicago Council on Foreign Relations found 65% of Americans agreeing that globalization is mostly good for the US, while 59% say that international trade is good for the country, with even stronger support among the young.
So, while 2016 may be the year of populism in politics, it does not follow that “isolationism” is an accurate description of current American attitudes toward the world.
Indeed, in crucial respects – namely, on the issues of immigration and trade – Trump’s rhetoric appears to be out of step with most voters’ sentiments.
Нарық фундаментализмінің дағдарысы
ЛОНДОН –  2016 жылдың ең үлкен саяси тосын сыйынан жұрттың бәрі абдырап қалды.
Ал менің сасатын еш жөнім жоқ еді: 2008 жылғы дағдарыстан соң жазған кітабымда саяси институттарға деген сенімнің жоғалуы араға шамамен бес жылдай уақыт салып экономикалық тоқырауға алып келеді деп ескерткен едім.
Мұндайды бұрын да көргенбіз.
Карл Маркс пен Фридрих Энгельс 1848 жылғы «Коммунистік манифест» еңбегінде сипаттаған жаһанданудың алғашқы күйреуінен соң реформалық заңдар қабылданып, жұмысшы табына бұрын-соңды болмаған құқықтар берілді.
І Дүниежүзілік соғыстан кейінгі Британ империализмінің күйреуінен соң Жаңа бағыт анықталып, бай мемлекет қалыптасты.
1968 жылғы Кейнс экономикасының күйреуінен соң Тэтчер-Рейган революциясы болды.
Capitalism 4.0атты кітабымда саяси дүрбелеңдердің соңы ғаламдық капитализмнің күйреуіне алып келеді деп жазғанмын. 2008 жылғы дағдарыс – соның басы.  
Капитализмнің белгілі бір моделі жақсы жұмыс істеп тұрса, материалдық прогресс саяси қысымды азайтады.
Ал экономика күйресе, онда бұл - жай өтпелі кезең емес, терең қайшылықтардың белгісі, капитализмнің жойқын әлеуметтік жанама әсері саяси тұрғыдан қатерлі дертке ұшыратуы мүмкін.  
2008 жылдан соң дәл сол жағдай болды.
Еркін сауда, қайта реттеу және монетаризм уақытша банк дағдарысына ғана емес, қатаң экономика мен экспектацияны азайтуға алып келді. 1950-60 жылдардағы тым көп салықтар 1970-жылдардағы стагфляция кезінде легитимділігін жоғалтқаны сияқты дағдарысқа дейінгі теңсіздік, жұмыс орындарының азаюы, мәдени өзгерістер заңды құбылыс болмай қалды.
Егер біз осындай трансформацияны бастан кешіретін болсақ, онда иммиграция, сауда және табыс теңсіздігі сияқты қиындықтармен күресіп жатқан жеке-дара реформаторлар бүкіл жүйеге қарсы шыққан радикал саясаткерлерден жеңіліп қалады.
Бір жағынан радикалдардың айтқаны дұрыс болып шығуы мүмкін.
Өндірістегі «жақсы» жұмыс орындарының жоғалуына иммиграция мен сауданы не технологияны ғана кінәлауға болмайды.
Экономикалық бәсекенің бұл векторы жалпы ұлттық табысты ұлғайтқанымен, ол табыстың игілігін әлеуметке лайықты жолмен тарата алмауы мүмкін.
Бұл үшін кем дегенде екі бағытта мақсатты саяси интервенция жасау керек болады.
Біріншіден, макроэкономикалық менеджмент технология мен жаһанданудың арқасында ұсыныс әлеуеті артқан сайын сұраныстың да артуын қамтамасыз етуі керек.
Бұл – Кейнстің 1980-жылдары монетаризм дәуірлеп тұрған кезде уақытша жоққа шығарылып, 1990-жылдары қайта күшіне енген (кем дегенде АҚШ пен Британияда), 2009 жылғы дефицит байбаламынан соң қайта ұмытылған ең басты қағидасы.
Кейнстің сұраныс менеджментіне қайтып оралу - АҚШ-та билікке келетін Дональд Трамп әкімшілігінің басты экономикалық жетістігі бола алады, себебі онша тиімді емес ақша-кредиттік ынталандыру шарасының орнына ықпалды фискалдық саясат жүргізуге болады. АҚШ бұдан былай орталық банктің тәуелсіздігі және инфляциялық таргеттеудің монетарлық догмасынан бас тартып, экономиканы бар күшімен жұмыс істетуді сұраныс менеджментінің басым бағыты ретінде қайта қалпына келтіре алады.
Ал, Еуропаға макроэкономикалық ойды осылай революциялау үшін әлі біраз жыл керек.  
Сонымен қатар, әлеуметтік нәтижелер мен экономиканың құрылымына мемлекеттің араласуы тұрғысынан бұдан да маңызды екінші бір революция қажет болады.
Нарықтық фундаментализмнің артында үлкен қайшылықтар тұр.
Еркін сауда, технологияның дамуы және экономиканың «тиімділігін» арттыратын басқа да күштер қоғамға пайдалы деп дәріптеледі, бірақ олар жеке жұмысшылар мен бизнеске кері әсерін тигізеді, себебі халықтың табысы өскен сайын ешкім құралақан қалмауы үшін жеңімпаздар жеңілгендерге өтемақы төлеуі керек болады.
Еркін нарықтық экономикаға қойылатын моральдық талаптардың барлығы осы Парето теңдігі принципіне келіп тіреледі.
Тек саяси шешімдердің көмегімен жеңімпаздар алған табыстың бір бөлігі жеңімпаздарға әлеуметтік тұрғыда лайықты әдістермен бөліп берген жағдайда ғана либералдық саясатты ақтап алуға болады.
Бірақ саясаткерлер іс жүзінде бұған кереғар әрекет жасаса не болады?
Қаржы мен сауданы қайта реттеп, бәсекені арттырып, одақтарды әлсірету арқылы үкіметтер байлықты жеңімпаздардан жеңілгендерге үлестіруді талап ететін теориялық жағдай қалыптастырды.
Бірақ нарықтық фундаментализмді жақтаушылар қайта бөлісуді ұмытып қана кеткен жоқ, оған мүлде тыйым салды.
Салық, әлеуметтік төлемдер, үкіметтің басқа да түрде араласуы ынтаны азайтып, бәсекені басқа арнаға бұрады, соның кесірінен бүкіл қоғамның экономикалық өсімі төмендейді деген сылтау айтылды.
Бірақ, Маргарет Тэтчер әйгілі сөзіне айтқанындай: «... «қоғам» деген нәрсе жоқ.
Жекелеген ерлер мен әйелдер, отбасылар ғана бар».
Бәсекенің әлеуметтік игіліктеріне баса назар аударып, оның жекелеген адамдарға түсетін салмағын ескермеген нарық фундаменталистері өз идеологиясының басты өзегі - индивидуализм принципін жоққа шығарды.
Биылғы саяси дүрбелеңдерден кейін әлеуметтік игілік пен жеке адамның жоғалтатынының арасындағы қарама-қайшылыққа көз жұма қарауға болмайтынын түсіндік.
Егер сауда, бәсеке және технологиялық даму капитализмнің келесі кезеңіне жеткізетін болса, онда олар дамудан түскен табысты бөлісуді көздейтін Тэтчер мен Рейган тыйым салған үкіметтің араласу механизмдерімен қатар жүруі керек.
Бұл тыйымдарды бұзу дегеніміз салықты көбейтіп, инфляцияны арттырып, 1970-жылдардағы тәуелділік мәдениетіне қайту деген сөз емес.
Керісінше, ол жаһанданудан көп пайда көріп жатқан менеджерлік және қаржылық элита мен экономикалық қиындықтардан тұрақты зейнетақысы қорғайтын қарт кісілерге бағытталды.
Алайда, биылғы саяси толқуларды қарт сайлаушылар туғызды, ал жас сайлаушылар көбіне осы қалыпта қалуды жақтады.
Бұл парадокс дағдарыстан кейінгі шатасу мен түңілу кезеңінің әлі бітпегенін дәлелдейді.
Бірақ, жақсы ма, жаман ба, әйтеуір мен «Капитализм 4.1» деп атаған жаңа экономикалық модельді іздеу кезеңінің басталғаны анық.
Populists Can be Right
Does the rise of left-leaning governments in Latin America, particularly the election of Evo Morales as President of Bolivia, presage a shift to the hard left across the continent?
Does it mark a repudiation of United States foreign policy in the region?
Will it, for example, lead to a re-nationalization of Bolivia’s vast natural gas deposits?
These are vital questions, but they miss the larger significance of the rise of someone like Morales, for he is Bolivia’s first indigenous elected head of state.
His victory marks a step forward in Latin America’s overall democratization, with positive long-term significance for economic and social development in the region.
To understand why, it is helpful to take a broad view of Latin America’s history and economic development.
The societies of the Americas were forged by European conquests of indigenous populations, and by the racial and ethnic divisions that followed.
Both the US and Latin America are still coming to terms with those historic divisions.
The Europeans who conquered and colonized the Americas after 1492 did not find vast empty lands, as they sometimes proclaimed, but rather lands populated by communities dating back thousands of years.
A large portion of the indigenous populations quickly succumbed to diseases and hardships brought by the European colonizers, but many survived, often in dominant numbers, as in Bolivia and much of the highlands of the Andes mountain region.
Almost everywhere, these surviving indigenous populations became subservient members of European-led societies.
The Europeans then brought millions of African slaves to the Americas.
After emancipation in the nineteenth century, the African-American communities remained impoverished and largely bereft of political rights.
Thus, vast inequalities of power, social standing, and economic well-being were part and parcel of the forging of the Americas.
Indigenous, African-American, and mestizo (mixed) communities have been fighting for their social, political, and economic rights ever since.
Democracy in Latin America has been a hard-won struggle.
Even in the US, a country that fancies itself as a model of democracy, African-Americans were not truly enfranchised until the mid-1960’s.
In Latin America, democracy has similarly been incomplete, unstable, and often inaccessible to indigenous, African-American, and mixed populations.
Moreover, given the vast inequalities of power and wealth in Latin America, and with a large part of the population bereft of land and education, the region has long been vulnerable to populist politics and rebellions, with leaders promising quick gains for the dispossessed by seizing property from the elites.
The elites have fought back, often brutally, to protect their property.
Politics has therefore often been more a violent than an electoral struggle, and property rights have often been tenuous.
A dominant pattern in both the US and Latin America has been the resistance of the dominant white communities to sharing in the financing of public investments in the “human capital” (health and education) of the black and indigenous communities.
While European societies have developed social welfare states with universal access to public health and education services, elites throughout the Americas have tended to favor private-sector provision of health and education, in part reflecting white populations’ unwillingness to pay for social services for other ethnic and racial groups.
Morales’ election in Bolivia – where indigenous groups are estimated to comprise around 55% of the population and mixed-race people account for another 30% – should be viewed against this historical backdrop.
Moreover, Bolivia is not alone: the shift from military rule to democratic politics in Latin America during the past 20 years is gradually, fitfully, but consistently, broadening political empowerment beyond the traditional elites and dominant ethnic groups.
In Peru, for example, Alejandro Toledo is that country’s first indigenous president.
In the longer term, the spread of democracy in Latin America promises not only fairer societies, but also economically more dynamic societies, through increased public investments in health, education, and job skills.
The region’s chronic under-investment in education, particularly in science and technology, is partly responsible for its economic stagnation during the past quarter-century.
Unlike East Asia and India, most of Latin America did not make a breakthrough to high-technology industries, instead suffering a period of low GDP growth, debt crises, and macroeconomic instability.
This can now change, at least gradually.
Bolivia would do well to follow the example of its eastern neighbor, Brazil, which has experienced a surge in educational and scientific investments since its democratization in the 1980’s.
Rising educational attainment is helping to promote more technologically sophisticated exports as well.
Of course, Morales’ election also raises many important short-term doubts and questions.
Will the new government follow responsible economic policies, or will Bolivia flirt yet again with destabilizing populist measures, as it has done so often in the past?
Will Morales renegotiate the laws and contracts governing Bolivia’s vast natural gas reserves, as his government is rightly committed to do, in a way that does not scare away urgently needed foreign investment?
Bolivia has entered a new era of mass mobilization of its long-suffering but now victorious indigenous communities.
The short-term outlook is uncertain.
In the longer run, however, it’s right to bet on the economic benefits of democratization.
Two Blows Against Illiberal Democracy
SANTIAGO – The number of elected governments competing to be the world’s worst has now fallen by two.
Zimbabwe’s Robert Mugabe remains in office, as does Hungary’s Viktor Orbán.
Poland is slipping into illiberalism, and regimes stretching from North Africa to the Hindu Kush are already there.
But 12 years of arrogant autarchy under Néstor and Cristina Kirchner have just ended in Argentina.
And a stunning defeat in parliamentary elections surely marks the beginning of the end of 16 years of churlish chavismo in Venezuela.
That is cause enough for cheer.
In Venezuela, all cards were stacked in favor of President Nicolás Maduro, Hugo Chávez’s hand-picked successor: arbitrary imprisonment of opposition leaders, intimidation of anti-government protesters by thuggish gangs, and what Human Rights Watch politely called “aggressive steps to reduce the availability of media outlets that engage in critical programming.”
Yet the opposition managed to win two-thirds of the seats in the single-chamber parliament.
That gives Maduro’s opponents the qualified majority needed to amend the constitution, remove politicized judges and regulators, and, if it comes to it, hold a referendum to remove Maduro.
Two weeks earlier, voters in Argentina’s presidential election had also defied the odds, narrowly giving a second-round victory to Mauricio Macri.
The Kirchners never went to the chavista extremes of locking up opponents or shutting down television stations.
But they did not hesitate to use the power of the state to perpetuate themselves in power, harassing opposition newspapers, manipulating judicial investigations, and abolishing the independence of the central bank.
With the economy flat in Argentina and in free-fall in Venezuela, and inflation rates in both countries among the highest in the world, pocketbook issues obviously influenced these election surprises.
The standard boom-and-bust cycle provides a plausible interpretation: incumbents could win elections only so long as commodity revenues remained high.
Once oil and soybean prices collapsed, according to this view, no anti-democratic antics short of suspending elections (which was intensely rumored in Venezuela) could save the populists from defeat.
Yet this interpretation is too simple.
Despite falling revenues, both governments spared little effort to spend their way to victory.
In Argentina, the budget deficit is 7% of GDP.
In Venezuela, no one is quite sure, though some believe it could be a whopping 24% of GDP.
But voters would not let themselves be bribed.
That is understandable.
After all, no government handout could offset the feeling of insecurity at home and on the streets.
Venezuela’s murder rate, at nearly 54 per 100,000 people, is more than twice that of Brazil and Mexico (both countries with frightening numbers of homicides).
In Argentina, traditionally a tranquil country, drug-linked crimes have been on the rise.
Defeating drug gangs was one of Macri’s three campaign mantras (zero poverty and ending corruption being the other two).
But, again, no single issue can explain the election results.
In his influential 1997 essay “The Rise of Illiberal Democracy,” Fareed Zakaria coined the term to describe countries that hold elections (of varying fairness) to choose their leaders, yet at the same time restrict civil liberties and democratic freedoms.
Under Chávez and Maduro, Venezuela became a fully illiberal democracy.
Under the Kirchners, Argentina was on its way there.
Yet the autocrat-wannabes were soundly defeated.
In the end, what Argentina and Venezuela show – and this is bad news for the likes of Orbán and Russian President Vladimir Putin – is the inherent fragility of illiberal democracy as a political system.
Under outright autocracy, public intellectuals, liberal parties, and the institutions of civil society are crushed; under illiberal democracy, they are harassed, but mostly survive.
Add to that modern technologies that make communicating and organizing cheap and easy, and an aspiring autocrat faces a volatile mix.
When objective circumstances and the correlation of forces (to use two old-fashioned concepts) permit, citizens spring into action.
That is exactly what happened in Argentina and Venezuela during the run-up to the recent elections.
In Buenos Aires Province, home to nearly 40% of Argentina’s voters, María Eugenia Vidal, a 42-year-old from Macri’s party, soundly defeated Cristina Kirchner’s former chief of staff to become the province’s first woman governor.
Neighborhood organizations proved key in defeating the local Peronist political machine, reputedly Argentina’s most potent.
In Venezuela, university students and NGOs designed election-monitoring systems to make potential fraud by the government easier to detect.
Attempts to make democracy illiberal are also foundering elsewhere in Latin America.
Ecuadorian citizens took to the streets to protest President Rafael Correa’s attempt to have himself re-elected indefinitely.
In Nicaragua, Sandinista President Daniel Ortega’s alliances with questionable local businessmen and his deal with a mysterious Chinese entrepreneur to build a new canal through Central America are not going unchallenged.
And Bolivia’s president Evo Morales, arguably the wiliest of the populist lot, is quietly switching camps.
He played a friendly football match with Macri the night before the new president’s inauguration.
In Argentina and Venezuela, what plausibly mattered most in the end was voters’ desire to live in what one might call a normal country.
That means a country where government institutions quietly do their work, presidents neither threaten citizens nor give three-hour speeches that television stations are forced to carry, people can walk down the street without fear, and the economy is not perennially teetering on the brink of financial collapse.
Beloved Argentine children’s songwriter María Elena Walsh once penned a ditty entitled “The World Upside Down,” in which thieves serve as judges, years last only a month, babies sport moustaches and beards, and dogs fall up, not down.
In Argentina and Venezuela, such a world could be coming to an end; for the sake of their citizens, may it right itself very soon.
The Inclusion Imperative
WASHINGTON, DC – Great advances have been made toward meeting the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) since they were initiated in 2000.
But, unfortunately, many countries still remain far from achieving them, and, even in countries that have made substantial progress, some groups – including indigenous peoples, residents of slums or remote areas, religious or other minorities, and people with disabilities – are consistently left out.
As a recent World Bank report emphasizes, understanding the causes of exclusion is critical to ensuring that future development efforts are more effective and inclusive.
The World Health Organization and the World Bank found that children with disabilities are less likely to enter school than their non-disabled peers – and that they also stay in school at lower rates.
In Indonesia, there is a 60% discrepancy between the share of disabled and non-disabled children attending primary school and a 58% discrepancy for secondary school.
The resulting feelings of exclusion and alienation can undermine social cohesion and even lead to unrest and conflict.
The emerging development agenda that will succeed the MDGs reflects a more acute awareness of the critical importance of inclusivity.
In its report on the post-2015 agenda, the High-Level Panel of Eminent Persons emphasized inclusion, stating that “no person – regardless of ethnicity, gender, geography, disability, race, or other status – is denied universal human rights and basic economic opportunities.”
The next development agenda, it asserts, must “end discrimination” and “tackle the causes of poverty, exclusion, and inequality.”
Given this, it is not surprising that inclusion is a cornerstone of the ambitious new proposal for the MDGs successor, the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) – beginning with the goal-selection process, in which developing countries are playing a leading role.
Achieving goals for social and economic inclusion will not be easy.
Targets must be clearly defined, measurable, and actionable, and they must be supported by effective monitoring, evaluation, and shared frameworks of accountability.
Moreover, a system must be created to help countries transform the global goals agreed at the United Nations into concrete measures that suit their particular economic circumstances and social norms.
To this end, Mexico’s government has hosted a series of workshops this year that have engaged representatives from governments, UN agencies, multilateral development banks, and academia to share visions, best practices, and methodologies to implement, measure, and monitor inclusive and sustainable goals.
These discussions were informed by the international community’s commitment to tackling the structural causes of poverty, inequality, and environmental degradation.
Social and economic inclusion lie at the heart of the World Bank Group’s goals of eliminating extreme poverty and boosting shared prosperity.
After all, these objectives cannot be achieved unless investment in development benefits everyone; ensuring this requires a focus on groups that have consistently been marginalized.
That is why the World Bank Group established equality as a key theme of this year’s Annual Meetings of the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund.
Policies and programs that seek to address social inclusion do not necessarily do more; rather, they do things differently.
With such an approach, South Africa has made considerable progress from institutionalized segregation toward an ideal of a “rainbow nation” in just two decades.
Similarly, Bangladesh has advanced inclusion by expanding participation in its once-exclusionary system of informal local justice, the shalish.
Vietnam’s Northern Mountains Poverty Reduction Project, created to provide improved social services and sustainable infrastructure to the region’s poor villagers, demonstrated the vital role that ethnic minority community members can play in development initiatives.
Finally, Mexico’s Inclusive Early Childhood Development Compensatory Education Project, focused on expanding access to early-childhood-development services and improving learning outcomes in the most marginalized municipalities, has engaged with excluded groups to identify their specific needs.
For example, it provides bilingual education, as requested by indigenous parents.
Of course, designing an inclusive post-2015 development agenda is only the first step.
Its successful implementation will require bold policies and strengthened global cooperation that address both the impact of inclusion and its underlying causes.
Moreover, world leaders must apply the key lessons of the MDGs: clear targets, adequate financing, and better data are essential to evidence-based policy and monitoring its effectiveness.
With such an approach, the next development agenda can finally ensure that all groups gain in terms of economic opportunity and social progress.
The Case for Muddling Through Brexit
SANTA BARBARA – Panic is gripping markets – stocks and bonds are falling, the pound is plumbing new depths, fears of recession are rampant – all because a slim majority of voters in the United Kingdom decided that the country should leave the European Union.
The British public has spoken and the die is cast.
The UK’s new prime minister, Theresa May, will have to invoke Article 50 of the Treaty of Lisbon.
Within two years, Britain will be officially out, like it or not.
But is all the market angst warranted?
One could argue that the outlook is much less dire than most people realize.
My advice is to take a deep breath and adopt the long view, because this story is far from over.
After all is said and done, the ending could in fact turn out to be surprisingly benign and, ironically, similar to what exists now.
The challenges ahead are obvious.
The narrow majority for “Leave” implies that there are still many in Britain who deeply resent the idea of “Brexit.”
Start with “the City,” London’s Wall Street, which, despite the UK’s use of the pound rather than the euro, has long served as the EU’s pulsing financial center and its gateway to the rest of the world’s markets.
With Britain out altogether, large sectors of the City’s business can be expected to migrate to new homes on the continent.
The only question is which city will win the race to replace London.
The most logical choice would seem to be Frankfurt, the home of the European Central Bank, but Paris and Amsterdam are also in the running.
Britain’s exporters are also unhappy because half of their sales are to fellow EU members.