But this logic failed to account for the political ramifications, which threaten to undermine European unity further.
German voters – who will head to the polls later this month – are unmistakably anxious.
While it may be too late to avoid forgiving Greece’s existing debt, Germany’s next government will not have a mandate to provide more loans.
As a result, important projects like establishing a European banking union, which would require a fiscal backstop, are likely to be delayed or even endangered.
The practice of presenting technocratic faits accomplis to national parliaments will only breed deeper resentments.
To be sure, there is always the possibility that Greece’s increasingly dire situation will finally catalyze the creation of a democratically legitimate pan-European bailout fund that provides automatic and unconditional relief to struggling countries.
The European Union would thus be transformed into a true federation, the United States of Europe.
That would be a triumph for the European project.
Given the improbability of such an outcome, Europeans must brace themselves for another bout of political and legal turmoil.
The Europe that emerges from it could look, for better or worse, very different from the Europe of today.
The Online Fight Against ISIS
WASHINGTON, DC – Even as the United States and its allies carry out aerial bombardments in Iraq and Syria, their target, the Islamic State (ISIS), may be preparing to retaliate on another front.
By taking the battle into cyberspace, ISIS would gain many of the advantages of asymmetric warfare – unless the US organizes itself to counter the group’s efforts.
The entry barriers to cyber warfare are remarkably low, even for non-state actors.
Even if ISIS does not currently have the capability to carry out cyber-attacks, it is unlikely to find it difficult to recruit followers with the requisite expertise; in the past, other terrorist and insurgent organizations, including Al Qaeda, have done just that.
There are bound to be cyber mercenaries, sympathizers, and freelancers available if the price is right.
Experts have cautioned that ISIS could strike unprotected infrastructure or private residences.
Hundreds of thousands of industrial and commercial control systems, including the rapidly growing Internet of Things, are leaving ever-wider swaths of everyday life vulnerable to disruption.
And far more troubling is the warning by the Nuclear Threat Initiative, a nonprofit devoted to strengthening global security, that many civilian and military nuclear facilities are inadequately protected against cyber-attacks.
Late last year, computer and network security researchers revealed, to little surprise or fanfare, that ISIS was active on the so-called dark web.
These websites, which are invisible to search engines and accessible only through specialized software, are often havens for purveyors of child pornography, drugs, or other illicit products, including hacking services and malicious software.
This development was the first sign that ISIS was actively seeking to develop a cyber capability that it could deploy even if it loses its footing on the ground.
So far, terrorists have lagged behind their criminal counterparts in adopting virtual currencies like the peer-to-peer currency Bitcoin.
But this could change if Western countries are successful in countering ISIS’s current sources of funding, including oil smuggling and extortion.
Indeed, ISIS has allegedly already solicited Bitcoin donations.
The group is also using the dark web to recruit and disseminate its propaganda to aspiring jihadists.
For sympathetic audiences, an online push can sometimes be enough to spark violent action.
This is especially true for individuals who are already radicalized, such as Syed Farook and Tashfeen Malik, the husband and wife who opened fire on a holiday party in San Bernardino, California, in December.
Perhaps most troubling from an operational perspective is the possibility that ISIS could use the dark web to coordinate with operatives to plan and plot a major attack in Europe or the US.
Terrorists are always seeking to stay one step ahead of law enforcement and intelligence services; so ISIS can be expected to seek software that encrypts a user’s IP address and routes Internet traffic through a series of anonymized servers.
To be sure, ISIS’s foray into cyberspace creates opportunities for Western law enforcement and intelligence agencies to conduct surveillance, if they can develop the capacity to do so.
Just as ISIS has proved far from omnipotent on the physical battlefield, it can also be defeated in cyberspace.
To fight effectively in this borderless domain, the US will have to work closely with its international partners.
But there are steps that it can take on its own.
Recently, Secretary of Defense Ashton Carter urged US Cyber Command – the arm of the military dedicated to cyberspace operations – to “intensify the fight” against ISIS.
But the US would be wise to consider expanding the fight by recruiting civilian volunteers.
When it comes to cyber-attacks, numbers matter.
Other countries, such as Iran, China, and North Korea, already boast large cyber armies, with tens of thousands of recruits who can monitor, track, counter, and mitigate threats to the country.
In the US, the Michigan Cyber Civilian Corps has organized itself to respond to cyber-attacks.
Replicating this program – described as something between a “volunteer fire department and the national guard” – on a national level could bolster US capabilities.
The Department of Homeland Security has already considered creating a “cyber reserve” of computer experts, and a report by Booz Allen Hamilton, a technology and security firm, suggested similar efforts to provide the US with more cyber warriors in the event of an attack.
To prevail against ISIS, the US and its cyber soldiers will have to be capable of reacting quickly, while being guided by an overarching strategy.
Countering ISIS online will require a continuously adaptive response.
And it will require the manpower to make that possible.
The Open Education Revolution
As the founders of two of the world’s largest open-source media platforms – Wikipedia and Connexions – we have both been accused of being dreamers.
Independently, we became infected with the idea of creating a Web platform that would enable anyone to contribute their knowledge to free and open learning resources.
Jimmy started with his popularly generated encyclopedia.
Rich developed a platform for authors, teachers, and students to create, remix, and share courses and textbooks.
Almost everybody dismissed these dreams.
Now, with the support of untold legions – from Nobel Laureates to junior high school kids from East Timor to East Los Angeles – Wikipedia and Connexions have spread around the globe and today are organic, growing information bases used by hundreds of millions of people.
We want to infect you with the dream that anyone can become part of a new movement with the potential to change the world of education.
This movement can redefine forever how knowledge is created and used.
Today, some community college students have to quit school because their textbooks cost more than their tuition; and today, some third graders have to share math texts because there aren’t enough to go around.
But imagine a world where textbooks and other learning materials are available to everyone for free over the Web and at low cost in print.
Today, language barriers prevent many immigrant parents from helping their children with their homework because the texts are only in English.
But imagine a world where textbooks are adapted to many learning styles and translated into myriad languages.
Today, Pluto remains on the list of planets in science textbooks, and who knows how long it will take for it to be removed.
But imagine a world where textbooks are continually updated and corrected by a legion of contributors.
Such a world was just a dream a decade ago.
But now the puzzle pieces of the Open Education movement have come together, so that anyone, anywhere can write, assemble, customize, and publish their own open course or textbook.
Open licenses make the materials legal to use and remix.
Technical innovations like XML and print-on-demand make delivering the output technically feasible and inexpensive.
The new development and distribution models promoted by the Open Education movement represent a natural and inevitable evolution of the educational publishing industry.
It parallels the evolution of the software industry (towards Linux and other open-source software); the music industry (recall the band Radiohead’s recent “pay what you like” digital download); and scholarly publishing (the United States government recently mandated online public access to all research funded by the National Institutes of Health – $28.9 billion this year).
The exciting thing about Open Education is that free access is just the beginning.
Open Education promises to turn the current textbook production pipeline into a vast dynamic knowledge ecosystem that is in a constant state of creation, use, reuse, and improvement.
Open Education promises to provide children with learning materials tailored to their individual needs, in contrast to today’s “off the rack” materials, together with quicker feedback loops that match learning outcomes more directly with content development and improvement.
And Open Education promises new approaches to collaborative learning that leverage social interaction among students and teachers worldwide.
Late last year in Cape Town, we joined delegates from around the world to reach a consensus on Open Education’s ideals and approaches, and we committed ourselves to them in the Cape Town Open Education Declaration, which was officially released on January 22.
(See www.capetowndeclaration.org .)
Everyone has something to teach.
Everyone has something to learn.
Together, we can all help transform the way the world develops, disseminates, and uses knowledge.
Together, we can help make the dream of Open Education a reality.
The Operating System that Stole Christmas
Before asking for a new Windows PC this holiday season, remember the old adage: “Be careful about what you wish for.”
In the best of all worlds, we would all benefit from the so-called “network effects” that result from most people using the same software: everyone could easily communicate with each other and teach each other how to use the software efficiently.
Unfortunately, since Microsoft uses network effects to maximize its profits rather than to benefit users, the world it delivers is far from the best.
Consider Vista, yet another “great” new operating system that Microsoft rolled out this year, together with Office 2007.
The first person at my company to use Vista was our Executive Vice-President. He was furious.
Vista and Office 2007 came with his new Dell computer by default.
Dell didn’t ask: “Would you prefer the old versions of the operating system and MS Office that you know how to use?”
So our VP got a shiny new computer that he didn’t know how to use: functions were rearranged, and keyboard shortcuts were different.
Think of the productivity cost of millions like him having to adjust to a new system.
Moreover, his coworkers couldn’t read the Microsoft Word files that he sent them in the new “.docx” format.
They wrote back and asked him to resend files in the older “.doc” format – which might not have worked if he had inadvertently used some new-fangled formatting feature.
To be sure, Microsoft does provide a patch that allows old versions of Office to read the new “.docx” format.
But Microsoft doesn’t publicize it – or warn you if your Office 2007 file is about to become incompatible with older versions.
While Microsoft could have kept the traditional “.doc” as its default format for MS Word, this would not have served its purpose: eventually, after enough of the world pays for Office 2007, holdouts will be dragged along, kicking and screaming.
Then, in four or five years, Microsoft will begin our agony all over again.
Obviously, Microsoft owns its old software and can decide at what price to sell it – or whether to sell it at all.
More subtly, Microsoft can control expectations, which turn out to be self-fulfilling when network economies are substantial, as they are in software markets.
If everyone woke up tomorrow expecting that the world would shift to Apple within a year, sales of Windows would plummet.
Why buy a Windows machine when all your colleagues will own Macintoshes and can help you on them but not Windows, and when all the independent software developers will be programming for the Mac’s new Leopard operating system?
But that is not our world.
Whenever Microsoft rolls out a new operating system, the question is not whether you should switch, but when.
Adding new features can speed the transition, but what is necessary is only that the new system be incompatible with existing systems in certain respects, and that a sufficient number of people expect that it will become the new standard.
Of course, creating new software is costly.
So why should Microsoft bother?
The Nobel laureate Ronald Coase answered that question long ago.
According to “the Coase Conjecture,” a monopolist selling a durable good must sell it at marginal cost.
For Microsoft, the problem is that the marginal cost of software is zero.
As a result, Microsoft cannot extract anything close to its full monopoly rents unless it sells upgrades.
After all, even though Microsoft has a monopoly of primary sales of its software, copies sold in 2007 compete with those sold in 2006.
So, by creating incompatibilities, some subtle and some obvious, that make its old software obsolete, Microsoft can sell its operating systems at high profit margins without fear that people will wait until the price drops.
The price will never drop, because Microsoft will just roll out a new system, again at high profit margins.
Microsoft has been in antitrust trouble for 15 years, and, despite the company’s recent agreement with the European Union to license its source code, it will probably be in trouble again.
When that happens, I hope the antitrust authorities will consider a remedy that Ian Ayres, Hal Varian, and I devised.
Suppose Microsoft had to license its old software freely whenever it brings out a new version. This would give the company an incentive to ensure that new versions are compatible with and significantly better than old versions – otherwise the new versions wouldn’t sell, or at least not easily.
SEOUL – Hubris usually gives birth to disaster. The root cause of the current global crisis was intellectual hubris in the form of the blind belief that markets would always resolve their own problems and contradictions.
Thirty years after the Reagan-Thatcher revolution, the ideological pendulum has begun to swing in the opposite direction.
Each time in the last hundred years that a shift of this magnitude has occurred in beliefs about state-market relations, a major political-economic upheaval has ensued.
For example, World War I marked the end of the nineteenth-century’s laissez-faire liberalism and ushered in a period of state-centered economic systems.
The Great Depression and World War II opened the new era of the Bretton Woods system of a more balanced state-market relationship.
Similarly, the 2008 global financial crisis ended three decades of neo-liberalism, characterized by free trade and financial globalization.
We still do not know the nature of the era ahead of us; we can only be certain that the global economy is in the middle of a major transition, and that the old ways will not work anymore.
The main concern in this period of great uncertainty is whether the transition to a new paradigm can be managed without further destabilizing the international political-economic order.
There are already some serious signs of distress – the currency war between the United States and China, and its spread to other countries, being a case in point.
Indeed, current global conditions have more worrying similarities to the early 1930’s than they have differences.
Then, every state looked inward, squandering valuable opportunities to achieve common prosperity through international policy coordination.
The leadership vacuum caused by America’s unwillingness to cooperate and Britain’s sudden inability to lead resulted in the failure of the London Conference of 1933, which is often seen as opening the way to the Great Depression and the catastrophe of World War II.
Having learned the lessons of the 1930’s, the post-war global economic order was built on a network of international institutions, such as the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank, and what ultimately became the World Trade Organization.
But the lessons of the past seem to be too distant in policymakers’ minds these days, whereas domestic political pressure to put national economies first appears overwhelming.
In addition, the institutions created in the days following WWII no longer seem effective enough to meet the new challenges of the global economy, and thus have lost some of their legitimacy.
For example, the IMF’s authority has suffered in the recent decade – especially in Asia – from the fund’s deep commitment to neo-liberal orthodoxy and the so-called “Washington Consensus.”
Reinvigorating these institutions is the first step toward solving the global economy’s current problems.
We need their help to implement norms, principles, rules, and decision-making procedures, thereby mitigating the endemic free-rider problems in quasi-anarchical international society.
Thus, the first task for the G-20 meeting on November 11-12 in Seoul must be to revitalize and strengthen the IMF and global financial regulation.
If the G-20 leaders can also make meaningful progress towards resolving the Doha Round of trade negotiations, they will add momentum for global economic stabilization.
There are signs that the Seoul meeting may be successful.
The meeting of G-20 finance ministers and central bankers in the South Korean city of Kyeongju on October 22 produced some noteworthy achievements, such as shifting 6% of the IMF’s voting quota from overrepresented Europe to underrepresented emerging countries, doubling members’ quotas, and reducing Europe’s representation on the Fund’s executive board by two seats.
IMF Managing Director Dominique Strauss-Kahn declared the move “historic” and the most important decision on the Fund’s governance since its establishment in 1944.
The IMF also was empowered to conduct the Mutual Assessment Process of each country’s macroeconomic policies under the Framework for Strong, Sustainable, and Balanced Growth.
That authority should allow the Fund to inspect even the world’s mightiest economies, the US and China.
The recent agreement by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision on a new capital-adequacy framework is another positive step.
But the key issues lingering in the minds of the G-20 leaders will be exchange rates and global imbalances.
The Kyeongju meeting decided that the G-20 countries would move toward market-determined exchange rates and pursue “politics conducive to reducing excessive imbalances and maintaining current-account imbalances at sustainable levels.”
These two issues may or may not be on the table for further discussion in Seoul.
If G-20 leaders can reach specific and effective agreements on exchange rates and global imbalances without overshadowing other issues, the prospects for a soft-landing for the global economy will improve greatly.
If not, protectionism and trade wars will intensify, and we will come one step closer to reliving the nightmare of the 1930’s.
Either way, the Seoul G-20 summit will likely mark a watershed in the history of the post-war global political economy.
The Ordeal of Pius XII
ROME – Once again, the reputation of Pope Pius XII is under scrutiny and attack.
Indeed, so searching are the questions and so inflamed are discussions about the Roman Catholic Church’s pontiff during World War II that the current pope, Benedict XVI, recently announced that he may postpone Pius’s beatification until the Vatican’s archives for the war years are opened and examined.
Why is Pius XII so often accused of having been almost an accomplice of Nazi Germany when, during his papacy, the Catholic Church in Rome protected and hid thousands of Jews?
This is one of the knottiest historical questions of our times.
For several years after WWII’s end, Pius XII enjoyed great popularity, even within the Jewish community.
The tide turned during the 1960’s, with Rolf Hochhuth’s play The Deputy the starting point for feverish questioning of Pius’s reputation.
But to understand how Pius’s reputation began to be challenged, we must see Hochhuth’s play within the context of the great social and cultural upheavals of the 1960’s.
The German left wanted to change the interpretation of German history that was the foundation for the democratic and capitalist West Germany built by Chancellor Konrad Adenauer.
That interpretation considered the horrors of Hitler’s National Socialism as a consequence of apostasy in Germany.
In the 1920’s and 1930’s, Germany’s traditional Christian values and culture had collapsed under the attack of two atheist ideologies: communism and Nazism.
Both destroyed the Weimar Republic, acting as a kind of evil twins who hated each other, yet shared a common hatred of Christianity and democracy.
The new interpretation that came with the radicalized German youth movement of 1968 argued that the Hitler era was not a sharp break with German history, but rather continuous with it.
The only direction for German culture that did not lead to the spiritual abyss of Nazism – according to this radical new interpretation – was Marxism.
Not the fossilized Marxism of the German Democratic Republic, of course, but the new “critical” Marxism espoused by figures such as Herbert Marcuse.
Given the distortion of reality that lay behind this vision, it is easy to understand how Pius XII came to be considered by its advocates an ally of Hitler.
Indeed, on the same basis, Adenauer could be (and was) considered a national socialist.
True, Pius XII did not condemn Nazism during the war.
But his predecessor Pope Pius XI had already done that, in the Encyclical Mit Brennender Sorge (“With Burning Concern”).
Pius XI had also condemned Communism, in the Encyclical Divini Redemptoris .
So the Church’s teachings about the evils of Nazism were crystal clear to everyone.
So why didn’t Pius XII reiterate this condemnation of National Socialism during the war?
To answer this question, we need to see the situation through the eyes of the man who led the Catholic Church during those years.
It is a vision very different from ours.
To a neutral observer in the 1940’s, the war was mainly a war of Nazism versus Communism.
Europe was the prize.
The Western democracies, as most historians now acknowledge, played a comparatively minor role in the great military struggle.
The Pope believed that he could either condemn both totalitarian powers or condemn neither of them.
But any condemnation by Pius of Communism would have been exploited by Nazi propaganda as support for Hitler’s war effort.
And a condemnation of Nazism could have been misinterpreted as an attack not against Nazism, but against Germany in its life-and-death struggle with Stalin’s Communist regime.
Very few people in the Vatican – indeed, in Europe at large – had any real knowledge in those days of the vast industrial might of the United States.
And even those who did know something about American power, doubted that the Americans would accept the dangers and expense of defending Europe against Communism after Nazi Germany was defeated.
Nobody could imagine that the invention of the atomic bomb would give the US such an extraordinary military advantage that defending Europe would become feasible and acceptable to the American public.
Pius XII was a Pope, not a prophet.
He did not know about all this and could not reasonably have known.
So what was the Pope’s vision during the war years?
A longstanding Germanophile, Pius XII was nonetheless anti-Nazi.
He hoped that Germany could be separated from Nazism, that Nazism could be destroyed without destroying Germany, thus preserving that great nation as a bulwark against the Soviet Union.
This was exactly the vision held by the German patriots who participated in the conspiracy to assassinate Hitler on July 20, 1944.
Most of them paid with their lives, and are now honored in the West for their courage and principles.
Yet Pius is ritually condemned.
The Germany of Klaus von Stauffenberg, not Hitler, was the Germany that Pius XII loved.
Indeed, papal diplomats not only knew about the plot against Hitler, but sought to mediate between the conspirators and the Allied Powers. 
The hope of breaking Nazi power while preserving Germany from the destiny of utter destruction and bloodshed that awaited it in the last months of the war was a noble one, even if in the end it proved to be unrealistic.
If Pius sinned with this hope, his was a noble sin.
The Organ Crisis
LONDON
 – Organ transplantation is one of the most impressive achievements of modern medicine.
It has brought hope to millions of patients suffering from previously fatal organ failure.
For many, it has made life longer and better.
It has benefited many professionals and industries, too, by becoming a new source of pride, funding, and profit.
Struggling to contain costs, health-care payers are also among its beneficiaries.
Kidney transplantation, for example, has proved to be less costly than dialysis.
Yet, since its inception, transplant medicine has been grappling with a rapidly increasing gap between the supply of organs and demand for them.
For most stakeholders, the often dire consequences gave rise to a whole set of solutions, all based on one general strategy: if we are short of organs, then let us get more of them.
This strategy has come with a high price tag, however.
On the one hand, it has given rise to some exceptionally corrupt practices, such as organ trafficking, transplant tourism, and many other ugly phenomena associated with a black market in organs.
On the other hand, it has put transplant ethics under severe strain.
Indeed, transplant ethics has been on a slippery slope almost since transplants began.
The strategy of getting more organs has pushed, and continues to push, the ethical line to places that had previously been deemed immoral.
To tackle insufficient supply from the dead, we first embraced an increasingly inclusive, and at any rate flexible, definition of death.
This has often raised suspicions about the motivations of doctors in pronouncing a candidate donor’s death.
We then came up with the idea of opt-out consent for deceased organ donation.
This system, which allows organs to be harvested also from refusers who have failed to express their refusal, has not increased trust in medicine, either.
As the organ crisis continued to deepen, we allowed donations from the living.
This was particularly audacious, for it required us to abandon the supreme Hippocratic principle according to which it is unprofessional to injure a healthy person.
In the category of living donations, we first permitted only directed donations by relatives and non-directed donations by non-relatives.
We assumed that family ties and non-directedness would preclude coercion and commerce.
However, the mechanisms we used to confirm that assumption were conveniently lax.
They did not allow certain forms of coercion to interfere with the donor’s consent.
Nor were they overly fastidious about clandestine commercial ties.
By that time, we had already become aware that interests in organ commerce were constantly intensifying, and that those in need of organs or money were increasingly likely to turn to the black market or seek a legal loophole that would allow them to conceal the commercial transaction behind some legitimate gesture.
Until recently, we have not done much about the black market (the 2008 Declaration of Istanbul marks the beginning of a determined struggle against this market), but we banned altruistic directed donations by living non-relatives out of fear that they would become that legal loophole.
This fear did not last long, though.
The increasing demand for more organs has driven us to legitimize this category as well.
Indeed, it has helped a lot, but it has not sufficed, either.
Currently, we peddle the idea of quasi-non-commercial incentives for organ donations from both the deceased and the living.
For example, the new Israeli transplant law provides incentives for people to sign a donor card by giving them and their relatives priority on transplant waiting lists.
This material incentive is in clear breach of the principle that organs should be distributed according to need only.
Moreover, it is likely to discriminate against people who are either unaware of the donor-card system or tend to refuse to sign the card for reasons associated with religious beliefs or low trust in the medical authorities.
The same law indeed forbids commerce in organs, but offers living donors reimbursement of expenses that contains fixed-sum elements.
Moreover, the Israeli National Transplant and Organ Donation Center now openly encourages providers, insurance companies, and the Donor Card Institution, to pay families who consent to donate the organs of their deceased relative.
Such arrangements, which should be described as government-sponsored commercialism, are considered unacceptable by all relevant international declarations.
If things continue as they have, we will soon become tired of quick-fix remedies.
Indeed, advocates of the increasingly popular idea of a regulated market in organs claim that it is the ultimate treatment.
Perhaps it is.
But let us not even go there!
For even if we believe that buyers and sellers of organs can in principle enter the transaction on the basis of free choice, none of them has chosen to face the underlying dilemma in the first place.
Both are victims: the buyer is a victim of morbidity and declining social solidarity, while the seller is a victim of poverty and other forms of financial distress.
A regulated market would not challenge these man-made facts.
Instead, it would reaffirm them more than any previous ethical solution has ever done.
Many of the social crises that we currently face are just symptoms.
Yet the underlying problems must be addressed as well if we are to lead the kind of life that human beings can and deserve to have.
The organ crisis is no different.
Instead of medicalizing and ethicalizing it, let us direct our main efforts at draining the swamp.
Organ transplantation, like mosquito repellent, should be used sparingly, and only when there is no other choice.
The Other Asia
WASHINGTON, DC – South Asia presents a depressing paradox.
It is among the fastest growing regions in the world, but it is also home to the largest concentration of people living in debilitating poverty, conflict, and human misery.
While South Asia is far more developed than Sub-Saharan Africa, and India (the largest country in the region) has achieved lower middle-income status, South Asia has many more poor people than Sub-Saharan Africa.
This raises the big question of whether the best escape from poverty comes from general economic growth or from a direct attack on poverty.
The answer depends on where one looks.
Stupendous growth hides deep pockets of poverty.
For the countries of South Asia, poverty has morphed from a national to a sub-national problem.
Although economic growth has reduced South Asia’s poverty rate, it has not fallen fast enough to reduce the total number of poor people.
The number of people living on less than $1.25 a day increased from 549 million in 1981 to 595 million in 2005.
In India, which accounts for almost three-quarters of this population, the numbers increased from 420 million to 455 million during this period.
Besides the slow pace of poverty reduction, human development has not kept up with the pace of income growth, either.
There are more than 250 million children in South Asia who are undernourished, and more than 30 million children who do not go to school.
Over one-third of adult women are anemic.
The share of female employment in total employment is among the lowest in the world.
Indeed, South Asia, with deeper regional disparities than the rest of the world, is really two South Asia’s. A lot of attention has been given to the “Shining Asia,” while the “Suffering Asia” has been forgotten.
The gap between them is so wide that they seem to be anchored in two different centuries.
Worse still, it continues to increase.
The leading regions have experienced rapid growth.
They have acted as gateways connecting South Asia to the developed world, and have benefited from globalization, education, capital accumulation, and technological advancement.
This is sustainable as there is huge room for South Asia to catch up to rich countries’ productivity levels.
This transformation has become a virtuous circle where initial growth has spiraled into greater growth, leading to more growth.
Some leading regions in India are now the envy of other middle income countries.
Indeed growth can eliminate poverty in leading regions in a generation.
But the lagging regions are doing no better than many Sub-Saharan African countries.
Indeed, their social and human development indicators are worse than in Sub-Saharan Africa.
South Asia’s worst problems – poverty, conflict, hunger, and gender inequalities – are largely concentrated in its lagging regions, where there are limits to growth, because geography, institutions, and globalization will continue to favor the concentration of economic activity in the leading regions.
With migration to leading regions low, poverty remains concentrated in the lagging regions.
What can be done?
There is no universal “fix” in economic development, and pluralism of approaches has great value.
The challenge is to find what works best inwhich setting.
While economic growth is critical for poverty reduction, reviving growth in lagging regions will take time.
Rather than wait for a rising tide to lift all boats, policymakers should consider direct policy interventionsto reduce poverty.
A direct attack on poverty can yield a double dividend: in reducing human misery, it could spark growth, thereby creating more political space for direct poverty reduction.
A high priority should be given to increasing pro-poor fiscal transfers.
Lagging states spend considerably less than leading states on social services, including education and health care.
Poor regions have a low base of economic activity to tax, which prevents them from investing in human and physical capital.
Achieving equity through fiscal transfers can ensure a level playing field.
But simply directing financial resources to lagging regions will not be enough to solve their problems.
For example, the gains from labor mobility have not been equally sharedbetween educated and uneducated migrants.
The gains are much higher for skilled workers, so the mobility rate increases with education.
The mobility of university graduates is much higher than the mobility of unskilled workers.
Removing barriers to human mobility – such as labor laws, state-specific social-welfare programs, and housing-market distortions – should be an integral part of development.
Human mobility promotes growth and reduces poverty. It also empowers traditionally disadvantaged groups, particularly women.
Likewise, slow agricultural growth has constrained economic opportunities for the vast majority of poor people in lagging regions.
Policymakers should recast agriculture in the new environment of globalization, supply chains, and growing domestic demand.
The food-price crisis of two years ago served as a wake-up call, and has created an opportunity to revisit existing agricultural policies.
Regional development policies to promote so-called “equitable growth” are not a solution, for two reasons. First, empirical evidence shows that convergence of per capita income between lagging and leading regions is neither a necessary nor a sufficient condition for achieving poverty reduction and social convergence.
Second, regional policies that promote “balanced” growth could lower overall growth, thereby impeding poverty reduction.
South Asia is at a critical stage in its historical transformation, when deepening economic disparities could stifle growth itself.
If not addressed through direct measures, all of Asia will suffer.
The Other, Brighter Africa
LONDON – The usual images of Africa are of a continent mired in conflict and squalor.
But this picture, based on Africa’s most corrupt regimes, is unfair and misleading – like claiming that all Europeans are guilty of “ethnic cleansing” because of what happened in the former Yugoslavia.
Yes, African has some failed states, but most of its 53 countries are mostly peaceful, agreeable places.
Last year, the annual Ibrahim Index of African governance, produced by my foundation, showed that governance had improved in two-thirds of African countries.
And if we look at politicians such as Joaquim Chissano, the former president of Mozambique, or Festus Mogae, the former president of Botswana, as well as men like Kofi Annan and Nelson Mandela, the high caliber of African leadership is obvious.
This matters because good governance is the cornerstone of development.
Governments must establish an enabling environment for the private sector to create jobs, and officials cannot consider the public purse to be a private bank account.
Government is responsible for delivering services, but it is up to civil society to be vigilant and ensure that officials work toward these aims.
A strong civil society that monitors and demands more of its leaders is vital to improving Africa’s governance.
As with economics, demand stimulates supply.
The annual Ibrahim Index of African Governance tracks government performance across sub-Saharan Africa, providing a tool that allows citizens and civil-society groups to monitor their governments’ progress.
We look at almost a hundred indicators and define governance in a new way – as the public goods and services that should be provided to citizens.
We do not measure inputs – including aid or natural-resource revenues – or government promises and commitments; instead, we have chosen to measure the impact of government activities on the lives of citizens.
Alongside this focus on improving African governance, we must also put pressure on our leaders to encourage regional integration.
Many small, landlocked African countries will never become serious players in the global economy without increased cooperation within their own regions.
Today’s haphazard, overlapping regional integration is proving largely ineffective, and this severely hampers African countries’ ability to compete in international markets.
One of the consequences of this lack of cooperation for Africa’s 967 million people is the bureaucratic replication and currency-exchange issues that being divided into 53 countries entails.
China, with 1.3 billion people, is just one country; and the European Union, with some 500 million people, functions as a single economic market, with most of its members sharing a single currency.
If Africa’s small and diverse nations do not come together, they will never integrate properly into the world economy, and so will not reap the benefits of our globalised world.
Economic integration must be backed up by increased intra-regional trade; less than 4% of Africa’s trade is between African countries, compared to over 70% in Europe and over 50% in Asia.
The International Monetary Fund credits Asian intra-regional trade as the main factor behind its recent export boom and strong economic growth.
Africa, with its huge and often untapped markets, must follow the same path.
Africans themselves must tackle these issues, but our international partners have an important role to play.
The debate over the failure of international aid to produce development, together with the current financial crisis, have added weight to arguments against development assistance.
But the argument should not be about whether to provide aid – no one can question the many successes that aid has brought, or its importance in providing a safety net for those who would otherwise be left to suffer.
The argument should instead be focused on how to get the most effective results out of aid, both for the recipients and for a donor country’s tax-payers. Aid, I believe, is best focused on infrastructure – the bridges, roads, Internet cables, and power stations that will help our economies to grow and allow us to trade more easily with each other.
Accompanying this should be a focus on the “software” of development – health and education.
If aid satisfies basic governance conditionality and is directed at these vital areas, Africa will have a far greater chance of progressing.
For too long there has been international dismay at the state of governance in Africa; corruption and at times a complete lack of accountability are blamed for all of Africa’s ills.
Although this is largely the case, no one can claim that Africans have a monopoly on governance failures.
The current financial crisis offers a perfect example, as it was poor governance in the banking sector that brought so many of the world’s great economies to their knees.
Moreover, while the international community is quick to pounce on African leaders for governance failures, it seems less enthusiastic about examining its role in the flight of African assets.
Europe and America were slow to enact legislation barring their companies from bribing foreign government officials in return for mining concessions or other advantages, and there has been limited enforcement of the rules.
Similarly, European and American banks keep the resources that are looted from Africa.
Then there is the unresolved problem of trade barriers.
If African products are forced to compete in markets skewed toward European and American producers, Africans do not have a fair chance to develop.
The issue of trade barriers speaks directly to the question of whether there is a genuine international commitment to Africa’s development.
Finally, there is the problem of limited resources for international peacekeeping operations in Africa – always with disastrous results.
In my own country, Sudan, and its western state of Darfur, African Union (AU) troops try to protect civilians.
While the AU is providing soldiers to police the conflict, the United Nations and the international community have been tasked with providing resources and equipment, which are widely viewed as inadequate.
No one denies that Africa has many problems.
But those problems should not be allowed to obscure the continent’s many success stories – much less to be defined as Africa’s alone.
The Other Half of the Peace Process
PRINCETON - American officials usually spend enormous energy highlighting the “process” in the Middle East “peace process.”
Only in the last 18 months of a second term president or following a military engagement in the Middle East does the United States actually start to concern itself with “peace.”
This pattern seems to be holding true for next week’s US-sponsored Middle East peace conference in Annapolis, Maryland.
The difference now is that, unlike the Madrid Conference after the 1991 American-led Gulf War, the current effort is coming after a perceived American defeat in Iraq.
Assuming that the Bush administration is serious in its current efforts, the US must have a Plan B in case the talks fail.
For Palestinians, the main concern is to avoid negative repercussions if they do.
Unlike former President Bill Clinton, who blamed Yassir Arafat for the failure of the Camp David talks in 2000, the Bush administration must honor its commitment not to point fingers or allow either side to use failure to advance its strategic goals.
Palestinian negotiators have always had to balance three issues: historic rights, current realities, and the price of using their negative power.
For Palestinians, the code words for historic rights –liberating Palestinian land, securing the right of return for refugees, and insisting on a truly independent state – are “international legitimacy.”
For both the PLO and Hamas, this refers to various UN resolutions and international public opinion, which have amounted to little more than lip service on the part of Western powers and Arab and Islamic leaders, whose statements raise false hopes, enticing Palestinian negotiators to harden their positions.
The current realities that the Palestinians must reckon with include their strategic, political, and economic imbalance vis-à-vis Israel and the US, the reality of occupation, and the challenges of diaspora life.
For example, Israel’s harsh policies to confront the 1987 intifada , coupled with the boycott of the PLO by oil-rich Arab countries (because of its failure to oppose Saddam Hussein’s occupation of Kuwait) formed a potent reality check for the Palestinian leadership.
Finally, Palestinian negotiators must consider the consequences of using their most valuable bargaining chip – the ability to reject a perceived bad deal – in terms of its direct effect on Palestinians and the strong possibility of continued expansion of Jewish settlements on Palestinian lands.
The late Haider Abdel Shafi repeatedly stated one of the major problems in the Oslo Accords, namely that it didn’t secure the halt of settlement expansion in the interim period or if the final status talks failed.
At Camp David II, former Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Barak cleverly insisted that the first clause of his offer included acceptance of the end of the conflict, which was a problem for Palestinians, given that historic rights remained unresolved.
Arafat used his negative power and blocked a settlement, but he couldn’t predict the consequences.
This time, Palestinian negotiators insist that they do not plan to engage in substantive negotiations.
They argue that the positions acceptable in Taba (following the failure of Camp David II) must be the basis of any agreement, and that what needs to be negotiated now is the timetable for implementation.
Backed by a reasonable Arab peace plan, they will insist that there is already a worldwide consensus on restoring the 1967 borders (with mutual adjustments of equal size and quality), the need for a fair agreement on dealing with refugees, and a formula to share Jerusalem.
As a result, Palestinian negotiators have reversed their position on the step-by-step approach to negotiations – an approach that proved disastrous, as it was exploited by radicals on both sides and gave the Israelis time to build more illegal settlements.
They insist that a broad agreement (in writing) must be reached before the talks.
Fears abound among Palestinians of another spasm of violence if no agreement is reached before Annapolis and this round of talks fails.
But what is crucially important for Palestinians is that, whatever the outcome, new settlements must not be built and land expropriation must end.
US Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice has said that the creation of a Palestinian state is a component of US national security.
But a Palestinian state will not appear now or in ten years if Israel continues build settlements in areas slated to be part of it.
The Other Palestinian Revolution
The euphoria that has, for over a week, greeted Mahmoud Abbas's election as President of the Palestinian Authority was perhaps justified.
But now it is time for a clear-eyed assessment of what lies before Palestinians, Israelis, and, perhaps more importantly, for the wider Arab world.
Such an assessment requires acknowledging that the election was far from flawless: Hamas and Islamic Jihad boycotted the poll, and Marwan Barghouti, a fellow Fatah member with Abbas and the one candidate who could seriously have challenged him, was ungently persuaded by the movement's leadership to withdraw his candidacy in order to present a unified front.
Moreover, Abbas (also known as Abu Mazen) succeeded in getting the dozen or so Palestinian security services and militias under his control. This guaranteed his victory, though the parades of armed men brandishing guns at his rallies were not exactly what democratic norms call for.
Yet the fact remains that after decades of Yasir Arafat's autocratic rule, and despite the obvious constraints of continued Israeli occupation, the Palestinians did elect a leader in a relatively free and competitive election.
For years, Arafat avoided holding elections, as required by the laws of the Palestinian Authority, under the pretense that they cannot be held under occupation: but, lo and behold, two months after his demise, an election was held - and with resounding success.
The presidential election will obviously serve as a catalyst for renewed, and possibly more successful, negotiations with Israel.
But the impact of the Palestinian vote will also be watched closely in the Arab world, because what happened in the West Bank and Gaza is unparalleled in the annals of Arab politics.
Abbas will now bask in the glow of having been elected. Nothing like this has happened in any Arab country.
Indeed, Abbas is now the only Arab leader who came to power in a more or less free election.
Is Palestinian society so different from other Arab societies?
Not really.
But there were several unique factors in the Palestinian context.
First, there was strong external pressure: confronted and exasperated by Arafat's deviousness and autocratic style, the United States and the European Union clearly told the Palestinians that any future support for their quest for independence would depend on their going through a reasonably acceptable democratic process.
Second, most Palestinians perceived that their ability to go through such a democratic process was itself a significant step in their struggle against Israel.
Finally, Palestinians have been exposed not only to the obvious hardships of occupation while living under Israeli rule for the better part of four decades; they were also able to experience, at close range, a liberal democracy at work - a free press, an independent judiciary, and political pluralism.
The dialectic of occupation plays strange games, both with occupier and occupied.
The Palestinian elections were seen all over the Arab world on Al-Jazeera and other Arab TV channels.
They must have focused people's minds on their own stunted political conditions.
If the Palestinians, under Israeli occupation, can choose their own leaders, why can't the same happen in Cairo or Damascus, in Ryadh or Algiers?
When the jubilation and the justly earned compliments for the Palestinians subside, both Arab rulers and Arab masses (the much hyped "Arab street") may start asking some hard questions.
The Palestinians have shown that it is not true that an Arab society cannot progress towards representative institutions.
So why can't this progress be emulated in other Arab societies?
Perhaps a time bomb has been planted under the thrones of Arab potentates - kings, emirs and presidents.
While Iraq - an attempt to import democracy by force - is failing, the paradoxical conditions of an Arab democracy under Israeli occupation may be a threat that Arab rulers have not yet comprehended.
The Other Switzerland
BRUSSELS – As policymakers scratch their heads and wonder how best to absorb different cultures and religions into Europe’s very distinct national societies, they could do worse than consider some new ideas being developed in Switzerland.
Switzerland, the country that recently voted to ban the construction of minarets on mosques?
Absolutely.
It is time for Europe to adjust the way that it thinks about nationality, cultural roots, and how it deals with immigrants.
In a world of increasing mobility, an aging Europe will badly need the immigrants of whom it is so frightened – and it should give them a voice in local politics soon (say, one year) after they arrive.
After all, it is more important for taxpayers to participate in local politics than to sit on the sidelines waiting to be given the rights of native citizens.
Democratic participation is the best way to integrate people into society and make them feel that their opinions count, regardless of whether they have formal citizenship and thus the right to vote.
I should declare a personal interest here: I was stateless for a time after my birth in Geneva.
My father was American, but naturalized too recently to hand his US citizenship on to me.
I was born on Swiss soil, but that did not give me the right to a Swiss passport.
In the end, the Irish accepted me because that was my mother’s nationality.
I have a framed copy of the Act of Parliament by Dail Eireann that was needed.
I have lived in Europe all my life, mostly in Belgium, but never in Ireland, and I have never voted, despite the fact that the Maastricht treaty entitles me to vote both in European elections and in Belgium’s local elections.
I suppose that I belong to an expat generation that has not been educated to consider voting an essential right, if not a duty, and I regret that.
But voting in Belgium is compulsory, so once you have started there is no jumping ship without a fine or a good excuse.
Foreign voter participation is clearly bound to work best at a local level, where the issues are more concrete.
That is where Switzerland demonstrates that giving foreigners a voice is good policy, one that also means teaching citizens to understand the benefits of open democracy.
The canton of Neuchatel (one of the 26 mini-states that comprise the Swiss confederation) lies alongside the French border.
Its official language is French, it has its own constitution, and it has created a highly efficient Multicultural Cohesion Service.
The Council of Europe, which for 60 years has promoted European integration through human rights and culture, includes Neuchatel among 10 “intercultural” cities that it is studying for “best practice” policies and governance in multicultural societies.
In the case of Neuchatel, this includes the canton as well as the picturesque lakeside city.
Unemployment is relatively low, despite hard times for its major industry – watch-making – and foreigners represent one-quarter of its 170,000 residents.
Much of Neuchatel’s progressive attitude toward foreign residents is attributable to one man, Thomas Facchinetti, who started a multicultural cohesion service 20 years ago and has steadily built it up.
Among his achievements is a Citizens’ Charter that is handed to every new resident to explain Swiss participatory democracy and lay out its rules.
His offices also have an anti-racism service, offer well publicized access to inexpensive French classes, and distribute booklets on topics like forced marriages and headscarves.
The fact that Facchinetti himself is the lynchpin of the canton’s open-minded views may be seen as a weakness, but it is also its strength.
Tolerance has a face – the neat smiling figure of this son of Italian immigrants, who is easily accessible to the canton’s citizens.
Partly as a result of his efforts, Neuchatel was one of the four cantons in Switzerland to vote against the ban on new minarets.
If people are to feel committed to the place where they live, they must be allowed to influence decision-making, and that influence should not depend on nationality.
In Neuchatel, many naturalized citizens, including elected local councilors, retain their foreign passports for several reasons: among European Union passport-holders, doing so allows their children to study in the EU or to work there themselves.
Among non-EU citizens, it allows them to re-settle in their parents’ or grandparents’ country if they so desire.
No two countries, regions, or cities are the same.
Geography, budgets, political systems, and the number and nature of its immigrants differ.
But where Neuchatel could serve as a model is in its hands-on attitude to helping foreigners fit in by making it easy for people to learn the local language, opening the voting booths to all, and encouraging foreigners to represent their country’s communities.
The Prion Puzzle
ZURICH – The outbreak of mad cow disease in the United Kingdom, which ultimately led to the slaughter of 3.7 million cows and severely damaged the British cattle industry, began insidiously.
In 1986, a UK cow developed an unknown brain disease.
The following year, tests revealed that the brain had been eroded by a myriad of small vacuoles, producing the sponge-like appearance that inspired the disease’s scientific name: bovine spongiform encephalopathy.
Within a few months, cases began appearing throughout the country.
A similar disease, called scrapie, was common in sheep, but had not previously been diagnosed in cows.
And a nearly identical, invariably lethal disease, kuru, had ravaged the aboriginal people in Papua New Guinea throughout the twentieth century.
Both kuru and scrapie are infectious.
Kuru was transmitted through cannibalistic rituals that were commonplace in Papua New Guinea until the 1950’s.
Similarly, in the UK and elsewhere, healthy cattle were fed meat and bone meal made from infected cattle.
The resulting epizootic (animal epidemic) affected more than 280,000 cows.
At its peak in 1992, mad cow disease was claiming nearly 1,000 head of cattle weekly.
Faced with a rapidly growing health crisis, the British authorities – equipped with little scientific understanding of the disease, and under pressure from a powerful industrial lobby – made a fatal mistake.
Because scrapie had never been definitively linked to human disease, they assumed that infected cows were also innocuous.
This assumption not only ignored the kuru tragedy; it also overlooked the hundreds of young people who had died of spongiform encephalopathy after receiving growth hormones extracted from human corpses.
This mixture of hubris, ignorance, and subservience to commercial interests reached peak toxicity in 1990, when the UK’s agriculture minister, John Gummer, televised his daughter eating a hamburger, declaring that British beef was safe.
But British beef was not safe.
In late 1995, two young people were diagnosed with Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease – a rare disease typically seen in elderly patients.
Post-mortem examinations of their brains revealed deposits of prions – the infectious agents that cause scrapie, kuru, and mad cow disease.
But these were not the prions of classic Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease.
Since then, “new variant” Creutzfeltdt-Jakob disease has claimed roughly 300 lives.
As the tragedy unfolded, however, scientists gained a greater understanding of the disease.
Prions seem to defy all conventional wisdom, surviving pressure-cooking, irradiation, and even incineration at 340°C for four hours – treatments that are routinely and reliably used to deactivate all known viruses and bacteria.
Furthermore, prions lack their own genes.
The prion gene is provided by the infected individual, in whom it resides in an innocuous state.
The infectious prion then hijacks the body’s machinery, reprogramming it into a willing executioner of prion replication.
Since the disease’s outbreak, it has been revealed that many common ailments – including Alzheimer’s disease and Parkinson’s disease – have similar properties.
While no cure has been found, some progress has been made, particularly on early detection of prions, which had been a daunting problem.
Sensitive detection of pathogens, such as HIV, typically relies on the presence of nucleic acids (DNA or RNA), which are absent in prions.
Recently, however, effective methods for amplifying prions have been developed, which could enable detection of the pathogen before it can damage its host.
Moreover, there is hope that an effective vaccination can be developed.
Introducing an innocuous version of a pathogen into the body causes the immune system to produce antibodies, which will neutralize the “wild” pathogen if it enters the body later.
A decade ago, my laboratory showed that an anti-prion antibody could significantly delay – and, in some cases, prevent – infection in mice that had been exposed to prions.
But several problems have emerged.
The host’s body produces its own version of the prion protein, and it is difficult to create a high-quality antibody against a body’s own components.
As a result, rather than trying to induce immunity, researchers must develop prefabricated anti-prion antibodies that can be delivered directly to patients.
This solution might work for related diseases like Alzheimer’s, but it has its own array of problems, including the difficulty of driving such antibodies from the injection site to the brain.
Severe side effects in animals, meanwhile, may prohibit the antibodies’ use in humans altogether.
Another possibility could be to eradicate prion diseases in livestock by removing the host’s prion gene.
The Swiss scientist Charles Weissmann demonstrated this using mice in a series of experiments two decades ago.
Using recently developed “zinc finger nuclease” technology, any given gene can be removed from an animal’s DNA.
In fact, prion-free sheep and cows have already been created.
These animals cannot host infectious prions.
While the quality of their meat remains to be assessed, they can provide a safe source of biological agents – such as therapeutic antibodies and growth factors – for use in human medicine.
The Ozone Mafia
Now that the Kyoto Protocol has been ratified, with even Russia belatedly signing on, a threat is emerging against an earlier landmark in international environmental protection – the Vienna Convention and the Montreal Protocol for defending the stratospheric ozone layer.
The threat comes from an unlikely source: organized crime.
The reason is simple.
To protect the stratospheric ozone layer, international agreements have been reached to ban the use and trade of the ozone-destroying chemicals called chlorofluorocarbons (CFC’s).
In order to replace these chemicals with others that are more benign, the equipment in which they are used – like freezers, coolers, and units for foam plastic production – must be substituted for new ones. 
But it’s much cheaper, although forbidden, to use the old equipment and refill them with CFC’s when needed than to buy new machines and use the more environmentally benign but more costly alternatives.
As with any ban, a market was thus created – and with it a business opportunity for well organized and environmentally reckless criminals.
Organized crime is constantly on the lookout for such opportunities, and it continues to find them.
So it is no surprise that CFC or freon smuggling has developed without much attention, and risks jeopardizing the Vienna Convention and the Montreal Protocol.
These agreements are hailed as great successes, and annual reports summarizing official statistics are published showing that the use of CFC continues to decrease.
The content of chlorine (from decay of CFC’s) in the stratosphere has leveled off, and two years ago the ozone hole over the Antarctic was the smallest in decades (and broken up into two).
However, new reports show a thinning of the ozone layer over the Arctic, and last year’s Antarctic ozone hole was as large and deep as ever.
There is no way of telling yet whether these represent mere fluctuations in a slow recovery process or a break in the positive trend.
Is the volume of illicit CFC trading so large that it is now a factor of real importance?
As with illicit drugs, it is difficult to estimate the extent of smuggling operations.
A number of extensive catches have been made by national customs agencies, the largest in Japan, in recent years.
In most cases, the forbidden CFC’s have been labeled as permitted HFC’s (hydrogenfluorocarbons), but labels like “spray paint” and “lubricants” also have been used. 
Ships and airplanes have been used for transport in this black-market trade.
The shipments caught by customs authorities mostly originate from free industrial zones, also called export-processing zones, in China, Vietnam, Thailand, and Egypt.
In most parts of the world, customs agencies are not especially focused on CFC’s, and the compounds are not easy to distinguish from HFC’s without sophisticated analytical equipment.
So it is reasonable to assume that the proportion of the total smuggled volume that is discovered is smaller than for narcotic drugs.
Complicated lines of transport using transit countries are often used.
One such line, which is presumed to be significant, goes from Europe (Spain) via Singapore or Dubai, through India to Nepal or Bangladesh and back again to the market in India.
Some features in the conventions for protecting the ozone layer constitute holes of a legal kind.
One is that industrial and developing countries march at different speeds when it comes to phasing out CFC’s.
This means that what is banned in one country is permitted elsewhere.
Another problem is that there are no restrictions on the sale of old equipment that runs only on the banned substances.
For example, freezers that require CFC’s can be freely exported from, say, Sweden, where they can no longer legally be refilled when required, to Egypt, where refilling is allowed.
The rapid increase of foam plastic production in export processing zones is thought to be based on their purchase of CFC-dependent production units from OECD countries.
So, do such practices constitute a real threat to the conventions for protecting the stratospheric ozone, or are they “only” a factor that will delay the final phase-out of CFC’s within years or a decade?
If the latter, that is bad enough, but the answer is not self-evident, and the whole question of organized crime and the illegal trade with CFC’s demands attention.
Customs officials all over the world and fighters of organized crime have a new battle – this time for the environment – on their already busy hands.
The Palin Charade
New York – The selection of Sarah Palin as John McCain’s running mate hit the United States like an electric storm.
To her legions of lipstick-waving fans on the right, Palin is a down-to-earth, God-fearing “hockey mom” whose moose hunting, evangelical faith, and even chaotic family life are all evidence that she is a real, typical American.
To her equally frantic detractors on the left – and increasingly in the center – she is a frightening harbinger of a theocratic America, a mafia-style executrix of state business who lies about the connection of the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks to Iraq, mocks Barack Obama for his opposition to torturing prisoners, and defies subpoenas.