Namun kisah serupa benar terjadi, walapun tidak sama persis.
Pejabat tersebut adalah Assistant Surgeon General, James Watt; pria yang diberi misi adalah ilmuwan asal Communicable Disease Center (CDC), Donald Henderson; dan musuh saat itu adalah cacar atau variola (smallpox).
Misi tersebut jelas tampak mustahil.
Pada saat itu, cacar sudah merenggut dua juta jiwa dan menjangkit 15 juta orang, setiap tahunnya.
Akan tetapi, seperti di televisi, Henderson dan tim yang dipimpinnya di World Health Organization (WHO) melawan ekspektasi.
Dalam sepuluh tahun, cacar adalah penyakit menular pertama – dan sejauh ini masih satu-satunya – yang berhasil dihilangkan sepenuhnya.
Kunci sukses prestasi medis ini bukan terobosan-terobosan di bidang kesehatan yang besar (vaksin cacar sudah digunakan sejak abad ke-18).
Justru kesuksesan ini dicapai melalui diplomasi, fleksibilitas, dan kerja sama.
Sejak awal, tidak begitu besar kepercayaan WHO terhadap kampanye vaksinasi.
Mayoritas, termasuk direktur jenderal WHO, meyakini bahwa upaya pemusnahan penyakit cacar mengharuskan suntik vaksin terhadap 1,1 miliar di 31 negara yang terkena infeksi, termasuk di desa-desa terpencil – bayangkan betapa sulitnya perencanaan serta pengaturan logistiknya.
Itulah sebabnya delegasi-delegasi WHO berdebat selama berhari-hari sebelum menyepakati, dengan perbedaan suara yang tipis, pengucuran dana sejumlah 2,4 juta dolar AS per tahun untuk upaya tersebut – bilangan yang terlalu kecil untuk menutupi biaya vaksin yang tidak ditanggung, apalagi untuk mendanai dukungan logistik yang diperlukan.
Banyak donor yang memiliki pesimisme yang sama, mereka percaya bahwa anggaran yang dimiliki lebih baik dihabiskan untuk infrastruktur pelayanan kesehatan, misalnya.
Bahkan UNICEF memutuskan tidak mau berkontribusi pada kampanye tersebut.
Faktanya, keputusan yang menugaskan Henderson menjalankan tugas sial untuk memimpin kampanye berasal dari keputusan direktur jenderal WHO untuk menempatkan warga asal Amerika sebagai penanggung jawab, agar Amerika Serikat lah, bukan WHO, yang dipersalahkan jika program tersebut gagal.
(Henderson mencoba menolak, namun tidak ada pilihan “jika anda berkenan” atau kalimat “should you choose to accept it” seperti yang diputar di televisi.)
Meskipun demikian, Henderson berhasil memutarbalikkan kemalangannya menjadi keberuntungan, berdasarkan sebuah pemahaman utama.
Henderson mengakui bahwa Uni Soviet – negara yang bertahun-tahun memaksakan kampanye penghapusan cacar dan sudah menjanjikan donasi sebanyak 25 juta dosis vaksin setiap tahunnya – tidak akan antusias atas kepemimpinan yang diemban warga Amerika.
Jadi ia mendekati wakil menteri kesehatan Uni Soviet, Dimitri Venediktov, lalu membangun ikatan yang memungkinkan kedua pihak berkolaborasi dalam hal strategi dan logistik, di luar donasi vaksin yang diserahkan (AS setuju menyediakan 50 juta dosis per tahun).
Dua sekutu yang paling berseberangan pada akhirnya memimpin perlawanan bersama.
Keterampilan diplomasi Henderson dijodohkan dengan keahliannya mengenali bakat dan kepemimpinan.
Ia bersikeras agar seluruh stafnya meluangkan setidaknya sepertiga waktu mereka di lapangan, berkerja dengan pejabat setempat dan mengunjungi desa-desa, supaya mereka bisa menyaksikan langsung kesulitan-kesulitan vaksinasi massal.
William Foege, salah satu staf adalah dokter misionaris Kristen Lutheran yang menjadi konsultan yang dipekerjakan CDC di Nigeria.
Pada suatu hari di bulan Desember 1966, Foege menerima informasi adanya kasus cacar di desa lain dan ia segera menuju kesana untuk memberi vaksin kepada keluarga korban dan penduduk desa.
Namun Foege khawatir bahwa wabah lebih luas mungkin merambah dan ia tidak memiliki vaksin cukup banyak untuk semua penduduk.
Jadi ia menerapkan taktik berbeda: ia menyuruh beberapa utusan (runner) ke semua desa dalam radius 30 mil untuk melakukan pengecekan, kemudian Foege memberi vaksin kepada penduduk yang tinggal di empat lokasi yang mana kasusnya bermunculan.
Tindakannya melahirkan “ring vaccination” di sekitar penduduk yang terkena infeksi sehingga menghentikan rantai penularan.
Strategi Foege diperluas ke Nigeria bagian timur, lalu diperkenalkan ke kawasan lain di Afrika Barat, dan pada akhirnya diterapkan dalam kondisi tersulit: India, dengan populasi 500 juta orang.
Membutuhkan 20 bulan dan 130.000 pekerja terlatih di bidang kesehatan, tapi kutukan cacar yang menghancurkan India sejak berabad-abad sebelumnya berhasil dihapuskan.
Kemudian, terlepas dari bencana alam, penculikan terhadap staf WHO, dan perang saudara, para pekerja mampu mengulangi kesuksesannya di Bangladesh, Ethiopia, dan Somalia.
Akhirnya, di tahun 1980, dunia terbebas dari cacar.
50 tahun setelah peluncuran misi gagah ini, memori dari prestasi hebat yang dihasilkannya mulai memudar.
Namun pembelajaran yang dipetik dari kemampuan misi ini dalam merangsang komunitas internasional yang jengkel untuk bersatu mengatasi tantangan bersama menjadi sangat vital, terutama ketika masalah-masalah urgen seperti pengrusakan lingkungan hidup menuntut adanya solusi-solusi global.
Sebagaimana dikemukakan Foege, penghapusan cacar membuktikan bahwa “upaya global itu mungkin”.
Kita tidak perlu “terus hidup dalam bencana, pemerintah yang buruk, konflik, dan risiko-risiko kesehatan yang tidak terkendali”.
Justru, “aksi terkoordinasi yang dilakukan sekelompok orang yang berdedikasi” bisa “menghasilkan masa depan lebih baik.”
Manusia tidak bisa bertahan hidup dalam lingkungan yang mana air dan udaranya tercemar, lautnya kotor, satwa dan tumbuhan liarnya terancam punah, dan lahannya rusak.
Tantangan-tantangan ekologis yang kita hadapi ini adalah persoalan kesehatan masyarakat dan isu kesejahteraan, sama seperti infeksi cacar dahulu.
Misi kita, mau atau tidak, siap atau tidak, adalah menyerukan kemauan bersama untuk menghentikan penghancuran diri di dunia kita.
Brexit and the Pound in Your Pocket
BERKELEY – The early returns on Brexit are in, and, contrary to what some have been claiming, they’re not good.
In July, following the referendum, consumer confidence collapsed at its most rapid rate since 1990.
Surveys of manufacturing and construction dropped precipitously.
While August’s data were better, it is too soon to say whether the improvement was just a “dead cat bounce.”
In this topsy-turvy post-referendum world, the one piece of good news is sterling’s fall on the foreign exchange market.
A lower exchange rate will make British exports more competitive.
Faced with higher import prices, consumers will shift their spending toward domestic goods. This, too, will give a boost to the British economy.
The question is how big a boost.
Skeptics caution that Britain relies heavily on exports of financial services, which are not especially price-sensitive, and that the scope for growth of merchandise exports is limited by the subdued global demand.
Britain has been here before, so this is a question on which history can shed light.
In 1931, when the UK abandoned the gold standard, sterling plummeted by 30%.
Like now, the country relied heavily on exports of services – not just banking services but also shipping and insurance.
And the external environment was even more unfavorable than it is now.
Yet, despite these headwinds, the merchandise trade deficit fell by a quarter between 1931 and 1932.
By 1933, the services balance was strengthening as well.
At this point, the economy was on the road to recovery.
Three circumstances made this possible.
First, excess capacity enabled companies to ramp up production.
Second, Britain was able quickly to put in place a set of favorable trade deals, negotiated with Commonwealth countries at the Ottawa Conference in 1932.
Third, political uncertainty fell sharply, as the Labour government, widely blamed for the 1931 crisis, was replaced by a Conservative-dominated cabinet with broad popular support.
Clearly, none of these conditions is present today. Excess capacity in traded-goods sectors is low.
In today’s more complicated legal environment, it will take years to negotiate trade deals with the EU and then other partners.
Political uncertainty is high, and there is no prospect of a general election to resolve it anytime soon.
Investors have every reason to adopt a wait-and-see attitude.
In 1949, Britain found itself in the same position, with a trade deficit vis-à-vis the United States and weak investor confidence.
In September of that year, sterling was again devalued, as it had been 18 years before, by 30%.
Because pressure for higher wages was subdued, British exports became more competitive.
The trade deficit with the dollar area, made up of the US and other countries that used its currency to settle international payments, contracted sharply.
The current account of the balance of payments swung from deficit in 1949 to surplus in 1950, and GDP rose strongly.
Again, three things made this possible.
First, there was robust demand in the US, which was recovering from its 1948-1949 recession.
Second, the outbreak of the Korean War in 1950 created demand for exports of all kinds.
Third, with the creation of the European Payments Union, the UK and its European partners agreed to dismantle controls on trade with one another.
Here, too, the current situation could not be more different. US growth is far from robust, and EU countries have made clear that they are in no hurry to negotiate a trade deal with the UK.
A third precedent is the 1967 devaluation of sterling, again after an interval of 18 years.
The balance-of-payments crisis of 1966-7 reflected the tendency of British wages to grow faster than productivity, the consequent trade deficits, and foreign investors’ reluctance to finance a position they saw as unsustainable.
This time, however, it took two years for the external accounts to improve.
With unemployment already low, that much time was needed to reallocate resources from nontraded- to traded-goods sectors.
In the interim, foreign investors remained reluctant to finance Britain’s deficits.
Seeing the difficulty of the adjustment, they worried that sterling would collapse.
The UK, unable to attract short-term capital inflows, was forced to borrow from the International Monetary Fund.
This history suggests that exchange rates matter for competitiveness, and that sterling’s depreciation should help by enhancing the competitiveness of British exports.
But policymakers shouldn’t expect too much.
The external environment is unfavorable.
It will take time to reallocate resources toward the production of traded goods.
And a new set of trade deals will not be concluded overnight.
Meanwhile, British leaders must resolve the lingering political and policy uncertainty.
They must use not just monetary policy, but also fiscal tools, to support spending and strengthen the incentive to invest.
Until now, they have shown little awareness of the urgency.
Smart Development Targets
ABUJA, NIGERIA – Over the next 15 years, the international community will spend $2.5 trillion on development, with national budgets contributing countless trillions more.
In September, the world’s 193 governments will meet at the United Nations in New York to agree on a set of global targets that will direct these resources.
With so much at stake, it is vital that we make the smartest choices.
Because it is only natural for politicians to promise to do everything, the UN is currently poised to consider an impossibly inclusive 169 targets.
The proposed targets range from the ambitious (“end the epidemics of AIDS, tuberculosis, and malaria”) to the peripheral (“promote sustainable tourism”) to the impossible (“by 2030 achieve full and productive employment and decent work for all women and men, including for young people and persons with disabilities”).
But promising everything to everyone provides no direction.
In truth, having 169 priorities is like having none at all.
That is why my think tank, the Copenhagen Consensus, asked 82 of the world’s top economists, 44 sector experts, and UN organizations and NGOs to evaluate which targets would do the most good for every dollar, euro, or peso spent.
A team of eminent economists, including several Nobel laureates, then prioritized these targets in value-for-money terms.
It turns out that not all targets are equal.
Some generate amazing economic, social, and environmental benefits per dollar spent.
Many others generate only slightly more than a dollar per dollar spent.
Some even generate a net loss, doing less than a dollar of good per dollar spent.
If the world were to spend money equally across all 169 UN targets, it would do about $7 of social good for each dollar spent.
That is respectable, but we could do much better.
The panel of eminent economists has produced a much shorter list of just 19 targets that will do the most good for the world.
Every dollar spent on these targets will likely produce $32 of social good – more than four times more effective than spending on all 169.
Being smart about development spending could be better than quadrupling the global aid budget.
The short list covers a lot of ground; what connects the targets is the amount of good they will do for people, the planet, and prosperity.
Consider a few targets that would do so much to help people.
Tuberculosis is a “hidden” disease, but a much bigger problem than headline-grabbing Ebola.
More than two billion people carry the TB bacterium, and at some point about 10% of them will develop the disease, which kills some 1.5 million victims per year (compared to 20,000 dead in the recent Ebola outbreak).
Yet treatment is inexpensive and, in most cases, highly effective.
Spending a dollar on diagnosis and treatment pays back $43 by giving people many more years of productive life.
Another outstanding use of resources is to reduce childhood malnutrition.
Good nutrition is especially critical for young children, because it allows their brains and bodies to develop better, producing life-long benefits.
Well-nourished children stay in school longer, learn more, and end up being much more productive members of society.
The available evidence suggests that providing better nutrition for 68 million children each year would produce $45 in long-term social benefits for every dollar spent.
Some targets that benefit the planet also provide excellent value.
Cutting fossil-fuel subsidies, which amount to nearly $550 billion a year – would reduce pollution and CO2 emissions while freeing up resources for investment in health, education, and infrastructure.
In total, each dollar not spent on fossil-fuel subsidies would provide more than $15 of planetary benefits.
Focusing on coral reefs turns out to be a surprisingly efficient target.
It preserves biodiversity, with healthy reefs producing more fish and attracting more tourists.
Each dollar spent protecting them can provide benefits worth $24.
Perhaps the most important, cross-cutting problem is poverty, which afflicts billions of people and underlies most other development problems.
When you are poor, your children will more likely suffer malnutrition and succumb to TB.
When you are poor, you are more likely to slash and burn rain forest or fish atop coral reefs with dynamite.
Better nutrition and greater access to education will help.
But so will targets for prosperity, allowing hundreds of millions to lift themselves out of poverty.
As we have seen repeatedly – in China, South Korea, Chile, India, and elsewhere – fewer trade restrictions can lift incomes and reduce poverty.
Economic models show that a successful reduction of trade barriers like that foreseen in the ongoing Doha Round of multilateral trade talks could add $11 trillion to global GDP by 2030.
This would mean $1,000 more for each person in the developing world every year, and would lift a staggering 160 million people out of poverty.
This list of smart targets will not solve all of the world’s problems; no realistic list, however ambitious, can.
But the 19 targets identified by the Copenhagen Consensus can help the world’s governments to concentrate on key priorities.
These targets will do more than four times as much good per dollar spent as spending across all 169 targets would do.
Nothing has been resolved since the Copenhagen climate talks fell apart last year.
Fortunately, recent research points to a smarter way to tackle climate change.
There is no longer any mainstream disagreement about the reality of global warming. The crucial questions concern the economics of our response.
But this debate can be just as heated. Ever since I published The Skeptical Environmentalist in 2001, I have always acknowledged that man-made global warming is real.
Yet activists have repeatedly labeled me a “climate-change denier.”
This is not because I have ever suggested that the basic science of global warming is wrong. Rather, it reflects anger and frustration over my insistence on pointing out that drastic carbon cuts make no sense.
The Copenhagen Consensus Center – a think tank where I serve as director – recently asked a large group of top climate economists to explore the costs and benefits of different responses to global warming.
At the same time, we convened a second, equally stellar group of economists, including three Nobel laureates, to examine all of the research and rank the proposals in order of desirability.
Cambridge University Press is publishing their research and findings this month, under the title Smart Solutions to Climate Change.
The book includes a chapter by prominent climate economist Richard Tol, who has been a contributing, lead, principal, and convening author for the United Nations’ Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.
In his chapter, Tol shows why grand promises of drastic, immediate carbon cuts are such a flawed strategy.
Tol found that trying to keep temperature increases under 2°C, as the G-8 industrialized nations have promised to do, would require emissions reductions of about 80% by mid-century.
Based on conventional estimates, this would avoid total climate damages of about $1.1 trillion across the century.
However, it would cut economic growth by around $40 trillion a year.
In other words, we would effectively be spending $40 trillion every year by the end of the century to do just over $1 trillion worth of total good.
In fact, this estimate is wildly optimistic.
The calculation assumes that over 100 years, politicians everywhere in the world will consistently enact the most efficient, effective laws imaginable to reduce carbon emissions.
Dump that far-fetched assumption and the cost could jump by a factor of ten or even 100.
To put it starkly, such drastic carbon cuts are likely to do a lot more damage than climate change to our quality of life (especially for those in the developing world).
The reason is simple. Despite all of the optimistic talk about wind, solar, geothermal, and other sustainable, non-carbon-emitting energy sources, no alternative is remotely ready to shoulder the energy burden currently borne by fossil fuels.
This is why I have long urged policymakers to increase significantly the amount of money invested in research and development of green-energy alternatives.
Now there is research that shows exactly how we can put this approach into action.
In Smart Solutions to Climate Change, Chris Green of McGill University and Isabel Galiana look at current rates of progress and conclude that by 2050 alternative energy sources will produce less than half the power needed to be able to stabilize carbon emissions.
By 2100, the gap would be even wider. The challenge is enormous.
Galiana and Green find that devoting just 0.2% of global GDP – roughly $100 billion a year – to green energy R&amp;D would produce the kind of game-changing breakthroughs needed to fuel a carbon-free future.
Not only would this be a much less expensive fix than trying to cut carbon emissions, but it would also reduce global warming far more quickly.
And, unlike carbon cuts, this is a solution that developing countries would be likely to embrace.
Even with a major R&amp;D effort, green energy won’t become affordable overnight.
To ensure that we have enough time to conduct the necessary R&amp;D, we should step up our commitment to research into climate-engineering technology.
In Smart Solutions to Climate Change, Eric Bickel and Lee Lane of the University of Texas offer compelling evidence that a tiny investment in climate engineering could result in bigger and faster reductions in global warming than would a vastly more expensive program of carbon cuts.
The publication of Smart Solutions to Climate Change has generated considerable interest, including some from activists who believe that my enthusiastic support of its proposals represents a major shift in my thinking.
In fact, I have advocated R&amp;D spending for years.
What is new – and exciting – is that with the publication of this research, we may finally be starting a constructive discussion about how we really can respond intelligently to this challenge.
Smart Taxes
ATHENS/BERLIN – Governments throughout the European Union and around the world confront a seeming Catch-22: the millstone of national debt around their necks has required them to reduce deficits through spending cuts and tax increases. But these are impeding the consumer spending needed to boost economic activity and kick-start growth.
As the debate shifts from austerity towards measures aimed at stimulating growth, smarter taxation will be essential to getting the balance right.
When governments think about the difficult task of raising taxes, they usually think about income tax, business taxes, and value-added tax (VAT).
But there are other taxes that can raise significant amounts of revenue with a much less negative impact on the economy. These are the taxes that governments already levy on electricity and fossil fuels.
Such taxes play a crucial role in cutting the carbon emissions that cause climate change.
But recent research shows that they can also play a useful role in raising government revenue at little cost in terms of economic growth.
Euro for euro, dollar for dollar, yen for yen: energy and carbon taxes have a lower negative impact on a nation’s economy, consumption, and jobs than income tax and VAT.
For example, an increase in direct taxes, such as income tax, can reduce consumption by twice as much as energy and carbon taxes that raise the same amount of revenue.
Maintaining consumption at as high a level as possible is vital to reviving economic activity, which means that freeing money for consumers to spend is just as important.
Energy and carbon taxes can raise revenue while leaving the economy in a stronger state to sustain a recovery.
Conventional taxes raise revenue, but pose a much greater risk of depressing growth in the process.
This is not the only reason why looking more closely at energy and carbon taxes makes sense.
The current framework for energy taxation, particularly in Europe, is not sustainable.
Tax rates on different fuels vary by more than 50% across the EU, causing major distortions in the single market.
Creating a level playing field on energy taxation in the EU would harmonize economic incentives, eliminate gas-tank tourism by drivers crossing borders for lower prices, and improve the business climate in all of Europe’s economies.
Rising energy bills, driven by the cost of fossil fuels, are a massive political issue in many countries in Europe and elsewhere, including the United States, where consumer energy prices have become a major issue in the run-up to this year’s presidential election.
But, relative to other forms of taxation, energy taxation tends to benefit consumers overall.
The gains from avoiding the negative impact of conventional taxes work across the economy, particularly as the least well-off maintain a higher level of disposable household income.
Most energy and carbon taxes are levied by national governments.
But in Europe there is another option for raising revenues: the European Union Emission Trading Scheme (ETS).
In terms of the effect on GDP and jobs, the cost of increasing revenue from this source would be as much as one-third less than that of raising the same amount via income taxes or VAT.
Given Europe’s fiscal deficits and the economic impact of reducing them, that is a huge potential prize. But, first, the issues depressing the carbon price must be addressed.
Taking the massive over-allocation of carbon-emission permits out of the ETS will be vital.
Finance ministers everywhere need to think more imaginatively about their fiscal options.
Energy and carbon taxes can produce less economic pain and more gain than conventional taxes can.
Europe needs fiscal consolidation, reductions in carbon emissions, and a strategy for economic growth.
Greater reliance should be placed on energy taxes and an effective ETS to deliver all three.
Smiles on the Rhine
On February 23, a day after addressing America’s allies in Brussels, President George W. Bush will meet German Chancellor Gerhard Schroeder in the old city of Mainz on the Rhine.
After the falling-out over Bush’s Iraq adventure, the two countries – so central to the transatlantic relationship in the past – are once again on speaking terms.
But, however welcome the return to cordiality may be, it is no more than that.
If Bush and Schroeder are now showing the world how well they get along together, it is not because they are off to a new start, but because it suits their tactical interests.
Had the American people chosen John F. Kerry over George W. Bush last November, the reunion would be seen by both sides as a new beginning, resonant with personal warmth. But both continue to doubt that past substantive divisions can really be overcome.
Thus, the meeting in Mainz will be one of those diplomatic courtesy calls that gloss over important bilateral differences.
There will be no meeting of minds between Bush and Schroeder, because, on most key issues, their minds hold opposite views.
Consider what is potentially the most contentious issue, how to cope with Iran’s nuclear program. Germany has been determined, together with France and Britain, to get Iran to stop uranium enrichment through incentives and negotiation.
While the US has now explicitly welcomed the European initiative, it remains openly skeptical and unwilling to join, thus weakening the chances of success.
Failure would lead America to seek the UN Security Council’s formal condemnation of Iran, coupled with sanctions.
Indeed, the US is already trying to soften up Iranian resistance by hinting at a possible use of force.
But there is no support in Europe for military action, and little backing for sanctions.
If the negotiations should fail, the transatlantic cleavage could once again become glaringly wide.
The divisions are no less marked in another transatlantic quarrel, this one over whether to lift the European Union’s embargo on arms exports to China, imposed following the Tiananmen Square massacre 15 years ago.
Schroeder has been pushing the EU to lift the embargo, a move that now appears imminent.
But for the US, the step is seen, not without reason, as an encouragement to China in its conflict with Taiwan.
It will be interpreted as a stab in the back of US efforts to maintain stability in the region.
Nor will there be much progress on a matter dear to Berlin, namely Germany’s application to enter the UN Security Council as a permanent member.
The prospect is uncertain enough as it stands that Bush may be spared the need to veto it.
But it would make an immense difference for Germany’s chances if the US actively supported what is, after all, a reasonable objective of one of its most important allies.
But the Mainz meeting will not bring the two sides closer to working out a common position on any of these issues, or even to seeing the other side’s point of view. Instead, they will dwell on what is by now uncontroversial: welcoming the recent, if still fragile, progress in Israel-Palestine relations, supporting stability in post-election Iraq and Afghanistan, and extolling the transatlantic link.
The drafters of the farewell communiqué are, no doubt, already at work listing all the issues on which the two governments see eye to eye.
Bush and Schroeder will make up for the paucity of substance with a good deal of friendly banter and bonhomie before the press assembled in Mainz.
That is, of course, better than nothing.
But it amounts merely to a temporary papering over of differences, not their resolution.
Worse, there is no sign that either man is willing to speak his mind in order to signal to the other side what he will expect when the next crisis looms.
Future misunderstandings and misgivings are thus inevitable.
The welcome return to civility is not, therefore, a return to mutual trust.
After all, the test of alliance does not lie in praising agreements, but in thrashing out disagreements in a spirit of cooperation.
Neither Bush nor Schroeder seem ready for this.
If nothing else happens, the chief transatlantic partners will be no better prepared for the next crisis than they were for the last.
As Leslie Gelb, the former president of The Council on Foreign Relations in New York, recently remarked, leaders in Europe and the US have lost the habit of serious cooperation.
What could revive that habit?
Perhaps only a miracle: real progress in the Israel-Palestine conflict, which both the US and the Europeans could then claim to have helped bring about.
Common success could make both sides realize that they still have a common cause.
But that miracle will not materialize in Mainz.
Surveillance and American Liberty
CAMBRIDGE – Ever since Edward J. Snowden disclosed the National Security Agency’s ongoing collection of massive amounts of electronic-communications data generated by United States citizens and non-citizens alike, attention has been lavished on his personal status.
But the more important issue, even before Russia granted him temporary asylum, is the status of American civil liberties.
Is the US guilty of hypocrisy, as Russia, China, and others have charged?
To answer that question, it is important to distinguish between two issues that have become conflated in public debate: electronic espionage against foreign entities and domestic surveillance of a government’s own citizens.
Before Snowden’s disclosures, cyber espionage had become a major point of contention in US-China relations.
It was discussed at the June “shirt-sleeves summit” between Presidents Barack Obama and Xi Jinping, and the two governments agreed to create a special working group on the issue.
The US accuses China of using cyber espionage to steal intellectual property on an unprecedented scale.
Among other public sources, it could point to a study by the cyber-security firm Mandiant, which traced many such attacks to a People’s Liberation Army facility in Shanghai.
China counters that it is also the victim of innumerable cyber intrusions, many originating in the US.
Both countries have a point.
If a proverbial Martian were watching the flow of electrons between East Asia and North America, he would probably notice robust two-way traffic.
But if he looked inside the data packets, he would see very different content.
American policy is not to steal intellectual property, while China’s policy appears to be the opposite.
At the same time, both governments constantly hack into each other’s computers to steal traditional political and military secrets.
Spying is not a violation of international law (though it often violates various domestic laws), but the US argues that theft of intellectual property violates both the spirit and letter of international trade agreements.
China is not the only country that steals intellectual property.
Some of America’s allies, now professing outrage at disclosures of US spying, have been known to do the same thing to the US.
According to the US, when it inspects a non-American’s e-mail, it is searching for terrorist connections, and has often shared the findings with its allies.
In that sense, security surveillance can benefit both the US and other countries.
After all, part of the plot that culminated in the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, was hatched by an Egyptian living in Hamburg.
But the Americans are not without sin.
As Snowden’s information revealed, the US was monitoring the communications of European Union representatives as they were preparing for trade negotiations.
This did not produce a joint benefit; it was a bad decision, and one that Obama should renounce.
It is tactically useful for Russia, China, and others to conflate espionage issues with civil liberties and accuse the US of hypocrisy.
But those charges seem odd coming from countries with weak rule of law and heavy Internet censorship.
Snowden revealed two major surveillance programs inside the US.
In terms of civil liberties, examining the content of a message from a suspect non-American source is less controversial.
The more hotly debated program is one in which the NSA maps the origin and destination of US citizens’ telephone traffic and stores it for possible later inspection (presumably with a court order).
This application of technological capacity to store what is called “big data” raises a new set of issues about intrusion into citizens’ privacy.
Defenders of the program point out that it is consistent with current law and with America’s constitutional philosophy of checks and balances, because both the legislative and judicial branches approved it.
Opponents argue that the court created in 1978 under the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act (FISA) was designed for an era before the advent of big data, and that current practice stretches the provisions of the Patriot Act, passed after the September 11 attacks.
The opponents call for new laws.
Last month, the current legal framework survived a close vote (217 to 205) in the House of Representatives.
Most interesting was the split in both parties.
The opposition consisted of a coalition of conservative Tea Party Republicans and liberal Democrats.
The issue is bound to arise again, with several pending bills proposing revisions of the FISA court.
Rather than demonstrating hypocrisy and acceptance of the erosion of civil liberties, the Snowden disclosures have provoked a debate that suggests the US is living up to its democratic principles in its traditionally untidy ways.
America faces a trade-off between security and liberty, but the relationship is more complex than it appears at first glance.
The worst threats to liberties come when insecurity is greatest, so modest trade-offs can sometimes prevent greater losses.
Even such a great defender of freedom as Abraham Lincoln suspended habeas corpus under the extreme conditions of the American Civil War.
And such decisions may not be recognized as mistaken or unjust until later – consider Franklin Roosevelt’s internment of Japanese-American citizens early in World War II.
In the decade after September 11, 2001, the pendulum of public sentiment swung too far to the security pole; but it has begun to swing back in the absence of major new terrorist attacks.
A recent ABC News-Washington Post poll showed that 39% of Americans now say that protecting privacy is more important than investigating terrorist threats, up from only 18% in 2002.
Ironically, the programs that Snowden revealed seem to have helped prevent massive new terrorism events, such as a bomb attack on the New York subways.
If so, they may have prevented the implementation of more draconian anti-terrorist measures – thus enabling the current debate.
A New Birth for Social Democracy
ISTANBUL – Nowadays, with the global economy undergoing fundamental transformation, workers worldwide are coming under significant pressure.
Particularly in developed economies, social policies must adjust to provide the support that lower-income groups need, while encouraging growth and advancing wellbeing.
The pressure has been unrelenting and inescapable.
In the United States, real (inflation-adjusted) compensation for men with only a high school diploma fell by 21% from 1979 to 2013.
In much of Europe, which provides stronger wage protection, unemployment has soared, especially since the euro crisis began in 2008.
Germany and some Northern European countries remain an exception, although the German labor market contains a large low-wage, mini-jobs segment.
Driving these trends is the changing nature of work.
For starters, services have been gaining ground worldwide, especially in developed economies.
From 1970 to 2012, the GDP share of services in the OECD countries increased from 53% to 71%.
New technology and “intelligent” machines are not only displacing many types of workers in both the manufacturing and services sectors; they are also facilitating the rise of new business models, in which individuals perform (mostly low-paid service) jobs within loose networks, instead of as dedicated employees of structured organizations.
For example, the ride-sharing service Uber now has 162,000 active drivers in the US alone and is displacing traditional taxi services.
The startup Handy hopes that its app achieves similar success in connecting customers to independent contractors providing various household services.
As technology races ahead and value chains become globalized, workers must adapt, whether by changing jobs, relocating, or acquiring new skills – a challenge that is particularly burdensome for older workers, but demands a new approach to life planning for all.
Some people – especially those who acquired valued and flexible skills early in life, as well as those who are already in strong positions because of inherited wealth – can flourish in this new economy.
Millions of others, however, are ill-prepared for the new age.
And it is their growing anxiety that is fueling the rise of identity politics, with populist leaders and movements appealing to ethnic or religious solidarity in the face of the impersonal forces of change.
Center-left parties face a particularly difficult challenge, as their lower-income electoral base is lured away by anti-immigration, chauvinist competitors.
Making matters worse, the fragmentation of production (whether in goods or services), together with intensifying fiscal pressures, militates against these parties’ traditional reliance on collective bargaining to create systems and policies that insure citizens against shocks and misfortune.
The right-wing response to this challenge – essentially to dismantle the welfare state – would leave the majority of citizens exposed to economic shocks and structural shifts (merely reinforcing their sense of isolation and vulnerability).
The progressive response, by contrast, must entail strong social policies – including both insurance and protection – compatible with new technologies and types of work.
Concretely, this means that, instead of generalized social protection, each citizen would have a lifelong individual budget of support and security, while requiring that eligible recipients show initiative in determining how to adapt.
The main difference between the progressive vision of a society underpinned by these “citizen accounts” and the conservative idea that individual citizens should create personal retirement accounts, take out student loans, or cover their own health insurance is the public sector’s role.
Not only would the public sector take primary responsibility for financing social protection; public policy would also frame cooperation among government, employers, and recipients to eliminate duplication and bolster effectiveness and fairness.
For example, a lifelong “family account” would enable paid maternity and paternity leave, provide child-care support, and allow time away from work to care for the sick or elderly.
It would combine some general rules with income-adjusted financial contributions by the state, employers, and individuals.
A “learning account” would set the parameters for educational support, including lifelong opportunities to acquire new skills and to teach skills to others.
Basic forms of such a scheme already exist in many countries.
Norway offers 49 weeks of parental leave with full pay, or 58 weeks with 80% pay.
Both parents must use at least 10% of this budget, but they can also roll part of it over to use when their children start school (and again benefit greatly from parental support).
Of course, few countries are as wealthy as Norway; but the principle – including support for elder care – can be applied to 30-, 40-, or 50-week periods.
France, too, is now moving in this direction, creating “individual activity accounts” that aim to streamline its social policies, without sacrificing its sense of national solidarity.
To be sure, this approach will not magically resolve all of the challenges countries currently face.
Fiscal constraints will remain, as governments continue to fund public goods.
Adequate taxation of high-income individuals and high-profit companies, together with strong and sustained efforts to reduce tax avoidance, will become even more vital to defend the revenue base.
And unions will still be needed to defend their members’ interests.
Nonetheless, a new social contract is needed to account for the increasingly important role that individual preferences, and individual responsibility, play in today’s world.
Each citizen should feel empowered, not isolated and abandoned, in the face of globalization and technological transformation.
With this approach, social democracy can again drive progress, instead of being stifled by identity politics and market fundamentalism.
That would serve not only the cause of social justice, but also the goal of sustaining the skilled, happy, and healthy workforce that a successful economy requires.
Social Democracy Lives in Latin America
MONTEVIDEO, URUGUAY – Amongst the different leftist governments in Latin America, there are new and rather strident populist regimes (Venezuela, Bolivia, Ecuador), which seem to grab all the attention.  But there is also a social-democratic strain to Latin American politics – a historical novelty in the region – that is gaining strength.
In Brazil, Chile and Uruguay, social democracy is proving that it can work.
What distinguishes these social democratic governments from their populist counterparts is that they are composed of a left that is integrated into competitive, multi-party democracies.
These social democrats were once part of a socialist, revolutionary, or reformist left, tightly allied with labor unions.  But they ultimately accepted the market economy, and came to lean toward ideological moderation and to compete for votes in the political center.  At the same time, motivated by their political competition and their own leftist ideology, these social democratic governments emphasize both economic growth and social inclusion.
These governments’ potential to innovate depends on the political resources and power at their disposal.  The first government of the left in Uruguayan history has comparative advantages in this respect, for, unlike in Brazil and Chile, Uruguay’s social democrats have ruled as a one-party majority government.
The Frente Amplio (FA) brings together nearly all the country’s left-wing groups and has the loyal support of labor unions. 
Moreover, Uruguay’s president, Tabaré Vázquez won his office five years ago in the first round and, by uniting the posts of head of state and party leader, was able to forge a strong presidential leadership and popularity.  As a result, during the cycle of economic prosperity that lasted until 2008, with rising commodity prices and internal dynamism, the Vázquez government insured macroeconomic stability, fiscal balance, and an open market, encouraging competitiveness as well as domestic and foreign private investment.
Despite this economic orthodoxy, Vázquez’s government also pursued important policy innovations: protection of human rights was improved; tax reform, including introduction of a general, progressive income tax was undertaken and a more inclusive health system was created.
In addition, the government forged policies for the poor with non-contributory income transfers and family allowances, which benefited minors and female who are heads of household.  Public education was boosted by bigger expenditure and a “one laptop per child” program.
A labor policy favorable to workers and unions revived Wage Councils for setting pay.
Given all this, it might seem that Uruguay’s carefully constructed social-democratic alternative could unravel.
But the party system and the FA’s internal balance of power do not favor any turn abrupt toward radical left or populism.  Indeed, because populist tactics are likely to prove self-defeating in the presidential campaign, Mujica started supporting Vázquez’s administration’s record and made Astori his candidate to be Vice President, entitled to take the lead on economic policy and participate in the executive.  To stress their social democratic credentials both candidates, Mujica and Astori, have gone on pilgrimages to the United States, Brazil, and Chile.
Moreover, Uruguay’s political structures will invariably have a moderating effect on any government that might be elected.
Regardless of the president’s political slant, if the FA remains in office, the social-democratic reforms of recent years are likely to continue, although with different emphases and considerable variations imposed by the economic cycle and the government’s political resources.
For the first time in history, we have the knowledge, the technology, and the wealth to design a different world.
We have the resources to “make poverty history.”
But, though we have the power to change the world, we are not taking the steps needed to do so.
In 2000, the world’s governments adopted the United Nations Millennium Development Goals, which aim to halve global poverty by 2015.
Yet the international community has lacked the political will needed to meet these basic responsibilities to humanity, causing people to lose faith in politics.
Unless we take action, our citizens will lose hope in the power of democracy – or find hope in extremism, fundamentalism, and violence.
To restore people’s trust not only in politics, but also in their own potential, our policies must guarantee responsible governance and institutions that work for and with responsible citizens.
As the largest political organization in the world, the Socialist International can unite the world’s citizens around a new global agenda to achieve these goals.
Our first challenge is to democratize globalization.
We must reconfigure globalization from the bottom-up, bringing in the two-thirds of the human race that is currently excluded from the process, on terms that reflect the socialist principles of inclusion, cultural diversity, and sustainable development.
How can citizens have a democratic say in world economic development when the IMF and World Bank work on the principle of “one dollar, one vote”?
There can be no real democracy when we have a massive concentration of capital and power in the hands of the few; when multinational corporations challenge the power of democratically elected representatives; when organized criminals can buy off police officers, judges, and politicians; when monopolization of the media erodes fundamental freedoms.
Democratizing globalization will take time.
But we can accelerate the process by strengthening regional cooperation and integration.
This calls for new channels of cooperation with progressive forces in other parts of the world – in China, the United States, India, and the Arab world.
To tackle global problems, we need to strengthen and democratize international institutions like the United Nations.
But we need to look beyond reform of the Security Council and start creating a democratic global architecture that puts globalization at the service of citizens, not markets.
Today, the top priority for socialists is to re-establish a balance between economic productivity and social justice.
While we have some successful precedents, such as the Nordic model, it is difficult for nations to achieve this balance.
As capitalist markets give way to vast commercial networks, and as market economies become market societies, governments and unions are increasingly restricted in scope.
This has disempowered and divided our citizens.
Citizens of developed countries increasingly feel like mere objects of consumerism, while citizens of developing countries struggle for daily survival.
In both cases, but in different ways, people feel impoverished.
To be sure, we have very diverse societies, but we also face new forms of inequality.
Lack of labor standards in one part of the world undermines the social welfare of workers in other parts of the world.
Mass migration from poor countries has created fear and xenophobia in richer countries, especially among the working class.
Similarly, free trade has turned farmers and service workers in the developing and developed world against each other.
Environmental concerns have become a “blame game.”
The developed world fears the depletion of vital resources by the developing world, which in turn blames the developed world for destroying the environment in pursuit of profit.
To bridge these divides, we must rethink the nature of employment in an increasingly automated, borderless, and mobile global economy.
As capital is globalized, so basic labor standards should be global.
Forced labor, child labor, and discrimination in the workplace must be eliminated.
We must also make our own politics more democratic.
We must fight exclusion from our political parties, just as we fight exclusion in our societies.
This means welcoming migrants and minorities, creating more opportunities for women and the disabled, and empowering citizens through education and participation.
Empowering citizens means giving them both the power to decide and the knowledge to decide well.
In PASOK, the Greek Socialist party that I lead, we are undertaking far-reaching reforms in this direction.
Likewise, the goal of the Socialist International is a world governed not by free markets, but by free people.
The Urban Village
CAMBRIDGE – “I want to be a part of it – New York, New York,” Frank Sinatra sang of the city that has attracted so many of the world’s most ambitious people, from artists and performers to businesspeople and bankers.
In a sense, this is not a difficult phenomenon to explain; metropolises like New York City, with their multicultural populations, multinational corporations, and multitude of talented individuals, are rife with opportunities.
But the impact of large cities runs deeper than economic or even cultural power; cities can fundamentally change people’s lives – and even the people themselves.
In 2010, Geoffrey West, together with a team of researchers, discovered that several socioeconomic measures – both positive and negative – increase with the size of the local population.
In other words, the larger the city, the higher the average wage, productivity level, number of patents per person, crime rate, prevalence of anxiety, and incidence of HIV.
In fact, when a city doubles in size, every measure of economic activity increases by about 15% per capita.
That is why people move to the big city; indeed, it is why cities thrive.
This law remains constant across city sizes.
And it is not unique.
A growing body of evidence suggests that similar functions govern even more aspects of urban life than the research by West’s team indicated.
How can cities as ostensibly different as New York, with its towering profile, and Paris, characterized by wide boulevards, function so similarly?
If, as Shakespeare suggested, a city is nothing but its people, the answer may lie in the characteristic patterns of connection, interaction, and exchange among residents.
HIV – indeed, any sexually transmitted disease – provides a particularly vivid example of the way that social networks shape urban life, as it spreads through linkages of sexual partners.
Ideas – and the innovations that result from them – spread in a similar manner.
Just a few years ago, a broad investigation of these complex social networks would have been virtually impossible.
After all, the available tools – isolated laboratory experiments and written questionnaires – were both imprecise and difficult to apply on a large scale.
The Internet has changed that.
By enmeshing billions of people in seamless connectivity, online platforms have transformed the scope of social networks and provided new tools for researchers to investigate human interaction.
In fact, an entirely new field of study is emerging at the intersection of data analytics and sociology: computational social science.
Using data collected online or through telecommunications networks – the wireless providers Orange and Ericsson, for example, have recently made some data available to researchers – it is now possible to address, in a scientific way, fundamental questions about human sociability.
A recent paper (of which one of us, Carlo Ratti, is a co-author) uses anonymized data from telecommunications networks across Europe to explore how human networks change with city size.
The results are striking: in large cities, people not only walk faster (a tendency recorded since the 1960s), but they also make – and change – friends faster.
This phenomenon is likely rooted in the fact that, in accordance with West’s findings, the total number of human connections increases with city size.
London’s eight million inhabitants regularly connect with almost twice the number of people as Cambridge’s 100,000 residents.
This increasing exposure to people – and hence to ideas, activities, and even diseases – could explain the impact of city size on socioeconomic outcomes.
But another tendency is also consistent across cities of all sizes: people tend to build “villages” around themselves.
This behavior is quantified as the networks’ “clustering coefficient” – that is, the probability that a person’s friends will also be friends with one another – and remains extraordinarily stable across metropolitan areas.
Simply put, humans everywhere are naturally inclined to live within tight-knit communities.
Of course, this idea has been suggested before.
The urbanist Jane Jacobs, for example, described the rich interactions occurring in New York City neighborhoods – what she called an “intricate ballet, in which the individual dancers and ensembles all have distinctive parts which miraculously reinforce each other.”
What computational social science offers is the prospect of quantifying such observations and gaining insights that could shape the design of urban environments in the future.
The question is whether these insights could also unlock the power of human interactions in small towns, enabling them to access some of the social and economic advantages of a large city.
In this sense, it is critical to recognize the fundamental difference between “urban villages” and their rural counterparts.
In the latter, social networks are largely predetermined by family, proximity, or history.
City dwellers, by contrast, can explore a wide variety of options to create custom-made villages according to their social, intellectual, or creative affinities.
Perhaps that is why Sinatra left his hometown of Hoboken, New Jersey.
Only in a city like New York could he find the Rat Pack.
Doing Well by Doing Good
BERKELEY – If you get most of your ideas about government from speeches by America’s Republican presidential candidates, it’s easy to believe that the US federal government is incapable of doing anything right.
But not even the Republicans actually believe it.
The proof is just beneath the surface, where a remarkable bipartisan consensus is emerging around an approach to America’s most serious social problems – including homelessness, criminal recidivism, preschool education, and chronic illness – that combines the best principles of conservatism and progressivism.
It is a strategy that is playing out in Republican states such as Utah and Kentucky and Democratic ones like Massachusetts and California.
This nationwide trend is being catalyzed in part by the federal government.
But it is being implemented mainly at the community level through partnerships among local governments, community groups, philanthropic organizations, and for-profit investors.
These are, in a sense, pay-for-success projects, sometimes structured as social impact bonds –formal contracts that tie payments to actual results.
Private investors and philanthropic organizations finance the upfront costs of the pilot projects, and local or state governments (sometimes supplemented with federal money) pay the investors only if the project produces the promised results.
Though the pay-for-success model is still in its infancy, dozens of projects are now underway.
Indeed, the United States is already the largest pay-for-success market in the world, with over $100 million invested in such transactions.
Utah was an early pioneer, launching a novel pilot project in preschool education that is funded by $7 million from Goldman Sachs and the Pritzker Foundation.
The city of Chicago has launched a similar but larger project for $17 million, with upfront funding from some of the same investors as in Utah.
Massachusetts has a $27 million project to test a program for reducing recidivism among young men on probation.
Pay-for-success projects mark a radical departure from traditional approaches to funding solutions to complex social challenges.
The most obvious difference is that taxpayers avoid the upfront financial cost of trying an unproven strategy.
Santa Clara County, California is introducing a pilot project aimed at reducing the cost of supporting people with acute mental illness.
At least 250 people will receive temporary housing along with “wrap-around” support and psychiatric services.
The goal is to lower public costs by reducing reliance on expensive acute-care hospitals, minimizing the number of emergency-room visits, and avoiding jail sentences.
The program’s effectiveness will be evaluated by a randomized control trial comparing the data of patients who participated with those who did not.
The key to success is that the incentives are based on outcomes, not the outflow of money.
A traditional social program is usually judged by the volume of services provided, such as the number of people trained or homeless people sheltered.
By contrast, in a pay-for-success model, the returns are based on the social benefits achieved or savings reaped by government.
How many additional children were brought up to their proper reading level?
How many additional former inmates obtained jobs?
How much money did government save as a result of reduced prison time or lower safety-net payments?
That is a big change from traditional privatization of public services, in which government contractors reap profits simply by billing for services.
It also provides relief from the bean-counting rigidity that comes from policing every dollar that a contractor spends.
President Barack Obama’s administration has been extremely active in this area, and it is now doubling down.
The White House Office of Social Innovation and Civic Participation (SICP) has been working with agencies across the federal government to spur pay-for-success efforts around the country.
The Social Innovation Fund has provided matching grants to dozens of communities, which are working closely with organizations such as Harvard’s Social Impact Bond Lab and Third Sector Capital, to identify and structure promising pay-for-success ventures.
The SICP just launched a competition for a new $10.6 million round of matching grants.
If the broad social goals sound “Democratic,” the method and strategy are in many ways “Republican.”
They rely heavily on the private sector, require tough quantitative evaluation, and devolve most of the actual work to states and localities.
Call this “progressive federalism.”
The “progressive” component is in taking on major social problems.
The “federalism” consists in the recognition that states and local communities are the primary sources of bold and effective new strategies.
Lawmakers in both parties have teamed up to introduce a variety of bills that would encourage and fund pay-for-success projects.
Meanwhile, the Obama administration has pushed through two important regulatory changes that could free up billions of dollars in private capital for social-impact investing, including pay-for-success schemes.
In September, the Treasury Department provided new regulations to philanthropic foundations that relaxed the perceived barriers to “mission-related investments.”
It was an important move: Foundations oversee some $600 billion, but had long worried that certain social-impact investments might jeopardize their tax-free status.
In October, the Department of Labor followed up with a “clarification’’ that eased worries at pension funds about investing in ventures that produce social as well as economic returns.
Of course, though these changes open the way for philanthropic foundations and pension funds to become major investors in pay-for-success projects, success is not guaranteed.
For example, a project to reduce recidivism among juvenile inmates at Rikers Island in New York City produced disappointing results.
But that is exactly how the approach is supposed to work: risk-conscious investors, rather than taxpayers, assume the upfront financial costs of innovating.
Failed efforts are not only inevitable; they are essential to finding real solutions.
Americans are generally wary of “big government,” but they do want solutions to their country’s biggest social problems.
A results-oriented pay-for-success approach, based on what we know works well in the private sector, provides an ideal opportunity to test bold and innovative solutions, learn from scores of competing projects about which work, and ramp up those that do.
A Future-Oriented US Fiscal Policy
NEW YORK – At last, Republican candidates in the US presidential campaign have begun focusing on the economy.
At a time of rising anxiety among middle-income voters about wealth inequality, and growing awareness of the unsustainability of Social Security and Medicare, this conversation could not be more important.
Unfortunately, not enough attention is being paid to the link between these two key issues.
In fact, tackling the problems with Social Security and Medicare is the key to addressing what ails the middle class.
But fiscal-policy progressives, in particular, remain fixated on using higher tax rates on the wealthy to fund higher incomes for everyone else.
Income redistribution may be an attractive idea for some – including, to a lesser extent, the Republicans who support a watered-down version, in which relatively high marginal tax rates support expanded family assistance – but it is fool’s gold.
As a recent Brookings Institution paper shows, higher marginal tax rates would do little to diminish income inequality in the US.
Likewise, higher taxes cannot resolve the problem posed by the mounting unfunded liabilities of Social Security and Medicare.
Maintaining these programs in their current form would require growth-destroying tax increases on middle-income Americans, as well as continuing cuts in government funding for defense, education, and research.
There is only one way to ensure broadly shared prosperity in the US: a future-oriented fiscal policy aimed at boosting employment and productivity, maintaining low marginal tax rates, strengthening support for workers, and investing in education, innovation, and infrastructure.
The alternative – allowing the past, in the form of interest payments on the national debt and entitlement spending, to continue dictating fiscal policy – would block prosperity among middle-income households, by requiring continuous tax increases and reduced public investment.
To fund this future-oriented policy, US leaders must implement reforms that enhance the long-run viability of the social safety net.
As it stands, Social Security and Medicare are unsustainable, with the long-term gap between projected income and promised benefits reaching tens of trillions of dollars – well in excess of the official debt the federal government has accumulated over its history.
Closing the gap with tax hikes – the burden of which would be borne largely by middle-income households – would threaten both economic growth and living standards.
And offsetting spending cuts provides no safety valve.
Health care and Social Security already consume half of the US federal budget, up from one-sixth in 1965, and these outlays relative to GDP are projected to more than double by 2040.
With no change in course, the programs’ “trust fund” balances will be depleted by the 2030s.
Avoiding that outcome will require US political leaders to constrain the growth of entitlement spending and bolster support for middle-income individuals.
While Social Security and Medicare remain important to ensure wellbeing in retirement, their role must be updated to suit today’s needs.
For example, to ensure that no one who has worked for 30 or more years will live in poverty in old age, Social Security needs a higher minimum benefit for lower-income workers, with more affluent seniors seeing less growth in benefits over time.
Adopting the chained consumer-price index for federal benefit calculations would ensure that benefits more accurately represent inflation, while slowing the rate of benefit growth for individuals.
Beyond stabilizing Social Security’s finances, US leaders should implement policies that place a higher value on work.
Seniors working past the retirement age of 67 should not be subject to the payroll tax, and the retirement earnings test should be eliminated, so that seniors can work full-time without losing out on Social Security benefits.
Finally, incentives for private retirement saving should be expanded.
A similarly honest and modern approach can also secure Medicare, without large tax increases on middle-income Americans.
For starters, bipartisan proposals for premium support, with seniors receiving subsidies to purchase private health insurance, should be implemented.
To enable individuals to prepare to cover the associated deductibles and copayments, health savings accounts – funds which are not subject to income tax at the time of deposit, and can be used tax-free at any time to cover qualified medical expenses – should be expanded and strengthened.
Premium support can significantly reduce Medicare spending, as it establishes a framework for more efficient spending on benefits, driven by competition and innovation in care and coverage.
So far, the only US presidential candidate who has recognized the need for such a future-oriented approach is former Florida Governor Jeb Bush, who has proposed modernizing reforms of Social Security and Medicare that avoid imposing high costs on middle-income Americans and a heavier debt burden on future generations.
Two other Republican candidates, Ohio Governor John Kasich and Florida Senator Marco Rubio, have also raised constructive reform ideas.
By contrast, former Secretary of State and Democratic candidate Hillary Clinton and a leading Republican contender, Donald Trump, have opposed reform of Social Security and Medicare.
Senator Bernie Sanders, Clinton’s Democratic rival, actually proposes to expand the programs’ unfunded liabilities.
With so few presidential candidates recognizing the link between reforming Social Security and Medicare and ensuring broadly shared prosperity, the US faces serious risks.
The progressive redistributive agenda could continue to advance, or the conservative entitlement-reform agenda could fail.
Either way, the US would face growth-limiting tax increases and limits on the contributions that public investment can make to the country’s future.
There is a fiscal path to enhancing prosperity for middle-income Americans.
It requires support for growth, rewards for work, investment in opportunity, and, unavoidably, reforms to Social Security and Medicare.
One hopes that, as the campaign progresses, honest and forward-looking fiscal-policy debates recognizing this fundamental truth gain traction.
The Authoritarian Temptation
NEW YORK – Twenty-four years ago this month, Soviet hardliners, desperate to stop the country’s nascent democratic transition, arrested Mikhail Gorbachev and declared martial law.
In response, millions of protesters poured into the streets of Moscow and towns across the Soviet Union.
Key elements of the army refused to accept the coup, and it soon collapsed – with the Soviet Union soon to follow.