Fayyad’s strategy for international recognition of a Palestinian state is to fight a legal battle against Israel in the United Nations Security Council and other international bodies.
He is convinced that establishing a Palestinian state would serve the interest of all parties, and that the odds favor the Palestinians in international political struggle.
Hamas does not share this view, and Palestinian reconciliation efforts have reached an impasse.
The Arab League has given Egypt the lead role in bringing the two sides together, but Hamas has spurned Egypt’s proposals.
Now, with questions about President Hosni Mubarak’s successor in the air, Egypt has put aside these talks.
Palestinians are looking instead to Iran, Hamas’ ally, for signs of any revival in discussions between Fatah and Hamas.
Palestinians’ choices are limited, and there is no consensus among them on how to proceed.
But there is a growing sense that the waiting game cannot last much longer.  Whatever comes next will most likely come soon.
Hamas in Power
The victory of the fundamentalist Hamas in the Palestinian elections will have far-reaching consequences for the region, some totally unexpected.
Two aspects, however, are already visible.
The Hamas victory is, first and foremost, an indication of the total failure of the traditional Palestinian leadership to create a body politic.
Palestine is not yet a state, but it is already a failed one.
Since the Oslo Accords of l993 between Israel and the PLO, the Palestinians enjoyed limited transitional autonomy.
To be sure, the new Palestinian Authority (PA) took power under difficult conditions, but which new liberation movement does not face serious challenges when it finally must govern?
The PA had an opportunity to lay the institutional foundations for a functioning state.
But, but instead of supplying the population with the necessary infrastructure – economic development, education, welfare, medical services, housing, and refugee rehabilitation – Yasser Arafat’s Fatah-led PA spent more than 70% of its meager budget on a dozen competing security and intelligence services, neglecting all other spheres of activity.
It created what is called in Arabic a Mukhabarat (security services) state, very much like what is prevalent in almost all Arab countries – Egypt, Syria, Saudi Arabia, republics and monarchies alike.
The vacuum that the PA left elsewhere, including the social sphere, was filled by Hamas.
Indeed, its popularity is due not only to its fundamentalist Islamic ideology and its commitment to the destruction of Israel.
The high esteem in which Palestinians hold Hamas also grew out of what Hamas actually did for them while the PA squandered its resources.
It was not only the endemic corruption of the official Palestinian leadership that turned so many Palestinians from it.
Hamas set up better schools, kindergartens, crèches for mothers, medical centers, welfare services, and programs for youth and women – all of this in addition giving special grants to the families of suicide bombers.
In the elections, Hamas received its dividend for doing what the Fatah-led Palestinian Authority failed to do.
It is still an open question whether Hamas in government will become more pragmatic and less committed to terrorism: it certainly is a possibility, and one should not prejudge the outcome.
Kadima’s success is due to Sharon’s main innovation in Israeli politics: the successful unilateral disengagement from Gaza.
That withdrawal was based on the conviction that the gaps between the Israeli and Palestinian positions are too wide to enable meaningful negotiations.
Hence, Israel must start deciding the future boundaries of the country unilaterally, hoping for eventual negotiations at a later stage.
This is also the line adopted by Olmert.
But Hamas’s victory suggests that the gaps between the Israeli and Palestinian sides will grow even wider, and that the chances for a negotiated settlement will recede even farther into the future.
This leaves further unilateral Israeli moves – such as a partial set of withdrawals from selected areas in the West Bank – as the only feasible option.
Realistic conflict management will replace utopian hopes for conflict resolution.
In a region full of paradoxes, the Hamas victory may have added another one: usually, when extremists on one side become stronger, it plays into the hands of extremists on the other side, producing a dangerous spiral effect.
In this case, however, the victory of the extremist Hamas may strengthen not the extremists of Likud, but, surprisingly, the more moderate centrists of Kadima.
One cannot be certain of such an outcome, of course, but it is now the best that one can realistically hope for.
Hamas’s Real Enemies
JERUSALEM – In Iran, elements from within the regime are reportedly offering a $1 million reward for the assassination of Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak because of his opposition to Hamas in the Gaza Strip.
In Lebanon, the leader of Hezbollah, backed by Iran and Syria, merely calls for the Egyptian government’s overthrow.
In response to this, Tariq Alhomayed, a Saudi who is editor-in-chief of the newspaper Al-Sharq al-Awsat , describes Hamas as Iran’s tool, and argues that “Iran is a real threat to Arab security.”
Egypt’s foreign minister, Ahmed Aboul Gheit, agrees – and he is not alone.
When Arab states met to discuss the Gaza crisis, Saudi Arabia vetoed any action.
Even the Palestinian Authority (PA) blames Hamas for the fighting.
Activists in Fatah, Hamas’s nationalist rival which runs the PA, make no secret of their hope that Hamas loses the war.
Welcome to the new Middle East, characterized no longer by the Arab-Israeli conflict, but by an Arab nationalist-Islamist conflict.
Recognizing this reality, virtually all Arab states – other than Iran’s ally, Syria – and the PA want to see Hamas defeated in the Gaza Strip.
Given their strong self-interest in thwarting Islamist revolutionary groups, especially those aligned with Iran, they are not inclined to listen to the “Arab street” – which is far quieter than it was during previous conflicts, such as the 1991 war in Kuwait, the 2000-2004 Palestinian uprising, or the 2006 Israel-Hezbollah war.
Today’s Middle East is very different from the old one in many significant ways.
First, the internal politics of every Arab country revolves around a battle between Arab nationalist rulers and an Islamist opposition.
In other words, Hamas’s allies are the regimes’ enemies.
An Islamist state in the Gaza Strip would encourage those who seek to create similar entities in Egypt, Jordan, and every other Arab country.
Already, a tremendous price has been paid in lives and treasure for this conflict.
The violence has included civil wars among Palestinians and Algerians; the bloodshed in Iraq; and terrorist campaigns in Egypt and Saudi Arabia.
In the Palestinian case, after winning an election victory and making a deal with Fatah for a coalition government, Hamas turned on its nationalist rivals and drove them out of Gaza by force.
In return, the PA has been repressing Hamas in the West Bank.
In Lebanon, Hezbollah has been trying to bully its more moderate Sunni Muslim, Christian, and Druze rivals into submission.
Second, because Arab states confront an Iran-Syria alliance that includes Hamas and Hezbollah, in addition to internal conflicts, there is a regional battle between these two blocs.
An aspect of this is that the largely Sunni Muslim-led states face a largely Shia Muslim-led competitor for regional hegemony.
These two problems pose far greater dangers to the existing states than does any (largely fabricated) Israeli threat, and the region’s rulers know it.
While this seems to be a very pessimistic assessment of the regional situation, the radical Islamist side has many weaknesses.
Launching losing wars may make Islamists feel good, but being defeated is a costly proposition, for their arrogance and belligerence antagonizes many who might otherwise be won over to their cause.
In addition, the situation provides a good opportunity for Western policymakers.
The emphasis should be on building coalitions among the relatively moderate states that are threatened by radical Islamist forces, and on working hard to prevent Iran from obtaining nuclear weapons – a goal that is in the interests of many in the region.
The worst mistake would be to follow the opposite policy – an inevitably futile effort to appease the extremists or seek to moderate them.
Such a campaign actually disheartens the relative moderates who, feeling sold out, will try to cut their own deal with Tehran.
The current crisis in Gaza is only one aspect of the much wider battle shaking the region.
Helping Hamas would empower radical Islamism and Iranian ambitions, while undercutting the PA and everyone else, not just Israel.
Arab states don’t want to help their worst enemy. Why should anyone else?
Italy’s Downward Spiral
MUNICH – Italy is now in a triple-dip recession.
But it didn’t get there by itself.
Yes, the economy’s long slide reflects Italian leaders’ failure to confront the country’s loss of competitiveness; but it is a failure that is widely shared in Europe.
When the financial crisis erupted in the fourth quarter of 2007, Italy’s GDP plummeted by 7%, then picked up by 3%, dropped again by 5%, rebounded by a measly 0.1%, and lately, during the first half of this year, shrank again, this time by 0.3%.
Altogether, Italian GDP has contracted by 9% during the past seven years.
Industrial production, moreover, has plunged by a staggering 24%.
Only thanks to stubbornly persistent inflation has Italy’s nominal GDP managed to remain constant.
Overall unemployment has climbed to 12%, while the rate for youth not attending school has soared to 44%.
Italy has tried to counteract the economic contraction by increasing its public debt.
With the European Central Bank and intergovernmental rescue operations keeping interest rates low, Italy’s public debt has been able to rise by one-third from the end of 2007 to the spring of 2014.
Italy’s new prime minister, Matteo Renzi, wants to stimulate growth.
But what he really intends to do is accumulate even more debt.
True, debt spurs demand; but this type of demand is artificial and short-lived.
Sustainable growth can be achieved only if Italy’s economy regains its competitiveness, and within the eurozone there is only one way to accomplish this: by reducing the prices of its goods relative to those of its eurozone competitors.
What Italy managed in the past by devaluing the lira must now be emulated through so-called real depreciation.
The era of low interest rates that followed the decision in 1995 to introduce the euro inflated a massive credit bubble in southern eurozone countries, which was sustained until the end of 2013.
During this time, Italy became 25% more expensive (on the basis of its GDP deflator) than its eurozone trading partners.
Seventeen percentage points of this rise can be accounted for by higher inflation, and eight percentage points through a revaluation of the lira conducted prior to the introduction of the euro.
Relative to Germany, Italy became a whopping 42% more expensive.
That price differential – and nothing else – is Italy’s problem.
There is no other solution for the country than to correct this imbalance by means of real depreciation.
But accomplishing that is easier said than done.
Raising prices is almost never a real problem.
Lowering them or making them rise more slowly than prices in competing countries is painful and unnerving.
Even if a country’s trade unions enable such a policy through wage moderation, debtors would run into difficulties, because they borrowed on the assumption that high inflation would continue.
Many companies and households would go bankrupt.
Given that disinflation or deflation leads through a valley of tears before competitiveness improves, there is reason to doubt whether election-minded politicians, with their short-term orientation, are capable of staying the course.
Former Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi wanted to solve the problem by withdrawing Italy from the eurozone and devaluing the new currency.
He conducted exploratory conversations with other eurozone governments in the autumn of 2011, and had sought an agreement with Greek Prime Minister George Papandreou, who proposed a referendum that effectively would have meant choosing between strict austerity and exiting the eurozone.
But both leaders had to resign, only three days apart, in November 2011.
Higher political considerations, as well as the interests of the banking system, militated against an exit.
The economist Mario Monti, who followed Berlusconi as Prime Minister, attempted a real depreciation, introducing greater flexibility into the labor market in order to force the unions into wage concessions.
But Monti’s efforts came to naught; among other problems, the ECB, with its generous financial help, removed the pressure from both unions and companies.
Enrico Letta, who followed Monti as the head of Italy’s government, lacked a clear concept for reform, and in turn was followed by the charismatic Renzi.
But, though Renzi expends much verbal energy on the economy, so far he has given no indication that he understands the nature of Italy’s problem.
Renzi is not alone in this.
On the contrary, virtually the entire European political elite, from Brussels to Paris to Berlin, still believes that Europe is suffering from a mere financial and confidence crisis.
The underlying loss of competitiveness is not discussed, because that is a problem that discussion alone cannot resolve.
Free-Trade Pitfalls
MUNICH − The Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership, currently the subject of intense negotiations between the European Union and the United States, is making big waves.
Indeed, given the scale of the two economies, which together account for more than 50% of world GDP and one-third of global trade flows, the stakes are high.
In order to ensure that the TTIP benefits consumers on both sides of the Atlantic, those negotiating it must recognize and avoid several key traps – some more obvious than others.
Bilateral trade agreements have been gaining traction lately.
For example, the EU and Canada recently concluded a Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement, which is likely to become the basis for the TTIP.
This is not surprising, given the repeated failure of attempts to reach a global agreement via the World Trade Organization.
The Doha Round of WTO talks was a flop, and the agreement reached in Bali last year, despite being sold as a success, does little more than accelerate the collection of customs duties.
As it stands, fear of insufficient consumer protection, distorted by vested interests, is dominating the TTIP debate.
Consider the disagreement over the differing treatment of chicken.
In the US, chicken meat is washed in chlorinated water; in Europe, chickens are stuffed with antibiotics while alive.
In an effort that can be described only as absurd, European producers are attempting to convince their customers that the former method is worse for consumers.
In reality, consumer protection in the US is considerably better and stricter than in the EU, where, following the European Court of Justice’s Cassis de Dijon decision, the minimum standard applicable to all countries is set by the country with the lowest standard in each case.
By contrast, the US Food and Drug Administration enforces the highest product standards, meaning that, under the TTIP, European consumers would gain access to higher-quality products at lower prices.
The main benefit of trade facilitation is that it enables countries to specialize in the areas in which they are most capable.
As Ralph Ossa showed in a working paper for the US National Bureau of Economic Research, if Germany did not have access to international markets, its standard of living would be half of what it is now.
The TTIP, according to the Ifo Institute’s Gabriel Felbermayr, could improve German living standards by 3-5%.
But these benefits are far from guaranteed.
One major risk of trade facilitation is trade diversion – that is, a reduction in customs duties between two countries leads consumers to avoid less expensive products from third countries.
If consumer savings do not outweigh the decline in countries’ customs revenue, the end result is reduced welfare.
Avoiding such an outcome requires provisions enabling a wider set of countries, in particular China and Russia, to participate in the trade-facilitation process on equal terms.
Indeed, building a sort of “economic NATO” that excludes powers like Russia and China would be inadvisable both economically and politically.
Instead, these countries should be included in the negotiation process.
Another potential risk concerns investment protection.
As it stands, it is acceptable for the EU to assume responsibility when its own health and environmental-protection measures function as de facto trade barriers.
EU directives capping the CO2 emissions of cars, for example, are actually a kind of industrial policy aimed at protecting small French and Italian automobiles.
Investment protection would limit this kind of abuse.
But it is not acceptable for the EU to offer foreign investors protection from a European country’s inability to meet its obligations, in particular to service its debt.
Such a move, as Handelsblatt’s Norbert Häring recently pointed out, would transform the TTIP into a mechanism for mutualizing liability within the EU.
EU-wide investment guarantees would artificially reduce the rate of interest under which single EU countries could borrow and thus encourage these countries to take on more debt, effectively suspending the self-correcting mechanism of the capital markets.
That would lead to the next act in the European debt disaster, with consequences that far outweigh the TTIP’s benefits.
The TTIP undoubtedly has considerable potential to boost economic performance on both sides of the Atlantic.
But it will mean nothing if the agreement is allowed to serve as a back door to European debt mutualization through what effectively might come close to Eurobonds.
Europe’s Next Moral Hazard
MUNICH – The euro crisis has passed through six phases so far.
It is worth recalling them, because they show how policymakers stumbled along, trying to put out fires without keeping an eye on where their chosen path was leading them.
The seventh phase of the crisis is one of enhanced moral hazard, stemming from a run-up in debt.
With investment risks largely collectivized by the bailout measures instituted by the ECB and the eurozone’s member governments, investors are once again accepting low yields, and borrowers are seizing the new opportunities.
To be sure, in 2011 a so-called fiscal compact was agreed in order to avoid precisely this consequence.
The compact, signed by all European Union member states except the United Kingdom and the Czech Republic, obliges governments among other things to reduce their (smoothed) debt/GDP ratio annually by one-twentieth of the difference between the actual debt/GDP ratio and the Maastricht limit of 60%.
However, the exceptions foreseen in the compact have effectively removed theses constraints.
Had the compact been enforced, Italy would have had to reduce its debt/GDP ratio from 121% in 2011 to 112% in 2014.
Instead, Italy’s debt ratio has skyrocketed, with a forecast by the European Commission projecting it to reach 134% at the end of this year.
	Likewise, Spain’s debt ratio should have fallen from 71% to 69%, but will probably increase to 99%.
Greece’s debt ratio will rise from 170% to 177% (despite a 58-percentage-point debt-relief scheme in 2012), Portugal’s will surge from 108% to 127%, and France’s will rise from 86% to 96%.
But, instead of ruefully admitting their failures, the governments in question are now going on the offensive by rejecting austerity categorically.
Italy’s new prime minister, Matteo Renzi, came to power on that platform.
Greek Prime Minister Antonis Samaras is trying to counter his leftist rival Alexis Tsipras in the same way.
Portugal’s Constitutional Court has thwarted the country’s fiscal-consolidation efforts.
And France’s new prime minister, Manuel Valls, is also moving against austerity.
Supposedly, everyone just wants more growth; unfortunately, when politicians talk about growth, what they usually mean is that they should be permitted to incur more public debt.
	An increase in public debt causes a short-term surge in demand, helping to increase the degree of capacity utilization and keep unemployment in check.
However, new debt is nothing but a form of dope, reducing pressure to take painful measures that would improve competitiveness and capacity growth.
de facto debt mutualization that has prompted creditors to accept lower interest rates, and it is only lower interest rates that have permitted Renzi, Samaras, Valls, and the others to distance themselves from austerity policies.
	There is nothing surprising about this: When a decision-maker can claim full credit for a policy’s benefits and collectivize the costs, he will pursue the policy sooner, more quickly, and to a larger extent than he would if he had to bear the costs alone.
What is remarkable is how matter-of-factly Europe’s transgressors succeed in cloaking themselves with the mantle of a new social breakthrough.
One only needs to look at the United States to see how dangerous – and indeed unsustainable – the eurozone’s path has become.
When one of the US states runs up too much debt, creditors become jittery and austerity measures are introduced to avert the risk of bankruptcy – as has happened in the past few years in California, Illinois, and Minnesota.
	But all of that occurs while the debt/GDP ratio is still minimal and clearly below 10%, because creditors know that no one will come to their aid.
The Federal Reserve will not buy their government bonds, and the federal authorities will not issue any guarantees.
In Europe, by contrast, easy access to the local printing presses before and after the foundation of the ECB, together with the new fiscal rescue mechanisms, ensure that investors start to become nervous only when debt ratios are 10-20 times as high.
As a result, the debt level rises until it spirals out of control.
	The critical limit beyond which creditors become anxious has been raised significantly by the bailout architecture put in place over the last two years.
This will bring a few years of calm as debt levels climb steadily to that limit.
Then the storm will come, battering ordinary citizens, while today’s leaders remain high and dry, drawing pensions.
Happiness, Money, and Giving It Away
Would you be happier if you were richer?
Many people believe that they would be.
But research conducted over many years suggests that greater wealth implies greater happiness only at quite low levels of income.
People in the United States, for example, are, on average, richer than New Zealanders, but they are not happier.
More dramatically, people in Austria, France, Japan, and Germany appear to be no happier than people in much poorer countries, like Brazil, Colombia, and the Philippines.
Comparisons between countries with different cultures are difficult, but the same effect appears within countries, except at very low income levels, such as below $12,000 annually for the US.
Beyond that point, an increase in income doesn’t make a lot of difference to people’s happiness.
Americans are richer than they were in the 1950’s, but they are not happier.
Americans in the middle-income range today – that is, a family income of $50,000-$90,000 – have a level of happiness that is almost identical to well-off Americans, with a family income of more than $90,000.
Most surveys of happiness simply ask people how satisfied they are with their lives.
We cannot place great confidence in such studies, because this kind of overall “life satisfaction” judgment may not reflect how much people really enjoy the way they spend their time.
My Princeton University colleague Daniel Kahneman and several co-researchers tried to measure people’s subjective well-being by asking them about their mood at frequent intervals during a day.
In an article published in Science on June 30, they report that their data confirm that there is little correlation between income and happiness.
On the contrary, Kahneman and his colleagues found that people with higher incomes spent more time in activities that are associated with negative feelings, such as tension and stress.
Instead of having more time for leisure, they spent more time at and commuting to work.
They were more often in moods that they described as hostile, angry, anxious, and tense.
Of course, there is nothing new in the idea that money does not buy happiness.
Many religions instruct us that attachment to material possessions makes us unhappy.
The Beatles reminded us that money can’t buy us love.
Even Adam Smith, who told us that it is not from the butcher’s benevolence that we get our dinner, but from his regard for his self-interest, described the imagined pleasures of wealth as “a deception” (though one that “rouses and keeps in continual motion the industry of mankind”).
Nevertheless, there is something paradoxical about this.
Why do governments all focus on increasing per capita national income?
Why do so many of us strive to obtain more money, if it won’t make us happier?
Perhaps the answer lies in our nature as purposive beings.
We evolved from beings who had to work hard to feed themselves, find a mate, and raise children.
For nomadic societies, there was no point in owning anything that one could not carry, but once humans settled down and developed a system of money, that limit to acquisition disappeared.
Accumulating money up to a certain amount provides a safeguard against lean times, but today it has become an end in itself, a way of measuring one’s status or success, and a goal to fall back on when we can think of no other reason for doing anything, but would be bored doing nothing.
Making money gives us something to do that feels worthwhile, as long as we do not reflect too much on why we are doing it.
Consider, in this light, the life of the American investor Warren Buffett.
For 50 years, Buffett, now 75, has worked at accumulating a vast fortune.
According to Forbes magazine , he is the second wealthiest person in the world, after Bill Gates, with assets of $42 billion.
Yet his frugal lifestyle shows that he does not particularly enjoy spending large amounts of money.
Even if his tastes were more lavish, he would be hard-pressed to spend more than a tiny fraction of his wealth.
From this perspective, once Buffett earned his first few millions in the 1960’s, his efforts to accumulate more money can easily seem completely pointless.
Is Buffett a victim of the “deception” that Adam Smith described, and that Kahneman and his colleagues have studied in more depth?
Coincidentally, Kahneman’s article appeared the same week that Buffett announced the largest philanthropic donation in US history – $30 billion to the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation and another $7 billion to other charitable foundations.
Even when the donations made by Andrew Carnegie and John D. Rockefeller are adjusted for inflation, Buffett’s is greater.
At a single stroke, Buffett has given purpose to his life.
Since he is an agnostic, his gift is not motivated by any belief that it will benefit him in an afterlife.
What, then, does Buffett’s life tell us about the nature of happiness?
Perhaps, as Kahneman’s research would lead us to expect, Buffett spent less of his life in a positive mood than he would have if, at some point in the 1960’s, he had quit working, lived on his assets, and played a lot more bridge.
But, in that case, he surely would not have experienced the satisfaction that he can now rightly feel at the thought that his hard work and remarkable investment skills will, through the Gates Foundation, help to cure diseases that cause death and disability to billions of the world’s poorest people.
Buffett reminds us that there is more to happiness than being in a good mood.
The Political Logic of Hard Brexit
PARIS – Little more than three months after the United Kingdom’s decision in June to leave the European Union, Brexit politics are careening out of control in the UK.
An almost revolutionary – and very un-British – dynamic has taken hold, and, as British Prime Minister Theresa May indicated in her “Little Englander” speech at the Conservative Party conference this month, the UK is heading for a “hard Brexit.”
That outcome would run counter to British public opinion, which remains moderate on the question of fully breaking with the EU.
According to a July BBC/ComRes poll, 66% of respondents considered “maintaining access to the single market” to be more important than restricting freedom of movement.
In an ICM poll the same month, only 10% of respondents said they would prioritize ending free movement over maintaining access to the single market, while 30% viewed the two as equally important and 38% considered maintaining full access to the single market the priority.
These findings will surprise only those who buy into the narrative that the West is confronting a large-scale xenophobic revolt against the elites.
While the “Leave” camp certainly included many hard Brexiteers whose primary motivation was to end free movement, it also comprised people who believed Boris Johnson, the former London mayor and current foreign secretary, when he promised (as he still does) that the UK could have its cake and eat it.
In fact, despite Leave’s large faction of angry white working-class voters, middle-class trade-friendly Brexiteers, together with the “Remain” camp, constitute a clear majority of everyone who voted in the June referendum.
Under normal circumstances, one would expect the government’s policy to reflect the majority’s preference, and to aim for a “soft Brexit.”
Instead, a classic revolutionary pattern has emerged.
According to the Brexiteers, the people have spoken, and it is the government’s duty to deliver a “true” Brexit.
But the government must overcome the spoilers, such as senior civil servants and the Remain majority in the House of Commons, who favor a Brexit in name only – a “false” version that could never deliver the benefits of the real thing.
In this revolutionary narrative, the worst elements of Europe’s political tradition have crowded out British pragmatism.
What a majority of British voters want is considered irrelevant.
With a hard Brexit, the Leave camp can avoid being seen by voters as the supplicant in negotiations with the EU – which it inevitably would be, no matter how often May denies it.
The EU will have the upper hand in negotiations for two simple reasons.
First, the UK has more to lose economically.
While other EU countries’ total exports to the UK are double what the UK exports to the rest of the bloc, its exports to the EU amount to three times more as a share of its GDP.
Likewise, the UK has a services surplus, which matters far less to the rest of the EU than it does to Britain.
Second, just like the EU’s Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement with Canada, any negotiated arrangement between the EU and the UK will have to be unanimously accepted by all EU member states.
Thus, the negotiation will not really be between the UK and the EU, but rather among EU members.
The UK, without a presence at those talks, will simply have to accept or reject whatever the EU offers.
This would be true even if the UK pursued a prepackaged arrangement such as membership in the European Economic Area or the EU Customs Union; it will be all the more true if the UK seeks a “bespoke” deal, as May has indicated she will.
If British voters recognized their country’s weak negotiating position, the Brexiteers, who won the referendum on their promise to “take back control,” would face a political disaster.
Walking away from substantive negotiations is the simplest way to avoid such an embarrassing unmasking.
Thus, politically, a hard Brexit is actually the soft option for the government.
Economically, however, hard Brexit will come at a high price, which the UK will have to pay for years to come.
The only consolation is that Brexit’s revolutionary momentum may not be sustainable.
Shortly after the Leave camp labeled bureaucrats in her Her Majesty’s Civil Service “enemies of the people” – a typical statement in the early stages of a revolution – pro-Brexit Foreign Trade Minister Liam Fox derided British exporters, calling them “too lazy and too fat” to succeed in his brave new free-trading Britain.
Such rhetoric is a symptom of desperation.
It carries echoes of the declining years of the Soviet Union under Leonid Brezhnev, when Marxist apologists insisted that there was nothing wrong with communism, except that humanity wasn’t yet mature enough for it.
If developments continue at this pace, the revolutionary zeal we see among British politicians may burn itself out before “hard Brexit” is consummated.
Hard Financial Questions about Soft Development Money
Achieving the Millennium Development Goals (MDG’s) by 2015 is a tremendous challenge facing the international community, and there is widespread agreement that additional external aid is required to meet it.
So the question now is not whether to increase aid, but how best to finance it.
The search for additional and more stable funding to meet the MDG’s has led to various proposals for innovative financing mechanisms and debt relief, in particular by British Chancellor of the Exchequer Gordon Brown.
But the broad range of proposed schemes to bolster resources for development assistance raises hard questions about the appropriate balance between objective needs and sound and effective financing.
Donors as well as recipients must ensure consistency between financing and absorptive capacity.
They must also ensure that additional official financing and debt relief will not distort incentives or create moral hazard.
New money should go to good performers, not just to those who are experiencing debt distress.
In addition to these issues, financing proposals to achieve the MDG’s should be discussed from a central banker’s perspective.
The best solutions include sufficient increases in rich countries’ foreign aid allocations and more ambitious trade liberalization.
But such policies seem politically untenable in the short term, even though – according to the World Bank’s estimation – an appropriate conclusion of the current trade round under the auspices of the World Trade Organization could contribute $350 billion a year to developing countries by 2015.
Similarly, when it comes to increasing foreign-aid budgets, politicians want solutions that are not “felt” by taxpayers (that is, voters) and that can remain outside of national budgets.
However, opaque solutions designed to avoid critical public scrutiny do not seem particularly democratic.
“Innovative” financing solutions might also undermine the clear assignment of responsibilities for raising and using public money.
Indeed, the term “innovative financing mechanism” conjures the idea that there is an easy way to meet the MDG’s.
But, in the end, there are only three ways to secure additional financing for development aid or debt relief: higher taxes, increased indebtedness (that is, higher taxes for future generations), and/or monetary expansion.
One proposal calls for taxing national and international financial transactions.
Others call for allocating Special Drawing Rights (SDR’s) from the IMF, or for using the IMF’s gold resources.
But none of them appears desirable.
To be effective, any tax on financial transactions would have to be implemented on a global scale, which currently does not seem realistic.
Moreover, taxation would increase costs (passed on to borrowers) and reduce the volume of transactions, thereby fueling market volatility amid decreasing liquidity.
Allocating new SDR’s also is inappropriate.
Above all, SDR’s represent liquidity and can be allocated only if and when there is a “global need,” which would currently be difficult to prove given highly liquid and “easy” international capital-market conditions.
Even if a “global need” were recognized, SDR’s, as a component of countries’ official foreign-exchange reserves, should not be available for budgetary spending.
Financing development aid with SDR’s – or even to replace budget-financed aid with such allocations – is comparable to financing budget deficits with central bank money.
In any case, new SDR allocations require the support of 85% of votes within the IMF’s board, which appears unachievable in the foreseeable future, as major shareholders are opposed.
Even the special one-time issuance of SDR’s, agreed upon in 1997 to ensure that all Fund members receive an “equitable” share of cumulative SDR allocations, has still not been activated, owing to insurmountable opposition.
Finally, the proposed “better use” of the IMF’s gold holdings to finance the costs of debt relief seeks to raise up to $8 billion.
At the current market price, this would require selling about a quarter of the Fund’s holdings of 103.4 million fine ounces.
However, these reserves represent an important “hidden” asset that lends strength to the Fund’s balance sheet.
The IMF’s creditors consider it a necessary safeguard against increased risks in the Fund’s credit portolio.
This is because the Fund has experienced exceptionally high access and prolonged use of its resources by a few large economies in the last decade.
Moreover, the IMF’s share in crisis countries’ total external debt has reached unprecedented and systemically problematic levels.
As a result of both tendencies, there is a high concentration of credits on a few large borrowers.
To use IMF gold for further debt relief in the face of increased risk threatens the Fund’s financial integrity and contradicts the recent decision to increase the IMF’s precautionary balances.
Development aid has to be financed in “real terms,” or in a reputable manner, not by spending central bank money or by jeopardizing the IMF’s financial integrity.
Aid should preferably be financed out of donor countries’ national budgets in a transparent, democratically accountable way.
“Innovative” must not become a euphemism for non-transparent, ineffective, or unsound.
Hard Truths About Global Growth
NEW YORK – The world’s high-income countries are in economic trouble, mostly related to growth and employment, and now their distress is spilling over to developing economies.
What factors underlie today’s problems, and how appropriate are the likely policy responses?
The first key factor is deleveraging and the resulting shortfall in aggregate demand.
Since the financial crisis began in 2008, several developed countries, having sustained demand with excessive leverage and consumption, have had to repair both private and public balance sheets, which takes time – and has left them impaired in terms of growth and employment.
The non-tradable side of any advanced economy is large (roughly two-thirds of total activity).
For this large sector, there is no substitute for domestic demand.
The tradable side could make up some of the deficit, but it is not large enough to compensate fully.
In principle, governments could bridge the gap, but high (and rising) debt constrains their capacity to do so (though how constrained is a matter of heated debate).
The bottom line is that deleveraging will ensure that growth will be modest at best in the short and medium term.
If Europe deteriorates, or there is gridlock in dealing with America’s “fiscal cliff” at the beginning of 2013 (when tax cuts expire and automatic spending cuts kick in), a major downturn will become far more likely.
The second factor underlying today’s problems relates to investment.
Longer-term growth requires investment by individuals (in education and skills), governments, and the private sector.
Shortfalls in investment eventually diminish growth and employment opportunities.
The hard truth is that the flip side of the consumption-led growth model that prevailed prior to the crisis has been deficient investment, particularly on the public-sector side.
If fiscal rebalancing is accomplished in part by cutting investment, medium- and longer-term growth will suffer, resulting in fewer employment opportunities for younger labor-market entrants.
Sustaining investment, on the other hand, has an immediate cost: it means deferring consumption.
But whose consumption?
If almost everyone agrees that more investment is needed to elevate and sustain growth, but most believe that someone else should pay for it, investment will fall victim to a burden-sharing impasse – reflected in the political process, electoral choices, and the formulation of fiscal-stabilization measures.
The core issue is taxes.
If public-sector investment were to be increased with no rise in taxation, the budget cuts required elsewhere to avoid unsustainable debt growth would bein implausibly large.
The most difficult challenge concerns inclusiveness – how the benefits of growth are to be distributed.
This is a longstanding challenge that, particularly in the United States, goes back at least two decades before the crisis; left unaddressed, it now threatens social cohesion.
Income growth for the middle class in most advanced countries has been stagnant, and employment opportunities have been declining, especially in the tradable part of the economy.
The share of income going to capital has been rising, at the expense of labor.
Particularly in the US, employment generation has been disproportionately in the non-tradable sector.
These trends reflect a combination of technological and global market forces that have been operating over the last two decades.
On the technology side, labor-saving innovations in network-based information processing and transactions automation have helped to drive a wedge between growth and employment generation in both the tradable and non-tradable sectors.
In the tradable part of advanced economies, manufacturing automation – including expanding robotic capabilities and, prospectively, 3D printing – has combined with the integration of millions of new entrants into rapidly evolving global supply chains to limit employment growth.
Multinational companies’ growing ability to decompose these global supply chains by function and geography, and then to reintegrate them at ever lower transaction costs, removes the labor-market protection that used to come from local competition for workers.
This challenge is particularly difficult, because economic policy has not focused primarily on the adverse distributional trends arising from shifting global market outcomes.
And yet the income distributions across advanced economies, presumably subject to similar technological and global market forces, are, in fact, startlingly different, suggesting that a combination of social policies and differing social norms does have a distributional impact.
Although the theory of optimal income taxation directly addresses the tradeoffs between efficiency incentives and distributional consequences, the appropriate equilibrium remains a long way off.
A healthy state balance sheet could help, because part of the income flowing to capital would go to the state.
But, with the exception of China, fiscal positions around the world are currently weak.
As a result, deleveraging remains a clear priority in a range of countries, reducing growth, with fiscal countermeasures limited by high or rising government debt and deficits.
Thus far, there is little evidence of willingness on the part of politicians, policymakers, and perhaps the public to reduce current consumption further via taxation in order to create room for expanded growth-oriented investment.
In fact, under fiscal pressure, the opposite is more likely.
In the US, few practical measures that address the distributional challenge appear to be part of either major party’s electoral agenda, notwithstanding rhetoric to the contrary.
To the extent that this is true of other advanced economies, the global economy faces an extended multi-year period of low growth, with residual downside risk coming from policy gridlock and mistakes in Europe, the US, and elsewhere.
That scenario implies slower growth – possibly 1-1.5 percentage points slower – in developing countries, including China, again with a preponderance of downside risk.
Hard Turkey
JERUSALEM – The recent surge in Turkey’s military actions against the Kurds in northern Iraq is an indication that, somewhat surprisingly – but not entirely unpredictably – Turkish foreign policy has undergone a 180-degree turn in less than two years.
The Turkish offensive is also an indication that these changes go beyond the current tensions between Turkey and Israel, which are just one facet of much deeper trends.
Opening an impressive new page, Turkey reached out to Armenia; softened its position on Cyprus; tried to draw Iran into a positive dialogue with the West; convinced Syria to settle the two countries’ simmering border dispute; and, as a crowning achievement, launched peace talks between Syria and Israel under Turkish mediation.
Assad has now spent the better part of 2011 killing his own people as they demonstrate for liberalization and reform.
Notwithstanding these failures, Turkey’s strategic stature did not suffer, partly because the diminution of US engagement under President Barack Obama enabled Turkey to fill the ensuing regional power vacuum.
The Arab Spring, despite its still-inconclusive outcome, greatly weakened Egypt’s role in regional politics and made it possible for Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdoğan to position Turkey – and himself – as the leader of a Muslim bloc and a model of co-existence between Islam and democracy.
Last but not least, the AKP’s victory in recent parliamentary elections has encouraged Erdoğan to embrace Putinesque ambitions.
All of this exposed the built-in ambivalence in Davutoğlu’s “zero conflict” policy.
While initially viewed as pacific and moderate, it was underpinned by an overarching view of Turkey as the hegemonic regional power – as an arbiter of conflicts, but ultimately also as an enforcer of its own views on lesser players.
It may be incorrect to call Turkey’s behavior “neo-Ottoman,” but some neighboring countries, after expecting a mediator and facilitator, may now feel faced by a possible bully.
Erdoğan’s policy re-orientation vis-à-vis Israel can be understood as an attempt not only to overcome traditional Arab suspicion of Turkey, given its imperial past, but also to present a more moderate Islamic alternative to theocratic Iran and its unpredictable president.
But Erdoğan’s threat to consider using the Turkish navy as a military escort for further flotillas to Gaza already borders on saber rattling, as does his declared willingness to use force to prevent the Republic of Cyprus from exploring for gas in its continental shelf.
Indeed, Erdoğan’s has warned of a diplomatic rupture with the EU if Cyprus accedes to the Union’s rotating presidency in 2012.
At the same time, renewed violent incursions into northern Iraq in pursuit of alleged guerillas suggest a reversion to hardline anti-Kurdish policies.
The withdrawal of US forces from Iraq only seems to have encouraged Turkey’s will to create a cordon sanitaire on the Iraqi side of the border – and possibly to establish a counterweight to Iran’s influence on a Shia-led government in Baghdad.
And, while Turkey’s agreement to host NATO anti-missile radar facilities, and its recent seizure of a Syrian-registered arms ship, may please the West, here, too, its policies are focused on “hard” military power.
Similarly, Erdoğan’s recent visit to Egypt, Libya, and Tunisia brings out the ambivalence of Turkey’s new claim to regional hegemony.
While Egypt’s shaky military junta welcomed Erdoğan, many Egyptians were not happy about his hectoring them – and other Arabs – to follow Turkish policies and to regard Turkey as their Muslim leader.
A new sultanate?
Erdoğan as the new Saladin?
Turkey has an enormously important role to play in the region.
It could be a bridge between the West and the East, between Islam and modernity, and between Israel and the Arabs.
But it runs the danger of succumbing to the arrogance of power, which has corrupted and sidelined many strong states in the past.
What Enabled Bretton Woods?
PRINCETON – The proximity of the 70th anniversary of the Bretton Woods conference, which established the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund, to historical anniversaries like the Allied landings in Normandy highlights just how ambitious its organizers were.
Indeed, amid considerable tumult, the conference aimed to create a stable international monetary framework that could serve as a cornerstone of a peaceful global order.
And it succeeded – at least for a while.
Bretton Woods retains a powerful fascination, with at least three recent books on the subject having achieved considerable commercial success.
What makes an event in which a group of mostly men talk about money so intriguing?
Of course, there are some juicy incidentals, such as the dance of John Maynard Keynes’s wife, a Russian ballerina, that kept the US Treasury Secretary awake, and charges of espionage for the Soviet Union against the main American negotiator, Harry Dexter White.
But the real drama of the conference lay in the systematic evolution of an institutional structure that underpinned global stability and prosperity for at least three decades.
The institutional vision was linked to a global security system.
Indeed, in the original agreement, the five large powers that would be represented permanently on the IMF Executive Board were the United States, the United Kingdom, the Soviet Union, China, and France – the same countries with permanent seats on the United Nations Security Council.
Even within this framework, the negotiations were challenging.
So how did 44 disparate powers, each seeking to protect its own national interests, manage to agree on a new global monetary system?
According to Keynes, the key was a process of international deliberation and planning, led by “a single power or like-minded group of powers.”
By contrast, a 66-country “pow-wow” like the abortive World Economic Conference, held in London in 1933, could never be expected to produce an agreement.
Keynes’s rival, Friedrich Hayek, went further, asserting that a successful, enduring order could not be negotiated at all; it had to be spontaneous.
The experience at Bretton Woods lends significant credence to Keynes’s assessment.
While 44 countries were formally represented at Bretton Woods, the UK and especially the US were the dominant players.
In fact, bilateral negotiations have enabled every major success of large-scale financial diplomacy.
In the early 1970s, when the fixed exchange-rate regime established at Bretton Woods collapsed, the IMF seemed to have outlived its function.
But, by renegotiating the Fund’s Articles of Agreement, the US, seeking greater flexibility, and France, which sought the kind of predictability that the gold standard had provided, were able to revive it.
Later that decade, efforts by France, Germany, and the UK to confer on monetary policy failed miserably.
But discussions between France and Germany – which remain the leading voices in debates on European monetary issues – were far more effective.
Likewise, in the mid-1980s, when exchange-rate volatility gave rise to calls for protectionist trade measures, the US and Japan found a solution involving exchange-rate stabilization.
Nowadays, international economic diplomacy is centered on the US and China.
In recent years, an emerging debate has focused on whether the global economic system of the 2000s – in which export-oriented emerging economies essentially pegged their currencies to the dollar to obtain faster growth and accumulate foreign-exchange reserves at spectacular rates – effectively created a sort of “Bretton Woods II.”
Could China and the US formalize such a system, with the renminbi playing a greater role?
The bilateral nature of the negotiations certainly implies that they have a chance.
But there was another critical factor underpinning the success of the Bretton Woods conference: the global political and security environment.
For starters, the conference occurred the month after the D-Day landings in Normandy, when the end of World War II seemed far closer than it turned out to be.
What would convince Chinese leaders that they must rapidly reinforce the open global economy that enabled China’s export-driven economic rise?
One such catalyst might be a financial crisis emanating from the country’s risk-laden shadow-banking system.
A contest for global leadership might serve that purpose as well.
Or perhaps the stimulus will be fear that the world is sliding toward protectionism, with bilateral and regional trade agreements like the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership deepening divisions between their participants and the rest of the world.
Bretton Woods demonstrated that it takes a major crisis to produce a political dynamic of reform.
Today’s world, for all of its troubles, is simply not dangerous enough – at least not yet – for the countries at the helm of the global economy.
Who Should Lead the Global Economy?
PRINCETON – In terms of global economic leadership, the twentieth century was American, just as the nineteenth century was British and the sixteenth century was Spanish.
Some Chinese and Europeans think that they are next.
Are they?
And should they even want to be?
The most important prerequisite for global economic leadership is size.
The bigger an economy, the greater its systemic importance, and the more leverage its political representatives have in international decision-making.
The United States is the world’s largest economy, with a GDP of roughly $16.7 trillion.
The eurozone’s $12.6 trillion output puts it in second place, and China, with a GDP of around $9 trillion, comes in third.
In other words, all three economies are conceivably large enough to serve as global economic leaders.
But an economy’s future prospects are also crucial to its leadership prospects – and serious challenges lie ahead.
No one thinks that the eurozone will grow more quickly than the US in the coming years or decades.
While China is expected to overtake the US in terms of output by 2020, decades of rigid population-control measures will weaken growth in the longer run, leaving the US economy as the most dynamic of the three.
Another key requirement for global economic leadership is systemic importance in commercial, monetary, and financial terms.
Unlike China, a large trade power with underdeveloped monetary and financial capabilities, the eurozone meets the requirement of systemic significance in all three areas.
There is also a less concrete aspect to leadership.
Being a true global leader means shaping and connecting the global economic structures within which states and markets operate – something the US has been doing for almost 70 years.
At the 1944 Bretton Woods conference, the US crafted the post-World War II international monetary and financial order.
The basic framework, centered around the US dollar, has survived financial crises, the Soviet Union’s dissolution, and several developing countries’ integration into the world economy.
Today, American leadership in global trade and financial and monetary governance rests on inter-related strengths.
The US provides the world’s key international currency, serves as the linchpin of global demand, establishes trends in financial regulation, and has a central bank that acts as the world’s de facto lender of last resort.
Beyond delivering a global public good, supplying the world’s central currency carries substantial domestic benefits.
Because the US can borrow and pay for imports in its own currency, it does not face a hard balance-of-payments constraint.
This has allowed it to run large and sustained current-account deficits fairly consistently since the early 1980’s.
These deficits raise persistent concerns about the system’s viability, with observers (mostly outside the US) having long predicted its imminent demise.
But the system survives, because it is based on a functional trade-off, in which the US uses other countries’ money to act as the main engine of global demand.
In fact, export-oriented economies like Germany, Japan, and China owe much of their success to America’s capacity to absorb a massive share of global exports – and they need to keep paying America to play this role.
Given this, the big exporters have lately come under intense pressure to “correct” their external surpluses as part of responsible global citizenship.
While this has contributed to a sharp contraction of the Chinese and Japanese surpluses, the eurozone’s current-account surplus is growing, with the International Monetary Fund expecting it to reach 2.3% of GDP this year (slightly less than the Chinese surplus).
A global economy led by a surplus country seems more logical, given that creditors usually dictate terms.
At the time of the Bretton Woods conference, the US accounted for more than half of the world’s manufactured output.
The rest of the world needed dollars that only the US could supply.
Chinese or European leadership would probably look more like the pre-World War I Pax Britannica (during which the United Kingdom supplied capital to the rest of the world in anticipation of its own relative economic decline), with the hegemon supplying funds on a long-term basis.
But this scenario presupposes a deep and well-functioning financial system to intermediate the funds – something that China and the eurozone have been unable to achieve.
Despite the 2008 financial crisis, the US remains the undisputed leader in global finance.
Indeed, American financial markets boast unparalleled depth, liquidity, and safety, making them magnets for global capital, especially in times of financial distress.
This “pulling power,” central to US financial dominance, underpins the dollar’s global role, as investors in search of safe, liquid assets pour money into US Treasury securities.
The belief that a common currency and a common capital market would buttress financial institutions and deepen markets was a driving principle behind the eurozone’s formation.
But, given the lack of a single debt instrument equivalent to a US Treasury bill, the crisis caused eurozone member states’ public-debt yields to diverge.
Bank lending subsequently withdrew to national borders, and the idea of a European capital market disintegrated.
Likewise, in China, the absence of currency convertibility – together with a weak financial supervisory framework, which reflects a broader problem related to poor implementation of the rule of law – is impairing the economy’s prospects for leadership.
Europeans and Chinese should question whether they really want to assume the risks associated with a position at the center of a large and complex global financial system.
Control of the system is the chalice of global leadership; but, for economies that are not adequately prepared for it, what should be an elixir may turn out to be poison.
Soccer Lessons for Europe’s Economy
PRINCETON – Though a solution to the euro crisis continues to elude European leaders, the foundations of one are not difficult to discern.
In fact, Europe’s recent soccer experience – specifically, in the EURO 2012 tournament and this year’s World Cup – provides insight into how to revive Europe’s economy and address its deeper identity problem.
On June 28, 2012, as European political leaders met in Brussels, amid growing uncertainty about the eurozone’s survival, to negotiate the design of the European Stability Mechanism (ESM), Germany was playing Italy in a semifinal match in Warsaw.
Two goals by Mario Balotelli cinched the win for Italy – and propelled Balotelli to superstar status.
At such a politically sensitive moment, a German victory could have sparked a bitter nationalist reaction in southern Europe.
Instead, encouraged by his country’s victory, Italy’s new technocratic prime minister, Mario Monti, in alliance with Spanish Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy, pressed German Chancellor Angela Merkel for easier access to ESM support – and scored another major victory for his country.
For a brief moment, Monti joined Balotelli in becoming a national hero.
The Italian media eagerly linked the two “Super Marios,” with photomontages showing the prime minister with the soccer player’s idiosyncratic mohawk hairstyle.
The message from both the soccer field and the negotiating room was that there was a quick and easy route to victory, complex issues could be solved by a brilliant argument, and individual superstars were the key to success.
The World Cup championship in Brazil was another matter altogether.
This time, the Germans won, with a spectacular display of power in a 7-1 semifinal erasure of the host country, Brazil, and a 1-0 triumph over Argentina in the final.
The disappointed supporters of the defeated teams viewed the games in terms of personalities.
Brazil and Argentina had long histories of superstars: Pelé, Garrincha, Ronaldo, Alfredo di Stéfano, and Diego Maradona.
In the semifinal, Brazil appeared to be paralyzed without its hero, Neymar, who wore the same number as Pelé but had been badly injured in the previous match.
In the final, Argentineans believed that the world’s best player, Lionel Messi, would surely carry the national team to victory.
Of course, the German team had plenty of good players.
But, instead of behaving like superstars, they worked together, passing consistently and creating opportunities for one another to score.
Germany’s World Cup performance was a brilliant demonstration of the importance of deep, long-term reforms.
In the early 2000s, German soccer was boring.
Germany’s heroes were from the distant past.
It was easy to draw an analogy between ineffective and mundane performance in the stadium and the general state of the country.
At the time, Germany was regarded as the sick man of Europe, with a proclivity for highly protected labor markets.
Something needed to be shaken up.
In 2004, the German national team’s new trainer, Jürgen Klinsmann, did just that.
Beyond more aggressive tactics, his radical new strategy entailed a fundamental revolution in sports education and training, with programs that identified and propelled promising young players through the teams in Germany’s domestic league.
In other words, it was a long-term strategy.
Fortunately, the team’s management understood this and persevered, despite the lack of a short-term payoff.
Klinsmann’s assistant trainer, Joachim Löw, succeeded him, and became the architect of the 2014 championship bid.
Germany’s soccer revolution was mirrored in the economy.
Beginning in 2003, Chancellor Gerhard Schröder, a Social Democrat, launched a series of reforms aimed at increasing labor-market flexibility and, more generally, laying the foundations for long-term prosperity.
But this future-oriented approach had serious short-term political consequences, with Schröder losing the next election and his party’s popularity diminishing considerably.
Neither Schröder nor Klinsmann attained superstar status, but they carried out the reforms that mattered.
There are other lessons that Germans and Europeans can derive from these experiences.
One concerns the integration of foreigners.
All of the major European teams, including Germany’s, depend on players of foreign descent.
In the Brazil game, Miroslav Klose, whose family hails from Poland, became the highest-scoring player in World Cup history.
The half-Ghanaian Jérôme Boateng was a pillar of the German defense.
And Mesut Özil, who is of Turkish descent, executed many beautiful sweeping passes.
Even Balotelli, Italy’s EURO 2012 superstar, is the son of Ghanaian immigrants.
But the most important lesson is that there are no quick fixes or magic bullets.
An exceptional performance by a superstar soccer player can be beautiful – even inspiring – just as rescue mechanisms and stimulus packages can rally markets and raise hopes.
But their impact is fleeting.
Consistent, reliable, long-term success requires forward-thinking measures that focus on building strong fundamentals.
Europe needs such an approach, one that includes microeconomic adjustments and programs that encourage mobility, flexibility, and innovation.
If other Europeans emulated the German model, Europe would begin to look – and play – like a championship team.
The Secret History of the Financial Crisis
PRINCETON – Balzac’s great novel Lost Illusions ends with an exposition of the difference between “official history,” which is “all lies,” and “secret history” – that is, the real story.
It used to be possible to obscure history’s scandalous truths for a long time – even forever.
Not anymore.
Nowhere is this more apparent than in accounts of the global financial crisis.
The official history portrayed the US Federal Reserve, the European Central Bank, and other major central banks as embracing coordinated action to rescue the global financial system from disaster.
But recently published transcripts of 2008 meetings of the Federal Open Market Committee, the Fed’s main decision-making body, reveal that the Fed has effectively emerged from the crisis as the world’s central bank, while continuing to serve primarily American interests.
The most significant meetings took place on September 16 and October 28 – in the aftermath of the collapse of the US investment bank Lehman Brothers – and focused on the creation of bilateral currency-swap agreements aimed at ensuring adequate liquidity.
The Fed would extend dollar credits to a foreign bank in exchange for its currency, which the foreign bank agreed to buy back after a specified period at the same exchange rate, plus interest.
This gave central banks – especially those in Europe, which faced a dollar shortage as US investors fled – the dollars they needed to lend to struggling domestic financial institutions.
Indeed, the ECB was among the first banks to reach an agreement with the Fed, followed by other major advanced-country central banks, including the Swiss National Bank, the Bank of Japan, and the Bank of Canada.
At the October meeting, four “diplomatically and economically” important emerging economies – Mexico, Brazil, Singapore, and South Korea – got in on the action, with the Fed agreeing to establish $30 billion swap lines with each of their central banks.
Though the Fed acted as a kind of global central bank, its decisions were shaped, first and foremost, by US interests.
For starters, the Fed rejected applications from some countries – whose names are redacted in the published transcript – to join the currency-swap scheme.
More important, limits were placed on the swaps.
The essence of a central bank’s lender-of-last-resort function has traditionally been the provision of unlimited funds.
Because there is no limit on the amount of dollars that the Fed can create, no market participant can take a speculative position against it.
By contrast, the International Monetary Fund has finite resources provided by member countries.
The Fed’s growing international role since 2008 reflects a fundamental shift in global monetary governance.
The IMF emerged at a time when countries were routinely victimized by New York bankers’ casual assumptions, such as J.P. Morgan’s assessment in the 1920’s that Germans were “fundamentally a second-rate people.”
The IMF was a critical feature of the post-WWII international order, intended to serve as a universal insurance mechanism – not one that could be harnessed to advance contemporary diplomatic interests.
Today, as the Fed documents clearly demonstrate, the IMF has become marginalized – not least because of its ineffective policy process.
Indeed, at the outset of the crisis, the IMF, assuming that demand for its resources would remain low permanently, had already begun to downsize.
In 2010, the IMF made a play for resurrection, presenting itself as central to solving the euro crisis – beginning with its role in financing the Greek bailout.
But here, too, a secret history has been revealed – one that highlights just how skewed global monetary governance has become.