Park Geun-hye, South Korea’s current president, is his daughter.
Park Geun-hye adored her father at least as much as Abe loved his grandfather, but the result of her dynastic connection is the opposite of Abe’s.
To be seen as a Korean nationalist today, she must distance herself from some of her father’s political ties, especially his links with Japan.
Though still admired by many South Koreans for rebuilding the country from the ruins of war, his legacy, like that of many members of the old conservative elite, is tainted by wartime collaboration.
So his daughter must confront Japan over territorial disputes, to avoid inheriting the stigma of her father’s colonial past.
The case of the current Chinese leader, Xi Jinping, is perhaps the most complicated of the three.
His father, Xi Zhongxun, was one of the top leaders of the Communist revolution.
A guerilla leader in the war against Japan, he helped to defeat Chiang Kai-shek’s Nationalists in China’s civil war, became a member of the Central Committee, and then chief of propaganda, Vice Premier, and Governor of Guangdong.
An impeccable Communist career, one might think, giving his son no need to distance himself or to complete a frustrated ambition.
But Xi’s nationalism, too, has a history.
Chairman Mao’s main aim was to consolidate his revolution at home.
His nationalist credentials were so impressive that he could afford to be relatively easy on former enemies.
Territorial disputes over unimportant islands could be laid to rest.
He did not even bother to reclaim Hong Kong from the British.
It was only when Deng Xiaoping opened the door to trade with capitalist countries that anti-Japanese sentiments were deliberately stirred up.
Neither Marxism nor Maoism could be used to justify China’s joining the capitalist world.
This left an ideological vacuum, which old-fashioned nationalism soon filled.
The more the leadership opened up the Chinese economy, the more it stoked popular anger over past wrongs, especially those committed by Japan.
The man who was most responsible for Deng’s Open Door policies was none other than Xi’s father, Xi Zhongxun.
Always a pragmatic Communist, the elder Xi had been the target of several purges under Mao, when relative moderates were frequently denounced as counterrevolutionaries.
His son appears to follow in this pragmatic tradition, open to business with the world.
That is why he, too, like Deng’s reformers, must burnish his nationalist credentials by standing up to Japan and asserting Chinese dominance in East Asia.
None of these leaders – Xi, Abe, or Park – wants a real war.
Much of their posturing is for domestic consumption.
One reason why they can engage in this dangerous brinkmanship is the continuing presence of the US as the regional policeman.
America’s armed forces are the buffer between the two Koreas, and between China and Japan.
The US presence allows East Asia’s rival powers to act irresponsibly.
The only thing that might change their behavior would be US withdrawal of its military force.
In that case, the three countries would have to come to terms with one another by themselves.
But that is still regarded by the Americans, Japanese, Koreans, and probably even the Chinese as too much of a risk.
As a result, the status quo is likely to persist, which means that nationalist grandstanding over conflicting territorial claims is far from over.
Abe’s Long March
TOKYO – Japanese Prime Minister Abe Shinzo’s coalition government has decided to “reinterpret” the postwar Japanese constitution.
According to Article 9 of the constitution, drafted by American lawyers in 1946, when Japan was under Allied occupation, Japan renounces “war as a sovereign right of the nation and the threat or use of force as means of settling international disputes.”
The new interpretation would allow Japan to use military force in support of an ally if Japanese security is under threat.
Abe chose to reinterpret the constitution because revising it would require the approval of two-thirds of the Japanese Diet.
Given that most Japanese are still allergic to military force, securing the necessary votes would have been impossible.
The reinterpretation will almost certainly result in protests from China and South Korea against resurgent Japanese militarism.
Because Abe is the nationalist grandson of a former prime minister who was once arrested as a war criminal, and because he has paid public tribute to soldiers who died for the emperor in World War II, these protests might seem reasonable.
Abe’s break with Japan’s pacifist consensus is beyond doubt.
But the circumstances under which Japan would use force are so restricted that a revival of militarism is still a very long way off.
More worrying is the effect on Japanese democracy: Elected governments do not simply change the meaning of the constitution without even bothering to get parliamentary support.
There is, however, an odd contradiction in Abe’s nationalism.
Constitutional pacifism was part of the postwar order imposed by the United States during occupation and largely supported by the Japanese people, who were tired of war.
Unlike in Germany, Japan had no Hitler or Nazi party on which to blame their wartime atrocities.
What needed to be purged instead, postwar reformers believed, was a specific form of Japanese militarism, rooted in emperor worship, the samurai tradition, authoritarian “feudalism,” and so on.
Much in the remaking of Japan after 1945 is still to be admired: democracy, women’s suffrage, land reform, freedom of speech.
But taking away Japan’s sovereign right to use military force had one major consequence: Japanese security was put almost entirely into American hands, reducing Japan to the status of a vassal state.
That is why the main goal of nationalist-minded Japanese leaders, starting with Abe’s grandfather, Nobusuke Kishi, has been the return of full Japanese sovereignty by revising Article 9.
That was not possible when Kishi was prime minister in the late 1950s.
The Japanese were not ready for it and Kishi was tainted by his wartime record as Minister of Munitions.
Abe’s dream is to make it happen now – and to go further.
He would like to restore some aspects of an older Japan, discredited by Japanese military behavior, such as patriotic pride, a more central role for the imperial institution, and even a reappraisal of Japan’s wartime record itself.
Hence his tributes to the Yasukuni Shrine, where the souls of imperial soldiers, including notorious war criminals, are worshipped.
Many Asians, including some Japanese, see this as a sign of new militarism.
Abe would like it to be viewed as an attempt to restore Japan’s international reputation as a “normal country.”
But Abe’s idea of normality is not yet shared by the majority of Japanese, let alone other Asians.
The contradiction in Abe’s nationalism is this: even as he talks about sovereignty regained and patriotic pride, he has done nothing to distance Japan from the postwar dominance of the US.
On the contrary, his reinterpretation of the constitution is meant to help the US in its military policing of East Asia.
In fact, what appears to be driving Abe’s endeavors even more than the desire to revise the postwar order in Japan is a widely shared fear of China’s increasing regional dominance.
A cursory glance at the Japanese press, or even the kind of books piled high in Japanese bookstores, shows just how frightened the Japanese are.
All of the talk in Tokyo is about Chinese aggression in the East and South China Seas.
Abe’s reinterpretation, then, is not really a radical departure from the postwar order at all.
China’s growing power has actually reinforced Japanese dependence on the US for its security.
Japan’s main worry is that the US may not wish to risk a war with China over territorial disputes in the East China Sea.
What is feared most, in addition to the rise of China, is the possible decline of the US.
The Japan-US alliance is an irritation to the Chinese, who would like the US to get out of the way, in order to be Asia’s dominant player.
Or so they say in public.
In fact, Chinese attitudes may be more complicated and less unified than they seem.
Indeed, China faces a rather stark choice.
Either it must live with the continued Pax Americana in Asia, for as long as it lasts, or face a more independent, nuclear-armed Japan.
Privately, many Chinese might still prefer the former.
This may seem to be the most stable solution.
In fact, it is fraught with danger.
To be sure, the US military presence still imposes a certain order with which most parties can live; but it risks dragging the world’s largest military power into petty regional conflicts, a prospect that should alarm us one century after 1914.
Reading Israel from Left to Right
NEW YORK – Israel’s current government and its supporters in the West are quick to denounce criticism of Israeli policies as anti-Semitism.
This can be inaccurate and self-serving, but it is not always wrong.
Israel’s defenders are right to point out that public opinion in Europe, and to a much lesser extent in the United States, tends to be much more critical of Israeli atrocities in Gaza than about bloodier violence committed by Muslims against Muslims in other parts of the Middle East.
This can be explained by the fact that Israel is supported by Western governments and generously subsidized by American taxpayers.
There is not much that public outrage can do about the behavior of Iranian mullahs or Syrian thugs.
But Israel is “one of us.”
To be sure, excessive zeal in denouncing Israel, and cheap comparisons between Israeli violence and Nazi mass murder, betray a dubious urge to throw off the burdens of guilt.
After decades of feeling obliged to drop the collective European head in shame for what was done to the Jews, people can finally say with an element of glee that Jews can be murderers, too.
But, though unseemly, this is not necessarily anti-Semitic.
Anti-Zionism takes a nasty turn to anti-Semitism when it conflates Jews with Israelis – for example, when the British Liberal Democratic politician David Ward criticized “the Jews” for inflicting horrors on the Palestinians.
And, while one can be skeptical about Zionism as a historical project, to deny Israel’s right to exist is hard to distinguish from anti-Semitism.
The most sinister form of anti-Zionism is to be found among leftists who see Israel and the US as the planet’s twin evils.
Those who see dark American forces behind all that is wrong with the world, from financial crashes to the violence in Ukraine, are prone to detect the malign hand of Israeli or even Jewish lobbies in every US policy.
The link between corrupting Jewish influence and the US was originally a right-wing trope.
Jews were supposedly rootless, clannish, and omnipotent, with no loyalty to any nation.
The immigrant society of the US was seen as rootless by definition.
In the view of early-twentieth-century right-wing European nationalists, Anglo-American capitalism, controlled by Jews, undermined the sacred ties of blood and soil.
This worldview also blamed the Jews for Bolshevism, which might seem like a contradiction, but is not.
Bolshevism, like capitalism, was internationalist, at least in theory.
(Joseph Stalin was actually a Soviet nationalist who also denounced Jews as rootless cosmopolitans.)
The dangers of zealous anti-Semitic attacks on Israel are obvious.
If Israel was&nbsp;not just a fearful nation oppressing the Palestinian people, but the source of all evil, any form of violence, however destructive of self and others, could be justified.
If the Israel Defense Forces were the modern equivalent of the Nazis, it should be smashed with maximum force.
If all Jews were responsible for the oppression of Arabs, attacks on Jews in Europe, or anywhere else, should be condoned, if not actively encouraged.
The number of people in the West who really hold such beliefs is, I believe, small.
Such people exist in universities.
They write blogs.
They march together in demonstrations with some indisputably anti-Semitic Islamist militants.
But they are far from the mainstream.
Remarkably, some of Israel’s most ardent admirers are now to be found on the right – and even the far right.
Quite a few are members of political parties with a profoundly anti-Semitic provenance, such as Austria’s Freedom Party, whose early members included former Nazis.
The Freedom Party leader, along with such luminaries of the populist right as Filip Dewinter, the Flemish nationalist leader, and the Dutch demagogue Geert Wilders, have visited the West Bank and voiced their support for Israeli settlements.
This can be explained partly by antagonism against Islam.
Right-wing populists in Europe regard Islam as the greatest threat to the West.
So, naturally, they applaud the Israeli government for using harsh measures to keep the Arabs down.
As Wilders put it, the Israelis “are fighting our fight.
If Jerusalem falls, Amsterdam and New York will be next.”
But the main reason for this new solidarity between Western right-wing populists and the state of Israel might lie deeper than shared antipathy toward Islam.
No state is static, and Israel has changed a great deal since the heroic decades after its founding in 1948.
In the early years, Israel was admired by Western leftists for being a progressive state, run by Polish and Russian socialists.
Today’s Israeli leaders, however, in their rhetoric and behavior, often sound more like the old European anti-Semites.
Israeli Jews are now firmly rooted in their own national soil.
But the ruling ideology is no longer socialism; it is a form of ethnic nationalism, with a great deal of military swagger.
No wonder, then, that Israel’s current admirers have a distinctly illiberal cast.
They reflect current mainstream opinion more than leftist anti-Zionists do.
The world is increasingly fragmenting, with fearful people embracing smaller, defensive identities: Scottish, Catalan, Flemish, Sunni, Shia, Kurdish, and so on.
The idealistic internationalism of the early postwar years is collapsing fast.
Tribal feelings – national, ethnic, and religious – are filling the vacuum.
And, most ironic of all, Israel, a nation-state built by a people despised for their cosmopolitanism, has become a prime symbol of this disturbing trend.
Sorry for Nothing
NEW YORK – Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe is once again stirring Asia’s cauldron of national rivalries and historical resentments.
This time, he has instructed a committee of historians to reexamine the official apology delivered in 1993 to World War II-era sex slaves held in Japanese military brothels.
It is clear from various recent statements that some of Abe’s closest advisers believe that the apology was not in order, so the committee might well conclude that Japan was never officially involved in prostitution, and that its “sincere remorse” should therefore be withdrawn.
What perverse reason could Abe have for pursuing such an outcome?
Glossing over, or denying, dark chapters of national history is not unique to Japan, of course.
There is no room for Stalin’s mass murders in the kind of “patriotic” education favored by Russian President Vladimir Putin.
And the Tiananmen Square Massacre, to name but one bloody event in China’s recent past, has been officially forgotten.
Still, Japan is a democracy, with freedom of expression.
The official apology made in 1993 was prompted by a Japanese historian’s discovery of documents showing that the Imperial Japanese Army had been directly involved in setting up, though not necessarily in running, what were known as “comfort stations.”
One of the official reasons was that widespread rape of Chinese women by Japanese soldiers was provoking too much resistance among the local population.
Various means were used to stock the brothels with young women.
But, because there was no escape, the women, once ensnared in the system, were effectively slaves.
This has been officially admitted, so why reopen the ghastly business now, at a time when rescinding the apology would make Japan’s already-strained relations with China and South Korea many times worse?
If Abe and his allies were cosmopolitan in their outlook, with a deep understanding of, or concern for, other countries, the decision to revisit the 1993 apology would indeed be extraordinary.
But, as is true of many political leaders, especially on the nationalistic right, they are chauvinistic provincials whose concerns are almost entirely domestic.
In their efforts to revise the historical record, they are not really thinking of Koreans or Chinese, but of political adversaries at home.
The views of the Japanese on their country’s wartime history are deeply divided, reflecting political battle lines drawn in the immediate aftermath of the war, when Japan was under Allied occupation.
The United States, which ran the occupation, was keen to reform Japanese society in such a way that another war would be unthinkable.
Worship of the emperor was abolished, though Hirohito remained on his throne.
Education was purged of all militaristic and “feudal” elements, including favorable references to the samurai spirit.
A new pacifist constitution, written by the Americans, banned the use of armed force.
And Japan’s wartime leaders were tried in Tokyo by Allied judges for “crimes against peace” and “crimes against humanity.”
Most Japanese, heartily sick of war and military bullying, were happy to go along with all of this.
But there was always a right-wing minority that felt humiliated and resentful of the loss of national pride and, more important, national sovereignty, for Japan’s security would henceforth have to depend entirely on the protection offered by the US.
One of the main leaders of this group of disgruntled nationalists was Nobusuke Kishi, Abe’s grandfather.
Kishi’s aim was to regain Japanese pride and sovereignty by revising the constitution and reviving old-fashioned patriotism, thus undoing some of the American educational reforms.
He failed, because most Japanese were still allergic to anything that smacked of militarism.
Until not long ago, there was a strong left-wing current in education and some of the media that used Japan’s horrendous wartime record as an argument against any kind of revisionism.
But, as long as the Japanese left used history to make this political argument, the nationalists pushed back by claiming that stories of wartime atrocities had been greatly exaggerated.
Books about the infamous Nanking Massacre of 1937, or the enslavement of “comfort women” in military brothels, were denounced as “historical masochism” or dismissed as “the Tokyo Trial View of History.”
The left was accused of being complicit in spreading foreign – Chinese, Korean, or American – propaganda.
This, then, is the modern Japanese version of populism: the “liberal elites,” by falsifying the history of Japan’s glorious war to “liberate Asia,” undermined the Japanese people’s moral fiber.
Because the ideological collapse of left-wing politics in Japan has been as precipitous as in much of the Western world, the so-called liberal elites have lost much of their former influence.
As a result, the voice of the nationalist right has grown louder in recent years.
That is why Abe can get away with appointing cronies to the board of NHK, the national broadcasting company, who openly claim that the military brothels were an entirely private enterprise and that the Nanking Massacre was a foreign fabrication.
Historical truth is not the point; political mastery is.
Japan’s prime minister is playing a risky game.
He is upsetting allies in Asia, embarrassing the US, and making bad relations with China even worse.
Like Putin, he is driving himself and his country into further isolation for entirely domestic reasons.
In a region increasingly dominated by Chinese power, he will be without Asian friends.
And that is where Abe’s behavior becomes truly perverse.
After all, a Japan that is isolated in Asia will be even more dependent on the US, the wartime victor, which Abe and his nationalist allies hold responsible for the postwar order that they seek to revise.
Diplomats Behaving Badly
NEW YORK – Diplomats, normally discreet figures who rarely court publicity, have been in the news a lot lately, for all the wrong reasons.
Two recent arrests of diplomats by their host countries have put a spotlight on the justification for, and limits of, the immunity from local law that such officials typically enjoy.
In the first case, Dmitri Borodin, the minister counselor at the Russian embassy in The Hague, was arrested late one night in October of last year, after neighbors alerted the Dutch police that Borodin, allegedly in a drunken state, was beating his two small children.
He was handcuffed in his own home and taken to the police station.
According to the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations, diplomats cannot be prosecuted according to a host country’s laws.
So Russian President Vladimir Putin immediately demanded an official apology from the Dutch government for ignoring Borodin’s diplomatic immunity.
The rabble-rousing Russian politician Vladimir Zhirinovsky called on his followers to smash the windows of the Dutch embassy in Moscow.
A week later, a Dutch diplomat in Moscow was beaten up at his home by armed thugs (no connection between the two cases has been proved).
The timing of all of this was awkward. The Dutch king, Willem Alexander, was about to visit Russia to celebrate the two countries’ friendly relations in the so-called “Netherlands-Russia Year.”
The Dutch foreign minister duly apologized to Russia for the conduct of his country’s police, and Borodin was recalled to Moscow.
Then, in December, the New York City police arrested an Indian consular official, Devyani Khobragade, for paying a domestic worker less than the minimum wage in the United States and for falsifying the worker’s visa application.
Because consular officials do not enjoy the same degree of immunity as higher-ranking diplomats, the police were acting within their authority, even if their methods – strip-searching Khobragade, for example – might be considered excessive.
The reaction in India, however, was much fiercer than in Russia.
Outrage was voiced in the press. Apologies were demanded.
Demonstrations were held.
US diplomats were stripped of customary privileges.
Threats were made to arrest same-sex partners of US diplomats, because Indian law criminalizes homosexuality.
All of this might seem over the top and childish.
But, because diplomats are their countries’ official representatives abroad, their symbolic function is much more important than their individual personalities.
They are like national flags: insult them, and you insult the “nation.”
And when it comes to preserving national “face,” Russia and India are perhaps touchier than most countries; Russia has always felt looked down upon by western European powers, and India is still reckoning with a legacy of colonial humiliation.
A writer for the Times of India expressed Indians’ sensitivity succinctly: “The sad truth is that India is now viewed abroad as a third-rate banana republic.”
Whether or not this is true is beside the point.
Many Indians, especially among the Delhi elite, believe it.
The behavior of the New York City police played into their deepest fears.
One of the most interesting aspects of these two diplomatic incidents is what it tells us about the new Russian and Indian elite.
Diplomats have always represented the face of their country, but their own faces have changed.
In the past, diplomats did not actually represent nation-states, but royal courts (in most monarchies this is still officially the case).
As a result, European diplomats, for example, were mostly aristocrats, who all spoke French to one another.
Diplomatic incidents often had to do with the relative status of kings and queens.
One famous incident in the late eighteenth century was Lord Macartney’s British mission to the Imperial Court of China.
Macartney refused to conform to Chinese imperial protocol by declining to kowtow to the emperor, because he was not required to do the same to his own sovereign.
This, too, was very much a case of “keeping face”: the Chinese expected tribute; the British lord insisted on the equal status of his king.
As a result, the mission broke down.
Diplomatic immunity from local prosecution was an idea that sprang directly from another incident, almost a century earlier, involving the arrest of a Russian aristocrat, Andrey Matveyev, who represented Peter the Great in London.
Matveyev was detained and roughed up by bailiffs who demanded money from him.
The Russians complained. The British apologized.
And the British parliament enacted a new law protecting diplomats from suffering similar treatment in the future.
Borodin and Khobragade are not aristocrats.
Far from it.
They represent a very different age, which one is tempted to call democratic, even if Russia today is more like a soft dictatorship.
Perhaps Borodin was just enjoying a rare night out and is normally an abstemious man, but his thuggish behavior is perhaps not entirely atypical of a new class of Russians that has accumulated a great deal of money and power since the Soviet Union collapsed.
Khobragade’s case is more interesting.
She was born into the Dalit caste, the “untouchables,” who in former times would never have gotten anywhere near the elite, except to sweep their floors.
Since Indian independence, the government has done much to improve the Dalits’ status, and the deputy consul general is one of the beneficiaries of this policy.
She is a member of the new Indian elite, increasingly wealthy and proud to represent a rising power in the world.
If the allegations that Khobragade systematically underpaid her domestic worker are true, this shows how fully she has adopted the customs of the class to which she has risen.
In all the Indian protests about the terrible blow dealt by the Americans to Indian self-esteem, only a few mentioned the habitual exploitation of the poorer classes.
As with their politicians, a country’s people, it seems, often have the diplomats they deserve.
Getting Globalization Right
OXFORD – Recent evidence suggests that much of the world has entered a period of low financial-market volatility.
But this is no time for complacency; more turbulent times are likely to lie ahead.
Over the last quarter-century, rapid technology-driven globalization – characterized by the physical and virtual integration of the global economy, including the opening of world markets – has contributed to the fastest increase in incomes and population in history.
But, while globalization has created unprecedented opportunity, it has also unleashed a new form of systemic risk – one that threatens to devastate political institutions and national economies.
Systemic risk is intrinsic to globalization.
Greater openness and integration necessarily increase the potential for cascading crises and amplification of shocks.
As individuals and societies become richer, they come into closer contact with one another – virtually, through communication technologies, and physically, through population growth, urbanization, and travel.
Meanwhile, rising consumption of products like food, energy, and medicine enhances the externalities, or spillover effects, of individual choices, with the connectivity of global systems increasing these effects’ range and impact.
For example, taking an antibiotic may be a rational individual decision.
But when billions of people take antibiotics, and livestock producers use them to boost efficiency, they often become ineffective.
The same paradox applies to energy use, owing to the destructive impact of large-scale carbon emissions.
Even the consumption of basic necessities like food (production of which can have major environmental consequences) and water (given limited supplies) is not exempt.
Furthermore, increased openness and market integration, driven by rapid technological change, is exacerbating divisions within and among societies.
Those who miss the globalization train at the start often are unable to catch up later.
Nowadays, the world’s most pressing challenges – from climate change to cyber-crime – increasingly transcend national borders, making them extremely difficult to address effectively.
Worse, they can have a cascading effect, with, say, a pandemic or cyber-attack provoking a financial or political crisis and imposing costs disproportionately on those who can least afford them.
The vectors of connectivity – such as the Internet, financial markets, airport hubs, or logistics centers – facilitate “super-spreading” of globalization’s effects, both positive and negative.
Though the systemic risks brought about by globalization cannot be eliminated, they can be mitigated, if world leaders work together and learn from past mistakes.
Unfortunately, neither appears likely.
For starters, national politics in key countries is largely moving away from cooperation, with rising inequality and social fragmentation making it difficult for governments, especially in democracies, to make tough decisions.
At the same time, populations are rejecting regional and global institutions.
Europe, for example, is witnessing an upsurge in support for nationalist parties, like Britain’s UK Independence Party, and increasingly loud calls for self-determination, such as in Scotland and Catalonia.
Equally problematic, the world has largely failed to learn from globalization’s most obvious and far-reaching consequence yet: the 2008 financial crisis.
While it is impossible to safeguard the system fully, sound regulation and effective oversight could have prevented the crisis, or at least reduced its impact on millions of people’s livelihoods.
The problem was that central banks, finance ministries, and multilateral organizations like the International Monetary Fund – the pillars of the global economy’s institutional framework – failed to grasp globalization’s emerging characteristics and effects, owing partly to the difficulty of discerning structural shifts in the huge mass of data now available.
In this sense, the crisis should have served as a wake-up call, spurring the financial sector, policymakers, and multilateral organizations to take action to enhance systemic stability.
But, despite employing tens of thousands of highly educated economists whose primary job is to determine how best to protect the financial system from globalization’s destabilizing effects, these institutions seem to be even less willing to act now than they were before the crisis.
This is particularly true in the advanced economies, where depleted financial reserves and political paralysis are preventing constructive investments in areas like infrastructure and education, which can enable citizens to take advantage of globalization’s benefits.
Making matters worse, some of these countries have reduced their contributions and commitment to the reform of regional and global institutions, which are essential to managing systemic risks.
In this context, it is not surprising that ordinary citizens feel uncertain about the future and frustrated with their governments, which have so far failed to protect them from globalization’s fallout.
But wresting power back from regional and international institutions – however shadowy and distant they may seem – would only compound the problem, for it would reduce the ability to guide the supranational trends that are shaping the world’s future. More, not less, cooperation is necessary to manage growing complexity and integration.
It is time for our leaders to recognize new systemic risks and work together to mitigate them.
Otherwise, the recent past will be prologue, with those risks likely to get the better of the global economy.
If Fish Could Scream
PRINCETON – When I was a child, my father used to take me for walks, often along a river or by the sea.
We would pass people fishing, perhaps reeling in their lines with struggling fish hooked at the end of them.
Once I saw a man take a small fish out of a bucket and impale it, still wriggling, on an empty hook to use as bait.
Another time, when our path took us by a tranquil stream, I saw a man sitting and watching his line, seemingly at peace with the world, while next to him, fish he had already caught were flapping helplessly and gasping in the air.
My father told me that he could not understand how anyone could enjoy an afternoon spent taking fish out of the water and letting them die slowly.
These childhood memories flooded back when I read Worse things happen at sea: the welfare of wild-caught fish, a breakthrough report released last month on fishcount.org.uk.
In most of the world, it is accepted that if animals are to be killed for food, they should be killed without suffering.
Regulations for slaughter generally require that animals be rendered instantly unconscious before they are killed, or death should be brought about instantaneously, or, in the case of ritual slaughter, as close to instantaneously as the religious doctrine allows.
Not for fish.
There is no humane slaughter requirement for wild fish caught and killed at sea, nor, in most places, for farmed fish.
Fish caught in nets by trawlers are dumped on board the ship and allowed to suffocate.
Impaling live bait on hooks is a common commercial practice: long-line fishing, for example, uses hundreds or even thousands of hooks on a single line that may be 50-100 kilometers long.
When fish take the bait, they are likely to remain caught for many hours before the line is hauled in.
Likewise, commercial fishing frequently depends on gill nets – walls of fine netting in which fish become snared, often by the gills.
They may suffocate in the net, because, with their gills constricted, they cannot breathe.
If not, they may remain trapped for many hours before the nets are pulled in.
The most startling revelation in the report, however, is the staggering number of fish on which humans inflict these deaths.
By using the reported tonnages of the various species of fish caught, and dividing by the estimated average weight for each species, Alison Mood, the report’s author, has put together what may well be the first-ever systematic estimate of the size of the annual global capture of wild fish.
It is, she calculates, in the order of one trillion, although it could be as high as 2.7 trillion.
To put this in perspective, the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization estimates that 60 billion animals are killed each year for human consumption – the equivalent of about nine animals for each human being on the planet.
If we take Mood’s lower estimate of one trillion, the comparable figure for fish is 150.
This does not include billions of fish caught illegally nor unwanted fish accidentally caught and discarded, nor does it count fish impaled on hooks as bait.
Many of these fish are consumed indirectly – ground up and fed to factory-farmed chicken or fish.
A typical salmon farm churns through 3-4 kilograms of wild fish for every kilogram of salmon that it produces.
Let’s assume that all this fishing is sustainable, though of course it is not.
It would then be reassuring to believe that killing on such a vast scale does not matter, because fish do not feel pain.
But the nervous systems of fish are sufficiently similar to those of birds and mammals to suggest that they do.
When fish experience something that would cause other animals physical pain, they behave in ways suggestive of pain, and the change in behavior may last several hours. (It is a myth that fish have short memories.)
Fish learn to avoid unpleasant experiences, like electric shocks. And painkillers reduce the symptoms of pain that they would otherwise show.
Victoria Braithwaite, a professor of fisheries and biology at Pennsylvania State University, has probably spent more time investigating this issue than any other scientist.
Her recent book Do Fish Feel Pain? shows that fish are not only capable of feeling pain, but also are a lot smarter than most people believe.
Last year, a scientific panel to the European Union concluded that the preponderance of the evidence indicates that fish do feel pain.
Why are fish the forgotten victims on our plate?
Is it because they are cold-blooded and covered in scales?
Is it because they cannot give voice to their pain?
Whatever the explanation, the evidence is now accumulating that commercial fishing inflicts an unimaginable amount of pain and suffering.
We need to learn how to capture and kill wild fish humanely – or, if that is not possible, to find less cruel and more sustainable alternatives to eating them.
Ignorance Today
NEW YORK – Ignorance is the root of all evil, according to Plato, who also famously gave us a still-current definition of its opposite: knowledge.
This is as true as astronomical facts get, particularly because we have sent artificial satellites into orbit and seen that our planet is indeed roundish.
Most of us (except for a lunatic fringe of flat-earthers) also believe this to be the case.
What about the justification of that belief?
How would you answer if someone asked you why you believe that the earth is round?
The obvious place to begin would be to point to the aforementioned satellite images, but then our skeptical interlocutor could reasonably ask if you know how those images were obtained.
Unless you are an expert on space engineering and imaging software, you may have some trouble at that point.
Of course, you could fall back on more traditional reasons to believe in a round earth, like the fact that our planet projects a round-looking shadow on the moon during eclipses.
Naturally, you would have to be in a position to explain – if challenged – what an eclipse is and how you know that.
You see where this could easily go: if we push far enough, most of us do not actually know, in the Platonic sense, much of anything.
In other words, we are far more ignorant than we realize.
Socrates, Plato’s teacher, famously goaded the Athenian authorities by maintaining that he was wiser than the Oracle at Delphi, who claimed to be the wisest, because he, unlike most people (including the Athenian authorities), knew that he did not know anything.
Whether Socrates’ humility was sincere or a secret joke at the expense of the powers that be (before said powers put him to death after tiring of his irreverence), the point is that the beginning of wisdom lies in the recognition of how little we really know.
Which brings me to the paradox of ignorance in our era: on the one hand, we are constantly bombarded by expert opinion, by all sorts of people – with or without Ph.D. after their name – who tell us exactly what to think (though rarely why we should think it).
On the other hand, most of us are woefully inadequate to practice the venerable and vital art of baloney detection (or, more politely, critical thinking), which is so necessary in modern society.
You can think of the paradox in another way: we live in an era when knowledge – in the sense of information – is constantly available in real time through computers, smart phones, electronic tablets, and book readers.
And yet we still lack the basic skills of reflecting on such information, of sifting through the dirt to find the worthy nuggets.
We are ignorant masses awash in information.
Of course, it may be that humanity has always been short on critical thinking.
That’s why we keep allowing ourselves to be talked into supporting unjust wars (not to mention actually dying in them), or voting for people whose main job seems to be to amass as much wealth for the rich as they can get away with.
It is also why so many people are duped by exceedingly costly sugar pills sold to them by homeopathic “doctors,” and why we follow the advice of celebrities (rather than real doctors) about whether to vaccinate our kids.
But the need for critical thinking has never been as pressing as in the Internet era.
At least in developed countries – but increasingly in underdeveloped ones as well – the problem is no longer one of access to information, but of the lack of ability to process and make sense of that information.
Unfortunately, colleges, high schools, and even elementary schools are unlikely to mandate introductory courses in critical thinking on their own.
Education has increasingly been transformed into a commodity system, in which the “customers” (formerly students) are kept happy with personalized curricula while being prepared for the job market (rather than being prepared to be responsible human beings and citizens).
This can and must change, but it requires a grassroots movement that uses blogs, online magazines and newspapers, book clubs and meet-up clubs, and anything else that might work to promote educational opportunities to develop critical-thinking skills.
After all, we do know that it is our future.
Ignoring the Storm
The most recent G7 finance ministers’ meeting in October was an utter failure.
The only thing that they agreed on was to admonish China to revalue its currency.
The yuan’s value, while important, is not the central question facing the world economy today.
The real immediate problem concerns what is happening and what will happen to the dollar.
But the real issue for prosperity concerns the foundations of the global financial system.
How low will the dollar go?
How can we undo the imbalances of economies – China, followed far behind by Europe – exporting massively to the United States or to the dollar zone?
Will the US mortgage market, which is expected to become even more difficult in 2008, subside into calm afterwards, or will it contaminate the whole international financial system?
Is there a risk that rising oil prices – already reaching all-time highs – will cause further debt defaults worldwide?
The spate of earning reports from America’s biggest banks suggests that there are real worries here.
The condition of the world economy nowadays is very strange.
There are no great shocks but various declines and crises.
Central bankers try to soothe and reassure, but they are not very convincing.
Governments are silent, acting more or less as if nothing important is happening.
And, according to many economists, commentators, and journalists, today’s worries are temporary, solvable difficulties.
There is no general crisis on the horizon.
I disagree.
I believe that we have entered a period of weakening across the different parts of the global economic system, and that this may lead to a global recession.
This weakening calls for a strong international public response, including tighter regulation, if we are to avoid such a crisis.
Why does the world economy look so flimsy?
First, the way capitalism operates nowadays has changed mightily from just 30 years ago.
In developed countries from 1945 to 1975, capitalism brought rapid growth, an average of 5% per year for long periods.
Of course, it was subject to ups and downs, but it was not subject to financial crises of the type that we see regularly today.
Moreover, capitalism in the post-WWII decades maintained full employment, with unemployment often hovering around 2% in Europe, North America, and Japan.
Job insecurity back then was mostly unknown and mass poverty had disappeared.
The keys to that period of growth and happiness were a strong social welfare system and mainly Keynesian domestic and foreign economic policies in all the world’s big states.
Above all, every developed economy pursued policies designed to provide high wages, which would guarantee high consumption and thus rapid growth.
Shareholders used to put up with relatively meager dividends compared to today.
Thirty years on, shareholders have broken definitively with this system.
Pension, investment, and hedge funds have taken the lead in this revolution.
In all developed economies, profits have leaped spectacularly in the past 25 years, by between 8% and 10% of GDP.
But wages and social security revenues have suffered an equivalent cut.
As a result, growth has weak underpinnings.
Everywhere, labor is becoming insecure and mass poverty has reappeared in developed countries.
As economic deregulation increased, financial crises began erupting: since 1990, there have been three distinct crises in Latin America, one each in Russia and Asia, the Internet bubble, and now the sub-prime crisis.
Second, over the past 6-7 years, strong GDP growth in the US and Great Britain has been offset by staggering debt.
The US now borrows $2 billion a day, 95% of it from Asia and 45% of that amount from China’s central bank.
America’s total debt exceeds 39 trillion dollars, or roughly 3.5 times US GDP.
This situation will remain manageable only if oil prices stop increasing.
And yet, the opposite is more likely, with domestic inflation – a danger aggravated by central banks’ loosening of money supply to help commercial banks – bringing the threat of higher interest rates.
Finally, while assets nowadays are much more liquid, this has not boosted long-term productive investment.
Instead, the profitable carving up of healthy companies has freed up capital to flow to intangible assets, houses and other forms of real estate, fueling a speculative crisis.
In short, the global economy – replete with get-rich-quick schemes, overpaid bosses, and corporate fraud – has lost its moral bearings.
We cannot let those dangerous trends continue unchecked.
We are obviously sailing toward the rocks, and the whole developed world should be concerned.
There is an urgent need for a global conference – a Bretton Woods II – to adopt strict rules to contain today’s wayward financial markets.
Unfortunately, as the most recent G7 meeting showed, the world’s major governments are not yet ready to act.
Illiberal Democracy in Latin America
SANTIAGO – In an influential 1997 essay, Fareed Zakaria coined the term “illiberal democracy” to describe those countries that hold elections (of varying fairness) to choose their leaders, yet restrict civil liberties and political freedom.
At the time, such practices were common mostly in Asia and Africa, with a sizeable concentration of illiberal democracies among the ex-Soviet states.
Zakaria described illiberal democracy as a “growth industry,” and he was right: in the past 15 years, it has come with full force to Latin America.
This might seem surprising, because most countries south of the Río Bravo (known to North Americans as the Rio Grande) moved from right-wing dictatorship to democracy in the 1980’s and 1990’s.
Some of these democracies were initially imperfect, to be sure, but optimists hoped that it was only a matter of time until all elections would be fair and restrictions on civil liberties fully lifted.
That was not to be.
On the contrary, the quality of democracy has deteriorated sharply in several countries in the region.
Venezuela’s late president, Hugo Chávez, was the chief exponent of this trend.
According to the democracy watchdog Freedom House, in the 2012 election, “the opposition candidate, Henrique Capriles, was able to hold rallies and engage in traditional forms of campaigning.”
But “Chávez benefited from massive use of state resources that enabled him to dominate media time by a margin of 25-to-1, distribute household goods to constituents, and convince many voters that the state could punish them for casting a ballot for the opposition.”
Much the same – along with accusations of widespread vote-counting irregularities – could be said about the recent election held after Chávez died, which installed his handpicked successor, Nicolás Maduro.
Press freedom is also on the decline.
In another report, Freedom House notes that the number of Latin American countries classified as “not free” when it comes to the media has risen to its highest level since 1989.
The report highlights deterioration in Paraguay (where a “parliamentary coup” removed an elected president) and Ecuador, where President Rafael Correa’s government withdrew “official advertising from privately-owned media that are critical of the government” and “placed limitations on media coverage of electoral campaigns.”
He has also engaged in “legal and regulatory harassment, and physical intimidation of journalists.”
Argentina is another country where journalists are on the defensive.
A 2009 law that aimed to diversify media ownership has been used to put pressure on media outlets that are critical of President Cristina Fernández de Kirchner.
Fernández’s supporters in Congress recently attempted to limit the judiciary’s independence and pack the upper echelons of the court system, but the country’s Supreme Court struck down their law as unconstitutional.
Illiberal democratic policies and practices are present almost everywhere in Latin America: a distortive electoral system in Chile, persistent violence in Mexico and Colombia, and endemic corruption among lawmakers in Brazil all limit citizens’ ability to express their views effectively and shape policy.
But the left-wing populists influenced by Chávez – who ruled Venezuela for 14 years – have perfected a particularly illiberal practice: bending constitutional rules to allow themselves to be reelected again and again.
In Bolivia, President Evo Morales’s new 2009 constitution banned reelection to a third consecutive term, but now the Constitutional Court has allowed him to run, arguing that the Bolivian state has been “refounded.”
Morales’s previous terms, according to this reasoning, occurred in a different state and thus do not count toward current term limits.
In Ecuador, Correa used the same trick right from the start: his 2008 constitution explicitly stated that the time Correa had served as President under the previous constitution did not bar him from seeking reelection, enabling him to remain in office until 2017.
Similarly, in Nicaragua – like Ecuador, also in Venezuela’s sphere of influence – the Supreme Court decided that President Daniel Ortega can run again, even though many legal scholars believe otherwise.
In Argentina, Fernández and her late husband Néstor Kirchner have held power for 12 years combined, and it remains unclear whether she will attempt to amend the constitution in order to seek yet another term in 2015.
The phenomenon of quasi-constitutional reelection has become so widespread in Latin America that Georgetown University professor Héctor Schamis has dubbed it “the new authoritarianism” in the region.
Other elected leaders in Latin America have been curiously tolerant of these anti-democratic practices.
Speeches at regional summits can go on for hours, but hardly a word is uttered about democracy’s decay.
Capriles, who claims that victory in the post-Chávez election was stolen from him, was recently in Chile, but President Sebastián Piñera agreed to meet with him only at a private dinner, not at an official meeting in La Moneda Palace.
Former Chilean President Michelle Bachelet, the front-runner in the country’s upcoming presidential election in November, did not meet with Capriles at all, citing “agenda problems.”
Augusto Pinochet, Chile’s former dictator, ruled for 16 years in the name of “authoritarian democracy,” and then attempted to leave behind what he called a “protected democracy.”
Today’s would-be strongmen speak of “popular” or “Bolivarian” democracy.
Times have changed, but one thing remains the same: true democracy needs no qualifiers.
The Illusions Driving Up US Asset Prices
NEW HAVEN – Speculative markets have always been vulnerable to illusion.
But seeing the folly in markets provides no clear advantage in forecasting outcomes, because changes in the force of the illusion are difficult to predict.
In the United States, two illusions have been important recently in financial markets.
One is the carefully nurtured perception that President-elect Donald Trump is a business genius who can apply his deal-making skills to make America great again.
The other is a naturally occurring illusion: the proximity of Dow 20,000.
The Dow Jones Industrial Average has been above 19,000 since November, and countless news stories have focused on its flirtation with the 20,000 barrier – which might be crossed by the time this commentary is published.
Whatever happens, Dow 20,000 will still have a psychological impact on markets.
Trump has never been clear and consistent about what he will do as president.
Tax cuts are clearly on his agenda, and the stimulus could lead to higher asset prices.
Lower corporate taxes are naturally supposed to lead to higher share prices, while cuts in personal income tax might lead to higher home prices (though possibly offset by other changes in the tax system).
But it is not just Trump’s proposed tax changes that plausibly affect market psychology.
The US has never had a president like him.
Not only is he an actor, like Ronald Reagan; he is also a motivational writer and speaker, a brand name in real estate, and a tough deal maker.
If he ever reveals his financial information, or if his family is able to use his influence as president to improve its bottom line, he might even prove to be successful in business.
The closest we can come to Trump among former US presidents might be Calvin Coolidge, an extremely pro-business tax cutter.
“The chief business of the American people is business,” Coolidge famously declared, while his treasury secretary, Andrew Mellon – one of America’s wealthiest men – advocated tax cuts for the rich, which would “trickle down” in benefits to the less fortunate.
The US economy during the Coolidge administration was very successful, but the boom ended badly in 1929, just after Coolidge stepped down, with the stock-market crash and the beginning of the Great Depression.
During the 1930s, the 1920s were looked upon wistfully, but also as a time of fakery and cheating.
Of course, history is never destiny, and Coolidge is only one observation – hardly a solid basis for a forecast.
Moreover, unlike Trump, both Coolidge and Mellon were levelheaded and temperate in their manner.
But add to the Trump effect all the attention paid to Dow 20,000, and we have the makings of a powerful illusion.
On November 10, 2016, two days after Donald J. Trump was elected, the Dow Jones average hit a new record high – and has since set 16 more daily records, all trumpeted by news media.
That sounds like important news for Trump.
In fact, the Dow had already hit nine record highs before the election, when Hillary Clinton was projected to win.
In nominal terms, the Dow is up 70% from its peak in January 2000.
On November 29, 2016, it was announced that the S&P/CoreLogic/Case-Shiller National Home Price Index (which I co-founded with my esteemed former colleague Karl E. Case, who died last July) reached a record high the previous September.
The previous record was set more than ten years earlier, in July 2006.
But these numbers are illusory.
The US has a national policy of overall inflation.
The US Federal Reserve has set an inflation “objective” of 2% in terms of the personal consumption expenditure deflator.
This means that all prices should tend to go up by about 2% per year, or 22% per decade.
The Dow is up only 19% in real (inflation-adjusted) terms since 2000.
A 19% increase in 17 years is underwhelming, and the national home price index that Case and I created is still 16% below its 2006 peak in real terms.
But hardly anyone focuses on these inflation-corrected numbers.
The Fed, like the world’s other central banks, is steadily debasing the currency, in order to create inflation.
A Google Ngrams search of books shows that use of the term “inflation-targeting” began growing exponentially in the early 1990s, when the target was typically far below actual inflation.
The idea that we actually want moderate positive inflation – “price stability,” not zero inflation – appears to have started to take shape in policy circles around the time of the 1990-1991 recession.
Lawrence Summers argued that the public has an “irrational” resistance to the declining nominal wages that some would have to suffer in a zero-inflation regime.
Many people appear not to understand that inflation is a change in the units of measurement.
Unfortunately, although the 2% inflation target is largely a feel-good policy, people tend to draw too much inspiration from it.
Irving Fisher called this fixation on nominal price growth the “money illusion” in an eponymous 1928 book.
That doesn’t mean that we set new speculative-market records every day.
Stock-price movements tend to approximate what economists call “random walks,” with prices reflecting small daily shocks that are about equally likely to be positive or negative.
And random walks tend to go through long periods when they are well below their previous peak; the chance of setting a record soon is negligible, given how far prices would have to rise.
But once they do reach a new record high, prices are far more likely to set additional records – probably not on consecutive days, but within a short interval.
In the US, the combination of Trump and a succession of new asset-price records – call it Trump-squared – has been sustaining the illusion underpinning current market optimism.
For those who are not too stressed from having taken extreme positions in the markets, it will be interesting (if not profitable) to observe how the illusion morphs into a new perception – one that implies very different levels for speculative markets.
Images of Scarcity
NEW HAVEN – Could the television image we’ve all seen of the Greenland ice cap crumbling into the ocean because of global warming somehow – indirectly and psychologically – be partly responsible for high oil and other commodity prices?
The usual explanation of today’s scarcity and high prices focuses on explosive growth in emerging countries, China and India in particular, whose demand for scarce resources is “insatiable.”
But psychology also matters in speculative markets, and perhaps that image of the Greenland ice disappearing makes it seem all too plausible that everything else– land, water, even fresh air – is running out too.
Let’s take a case study, the last generalized boom-bust cycle in commodity prices, which caused these prices generally to rise (more or less) from some time in the 1960’s until the 1980’s, and then generally to fall until the mid-1990’s.
Maybe images matter just as much as substance in explaining that.
The conventional “fundamental” explanation for that cycle relates it to political events.
The 1973-1974 oil crisis is said to have been due to the cutoff of oil following the Arab-Israeli Yom Kippur War.
The 1979-1981 oil crisis is said to reflect the cutoff in oil due to the Iranian Revolution and the Iran-Iraq war.
The drop in oil prices after the mid-1980’s is said to be due to the collapse of the OPEC oil cartel.
But some economists doubt that these events tell the whole story.
Sure, there were sharp movements in oil prices corresponding to these events, but maybe there were other, even more important factors affecting general trends in oil prices.
After all, these events don’t really explain why prices of other commodities often followed that of oil.
Maybe more important than those wars in the 1970’s was that people throughout the world got worried about running out of things.
This was the time of the “great population scare,” which transformed thinking worldwide, no doubt contributing to higher commodity prices while the fear lasted.
There seemed to be some basis for this scare.
The rate of increase in the world’s population rose from 1.8% in 1951 to 2.1% in 1971.
But those were just dry statistics.
Images likely mattered more.
In 1948, the astronomer Fred Hoyle said, “Once a photograph of the Earth, taken from outside, is available – once the sheer isolation of the earth becomes plain – a new idea as powerful as any in history will be let loose.”
A generation later, he was proven right.
The first photograph of the earth from space came as part of the Apollo project in November 1967.
One of the Apollo astronauts, James B. Irwin, who landed on the moon in 1971, said of his view of the earth, “It was so far away…a little ball in the blackness of space.
That does something to your soul….We all came back humanitarians….We saw how fragile our planet is and yet how beautiful.
We saw how we must learn to work together, to love each other.”
Let’s not discount that statement.
That image of the earth from space had a profound psychological effect, and we all saw it.
Maybe that image was at least part of the reason why people became so worried in the 1970’s about population running ahead of resources.
The Club of Rome’s monumental book The Limits to Growth came out in 1972, with a picture of the earth on its cover.
The book, written by a team of scientists, predicted disastrous shortages and mass starvation due to population pressure.
Despite scientific critics of the Club of Rome’s methods, the public was ready to believe the dire forecast.
The great population scare led to various birth-control efforts around the world, notably to the “one-child policy” instituted in China in 1979.
Partly due to such efforts, as well as to a change in family values, the rate of growth of the world’s population, began a long decline, to 1.1% in 2005.
That gradual decline led to gradual loss of concern about limits to growth.
Commodity prices fell, too.
Today, we remain mostly unconcerned about global population growth.
But, in the last ten years or so, we have become concerned about something else: rapid world economic growth.
While it may seem that no image in the last decade was so dramatic as the first photo of the earth from space, think again.
Try searching YouTube, for example, on Greenland ice.
More generally, the Internet gives a sense of vastness to the world’s economic activity that was never available before.
The ability to communicate via e-mail to everyone in the world creates a sense of the world’s smallness relative to the abundance of people in it.
We have seen photographs of hurricane and typhoon activity due to global warming, affecting people in Louisiana or Myanmar.
We have seen devastation from the 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami, interpreted as a sign of crowding at the coasts.
The North Pole turned into a lake for the first time in 2000.
We see aerial photos of the Aral Sea drying up.
We practically can’t buy caviar from the Caspian Sea any more.
The European Space Agency announced in September 2007 that satellite photos showed that the Northwest Passage appeared clear of ice for shipping for the first time ever, and that the Northeast Passage is almost clear.
With so many vivid images of a shrinking and damaged planet, is it really any wonder that human psychology is ripe for high commodity prices?
Imagining a New Bretton Woods
AUSTIN, TEXAS – The financial meltdown of 2008 prompted calls for a global financial system that curtails trade imbalances, moderates speculative capital flows, and prevents systemic contagion.
That, of course, was the goal of the original Bretton Woods system.
But such a system today would be both untenable and undesirable.