Americans, however, have generally been averse to class warfare.
True, the US has been home to a rigid, albeit comparably fluid, class structure ever since its founding.
But Americans just don’t like to talk about it, even when they are whining about the follies of the “elite.”
Nearly all Americans, apart from the richest and poorest, define themselves as “middle class.”
Such remains America’s democratic ethos.
Still, it is right to ask if the American way of life will survive the twenty-first century, and, if it does, whether it will survive in America or migrate elsewhere as the US economy and political system collapse under the accumulated weight of decades of myopic national leadership and squandered opportunities.
Indeed, Chinese President Hu Jintao’s recent trip to Washington was seen by many – particularly many Chinese – as the passing of the torch.
Pessimists have been saying this for a long time.
Optimists, touting GDP and other indicators, will continue to insist that Americans have never had it so good.
If there is any continuity worth underscoring, it is the regular cohabitation of boosterism with declinism: America’s glass is always simultaneously half full and half empty.
It is no coincidence that during the Reagan/Bush years – the last time so assertive a foreign policy coincided with such large deficits – a book like Joseph Nye’s Bound to Lead (1990) could follow in the footsteps of Paul Kennedy’s The Rise and Fall of Great Powers (1988).
The former made a strong case for the necessity of American global hegemony; the latter warned of “imperial overstretch.”
Both authors based their arguments on an assessment of the underlying context – that is, the structure – of world power.
America was overstretched because its global liabilities were increasingly out of balance with its national assets, and it was bound to lead because the world as we know it is arranged favorably for it to do so.
Similar arguments have been raised again recently.
Writers Parag Khanna and Fareed Zakaria have regurgitated those made by Kennedy, Nye, and forebears like Hedley Bull in asserting that the US must lead the world away from a “new medievalism” amid the “rise of the rest” and the relative stagnation of the “West.”
But are such writers making a valid point?
If we look at moments of so-called structural convergence – the 1880’s, 1920’s, 1950’s and 1960’s, and 1990’s, in particular – we see the sources of American prosperity and power emerged in a global context, only to recede again.
Perhaps rise and fall is more of a cyclical than a linear phenomenon.
Or maybe it’s neither.
The missing variable in most of these arguments, even Nye’s, is leadership.
Leaders are never bound to rise or fall by circumstances alone.
Most historians place leadership in the foreground of human history, with structural variables having conditional, not causal, value.
Beneath even the richest soil, Dangerfield wrote, may lie the most perilous residue of discord and destruction.
Why have Americans been so good at leading?
Are Americans specially blessed, or just lucky?
Now that the US has at last begun to move, gradually and thoughtfully, away from the passions that characterized the country’s response to the 2001 terrorist attacks, it is worth asking if Bill Clinton was right to say that America’s virtues and assets always prevail against its vices and defects.
The writers mentioned above are less interested in the essence of power than in its exercise.
They would rather have the US become more sophisticated in the ways of the world.
Khanna, for example – presumably drawing upon the recent writing of Edward Luttwak – urges Americans to learn from the Byzantine Empire in crafting complex and obscure alliances among large and small states and non-state entities, so that diplomacy comes to resemble something like the global derivatives market.
Americans don’t do this particularly well, however Byzantine their country’s own politics and policy-making may seem.
Which takes us back to structure.
The US political system was never designed to rule the world.
Its checks and balances were meant to frustrate any such mission at the hands of an all-powerful executive, and it is doubtful that Americans would support such activism in perpetuity.
The secrets of American success are transparent yet difficult to quantify.
Americans’ pragmatism, opportunism, fair-mindedness, inventiveness, adaptability, optimism, and, above all, their inherent competitiveness offset their tendencies toward violence, impatience, self-righteousness, and unpredictability, their fondness for novelty and celebrity for their own sake, and their self-assertion en masse – getting there, as they like to say, “fastest with the mostest.”
Those who understand Americans’ deep-rooted passion for “making it” know why class or any other civil warfare has not succeeded in destroying America from within.
The American character prefers displacement to destruction, the win-win to the zero-sum.
That is still true, both at home and abroad.
The Known Knowns of Climate Change
POTSDAM – The philosopher Daniel Dennett once compared science to the construction of a huge pyramid.
Its base comprises the mass of well-established knowledge – no longer controversial and seldom discussed outside academia.
More recent research is piled toward the top of the pyramid, where most public debate takes place.
It is an apt metaphor for climate-change research, and one worth bearing in mind with the publication of the latest report of the United Nations Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC).
The IPCC’s fifth report, the product of several years of work by hundreds of climate scientists around the world, reviews our established understanding of climate change and explains more recent findings.
The media understandably tend to focus on the latter – like the much higher sea-level rise predictions compared to the previous IPCC report of 2007.
But let us step back from the news cycle to look at the solid knowledge base of our pyramid.
Climate research dates back at least two centuries, to Joseph Fourier’s discovery of the effects of greenhouse gases on planetary climates; in 1859, John Tyndall demonstrated in his laboratory which gases cause this effect.
Detailed radiation measurements on the ground and from satellites have since proved the greenhouse effect’s existence.
We also know beyond doubt that emissions from human activities have substantially increased the amount of greenhouse gases (especially carbon dioxide) in our atmosphere.
When the first IPCC report was published in 1990, the concentration of CO2 in the atmosphere had reached 354 parts per million (up from the preindustrial baseline of 280 ppm).
This year, the concentration of atmospheric CO2 crossed the 400 ppm line for the first time.
CO2 levels are already far higher than they have been in a million years, as ancient air bubbles trapped in the Antarctic ice show.
We know that the amount of greenhouse gases is rising due to our emissions, and we know that this is causing warming.
But how much?
This reflects an overwhelming consensus among scientists from around the world.
Polls of climate researchers, as well as analysis of thousands of scientific publications, consistently show a 97-98% consensus that human-caused emissions are causing global warming.
Yet these conclusions need to be reaffirmed in the face of efforts by well-funded special-interest groups to sow doubt among the public.
Indeed, these efforts have been so successful that few members of the public are aware of the scientific consensus on the fundamentals of climate change.
Many believe that there is controversy where there simply is not.
The past can serve as a guide to the consequences of the warming that we are causing.
Scientists studying paleoclimate – the climates of the ancient past – have documented the massive impact of earlier climatic changes.
At the end of the last Ice Age, for example, global temperature rose by about 5ºC over a period of 5,000 years.
This was enough to transform the Earth’s vegetation cover, melt two-thirds of the continental ice masses, and raise sea levels by more than a hundred meters.
Slowly but surely, sea levels are inching up once again.
A key conclusion of the new IPCC report is that sea-level rise has accelerated.
But, before millions of people are submerged, many will be struck by extreme weather events.
Record-breaking hot months now occur five times more frequently than they would in a stable, unchanging climate; these heat waves cause droughts, wild fires, poor harvests, and, inevitably, loss of life.
The latest IPCC report describes our current predicament with disturbing clarity: global temperatures are climbing, mountain glaciers and polar ice caps are melting, sea levels are rising, and extreme weather events are becoming more frequent and more severe.
The details near the top of the knowledge pyramid can and should be intensely debated.
But our solid understanding of the fundamentals of global warming – the base of our knowledge of climate science – should provide reason enough to press on with the implementation of carbon-free energy technologies.
With a rapid reduction in emissions, it is still possible to keep warming within safe bounds (estimated at below 2ºC); but the task is becoming increasingly difficult.
Failure to act quickly and globally will leave our children and grandchildren struggling to adapt to rapidly rising seas and devastating weather.
China’s Dream Team
NEW HAVEN – China’s recent leadership transition was widely depicted as a triumph for conservative hard-liners and a setback for the cause of reform – a characterization that has deepened the gloominess that pervades Western perceptions of China.
In fact, nothing could be further from the truth.
Xi Jinping and Li Keqiang – the top two officials in China’s new governing council (the Standing Committee of the Politburo) – are both well educated, well traveled, and sophisticated thinkers who bring a wealth of experience to the many challenges that China faces.
As so-called Fifth Generation leaders, they continue the steady progress in competence that has marked each of China’s leadership transitions since the emergence of Deng Xiaoping in the late 1970’s.
While it is entirely premature to judge the style and direction that China’s new leaders will take, three early hints are worth noting.
First, Xi’s assumption of power is more complete than was the case in earlier transitions.
By immediately taking the reins of both the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) and the Central Military Commission, he has a greater opportunity to put his personal stamp on policy than his predecessors had at the start of their administrations.
Yes, China governs by a consensus of the Standing Committee.
But Xi is well positioned to drive the thinking of a now-leaner decision-making body (downsized from nine members to seven).
Moreover, he has long favored a market-friendly, scientific approach to economic development, which will be vital to China’s future.
Second, Li Keqiang – the presumptive incoming premier – could be the big surprise in the new leadership team.
Unlike the current premier, Wen Jiabao, who was third in the chain of command for the past ten years, Li has been elevated to number two, which suggests a greater potential for power-sharing between the CCP and the government at the top of China’s new team.
With a Ph.D. in economics, Li, who, as Executive Vice Premier, headed the all-important “Central Committee Finance and Economy Leading Small Group,” is especially well equipped to deal with the long-awaited structural transformation of China’s economy.
Indeed, having overseen China 2030 – an extraordinary joint report recently produced by the World Bank and China’s own high-level think tank, the Development Research Center – he has a deep understanding of the roadmap that China must embrace.
His promotion could be a major step up from Wen, who emphasized rhetoric and strategy more than implementation.
Third, and contrary to prevailing wisdom in the West, Wang Qishan, one of China’s savviest and most experienced senior officials, has not been relegated to obscurity in his new position overseeing “discipline” on the Standing Committee.
Yes, Wang has invaluable experience in the financial sector, and it would have been logical for him to assume similar responsibilities on the new leadership team.
But, as one of the top seven in the CCP hierarchy, he will still be able to weigh in on all important economic and financial matters, while assuming responsibility for tackling one of China’s toughest problems – corruption.
Having known Wang for more than 15 years, my sense is that he is very well suited to this vital task.
The other members of the new Standing Committee bring a broad array of experience and skills.
That is especially true of Yu Zhengsheng and the two Zhangs, Dejiang and Gaoli, who come from senior roles in three of China’s most powerful and dynamic urban centers – Shanghai, Chongqing, and Tianjin.
Their deep knowledge of the key role played by urbanization in driving economic development will be critical to broadening the structural transformation that China now faces.
The West is not only overlooking the new Chinese leaders’ enhanced skill set, but is also misjudging the current state of the country’s economy, which, while far from perfect, is not crisis-torn and in desperate need of a quick fix.
In fact, China is emerging in reasonably good shape from yet another global slump.
This gives its new leaders leeway between now and the National People’s Congress in March 2013 to focus on the development of implementation tactics for their strategic agenda.
None of this is to minimize China’s enormous challenges.
But strategy is not the problem; the pro-consumption 12th Five-Year Plan lays that out with great clarity.
The new leadership must now shift the focus to commitment and implementation of that strategy – namely, through enactment of a new set of bold reforms, especially those related to the services sector, the social safety net, and state-owned enterprises. Xi’s emphasis on the “top-level design” of reforms lends itself particularly well to this agenda, as does Li’s intimate familiarity with the detailed blueprint provided by China 2030.
Western observers, focusing on recent public statements by Xi and Li, highlight a dearth of comments in favor of economic or political reforms.
But the same could have been said of the early utterances of Deng, modern China’s greatest reformer.
As Ezra Vogel notes in Deng Xiaoping and the Transformation of China, Deng’s first public statement after his political rehabilitation in 1976 was, “Marxism-Leninism and Mao Zedong Thought constitute the guiding ideology of the party.”
Those were not exactly enlightened words – especially in view of what was shortly to come.
Yet Deng seized the moment at a critical juncture that is strikingly reminiscent of the one now faced by Xi and Li.
As is the case in any country’s leadership transition, no one knows for certain whether China’s incoming administration is up to the multiplicity of challenges that they face.
Since the days of Deng, China has had an uncanny ability to rise to the occasion and meet its challenges head on.
The new generation of leaders has the right skills and experience for the task.
Western biases notwithstanding, we will know soon enough if they can translate strategy into action.
The Stressful Life of Laboratory Animals
Research on animals is performed to gain more knowledge about diseases and how to cure them, and to evaluate drugs for toxicity before testing them on humans.
In fact, animal studies have played a vital role in almost every major medical advance.
Although researchers are committed to finding new ways to reduce and replace animal testing, current technology cannot yet replace many types of animal research.
The Nuffield Council on Bioethics estimates that between 50 and 100 million animals, from flies to monkeys, are euthanized for research each year worldwide, with roughly 90% of the vertebrate animals used for research being rodents.
Gaining useful knowledge from animal research requires robust experimental findings: different scientists should be able to reproduce them in different locations.
This requires a thorough understanding of each animal species and its biology.
Evidence is gradually accumulating that the majority of mammalian research animals, particularly rodents, are mentally stressed by their living conditions.
Stress is generally defined as the state that results when the brain instructs the body to make changes in order to adapt to a new or excessive demand and the individual perceives that the demand will exceed the personal resources which he or she has available.
The response is fuelled by stress hormones that flow through the body, altering every organ and biochemical function, with wide-ranging effects on metabolism, growth, and reproduction.
Although the environments of laboratory animals are usually well controlled in terms of lighting, temperature, and humidity, there are many uncontrolled sources of noise in animal facilities, most of which derive from human activities.
These include high-pressure hoses, cage cleaners, and air-conditioners/heaters; squeaking doors, carts, and movable chairs; and jangling keys.
Rodents, in particular, are sensitive to these noises, and studies show that this sensitivity does not diminish with time, as is commonly assumed.
These noises can alter rodents’ behavior and even adversely affect their health.
Yet, surprisingly, many scientists are unaware that loud noises in their animal facilities can affect research outcomes and compromise their data.
Apart from noise problems, research animals are often housed in small cages with no source of enrichment, such as wheels, shelves, or tubes.
Such devices enable animals to exert some control over their environment, such as escaping an attack from a cage-mate by moving to another level in the cage or hiding.
Often, researchers are unwilling to include such items in their animals’ cages because other researchers do not.
However, rigorous standardization of the environment, particularly if it leads to barren surroundings, increases the risk of obtaining results that, being specific to a narrow set of conditions, cannot be compared with other researchers’ results.
If animals are under stress, they can have permanently raised concentrations of stress hormones, reduced concentrations of sex hormones, and compromised immune systems.
These uncontrolled variables make the animals unsuitable subjects for scientific studies.
To ensure good science, research animals should be healthy and exhibit normal behavior, apart from the specific effects under investigation.
Researchers often dismiss questions concerning environmental influences on their experimental data by claiming that such effects “cancel out,” because their control animals are housed under the same conditions.
But the conclusions drawn from such experiments are specific to the stressed animals and cannot necessarily be extrapolated to healthy animals.
The increasing use of genetically modified mice since their advent 20 years ago amplifies this problem.
Genetically modified mice either lack a specific gene or gene-pair (knock-out mice) or carry a piece of foreign DNA integrated into their own chromosomes (transgenic mice), and are used to deduce the functions of particular genes.
Studies are beginning to show that an animal’s environmental conditions can completely change the results of genetic studies.
A more humane and effective way to ensure the validity and usefulness of animal experimentation would be to provide conditions that minimize stress-related activities such as excessive grooming and fighting.
In addition, the environment should allow the animals to perform the behaviors normal for their species.
Normal and aberrant behaviors for each species could be agreed upon institutionally and a list made available to all investigators.
Designing an environment to suit animals’ psychological and physiological needs would be far preferable to the minimalism, otherwise known as “standardization,” that is currently employed.
The exact conditions used to achieve these goals would probably vary between laboratories.
But the end result would be similar.
Both the welfare of research animals and the quality of the science would be markedly improved, leading to data that could be meaningfully applied to our quest for medical knowledge.
The Strong Force is Almost With Us
HAMBURG – Roughly 60 years ago, the discovery of nuclear power promised the ultimate solution to the world’s energy problems.
Today, this promise remains unfulfilled.
Development of nuclear technology has stagnated, with nuclear power plants still using technology developed a half-century ago.amp#160;
Nuclear energy is produced in the decay processes of heavy elements, like Uranium or Thorium.
The nuclei of their atoms usually decay into two smaller nuclei and a couple of neutrons, releasing many million times more energy than any chemical process ever could.
Heavy elements contain so much energy because they stored a fraction of the energy released in the supernova explosion that created our Earth and the solar system around five billion years ago.amp#160;
Today’s power plants use as a fuel a special kind of Uranium, U-235, which is burned in a chain process whereby the neutrons from one nuclear decay induce the next decay.
Neither Uranium-238, which is roughly 100 times more abundant than U-235, nor Thorium, which is even more accessible, is used to produce energy on a large scale.
Indeed, in principle, every heavy element, even lead, is a potential source of nuclear energy.
Everybody who has studied nuclear decay processes has been struck by the myriad possible ways in which energy can be produced.
Progress in gaining access to this resource has, however, been very slow.
From the scientific point of view, the main problem is a lack of knowledge.
Despite many hundreds of well-functioning nuclear power plants, our understanding of nuclear forces is only empirical, and empirical knowledge is always imperfect.
For example, in producing nuclear energy, the decay reactions repeat many times, with the imperfections of every repetition resulting in a loss of predictive power of computations.
This hampers the optimization process, and is one of the main reasons why several large projects investigating energy production using more abundant Uranium-238 or Thorium (fast breeder reactors) were closed in Europe and the United States before they achieved the expected level of performance.
Another problem is the nuclear waste that emerges when energy is produced in the decay process.
The waste can be substantially, or even completely, reduced if we could use an alternative form of nuclear decay that is triggered by externally accelerated particles.
Here, too, however, we need more precise knowledge of the properties of nuclear processes.
The force binding atomic nuclei is a special case of the “strong force,” one of the four fundamental forces in nature, and is extremely difficult to investigate, because it acts very quickly and violently.
Around 50 years ago, it was proposed to study the strong forces by firing protons at each other at very high energies.
The acceleration of particles at high energy slows down all physical processes, because, according to Einstein’s theory of relativity, time runs more slowly for fast-moving objects.
Since protons are the simplest nuclei, it was hoped that, at high energy, the forces acting during the scattering of protons could be observed and analyzed like in a slow-motion film, providing a precise understanding of the strong force.
Several large accelerator research centers were built, and the scattering of particles at high energies revealed a fascinating structure of matter.
New particles, called gluons, were found to mediate the strong force. Their discovery should provide a clue to precise knowledge of the strong force.
At short distances, gluons create an attractive force that is pretty weak and well understood.
But, at larger distances, comparable to the proton radius, the force becomes really strong, and a very large number of gluons is involved, forming complicated structures that are not well known today.
Therefore, for some time, it was not expected that the properties of the strong force could be directly derived from the properties of gluons.
In the last few years, however, experiments at the HERA accelerator in Hamburg, Germany, have observed the strong interaction effects in slow motion, which could open a way to a precise understanding of the strong force.
At the HERA accelerator, the scattering of electrons on protons was studied at the highest energies ever for this type of experiment.
The HERA machine operated from 1992 until 2007.
One of its most important discoveries was that several distinct phenomena observed at high energies and short distances could be clearly attributed to the emission of gluons and the emergence of gluonic structures.
By observing how these structures change while increasing the distance, it should be possible to follow – and thus to understand –the action of the strong force.
The appearance of such clear gluonic structures was unexpected; the experiments at HERA were not designed to study them.
But the precision experiments required to measure the strong force can be designed and built with known technology.
So two large groups of physicists – one concentrated around the Brookhaven and Jefferson National Laboratories in the United States, and the other around CERN in Geneva – are proposing to restart the investigation of electron-proton interactions.
The study of these interactions should provide a precise understanding of the strong force.
And, as the history of physics has shown, a better understanding of natural forces will open new, completely unexpected possibilities.
For example, our understanding of electromagnetic force, developed mostly in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, gave rise to today’s breathtaking developments in telecommunications, computers, chemistry, and material sciences.
A preciseunderstanding of the strong force could be just as important, opening new ways to use nuclear-energy resources while solving the problems of safety and nuclear waste.
What’s Stopping Europe?
PITTSBURGH – On a recent visit to Greece, French President François Hollande declared that Europe’s decline was over, and urged French companies to invest in Greece.
Bad advice.
French production costs are high, but Greek costs are higher.
Despite the considerable decline in Greek (and Italian and Spanish) real GDP since 2007, adjustment is far from complete.
In fact, one would be hard pressed to find broad agreement with Hollande’s assessment anywhere in Europe.
Before the recent Italian election, financial markets showed signs of optimism, encouraged by the European Central Bank’s policy of guaranteeing eurozone members’ sovereign debt, expanding its balance sheet, and lowering interest rates.
Bondholders gain when interest rates fall.
But unemployment continues to rise in the heavily indebted southern countries, and output continues to lag behind Germany and other northern European countries.
The main reason for the lag is not simply low demand or large debts.
There is a vast difference between unit labor costs – real wages adjusted for productivity – in Germany and in the heavily indebted southern countries.
When the crisis began, production costs in Greece were about 30% higher than in Germany, so Greece exported very little and imported very much.
Production costs in other heavily indebted countries were 20-25% higher than in Germany.
Growth will not resume until production costs in the indebted countries decline, which requires either a substantial permanent increase in productivity, a reduction in real wages, or both.
While some adjustment has occurred, much of the change is not permanent.
Austerity reduced the number of employed workers, particularly those with low skill and productivity levels.
But gains in measured productivity growth from this source are not permanent changes, so a large part of the reported reductions in unit labor costs are temporary.
Indeed, major cost differences remain.
In Greece, the private sector has been forced to adjust, but the government failed to keep its promise to reduce public employment.
That will prolong excessive government spending, and deficit targets will not be met on a sustained basis.
Large reductions in public-sector wages brought down the primary deficit, but employment maintenance lowers productivity, raises costs, and delays adjustment.
In Italy, former Prime Minister Mario Monti’s government undertook some reforms, but it continued to support unions and corporate monopolies.
And Italy’s parliament rejected many of Monti’s proposed reductions in government spending.
Labor and many product markets remain closed, despite the urgent need to increase competition, lower production costs, and raise productivity.
After five years of slow growth and rising unemployment, voters in other indebted countries, like Italians (and French voters before them), are likely to reject additional spending reductions, tax increases, and further painful deregulation.
Europe must find more effective policies that reduce production costs toward German levels.
The economic historian Harold James has shown in a recent book that in the 40 years of negotiations leading to the adoption of the common currency, all of the problems that now beset the eurozone were discussed repeatedly.
Everyone understood that a monetary union would require enforceable fiscal and banking rules.
But such rules were never adopted.
Before the euro, countries adjusted misaligned production costs by devaluing or revaluing their exchange rates.
Fiscal austerity is a poor substitute.
It works slowly, if at all, because elected governments are often reluctant to implement their promises – and may not feel bound by those of previous administrations (especially if they owe their victory to voters who are rebelling against years of belt-tightening with no evidence of renewed growth).
Likewise, politicians are reluctant to adopt deregulation that eliminates state-sponsored special privileges.
For several years, I have proposed a policy that combines growth and fiscal rectitude.
Let all the heavily indebted southern European countries jointly agree to join a weak euro, which would float against the stronger northern euro.
When the weak euro reduces the heavily indebted countries’ production costs by 20-25%, they can rejoin the “hard” euro if they accept fiscal reforms that are subject to approval by the European Commission (and thus by the hard-euro creditor countries).
After all, a fixed exchange rate or common currency requires limits on fiscal independence.
The Italian election sent a message.
After five years of decline in living standards, voters oppose more austerity and further retrenchment without growth.
Restoring a sound euro requires policies that revive growth, rein in government spending, and reform heavily regulated labor and product markets.
The Struggle for Syria
CAIRO – As the violence in Syria mounts, the international community’s paralysis has become increasingly jarring.
But the role of external regional forces is almost as important in fueling the domestic bloodshed as what is happening internally.
If Syria could break free of the negative influences of regional politics, genuine change without continued violence might become possible.
Syria needs to manage its diverse ethnic and religious composition, and to decide its own position on the Arab-Israeli conflict.
But that is more difficult when neighboring countries are exploiting the country's heterogeneous makeup to pursue their own hegemonic agendas.
Syria, after all, sits at the center of mighty and antagonistic geopolitical forces.
To the east looms Iran, with its anti-American, anti-Western rhetoric and vast regional ambitions.
To the south sits Saudi Arabia, with its long friendship with the United States and its inherent hostility toward Iran's Islamic Republic.
And to the north is Turkey, a pro-European, largely secular and democratic country that seeks to wield influence across the Arab world.
The region in and around Syria is also populated by extremist Islamist groups that are attempting to expand their spheres of influence - and that are quick to capitalize on instability in any country.
Syria is particularly vulnerable in this regard, as extremists incite violence against minority religious groups by using, for example, television stations in Saudi Arabia and Egypt.
The current regime in Syria, in its ruthless quest to remain in power, refuses to acknowledge peaceful protesters' demands for freedom and dignity.
If it did - and if it met those demands - Islamists would not be able to hijack the demonstrations.
Peaceful change in Syria can nonetheless be achieved, and the international community can influence that process by recognizing that its continued focus on the country's “complexity” does nothing for its people.
In fact, the obsession with Syria's sectarian rivalries provides destabilizing external forces with the oxygen that their inflammatory rhetoric requires.
The incitement against Syrian religious minorities promulgated by extremist TV stations, and by people like the Chief Justice of Saudi Arabia's Supreme Judicial Council, coupled with equally damaging behavior by Iran, if left unchecked, could result in an even worse bloodbath, with Syria's people drawn into a war of all against all.
The international community allowed change in Tunisia and Egypt to proceed at those countries' own pace.
In Syria, a Libyan-style military intervention is not warranted, but diplomatic intervention is needed to allow the country's people to determine its future.
The international community's goal must be to persuade neighboring countries to halt their brazen, unwarranted attacks on parts of Syrian society.
In particular, the US, which has significant influence in Saudi Arabia, must act to stop attacks by that country's extremists on Syria's religious minorities - attacks motivated merely by a desire to provoke sectarian conflict.
Likewise, efforts to weaken Iran's disruptive influence in the region must be maintained, while Turkey's regional ambitions must be kept in mind.
Optimism about the Syrian people's future must be tempered by realism about the challenges facing Syria's opposition movement and the international community alike.
Dramatic, rapid change could result in prolonged failure.
Fortunately, Syrians have no predilection for violence.
For them, peaceful, gradual change is the best option.
And that requires a national dialogue, overseen by the international community, aimed at bolstering internal unity – and thus at protecting the country from regional interference.
The situation in Syria is usually – and rightly – described as an intricate, multi-dimensional playing field with a wide variety of political actors and competing interests.
But there has been an inadequate focus on the Syrian people’s simple desire for genuine reform, greater personal freedom, and more economic opportunity.
Syrians have experienced uninterrupted dictatorship for 40 years, and, with it, extreme economic hardship, including high unemployment, rising food prices, and endemic corruption.
They are also now suffering from water shortages and a budget deficit that has been exacerbated by declining oil revenues.
But Syrians are a remarkably resilient, resourceful people, as well as being young and well educated
With international assistance in developing Syria’s democratic institutions and political infrastructure, we can build a robust civil society that can assert its own identity and sovereignty, independent of undue outside influence.
A new Syria, based on democratic principles, would not only benefit Syrians, but would be a force for stability throughout the region.
The Sugar Season
The holiday season that is now upon us is a time for festivity, and usually of overeating.
But the rampant consumption of sugar that marks this time of year is nothing to celebrate.
In fact, this seasonal upsurge in sugar consumption is just part of a huge transition in world health that is now underway.
Many countries, especially developing countries, are facing the consequences of huge changes in lifestyle: modifications in diet, lower levels of physical activity, and increased tobacco use.
These changes are determined, to a large extent, by the globalization and expansion of food markets, and by ever-greater levels of urbanization.
Both of these factors incite sedentary behavior at home and at work, as well as profound alterations in dietary habits.
So it should be no surprise that noncommunicable diseases (NCD's), including cardiovascular diseases (CVD's), obesity, diabetes and cancer, now kill roughly 33 million people around the world each year, and cause almost 60% of total deaths.
Indeed, they account for almost half the global burden of disease.
By 2020, that contribution is expected to rise to 73% of all deaths and 60% of the global burden of disease.
Moreover, more than 60% these deaths occur in the developing world, and here NCD's increasingly appear in younger age groups, which can have huge implications for how productive a country's workers are.
Recent data from China reflect the extent of the problem.
In China's rural areas, with more than 800 million people, NDC's account for more than 80% of deaths.
Many countries are now afflicted by a double burden of diseases.
Countries that still struggle with malnutrition and illnesses like malaria, tuberculosis, and HIV/AIDS, now must contend with an explosion of CVD's, diabetes, and obesity, as well as soaring rates of high blood pressure and high blood cholesterol.
Indeed, five of the 10 leading causes of death worldwide are related to diet and physical activity: high blood pressure, high cholesterol, low intake of fruit and vegetables, high body mass index, and insufficient exercise.
Clearly, effective strategies to tackle the NCD burden require a critical examination of what people are eating and their levels of physical activity.
The World Health Organization, together with a group of international experts, has developed a global strategy on diet, physical activity, and health over a period of 18 months through an extensive series of consultations in more than 80 countries, and with the input of United Nations bodies, civic groups, and food producers.
One of the strategy's key conclusions is that reducing the burden of NCD's requires a multi-sectoral approach.
Like a toolbox, the strategy provides WHO members with a comprehensive range of policy options from which to choose.
Governments can act.
Transport ministries should provide safe roads so that children can bike to school.
Finance ministers could tax unhealthy food and subsidize healthy food.
Education ministers should demand healthy school meals.
Many countries are already developing their own national strategies.
Most of what WHO is recommending has been endorsed by public health officials for many years.
But we face a global problem, with many international stakeholders, and this requires an urgent and worldwide response.
Of course, there is considerable debate about what precisely makes for a healthy diet.
This debate is both welcome and to be expected; improving diet and finding ways to increase physical activity is a complex issue.
Moreover. there will always be groups with their own interests, using arguments that we do not have sufficient evidence to act.
But there has been no challenge to the strategy's recommendations from the global scientific or public health community.
The strongest critique has come from sugar associations, who claim that the upper limit of 10% on caloric intake from sugar is not based upon scientific evidence.
However, more than twenty national and international reports from around the world by scientific bodies governing dietary recommendations set similar or lower targets for sugar intake.
The growing NCD and CVD burden is a time bomb for world health.
The implementation of the WHO's strategy could lead to one of the largest-ever positive shifts in human health, putting populations throughout the world on pathways to lifelong and sustained improvements in well-being.
The Summit of Europe’s Ineffectiveness
LONDON – The European Union likes summits.
Just look at the way it reacts when the other side decides not to show up (for example, its response to President Barack Obama’s decision not to attend the May EU-US summit in Madrid).
If the EU wants to be taken seriously and have a tangible impact, it needs to learn that talking about the right things is no substitute for taking the right kind of action.  
No policy area better illustrates this EU preference for talk over action than Pakistan.
The Pakistan-EU summit will take place on April 10, a follow up to the first meeting last autumn.
But you would be hard-pressed to know anything about the event, since nobody is taking ownership of it: not Herman Van Rompuy, the European Council’s new permanent president; not Catherine Ashton, the EU’s new foreign policy chief; not even Spanish Prime Minister José Luis Zapatero, who has pushed Spain onto the stage in plenty of other areas.
The reason is simple: the EU has nothing new to say or offer.
Pakistan desperately needs the EU’s vaunted expertise in police training. But any deployment of trainers is seen as too dangerous, expensive, and likely to fail.
Instead, individual member states are going it alone, with their own bite-sized assistance projects.
The EU is equally unlikely to change dramatically its development-aid policies towards Pakistan.
Questions of capacity, corruption, and quality assurance remain unanswered, and with the US granting $1.5 billion a year for five years, any change in the EU stance would be relatively insignificant.
There is also the question of President Asif Zardari’s government.
Since his five-year term began in September 2008, Zardari has found it hard to assert his authority. Like his predecessor, General Pervez Musharraf, he is in danger of falling victim to a tide of anti-Americanism, fueled by disquiet over US policies in Pakistan, such as the use of military drones and covert operations.
Unlike Musharraf, Zardari cannot count on the support of the army, which remains Pakistan’s most powerful state institution.
It has already reacted furiously to attempts to curb its powers and rein in the activities of its intelligence apparatus.
Sensing Zardari’s weakness, his main rival, Nawaz Sharif, is said to be plotting a political comeback.
Given this context, the Pakistan-EU summit will come and go, with barely the caterers noticing.
The EU will remain a minor player in Pakistan.
Does this matter?
Even the engaged US finds it difficult to attain its aims: witness the Pakistani interpretation of America’s $7.5 billion aid package as interference rather than goodwill.
So why should the EU even bother?
There are perhaps three reasons. First, the EU needs to focus on Pakistan because terrorists in Pakistan focus on the EU.
In its 2009 intelligence assessment (the TE-SAT Terrorism Situation and Trend Report), Europol concluded that “Pakistan [has] replaced Iraq as preferred destinations for volunteers wishing to engage in armed conflict.”
A senior EU official spelled out what this means: there had been “many cases in the recent past where either Pakistanis were coming to Europe or young EU citizens were going to Pakistan for training and being brainwashed.”
An effective Pakistan policy would depend in part on changing US policy.
But, in order to be taken seriously by the US, the EU needs to bring well-developed, well-resourced policies to the table, rather than 27 half-baked ideas.
So a second reason for revamping the EU’s Pakistan policy is to be able to help shape US policy rather than be a passive by-stander.
The third reason is that, despite its aid and effort, the US is unlikely to be able to meet its aims alone.
The US made Pakistan a top-priority Cold War ally.
As a result, many unsavory aspects of Pakistan’s conduct went unchallenged by America, while its military and intelligence services were handsomely resourced.
This nurtured two types of anti-US sentiment.
Ordinary Pakistanis hate the US because they believe that America supported years of oppression and military rule, while Pakistani elites are wary of anything that may undermine the position they have come to enjoy.
The US, therefore, will never be seen as a constructive partner in Pakistan’s development.
This leaves the door open to the EU, which is recognized as a consistent supporter of democracy.
There are many reasons to be wary of greater EU engagement in Pakistan, but foreign policy is not about easy problems; it is about addressing the difficult issues that affect people’s lives.
Pakistan matters to Europe, and Europe could matter much more to Pakistan.
If the EU wants to be a serious global player to which the US turns as a credible partner (showing up at its summits, for a start), the Pakistan-EU summit is a good opportunity to start replacing words with action.
The Summit of Muted Intentions
MEXICO CITY – The Summit of the Americas, which takes place roughly every three years, could be viewed as the sort of Latin American boondoggle that convenes heads of state for a few days, either south or north of the Rio Grande, to make endless speeches that lead nowhere.
But every now and then, the Summit – an American initiative launched by US President Bill Clinton in 1994 – actually helps to place key issues on the hemispheric table.
One such issue was the so-called Free-Trade Area of the Americas, which was proposed by former US President George H.W. Bush in 1990, and then collapsed at the Mar del Plata summit in Argentina in 2005.
Incensed by the presence of Bush père’s son, President George W. Bush, Venezuelan President Hugo Chávez rallied thousands of anti-American demonstrators to protest against the agreement.
The Summit of the Americas thus serves as a bellwether of United States-Latin American relations, even if it fails to accomplish much of significance.
This year’s summit, which will take place in Cartagena, Colombia, in mid-April, has already generated controversy.
Two traditional hot-button issues will dominate the discussions: Cuba and drugs.
Cuba has never been invited to the Summit of the Americas, because the meeting was designed to include only members of the Organization of American States (OAS) and democratically elected presidents (although Peru’s then-president, Alberto Fujimori, attended in 1998, despite having suspended the country’s constitution in an “auto-coup” in 1992).
In February, Ecuador’s president, Rafael Correa, declared that if Cuban President Raúl Castro were not invited to the Summit, the ALBA countries (Cuba, Venezuela, Ecuador, Nicaragua, Bolivia, and some of the Caribbean islands) would not attend.
This was clearly intended to provoke the US, Canada, and a handful of other countries opposed to his presence.
Several Latin American leaders and commentators recommended that US President Barack Obama attend, despite Castro’s presence, in order to confront him about Cuba’s dearth of democracy.
Obama did not take the bait: an accidental photo opportunity or public debate with Raúl Castro in the middle of an election campaign is not how a US president wins a second term.
Colombian President Juan Manuel Santos tried to defuse the issue by first ascertaining whether the Cubans actually wanted to be invited.
Having sent his foreign minister to Havana to ask, he received a surprising response: Cuba did wish to attend, despite having rejected in 2009 an invitation to return to the OAS.
It was clear to Santos that, if Castro attended, the Cartagena summit would take place without Obama, Canadian Prime Minister Stephen Harper, and perhaps a few other heads of state.
If, on the other hand, Castro did not attend, some of the ALBA members, including two neighbors with which Colombia hopes to improve relations – Ecuador and Venezuela – might not show up, either.
In the end, Santos, like his summit-hosting predecessors, had no choice but to inform the Cubans personally that they were not welcome, as “there was no consensus regarding their participation.”
Despite talk of growing Latin American independence and Castro’s recent reforms, most countries, when forced to choose between Cuba and the US, choose the latter.
Indeed, even Cuba’s supposed allies in the region refrained from urging Santos to invite Castro.
So Castro will not attend, Obama will, and the ALBA leaders will probably be divided.
The participants will try to ensure that Cuba is invited to the next summit in 2015, but it is difficult to predict what will happen.
Cuba remains Latin America’s black sheep for now.
Because Obama will be present, other leaders may seize the opportunity to share with him their views on what is increasingly called the “failed war on drugs,” the anti-drug program originally launched by US President Richard Nixon in 1971.
Recently inaugurated Guatemalan President Otto Pérez Molina, together with Santos and other heads of state, question today’s punitive, prohibitionist approach, owing to its enormous costs and meager results, and propose a different strategy: legalization.
Obama sent Vice President Joe Biden to Mexico and Central America a few weeks ago to forestall this trend, and he may have partly succeeded.
Nevertheless, whereas only a smattering of political leaders and intellectuals advocated legalization in the past, nowadays officials are coming “out of the closet” on drugs in droves.
Those who used to say that they favored a debate on the issue now support legalization; those who opposed it now accept the need for debate; and those who continue to oppose legalization do so on moral, rather than rational, grounds.
But Obama has other priorities.
His foreign-policy challenges, with the exception of Iran’s nuclear-enrichment program and Israel’s reaction to it, come second to the US economy’s health, and its impact on his re-election.
Latin America – even Mexico – is not on his radar screen at the moment.
Nonetheless, Obama will go to Cartagena, as he should.
The US has learned by now that it is in the country’s best interests to pay close attention to its southern neighbors.
The Sumo and the Yakuza
OSAKA – Perhaps no other sport is pursued as religiously as sumo wrestling.
Before a match, referees (who double as Shinto priests) purify the seaweed, salt, and sake. Wrestlers wash their faces, mouths, and armpits before entering the dohyo (ring), on whose sacred sand neither shoes nor women may tread.
Before a match starts, the two contestants raise their hands to show that they are not hiding weapons in the folds of their loincloth-like belt.
The elders of the Japan Sumo Association (JSA), the retired wrestlers who govern the sport, see themselves less as administrators than as guardians of a holy tradition.
They promote wrestlers to the highest ranks not just on brute merit, but according to how much hinkaku (dignity) they are judged to possess.
That dignity is vanishing.
Allegations of match-fixing, dope-smoking, orgies, and ties to gangsters among the sport’s top stars have enraged the Japanese public.
Indeed, Japanese Sumo circles are now facing growing public infamy, causing many Japanese to wonder if the country, after 20 years of stagnation, is capable of purifying itself.
Backed by an enraged public, the Tokyo Metropolitan Police Department (MPD) recently searched some 30 sites, including a raid on a major Sumo “stable,” or training center.
The move was made in an effort to seize material evidence about the nexus between Sumo wrestling and the “Yakuza,” Japan’s Mafia-like organized-crime groups that date from the seventeenth century.
The investigation continues, and the MPD has not yet referred anyone to prosecutors.
But the incessant, extended media coverage of the investigation suggests that the MPD has provided – and possibly even leaked – information from the investigation to journalists, a routine but legally dubious means of gaining public support.
Gambling is illegal in Japan, except for some limited forms of public gambling such as horse racing, bicycle racing, and lotteries.
The Japanese police usually overlook private gambling that does not threaten public peace and order.
Indeed, there is a long tradition of retired police “parachuting” into lucrative posts in “Pachinko,” the de-facto gambling industry and, to a lesser extent, across the public gambling sectors.
These links raise the question of the real objective of the Japanese police, a bureaucratic behemoth, in their investigation of the Sumo circle.
Sumo evolved over many centuries as a peripatetic form of public entertainment in which the wrestlers, trainers, and promoters depended on local gangs to secure facilities and an audience, including selling the tickets.
This cozy relationship was supposedly dissolved when the traditional Sumo circle was modernized, becoming today’s JSA.
But a significant part of the JSA’s revenue, if not a majority of it, still comes from ticket sales, despite the big fees that NHK, Japan’s public television, pays for broadcast rights.
Sumo, as a traditional spectacle, cannot survive without respectable patrons.
But Japan’s wealthiest people, such as entrepreneurs, medical doctors, and lawyers, are nowadays less willing or financially able to continue patronizing the sport, particularly since the collapse of Japan’s asset bubble in the early 1990’s.
Instead, these respectable supporters have gradually been replaced over the years by a shady new class of rich Japanese, who have risen through loan-sharking and other dubious businesses.
As a result, some Sumo stables have become associated in one way or another with people running front companies for Yakuza organizations.
The Yakuza’s grip on the Sumo circle is important, because its traditional way of life is fraying.
In the 1950’s, Japanese ministers and industrialists sometimes relied on nationalist elements of Yakuza groups to quash unions and socialists.
The gangs then upheld classic Japanese virtues of manliness and loyalty – and paid for mistakes by slicing off one of their fingers in atonement.
But Japan’s long-floundering economy has eaten revenue from traditional activities that required muscle, such as gambling, prostitution, and loan-sharking.
For example, “land-sharking” – the practice of coercing landowners to sell their land and then flipping it for huge profits – is no longer as lucrative as it once was, because land prices have been flat for years.
To compensate, Yakuza groups plunged into financial fraud, stock manipulation, and cybercrime, giving rise to a new generation of gangster-nerds, more interested in business than blackmail.
For instance, “Yamaguchi-Gumi,” the largest Yakuza organization in Japan, boasts roughly 36,000 members and associate members, constituting less than a half of the total Yakuza gangsters in Japan, and is estimated to haul in as much as ¥2 trillion ($21 billion) annually. The organization has hundreds of subsidiary organs across the country and nationwide networks.
As with America’s Mafia, police zeal has imprisoned many Yakuza leaders.
The sixth godfather of “Yamaguchi-Gumi” is now in prison until 2011.
Once he is released, it is anticipated that he will direct a major drive to revitalize his organization through both its traditional and new illegal activities.
Some analysts suspect that the Sumo circle has provided some of the best match tickets to Yakuza leaders, who, as matches were shown on television, sent signals to the godfather that they remain loyal to him.
So it is likely that next year will see a showdown between the police and the “Yamaguchi-Gumi.”
The Sumo gambling scandal, indeed, may be a prelude to it.
The Sun Will Rise Again
TOKYO – In Japan, memorial services for the dead are normally held 49 days after their passing.
The bereaved mourn throughout this period.
The number of victims of the earthquake and tsunami that assaulted the Tohoku region of northeast Japan has now reached around 30,000, if those who are still missing are included.
This was the largest natural disaster to strike Japan in its history, and the entire nation has been in mourning.
Throughout this period, television stations, in response to viewers’ feelings, have refrained from showing frivolous programs and gaudy commercials.
Many of the hanami events, for celebrating the annual eruption of cherry blossoms, a much-loved activity for us Japanese, have been canceled.
Music and sporting events, along with town gatherings, have also been canceled or postponed.
Bizarrely, the American rock singer Cyndi Lauper’s concerts were just about the only events that weren’t called off.
The strong bonds (kizuna) of the Japanese people create great solidarity during dark times such as these.
One virtue of kizuna can be seen in people’s inability to enjoy themselves in their usual ways in the face of the loss of so many countrymen and the knowledge that 200,000 more are enduring harsh conditions in evacuation centers.
But there are concerns that these bonds of kizuna may also bind the Japanese economy, which must recover as soon as possible – not only for the benefit of the Japanese, but also because disruptions in Japan’s economy are hitting the rest of Asia, owing to the production chains of which Japan is an integral part.
But today’s strong kizuna and mentality of mourning have led to sharply diminished consumption.
The tourism industry has been directly hit by people refraining from travel, and the abundant hot springs in the Tohoku region, normally popular with tourists and totally unaffected by the earthquake or tsunami, have become a victim of the disaster.
Similarly, the baseless rumor that all of Japan is soaked in radiation has caused tourism from abroad to plummet.
Meetings and parties in Tokyo have been canceled, and this has directly affected not only hotels and inns, but also the liquor industry and the food and beverage industry.
The restaurant industry, too, is being pushed to the wall.
It is now no problem to get reservations at restaurants with three Michelin stars.
Despite the great efforts made to manage refrigeration amid blackouts caused by power shortages, customers are not turning out.
Likewise, customers who formed lines to buy up water and toilet paper immediately after the disaster are now slow to return to supermarkets.
And this tendency to shun all purchases except disaster-related goods, is not limited to east Japan. It is a nationwide trend.
This curtailed consumption, however, comes at a time when Japan’s economy is already weak.
Indeed, the Japanese economy, which has endured two decades of sluggishness, has been falling behind in the global economy even more since the shockwaves caused by Lehman Brothers’ collapse in 2008.
Now it has been struck by a combination of prolonged deflation and the shocks caused by the recent natural disasters.
The end of April will mark 49 days since the earthquake and tsunami hit on March 11.
The profound disruption of the economy will continue at least until that time.
It took a year for consumption to recover after the Kobe earthquake in 1995, but the widespread damage did create widespread demand back then, and should do so again.
Enormous demand will be created for construction of temporary housing and, later, for the reconstruction of lost towns.
The estimated damage of ¥25 trillion is also the size of the potential reconstruction demand.
But Japan’s government needs to think big and creatively.
If towns suffering from depopulation before they were destroyed are transformed in their reconstruction, they could mark the emergence of a new model for regional development that can decentralize Japan’s Tokyo-centric economy.
Farmland that had been worked by an aging population with no successors, and that was subdivided into blocs that were too small, has now become vacant, opening the way for much larger-scale farming.
Similarly, individually operated fishing businesses whose potential heirs ended up choosing other careers can now be reorganized and consolidated, thereby taking advantage of greater economies of scale.
Perhaps most importantly, the nuclear accident has shed a stark light on the need for safe, renewable energy, which had been shunned in the past.
The current government has plans to generate power using large-scale solar and wind power plants in the disaster-affected areas.
But Japan’s economy has for too long been stuck in a ditch as a result of its being bound by over-regulation and a rigid adherence to precedent.
So, if there is a ray of light to come from the horrors suffered by the people of the Tohoku region, it is that the Japanese understand that what they need most of all nowadays is clear leadership with a coherent and bold plan for rebuilding and renewing their country.
Indeed, the only way truly to honor those who lost their lives is to create a new-model Japan from the tsunami’s wreckage, rather than simply restoring towns and their economies to their previous decadent conditions.
The Sustainability Mindset
MILAN – Markets and capitalist incentives have great strengths in promoting economic efficiency, growth, and innovation.
And, as Ben Friedman of Harvard University argued persuasively in his 2006 book The Moral Consequences of Growth, economic growth is good for open and democratic societies.
But markets and capitalist incentives have clear weaknesses in ensuring stability, equity, and sustainability, which&nbsp;can adversely affect political and social cohesion.
Obviously, abandoning market-capitalist systems, and implicitly growth, is not really an option.
Collectively, we have little choice but to try to adapt the system to changing technological and global conditions in order to achieve stability, equity (in terms of opportunity and outcomes alike), and sustainability.
Of these three imperatives, sustainability may be the most complex and challenging.
For many people, sustainability is associated with finite natural resources and the environment.
The global economy will probably triple in size in the next quarter-century, largely owing to growth in developing countries as they catch up to developed-country incomes and adopt similar consumption patterns.
Thus, there is a well-founded fear that the planet’s natural resources (broadly defined) and recuperative capacities will not withstand the pressure.
To some, this logic leads to the conclusion that growth is the problem, and that less growth is the solution.
But, in developing countries, where only sustained growth can lift people out of poverty, limiting it cannot be the answer.
The alternative is to change the growth model in order to lighten the impact of higher levels of economic activity on natural resources and the environment.
But there is no existing alternative to which we can all switch.
Changing the growth model means inventing a new one over time, step-by-step, from complementary parts.
The two key ingredients seem to be education and values.
Everyone, not just policymakers, needs to understand the consequences of our individual and collective choices.
We need to be aware for example, that population growth and rising consumption levels have intergenerational consequences, and that how we conduct ourselves will affect the lifestyles and opportunities of our children and grandchildren.&nbsp;
Thus far, the quality of our choices has been unimpressive, reflecting little sensitivity to sustainability and the impact of our choices on future generations.
As a result, many developed countries have built up dangerously large public debts and even larger non-debt liabilities, owing to unsustainable growth patterns.
Most of us, I believe, do not knowingly make choices that adversely affect future generations.
So perhaps incomplete knowledge of the consequences of our choices is responsible.
Moreover, an unfunded liability path, once taken, is hard to leave, because at the point of departure, some generation is paying for past commitments and at least beginning to fund future ones.
That seems unfair, because it is.
Most people might agree that living beyond our means in the aggregate, via unfunded social services and insurance, or disproportionate use of resources, imposes a burden on our offspring.
But we might still fail to reach agreement on who should pay for funding these programs, or for reducing our consumption of resources.
Too often, it is easier to deal with the distributional problem by shifting the burden to those who are not present, and who are insufficiently represented by those who are.
Education and values are the foundation of sound individual and, ultimately, collective choices.
Without them, the incentives and policies that economists rightly argue are needed to increase energy efficiency, limit carbon emissions, economize on water usage, and much more will lack support and fail in the democratic decision-making process.
If sustainability is to triumph, it must be predominantly a bottom-up process.
Environmentalists are right to focus on education and individual choices, even when their policy proposals are not always on target.
Education and values will drive local innovation, alter lifestyles, and shift social norms.
They will also affect business behavior via choices by customers and employees, including business leaders.
Thus, they are essential components of the formulas needed to pursue sustainable patterns of growth.
But, while education and values are necessary, they clearly are not sufficient.
Complementary national policies and international agreements will require careful scientific and economic analysis and thoughtful choices.
The need for burden-sharing, particularly between advanced and developing countries, will not magically disappear.
Climate-change risks, though serious, should not be mistaken for the entire sustainability agenda.
There are clear steps that can be taken.
Appropriate regulation and sufficiently long time horizons can make structures of all kinds much more energy-efficient, without imposing burdensome costs.
In a similar way, transportation can become less energy-intensive without restricting mobility.
Some of these shifts might be subject to international coordination, in order to avoid adverse competitive consequences, whether real or perceived.
But too much coordination can be a bad thing.
That is why climate-change negotiations are shifting from the misguided objective of seeking risky 50-year commitments to binding carbon-emissions targets to focusing on parallel, step-by-step processes, including higher energy efficiency, better urban planning, improved transportation systems, and on learning as we go.
Likewise, businesses and industries that are heavy water users will simply develop new technologies and thrive in the face of scarcity.
Progress has been helped by growing awareness in populous Asia – and in developing countries generally – that sustainability is the key to achieving their longer-term growth objectives.
This perspective perhaps comes more naturally in an environment of rapid growth, because their growth models require continual review and adaptation to be sustainable.
Over time, values shift as knowledge is acquired and disseminated.
Policies aimed at sustainability are likely to follow.
What is unknown is whether we will reach that point fast enough to avoid major disruptions, or even potential conflict.
The Swedenization of Europe
Anti-Semitism, anti-Zionism, and anti-Americanism are becoming linked and ever more rabid in today's Europe.
They arise from a kind of blindness, combined with a strange mixture of alienation, guilt, and fear toward both Israel and America.
Millions of Europeans resist seeing Israel as a country fighting for its survival.
Israel cannot afford to lose one major war, as it would mean the end of the Jewish democratic state.
But huge numbers of Europeans believe that something is fundamentally wrong with the Israelis: they never compromise; they prefer using military means to solve political problems.
Something similar is at work in the European attitude to the US.
Look at Europe, many Europeans say, we have eradicated wars, dangerous nationalism, and dictatorships. We created a peaceful European Union.
We do not wage war; we negotiate.
We do not exhaust our resources on weapons.