The post-independence government thus found itself having to hire vast numbers of teachers, many of them unqualified, to cope with the influx of black students attending school for the first time.
Today, however, there is an oversupply of trained teachers.
In fact, many of them can now only find work in neighboring countries such as South Sudan, which needs to fill shortages left by decades of conflict.
Investment in Kenya’s education system, along with economic reforms, and (until recently) relative political stability has undoubtedly helped the economy, which has grown by around 4-5% annually over the past decade, following long periods of stagnation.
By some definitions, around one-quarter of the country’s 44 million people are in the middle class.
Compared with the rest of the region, the country’s key sectors – including education, transport, communications, agriculture, and tourism – are professionally managed and the envy of much of East Africa.
But the emergence of an increasingly educated population has also intensified the need for more skilled jobs.
Unemployment is conservatively estimated at a staggering 40% of the workforce.
The government has promised to create jobs, but that is only part of the battle; it must also reform the way such jobs are filled.
Public-sector employment in Kenya is notoriously opaque.
Kenyans typically complain that key positions are not advertised nationally (as required by law) until the employer has already found the “ideal” candidate.
Instead, vacancies are listed internally as temporary contracts, obviating the need for a national search.
This makes it easy for a manager to hire a relative or friend, usually from a favored ethnic group.
The candidate is then best placed to benefit when the temporary post is upgraded and advertised as a permanent position.
There are even instances in which two managers will contrive to hire each other’s relatives to evade nepotism charges.
The system is hardest on first-generation graduates who lack a highly placed relative to help them into the workforce; they are often left with no option but to pay a hefty bribe to advance their careers.
Unsurprisingly, the way state jobs are filled, from the presidency down, has become a source of deep and widespread bitterness.
The Kenyatta government could go a long way toward addressing the problem with one very practical measure: establishing and supporting an independent watchdog to audit hiring and promotion decisions in official agencies.
The vetting process that Kenyans observed being applied to recent cabinet appointments should be extended throughout the public sector (and also to private entities that win state contracts).
An independent watchdog would require all employers to demonstrate that their hiring practices are transparent, competitive, and meritocratic.
Such an agency need not be expensive.
Its very existence, and the threat of random investigations, would serve as an effective deterrent against malpractice – just as random audits deter tax evaders.
Whistleblowers, encouraged to come forward by legal protections enshrined in the agency’s founding legislation, would provide leads for the investigators.
Kenyatta has a chance to steer Kenya away from the ethnic tensions that have plagued its society and economy.
By introducing and implementing fairness and transparency to public-sector recruitment, and ensuring that appointments are based on talent, not ethnic or family connections, Kenyans may become less fearful about their political leaders’ origins.
They may also grow more confident that their skills will be properly deployed in a fast-growing economy, further spreading the prosperity that many fellow citizens have only recently started to enjoy.
How United Is \
Seen from the point of view of the European Union's longtime member states, the eight postcommunist countries that - together with Cyprus and Malta - joined the EU on May 1st seem united in their positions on most important issues.
Indeed, since the US intervention in Iraq, many West Europeans see the EU's new members from Europe's East as something of a bloc.
US Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld's division of Europe into "new" and "old" was, above all, a clever ploy that helped the Bush Administration get its way by using the old strategy of "divide and rule."
But, although it reflected real differences between established EU members and the newcomers, it also managed to solidify the false impression that the EU's new members share a similar identity and political agenda.
Rumsfeld's remarks were divisive because Western Europe seems to know even less than the Americans about Europe's eastern half.
In reality, big differences exist among the new EU members.
Even with regard to Iraq, there was little unity.
While some countries ­- say, Poland - strongly supported America's war effort, others tried to balance their support for the US with their "understanding" of the views of Germany and France.
Still others - for example, Slovenia - stood on the side of "old Europe."
Beyond politics, there are vast differences among the economies of the new members, not only in terms of wealth, but also in their structures.
Industrialized and urbanized countries, with relatively small agricultural sectors, such as the Czech Republic, Slovenia, or Slovakia, have different concerns than Poland, where farmers form 20% of the population.
Historical traditions also play a role.
Although all new member states claim to be "western," some are more Western than others.
The Czech Republic, Slovakia, Hungary, Slovenia and parts of Poland share a common legacy of Mitteleuropa , formed during the Hapsburg Empire.
Moreover, communism in those states was different than that practiced in the three Baltic countries, which were part of the Soviet Union.
At the start of the 1990's, following communism's fall, the common experiences and the shared legacy of Czechoslovakia, Hungary, and Poland were behind the idea of creating the so-called "Visegrad Group," with the aim of coordinating the three countries' efforts to join the EU and NATO.
The Visegrad initiative worked to some extent, though it was temporarily paralyzed by the disintegration of Czechoslovakia just over a decade ago.
Although the leaders of Poland, Hungary, the Czech Republic and Slovakia recently declared they wanted to keep the Visegrad grouping alive even after their countries' enter the EU, the future of Visegrad cooperation is uncertain.
In fact, the fate of this group is perhaps the best example of how individual identities of the new member states are beginning to assert themselves now that membership in the EU and NATO are secured.
Poland, as its stance over the EU constitution demonstrated, pursues its own specific interests in a united Europe, which may be difficult to harmonize with the interests of smaller Central European states.
Once in the Union, Poland will have an even freer hand, unconstrained by the need to support the aspirations of other East European countries.
Some advocates of a closer Visegrad cooperation criticize Poland's emerging strategy, while euroskeptics in the Czech Republic, Hungary, and Slovakia applaud the Poles.
For example, the Czech Civic Democratic Party, heavily influenced by Czech President Vaclav Klaus, describes Poland as the Czech Republic's chief ally and an example of how new members should approach the EU.
The situation could become even more complicated, because some leaders in the Czech Republic, Hungary, and Slovakia would like to join the "hard core" of European integration should some European states one day decide to create a two-speed Europe.
If these countries join the hard core of European integration, while others, Poland in particular, opt to stay out, it would create a dividing line between them, burying Visegrad cooperation.
Regardless of what happens, all Europe needs to get past clichés about "old" versus "new" Europe.
Poland may find that it has security and other interests in common with some states of a similar size in the current EU.
The three Baltic states will most likely cooperate much more closely with the Scandinavian countries than with the other new members.
It is also time to start thinking about a new way of organizing Central Europe.
For the Czech Republic, Hungary, and Slovakia, close cooperation with Poland may not be the best way to protect their interests in the EU, as their interests and the interests of a big, self-confident Poland may not be identical.
It may be more natural for the Czech Republic, Hungary, and Slovakia to strive for closer regional cooperation with Austria and Slovenia, the contours of which can already be seen in some existing regional groupings.
Such a regional group would be bound together by a long common history and compatible interests.
This would be much more effective and durable than the Visegrad initiative, which lumps together three small states with a country that has more inhabitants than its three partners put together, plus its own agenda.
How Will Tomorrow’s Scientists Learn?
I was recently invited to speak at science-related meetings on two consecutive days in different places in Europe.
One was the official opening of a network of science centers in Vienna, linking decentralized activities in an interactive exhibition that tour Austria.
The other was the Science Festival of Genoa, Italy, a young and hugely successful event with exhibitions and high-profile speakers throughout the ancient town.
What struck me on both occasions was the sustained, and evidently successful, attempt to reach out to the two target groups upon whom the future of science and technology will depend.
The first group is teenagers, who are deeply interested in all the new technologies and gadgets that surround them.
They have made these technologies an integral part of their lives, but their relationship to science has remained distant.
The other target audience consists of younger children, whose openness and inborn curiosity have not yet been stifled by formal schooling.
The success of Europe’s newly established science centers and festivals in reaching their potential audiences reflects their invention of a new way of teaching and learning.
They have succeeded in setting up a largely informal learning environment, focusing mainly on truly interactive learning.
By soliciting questions from children that have little place in the formal educational system, the audience is led to experience the research process – which often begins precisely by asking the right kind of question.
Talent is now recognized as a scarce commodity that needs to be nurtured for a worldwide market of skills and competencies.
Just as formal schooling needs to become better integrated with the informal learning environments to which our children are exposed in multiple ways, formal and informal learning must mesh in a life-long process.
Science and technology have an enormous stake in this development, and worldwide competition for the best brains is already acutely felt in European universities.
This year’s Nobel Prizes highlighted once more that the research climate in the United States continues to be more conducive to scientific excellence compared to what Europe has to offer.
Initiatives aimed at fostering scientific excellence in Europe, like one recently launched in Germany that officially defined three universities, all in the southern part of the country, as “excellent”(qualifying them for extra funding), seek to make universities more attractive and thus more competitive.
While such efforts certainly point in the right direction, the research-friendliness and innovativeness of the wider societal environment – particularly practices of informal learning and opportunities to follow one’s curiosity – also matter.
When, beginning in the nineteenth century, book publishing became not only a lucrative business, but also made books increasingly affordable to many more households, the sources of learning in society exploded.
Indeed, the societal wealth created through the Industrial Revolution is partly due to this new diffusion of knowledge and skills.
Seeing the excitement that can be generated in young people through events like science festivals and networks of science centers gives rise to cautious optimism – provided we seize the diversity of opportunities that informal learning offers.
Informal learning implies a messy, unruly, and potentially subversive process.
But it also promises to nurture the creative ferment in which great science thrives.
How Women Go Bankrupt
As the world struggles to emerge from the economic near-collapse of last fall, there is one sub-group that has slid below the waterline in record numbers: formerly middle-class women.
A new report shows that a million American middle-class women will find themselves in bankruptcy court this year.
This is more women than will “graduate from college, receive a diagnosis of cancer, or file for divorce,” according to the economist Elizabeth Warren .
Their plight, symptomatic in many ways of the plight of women around the world, holds lessons for us all.
These bankrupt women are better educated than their male counterparts: most have some college; and more than half own their own homes.
What tipped them from middle-class lifestyles to incomes just above the poverty line were likely to have been one or all of three factors.
Two are economic, and, for many women, the third may be emotional.
First, these women tend to be awash in debt.
Just about everyone spent above their means in the recent bubble, but middle-class women have a special relationship to debt.
Many of them have jobs that require them to dip into credit lines just to stay afloat.
But others have been successfully targeted by luxury-goods manufacturers and credit-card companies, which benefit from the way that mass culture ties certain kinds of consumerism – the latest designer clothes, this season’s “it” bag, the right highlighting, and even the trendiest sports car – into a narrative of successful femininity.
Nor is this pressure confined to the United States.
New middle classes are emerging globally, and magazines like Cosmopolitan and Vogue are targeting newly middle-class women in India and China – many of them part of a generation with its own disposable income for the first time ever in their family histories – with the very same luxury goods.
The second reason that a million US women have filed for bankruptcy is that legislation enacted in 2005 now pits individual women – who can’t afford costly legal advice – against credit-card companies in terms of who gets paid first when ex-husbands owe delinquent credit-card payments and child-support payments.
These pressures are serious, and both are discussed publicly.
But there is frequently a third factor in middle-class women’s economic stress, one that is seldom publicly addressed, much less measured.
It has to do with many middle-class women’s emotionally complex expectations and projections about money.
In the young women’s leadership program that I help to run at the Woodhull Institute, we regularly see that middle-class women, more often than working-class women, find it embarrassing to talk about money.
When they do bring it up – to employers, for example – they use apologetic, self-defeating language.
They are reluctant to negotiate salaries and rarely know how to do so.
They believe that asking for money in exchange for their labor makes them “unfeminine.”
They frequently assume that working twice as hard as those around them – while never speaking up for their own worth or accomplishments – will generate a raise because an authority figure will notice.
Moreover, these women tend to have unrealistic notions about their economic paths.
Young, middle-class women often fail to save because they assume – still – that marriage will rescue them financially.
As a result, they often see buying trendy shoes or a great haircut – rather than giving some money each month to a broker – as an “investment” in their romantic futures.
And the familiar cliché is all too often true: older middle-class women fail to become financially literate in their own households, leaving brokerage accounts, pension accounts, taxes, life insurance, and so on to their husbands.
This leaves them economically vulnerable when divorce or widowhood strikes.
Paradoxically, we have found that working-class women (and women of color) rarely harbor such economically problematic structures of denial.
They tend to be more ready than middle-class white women, in our experience, to master the basics of financial literacy and to learn salary negotiation, because they don’t have the luxury of assuming that a knight on a white horse will rescue them economically.
Indeed, the financial pragmatism of working-class and poor women is the reason for the successes in the developing world of micro-financing that puts money in their hands.
It would surprise me if middle-class women anywhere in the world – brought up to view certain forms of economic ignorance and naiveté as socially appropriate – could, without climbing a steep learning curve, be as reliable and hard-nosed as the world’s poor and working-class women consistently prove themselves to be.
The new book Financial Intimacy , by Jacquette Timmons, a talented financial coach who focuses on women, offers truths that would have been valuable to any of the middle-class women now in crisis.
“Many women today earn significantly more than women in previous generations,” she writes.
“But, ironically, that hasn’t necessarily resulted in a higher degree of financial security,” owing to the “don’t talk about money taboo.”
When middle-class women anywhere in the world get over this taboo, we will do so by understanding that money is never just about money, and that becoming financially literate means pushing back against a social role that casts middle-class women as polite, economically vague, underpaid, shopping-dazed dependents.
All the other awful pressures that are driving so many women into bankruptcy will still exist, but at least more women will be facing these pressures with their eyes wide open, and, one hopes, with many better options.
Japan’s Secret Demographic Weapon
NEW YORK – As the annual World Bank/International Monetary Fund meetings get underway in Tokyo, Japanese leaders must confront an unfolding demographic disaster.
Japan’s National Institute of Population and Social Security Research recently forecast that by 2060, the country will have lost nearly one-third of its 2010 population of 128 million, and just half of this smaller population will be between 15 and 65 years old – the most productive age group in any economy.
That is why Japanese policymakers should prioritize drawing more women into the workforce.
For the moment, things are moving in the wrong direction.
Japan slipped from 80th place in the World Economic Forum’s gender-gap rankings in 2006 to 98th in 2011, a worrying sign that a critical opportunity is being missed.
For women in the workplace, Japan remains the Saudi Arabia of the developed world.
The first step toward reversing this trend could be to create work environments that are better suited to the needs of Japanese women, and that promote their talents.
Government officials have taken modest steps in this direction, but culture and inertia remain powerful obstacles.
Still, the prize for getting this right is worth the effort.
A 2010 Goldman Sachs study concludes that an increase in female labor-force participation rates to parity with men would add 8.2 million workers to Japan’s economy, virtually erase the projected decline in the country’s working-age population, and boost GDP growth by 15%.
The problem is not that Japanese women lack opportunities for higher education; the university enrollment rate for 18-year-old women already exceeded that of men in 2005.
But just 65% of women with college degrees are now working.
One problem is that working for Japanese firms often requires both long hours on the job and post-work socializing with colleagues – customs that make life harder for working mothers.
But Japanese men, who spend less time caring for children than fathers in most other industrialized countries, could share more of the responsibilities of parenting.
Better work-life balance would benefit both men and women.
And increasing the availability of affordable child care would help, too.
Those who resist feminizing the workforce might argue that doing so would mean fewer children – and thus a new demographic complication.
But the evidence suggests otherwise.
OECD countries with higher female labor-force participation rates also have higher birth rates.
Japan’s birthrate has already fallen to just 1.37 children per female, far below the level that would keep the population constant.
Beyond the cultural obstacles, Japanese policymakers could take many concrete steps.
According to Japan’s Ministry of Health, Labor, and Welfare, 54.7% of women were employed on a non-regular basis in 2011.
Officials could encourage employers to offer women permanent, full-time positions, rather than all-too-common temporary contracts, which mean lower pay, less stability, and a lack of opportunity for advancement.
More important, current tax policies that reinforce women’s over-representation in temporary contract work should be changed.
Both the OECD and the Goldman Sachs study identify rules that discourage women from working.
A “special dependent” exemption that could be claimed by heads of households (mainly men) for dependents (mainly women) who earned less than about $12,000 per year was eliminated in 2004, but a “dependent” exemption still remains.
Policymakers could also find creative ways to increase the odds that women will return to the labor market after having children.
They could close Japan’s salary gender gap – wider than in any OECD country except South Korea – in part by establishing rules that reward performance rather than seniority.
And they could help to create credible opportunities for women to rise to leadership positions.
Opening Japan to more immigrants could help it to meet its demographic challenge. But the more durable solution is already inside the country.
The Chávez Way
LONDON – I remember the exact date of my visit to Venezuela.
I was sunbathing by the pool on the roof of the Caracas Hilton.
A waiter came up to me and mumbled something about a bomb attack in New York.
I rushed to my room and saw the news footage, endlessly replayed, of two airplanes crashing into the World Trade Center.
I was in Venezuela on September 11, 2001, to attend a conference on the “Third Way.”
Hugo Chávez was very interested in the Third Way – a modus vivendi between American-style capitalism and state socialism – as had been Tony Blair a few years earlier.
Chávez himself, dressed in fatigues, briefly graced the meeting with his presence, receiving a heavy volume of Marxist texts from an elderly professor.
A day earlier, I had had lunch at the Venezuelan central bank, sitting next to the deputy governor, Gastón Parra Luzardo.
He told me that all Venezuelans believed that they had been born with a “loaf under their arm” – that is, a right to a share in the country’s oil revenues.
As a result, no one worked hard.
An economist, Orlando Ochoa, explained that rent-seeking dominated the Venezuelan economy.
Oligarchs fight to keep control over the oil revenues, populists promise to redistribute them, and both groups steal as much as they can for themselves.
No one is interested in creating wealth.
“No one,” I wrote in my diary, “believes that Chávez will last his full term.
They see him as a damaging buffoon, rather than as a dangerous revolutionary.”
In fact, a coup against him was attempted a year later.
He survived it, and went on to win a second, a third, and then a fourth term.
The debate over Chávez’s political legacy is a posthumous re-enactment of the ideological battles that were fought while he was alive.
The battle for his economic legacy is more straightforward: it comes down to how he managed Venezuela’s oil wealth.
Venezuela has the largest oil reserves in the world, and Chávez’s economic strategy depended on harnessing that wealth in order to address his country’s social problems.
The first few years of his rule were dominated by his struggle to gain control of the country’s state-owned oil company, PDVSA.
Upon reasserting political control in 2003, Chávez fired 40% of PDVSA’s staff.
His hostility to foreign players in the industry (he expropriated several American oil companies’ holdings in 2007) limited investment and held back production.
Chávez turned PDVSA into a personal fiefdom and used it as a cash cow; many of his social programs were funded directly from the company’s budget.
Starved of cash, PDVSA was forced to cut back on maintenance and expansion, which increased the number of accidents and limited production.
Thanks partly to Chávez’s policies, Venezuela is still a small player in the global oil market, with less than a 3% share of world production.
It is therefore vulnerable to price fluctuations, and has to follow the lead of Saudi Arabia and other big OPEC producers.
Though Venezuela’s non-oil sector has been growing, oil still provides the vast majority of its dollar earnings.
For the past decade, booming oil prices have spurred economic expansion, with only a short break following the financial crisis of 2008.
Yet stumbling oil-export performance and a sharp rise in infrastructure-related imports, combined with an explosive growth in public spending, have fueled consistently high levels of inflation, with the annual rate now at more than 20%.
This has put immense pressure on Venezuela’s dollar-pegged currency, the bolívar.
In early 2013, the government was forced to announce a 32% devaluation, and stopped issuing government debt in dollars.
The issuance of dollar bonds was a major source of abuse, with speculators buying dollar debt at the official exchange rate, selling it for greenbacks, and then exchanging them for bolivars at a much higher rate on the black market.
With limited access to global capital markets, Chávez turned to China for loans, backed by sales contracts for oil.
Loans from the China Development Bank carry higher interest rates than the West’s traditional lending mechanisms, but they also come with fewer restrictions on policy, and allowed Venezuela to escape the worst of the bondholders’ wrath – at least so far.
Where has the oil wealth gone?
Chávez’s social programs were the biggest beneficiaries.
He used to go around the villages writing checks to poor farmers.
The most reliable data suggest that he was successful at reducing inequality; during his rule, Venezuela’s Gini coefficient, a 100-point scale measuring income inequality, fell from 50 to 39, the biggest decline in Latin America.
Poverty was cut in half – from 50% to around 25% of the population, while extreme poverty fell by two-thirds.
One can hardly say that every céntimo was well spent.
Cronyism was rife and the murder rate tripled, partly owing to corruption in the police and the justice system.
Chávez’s petro-diplomacy sometimes took bizarre forms, like providing cheap bus travel for Londoners to please London’s left-wing mayor, Ken Livingstone.
Despite his extravagancies and authoritarian style, the masses loved him.
They fervently believed that he was on their side, and voted overwhelmingly for him up to the end, even when they knew that he was dying of cancer.
He is sure to enter the pantheon of Latin American heroes.
And what about the Third Way?
In the aftermath of the collapse of communism, Chávez’s mix of anti-Americanism and state activism seemed merely eccentric.
There could be no alternative to free markets and the neoliberal Washington Consensus – or so it appeared.
But the rise of China, the relative decline of the United States, the long boom in commodity prices, and the Western financial collapse of 2008 have created space for political and economic experiments.
Chávez took advantage of that opening, and Chávezism may well prove to be a significant phenomenon far beyond its Latin American homeland.
The Inflation of Hugo Chávez
MEXICO CITY – Supporters of Hugo Chávez, the recently deceased Venezuelan president, and even many of his critics, have repeatedly emphasized two supposed achievements that will burnish his legacy.
First, the share of people living in poverty plummeted to approximately 28% in 2012, from a peak of 62% in 2003 (though it was 46% three years earlier, at the beginning of Chávez’s first term).
Second, he gave to a majority of Venezuelans a sense of identity, pride, and dignity long denied them by a corrupt, elitist, light-skinned oligarchy.
Both claims, however, are only partly true, and only partly account for Chávez’s recurrent electoral victories – 13 of 14 popular votes, including referenda.
As for the first claim, both The Economist and the Nobel laureate Mario Vargas Llosa were right to put Chávez’s achievement in perspective.
Almost every country in Latin America has reduced poverty significantly since the beginning of this century, with the extent of progress depending on baselines and cut-off dates, good years and bad years, the reliability of official data, and other factors.
The reasons for this progress are well known: with the exception of 2001 and 2009, these were boom years for commodity-exporting countries like Brazil, Argentina, Peru, Chile, and, of course, Venezuela, as well as for manufacturing-based economies, like Mexico.
Furthermore, during these nearly 15 years, most governments have managed their accounts responsibly: small or no fiscal deficits, low inflation, well-targeted anti-poverty programs, and so on.
This has helped to lower not only poverty, but also inequality, Latin America’s traditional scourge.
According to the economist Nora Lustig, between 2000 and 2010, “income inequality…declined in all 17 Latin American countries for which comparable data exist.”
The decline was especially pronounced in the three largest countries – Brazil, Mexico, and Argentina – which comprise nearly 75% of the region’s population.
One difference in Venezuela is that Chávez spent more than $1 trillion to achieve the same feat – in a country with a population one-sixth the size of Brazil’s and slightly more than one-quarter the size of Mexico’s.
While the long-term viability and effectiveness of conditional cash-transfer programs in Brazil and Mexico is questionable, these anti-poverty initiatives certainly are better designed than Chávez’s massive, blanket subsidies on everything from poultry and flour to housing and gasoline.
Then there is the destruction of Venezuelan industry, the spectacular increase in violence, the explosion of foreign debt, and the depletion of foreign-currency reserves that has accompanied Chávez’s so-called “Bolivarian socialism of the twenty-first century.”
None of these problems has afflicted the region’s other large countries – or at least not to anywhere near the same extent.
If Chávez had not played with the numbers, as demagogues and populist leaders tend to do, the results would be more disheartening.
The second argument in defense of Chávez’s legacy is a bit more robust, but not much.
True, Venezuela’s immense natural riches have been exploited and often squandered by elites more accustomed to the boulevards of Miami than to the slums of Caracas.
But it is equally true that Venezuela enjoyed 40 years of democratic rule before Chávez, under the 1958 Punto Fijo Pact, whereby two parties, one social democratic and the other social Christian, alternated in power peacefully.
Venezuela also boasted one of the region’s most vibrant civil societies, with some of its freest and most vigorous media.
With the exception of the Caracazo – a wave of protests against free-market reforms in 1989 that resulted in an estimated 3,000 deaths – there were only minor bouts of repression.
To be sure, large swaths of Venezuelan society rightly felt excluded from the country’s cozy elite consensus and insular governing arrangements, and resented it immensely; but an aspiring middle class comprised roughly half the population.
Chávez exploited – and widened – that division; indeed, as the current campaign to elect his successor shows, the country remains more polarized than ever.
It may well be that Chávez’s purported feats and popularity will outlast him.
Instead of a simple rotation of elites in power, perhaps what occurred during his time in office was the advent of political leadership that looks, talks, worships, and loves like the people of the country – leadership that identifies with and benefits the millions of Venezuelans who previously were marginalized.
In that case, Chávez’s designated successor, Nicolás Maduro, will make short work of opposition candidate Henrique Capriles in the upcoming election.
Chavismo will outlive Chávez.
But, whatever the outcome, all the mourning and embalming will not alter a simple fact: Venezuela and its people are not clearly better off than they were 14 years ago.
And whatever modest improvements they may feel in their lives were also secured elsewhere, at a far lower economic and political cost.
Human Change We Can Believe In
Montreal – A recent symposium on evolution in Montreal posed to high-school students and university professors the following question:&nbsp;“Do you think that humans are still evolving?”
Approximately 80% of the audience answered “no.”
Indeed, there is an almost universal belief that, with multifaceted cultures and intricate technology, humans have freed themselves from the pressures of natural selection.
Recent findings, however, show otherwise.
Far from providing immunity against evolutionary pressures, culture often creates new ones.
For example, the genes associated with digestion of lactose are more prevalent in populations that have traditionally bred cattle and consumed milk.
In scientific reviews in Nature Genetics and Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, the evolutionary biologist Stephen Stearns and his colleagues set out to demonstrate that natural selection operates on contemporary humans.
Supported by extensive genealogies, including centuries of church and national health registries, their argument is convincing.
Indeed, contrary to the widely held assumption that evolution takes millennia to manifest itself, recent evidence suggests that its effects can become visible as quickly as in a few generations.
Rapid evolutionary change, or “contemporary evolution,” is not drastic; humans are not likely to sprout wings a few generations down the road.
Rather, these evolutionary effects are difficult to detect, as they are reflected in a population’s genetic composition.
Contemporary evolution requires a specific set of conditions.
First, the population must comprise individuals with varying characteristics, or traits.
Moreover, members of the population must differ in terms of survival rates, including, most important, lifetime reproductive success (LRS) – the total number of offspring that they produce over a lifetime.
These conditions are fundamentally linked: different values for a particular trait translate into diverse survival rates.
This crucial link facilitates change in a trait’s average value over successive generations.
For example, if larger individuals produce more children than smaller ones, the number of larger individuals would grow, thereby increasing the average size of individuals in the population.
The most significant changes occur when individuals at one end of a trait’s value are heavily favored, pushing the entire population in that direction.
Prevalent human traits are often strongly associated with LRS.
For example, people who first reproduce at a younger age tend to have more children, so selection generally favors those who become parents earlier.
Tall women’s LRS tends to be lower, while tall men’s is higher.
In a recent study, research psychologist Markus Jokela and his colleagues took this link further, connecting LRS to personality.
According to Jokela, selection pressure favors people of both sexes who are extroverted, open to experience, and less anxious.
Moreover, women who are agreeable and less meticulous do better reproductively, while these qualities do not affect men’s LRS at all.
Even certain cultural traits, such as income and wealth, can be connected to LRS: in men, the link is positive; in women, it is negative.
But translating selection pressure into evolutionary change requires another crucial ingredient: the variation observed in the trait should be caused at least in part by genetic differences.
Indeed, evolution is possible only if the resemblance between related individuals has a genetic basis, and is not simply a reflection of a shared environment.
For example, siblings do not have to grow up together for their resemblance to be evolutionarily meaningful, owing to their common genes.
Even when it comes to morphology, personality, and life-history traits – such as age at sexual maturity and fertility – related individuals’ likeness often has a genetic basis.
The conditions required for rapid evolutionary change to occur in human populations exist.
But, given that measurable alterations in a trait over time can occur for many reasons – including those related to shared culture or environment – or randomly (“genetic drift”), studies demonstrating this phenomenon are rare.
Today’s challenge is to isolate the diverse sources of change.
Recently developed statistical tools have finally made this possible.
With more sophisticated methods, my colleagues and I were reliably able to distinguish genetic changes, and thus to demonstrate an evolutionary shift toward a younger age at first birth in a small, insular population in Québec over the last 140 years.
This discovery challenges another fundamental myth: evolutionary change necessarily benefits the species.
In fact, evolution simply increases the average individual’s reproductive success – with potentially damaging demographic consequences.
So, while contemporary evolution is occurring, adaptation may not always lead to a better life.
Air Pollution’s True Costs
PARIS – Air pollution takes years off people’s lives.
It causes substantial pain and suffering, among adults and children alike.
And it damages food production, at a time when we need to feed more people than ever.
This is not just an economic issue; it is a moral one.
Air pollution can be produced both outdoors and indoors.
For the poorest families, indoor smog from coal- or dung-fired cooking stoves is typically the more serious problem.
As economies develop and start to electrify, motorize, and urbanize, outdoor air pollution becomes the bigger issue.
Cleaner technologies are available, with the potential to improve air quality considerably.
But policymakers tend to focus myopically on the costs of action, rather than the costs of inaction.
With economic growth and rising energy demand set to fuel a steady rise in emissions of air pollutants and rapidly rising concentrations of particulate matter (PM) and ozone in the coming decades, this approach is untenable.
A new OECD report, The Economic Consequences of Outdoor Air Pollution, estimates that outdoor air pollution will cause 6-9 million premature deaths annually by 2060, compared to three million in 2010.
That is equivalent to a person dying every 4-5 seconds.
Cumulatively, more than 200 million people will die prematurely in the next 45 years as a result of air pollution.
There will also be more pollution-related illness.
New cases of bronchitis in children aged 6-12 are forecast to soar to 36 million per year by 2060, from 12 million today.
For adults, we predict ten million new cases per year by 2060, up from 3.5 million today.
Children are also being increasingly affected by asthma.
All of this will translate into more pollution-related hospital admissions, projected to rise to 11 million in 2060, from 3.6 million in 2010.
These health problems will be concentrated in densely populated areas with high PM concentrations, especially cities in China and India.
In per capita terms, mortality is also set to reach high levels in Eastern Europe, the Caucasus region, and other parts of Asia, such as South Korea, where aging populations are highly vulnerable to air pollution.
The impact of air pollution is often discussed in dollar terms.
By 2060, 3.75 billion working days per year could be lost due to the adverse health effects of dirty air – what economists call the “disutility of illness.”
The direct market impact of this pollution in terms of lower worker productivity, higher health spending, and lower crop yields, could exceed 1% of GDP, or $2.6 trillion, annually by 2060.
Massive as they are, however, the dollar figures do not reflect the true costs of air pollution.
Premature deaths from breathing in small particles and toxic gases, and the pain and suffering from respiratory and cardiovascular diseases, do not have a market price.
Nor does the experience of constantly inhaling foul-smelling air, or forcing your child to wear a face mask just to play outside.
These burdens weigh far more heavily on people than any price tag can represent.
Nonetheless, the truth remains that policymakers tend to respond more to hard figures than to abstract experiences.
So the OECD examined myriad economic studies on air pollution to quantify what people’s health is worth to them.
On average, individuals would be prepared to pay around $30 to reduce their annual risk of dying prematurely by one in 100,000.
Using well-established techniques, these “willingness-to-pay” figures were converted into an overall value of premature deaths caused by outdoor air pollution, as illustrated, for example, in the OECD’s Mortality Risk Valuation in Environment, Health and Transport Policies.
By that measure, the global cost of premature deaths caused by outdoor air pollution would reach a staggering $18-25 trillion a year by 2060.
Arguably, this is not “real” money, as the costs are not related to any market transactions.
But it does reflect the value people put on their very real lives – and the value they would put on policies that would help to delay their very real deaths.
It is time for governments to stop fussing about the costs of efforts to limit air pollution and start worrying about the much larger costs of allowing it to continue unchecked.
Their citizens’ lives are in their hands.
Kehidupan yang Bebas dan Setara
MADRID – Dalam seperempat abad sejak publikasi pada tahun 1990 mengenai Laporan Pembangunan Manusia yang pertama (Human Development Report), kita telah menorehkan kemajuan yang luar biasa dalam pengentasan kemiskinan dan peningkatan kesehatan, pendidikan, dan kondisi kehidupan ratusan juta penduduk dunia.
Meskipun demikian, sejumlah pencapaian yang membanggakan ini belum merata penyebarannya.
Baik itu antar negara maupun di dalam negeri, masih terlihat tingginya ketimpangan dalam hal pembangunan manusia.
Contohnya kematian bayi.
Di Islandia, dari setiap 1.000 anak yang dilahirkan, dua anak meninggal dunia sebelum menginjak usia 1 tahun.
Di Mozambik, angka kematian bayi adalah 120 per 1.000 kelahiran hidup.
Demikian pula di Bolivia, bayi yang lahir dari ibu yang tidak berpendidikan memiliki kemungkinan dua kali lebih besar akan meninggal di bawah usia 1 tahun dibandingkan bayi yang dilahirkan seorang ibu yang setidaknya menyelesaikan pendidikan sekunder.
Seorang anak berusia lima tahun yang dilahirkan ke dalam keluarga berpendapatan rendah di Amerika Tengah, rata-rata memiliki tinggi badan yang 6 cm lebih pendek dibandingkan anak di keluarga berpendapatan tinggi.
Perbedaan tersebut terjadi karena berbagai alasan.
Diantaranya adalah “vertical inequalities” seperti ketimpangan distribusi pendapatan, serta “horizontal inequalities” seperti perbedaan yang ditemukan dalam kelompok karena faktor-faktor seperti ras, jenis kelamin, dan etnis, selain itu juga perbedaan yang terbentuk antar komunitas karena pemisahan wilayah pemukiman.
Banyak orang mengalami berbagai jenis diskriminasi di saat yang sama dan kadang pengucilan yang mereka derita adalah akibat dari interaksi.
Gabungan antara kesenjangan/ketidaksetaraan yang bersifat vertikal dan horizontal ini bisa menyebabkan memperpanjang kemiskinan dan ketimpangan inter-generasi.
Kita patut bersyukur, kesadaran atas dampak buruk dari ketimpangan terhadap demokrasi, pertumbuhan ekonomi, perdamaian, keadilan, dan pembangunan manusia kini semakin meningkat.
Semakin jelas juga bahwa ketimpangan mengikis kohesi sosial dan menaikkan risiko kekerasan dan ketidakstabilan.
Pada akhirnya, kebijakan-kebijakan ekonomi dan sosial menjadi ibarat dua sisi mata koin, saling berkaitan walaupun tidak sama persis.
Selain alasan moral untuk menurunkan ketimpangan, disini terdapat alasan ekonomi.
Jika ketimpangan terus meningkat, perlu adanya pertumbuhan yang lebih tinggi untuk memberantas kemiskinan ekstrem dibandingkan dengan kondisi apabila manfaat ekonomi tersebar dengan lebih merata.
Tingginya ketimpangan juga berkorelasi dengan kemungkinan adanya political capture oleh sekelompok elit yang ingin membela kepentingannya dengan menghambat reformasi egaliter.
Permasalahannya, tidak hanya ketimpangan akan melemahkan uyaya perwujudan tujuan bersama dan ketersediaan common good, tapi juga bisa menciptakan hambatan struktural pada pembangunan, contohnya dengan pajak regresif dan penurunan investasi untuk pendidikan, kesehatan, atau infrastruktur.
Pertumbuhan saja tidak akan menjamin terciptanya akses yang sama pada barang publik dan jasa berkualitas, tetap dibutuhkan kebijakan yang terencana.
Sejarah terkini di Amerika Latin, kawasan di dunia dengan ketimpangan tertinggi, memberikan contoh baik tentang hal-hal yang dimungkinkan ketika kebijakan semacam itu diterapkan.
Kawasan ini berhasil memperbaiki inklusi sosial dalam dekade pertama di abad ini melalui gabungan antara dinamisme ekonomi dan komitmen politik yang konstan untuk melawan kemiskinan dan ketimpangan sebagai kedua permasalahan yang saling bergantung (interdependent).
Berkat upaya ini, Amerika Latin adalah satu-satunya kawasan di dunia yang berhasil menurunkan kemiskinan dan ketimpangan, sembari meningkatkan pertumbuhan ekonomi.
Lebih dari 80 juta penduduk beralih ke kelas menengah, untuk pertama kalinya melampaui jumlah penduduk miskin dan menjadi segmen populasi yang terbesar di kawasan tersebut.
Banyak yang berpendapat bahwa ini dimungkinan oleh kondisi-kondisi eksternal yang menguntungkan, termasuk tingginya harga komoditas sehingga memudahkan ekspansi ekonomi.
Tetapi, bukti dari LAC Equity Lab milik Bank Dunia menegaskan bahwa pertumbuhan hanya berkontribusi sebagian terhadap perbaikan sosial (social gain) yang terjadi di Amerika Latin, selebihnya karena distribusi ulang pengeluaran sosial (social spending).
Memang benar, kebijakan-kebijakan progresif adalah inti dari ekspansi ekonomi itu; adanya generasi baru pekerja berpendidikan tinggi yang memasuki pasar tenaga kerja, mendapat gaji yang lebih besar dan mengambil dividen dari pengeluaran sosial.
Kenaikan upah terbesar terjadi pada kelompok berpendapatan terendah.
Kini Amerika Latin telah memasuki periode pertumbuhan ekonomi yang lebih lambat, prestasi mereka sedang diuji.
Pemerintah memiliki ruang fiskal yang lebih sedikit dan sektor swasta kurang mampu menciptakan lapangan kerja.
Upaya untuk menurunkan kemiskinan dan ketimpangan berisiko akan tertunda atau bahkan terhenti.
Para pembuat kebijakan di kawasan ini harus bekerja keras untuk mempertahankan kemajuan dalam pembangunan manusia jangka panjang.
Pentingnya menurunkan ketimpangan telah diabadikan dalam prinsip-prinsip Revolusi Perancis, kata-kata di dalam Deklarasi Kemerdekaan Amerika Serikat, dan target-target yang ditetapkan pada Tujuan Pembangunan Berkelanjutan PBB.
Upaya ini merupakan landasan membentuk dunia yang tidak hanya berkeadilan, tapi juga damai, sejahtera, dan berkelanjutan.
Jika Deklarasi Universal Hak Asasi Manusia menyatakan “semua orang dilahirkan merdeka (bebas) dan memiliki hak yang sama”, bukankah kita semua layak senantiasa menjalani kehidupan seperti itu?
Human Evolution: No Easy Fix
MADISON –Humans are undeniably complex, and proud of it.
No case, we believe, needs to be made for our biological superiority.
Our biological functions are exquisitely regulated and resilient to external variations, owing to complicated webs of interactions.
Unlike other species, we seem to be endowed with willpower and intellect, hence we are capable of modifying the environment to buffer the effects of our decreasing fitness.
Be that as it may, we may be doomed as a species precisely because of the way in which our complexity arose.
Paraphrasing the science writer Philip Ball, nature seems to have activated a time bomb, and our complexity is only a short-term fix.
To grasp the nature of the problem, we need to examine how humans are made at the molecular level, and contrast our constitution with that of other species that we often call “rudimentary,” such as unicellular organisms.
This analysis leads us to examine proteins – our cellular building blocks and the executors of biologicalfunctions – across vastly different species.
Proteins with common ancestry belonging to different species, termed “orthologs,” offer solid ground for comparison.
It has been generally recognized that the basic “fold,” or shape, of a protein must be conserved across species, because there is a tight correspondence between structure and function.
Proteins that retain the same function across very different species – generally the case with orthologs – are expected to keep the same fold.
But the sequence of amino acids that make up the protein chains in these orthologs can vary significantly.
Sometimes the extent of sequence identity between two orthologs can be as low as 25-30%, and yet their folds remain strikingly similar, attesting to the robustness of function to evolutionary change.
This conservation of the protein fold across species makes the origin of our complexity even more puzzling, as it is well known that the number of human genes is deceptively small, merely one order of magnitude larger than that of, say, rice.
If the structure of the proteins is conserved across species, where is our complexity coming from?
Better still, in what sense are we more complex?
Researchers have recently discovered subtle structural variations occurring in orthologs from species that diverged from each other billions of years ago.
In these structures, something subtler than overall topology changes across orthologs.
The structure in some seems “looser” than in others – less well packed, with surface regions that enable surrounding water to penetrate and disrupt the structure by interacting favorably with the protein backbone.
These structural vulnerabilities are known as dehydrons.
As we examine orthologs, the proteins become more degraded, or richer in dehydrons, in species with a lower effective population – a somewhat elusive indicator inversely related to the size and complexity of the organism and to the complexity of its reproductive pattern.
Thus, humans (or mammals) have significantly smaller (ten or more orders of magnitude) populations than bacteria.
The observation that structural degradation is a reflection of decreasing species population resonates in the field of evolution, because natural selection becomes more inefficient as the population gets smaller.
Structural degradation is thus an indicator of the species’ exposure to random genetic drift: mildly deleterious mutations that would typically degrade the protein structure are more likely to be selected against in bacteria before they can become fixed in the entire population (estimated in trillions of individuals), whereas such a mutation has a far better chance of prevailing in humans.
A protein that is richer in dehydrons than its ortholog is more vulnerable to becoming disrupted by surrounding water.
Precisely for this reason, it becomes more “needy” – that is, more reliant on binding partners to maintain its structural integrity.
Furthermore, dehydrons are known to be sticky, so structurally degraded proteins are more likely to promote protein-protein associations than orthologs with lower dehydron content.
Thus, protein-protein interactions, a hallmark of complexity, are actually promoted by randomdrift, the evolutionary force behind the protein degradation process.
So, it seems, complexity is not really naturally selected, but instead arises as a short-term fix to the effects of selection inefficiency.
At first reading, this assertion seems counterintuitive, but the root of the paradox is simply our dogmatic way of thinking, where complex traits are expected to be an outcome of natural selection.
And where is nature’s gambit taking us?
The proteins with the largest accumulation of structural defects are the prions, soluble proteins so poorly wrapped that they relinquish their functionally competent fold and form aberrant aggregates that may cause degenerative neuropathies.
This extreme case of an “aberrantly needy protein” illustrates the high level of genetic risk to which we are exposed as a result of our small population.
The prion is a “fitness” catastrophe that gives us clues as to where nature’s gambit might lead humanity.
Perhaps the long-term evolutionary cost of our complexity is too high, with our survival as a species ultimately depending on our ability to mitigate its fitness cost through increasingly arduous therapeutic solutions.
Let’s hope we pass the test.
Something to Smile About
LONDON – As I put pen to paper, my wife threw out a seasonal challenge: “Christmas is approaching – the time for peace and joy and all that.
Can’t you write about something that will make people happy?”
What sounds like a light-hearted request is actually a formidable task.
Ebola is decimating lives and livelihoods in West Africa.
A legion of Islamist thugs is terrorizing Syria and Iraq.
Russian President Vladimir Putin’s forces have invaded Crimea and eastern Ukraine.
Add to that a faltering global economy, and there seems to be little “holiday cheer” on offer.
But happiness is a complex phenomenon.
People living poorly may feel happier more often than their more “fortunate” counterparts.
It is this kind of contradiction that has fueled research in the social sciences and neurology devoted to answering the age-old question: What is the secret to happiness?
Of course, the tools that scientists are using – from advanced imaging to examine the brain’s pleasure centers to microeconomic happiness equations – are not proven in this area.
Can an algorithm, however well researched and carefully crafted, ever really capture the relationship between happiness and factors like income, health, lifespan, and education?
In any case, it is clear that happiness is not dictated by one’s job title or bank balance.
The British comedian Spike Milligan may have wanted the chance to prove that money couldn’t buy him happiness.
But he undoubtedly would have conceded that other factors – like good health and close friends – did much to improve his state of mind.
Even seemingly mundane activities can – and should – bring considerable happiness, as they can represent significant progress.
My visit to the dentist last week, for example, was far superior to my childhood visits.
As a child, the mere sight of the dentist chair would cause me to break out in a cold sweat, as I anticipated my forthcoming encounter with the battery of gleaming instruments seemingly designed for the principal purpose of causing excruciating pain.
My most recent experience, by contrast, was uncomplicated, even comfortable.
And I was not a child that long ago.
Imagine a child’s experience a century ago or earlier.
Some 5,000 years ago, the Chinese used acupuncture, not dental care, to treat toothaches.
Aristotle was preoccupied with dental issues, writing about treatments of decayed teeth and gum disease, extractions conducted with forceps, and the use of wire to stabilize fractured jaws.
The classical Sanskrit writer Vagbhata described 75 oral diseases.
And Shakespeare noted that tooth decay was a cause of awful pain and unpleasant odor.
The pain affected rich and poor alike.
Queen Elizabeth I of England used bits of cloth to plug the gaps in her teeth, in order to improve her appearance.
Louis XIV of France had all of his upper teeth removed after a dentist fractured his jaw trying to extract a lower molar.
So many people lost their teeth that dead people’s teeth were recycled.
The teeth of the 50,000 soldiers killed at Waterloo in 1815 were extracted and used until the 1860s as replacements for the toothless.
Even in my own lifetime, tooth loss was commonplace.
My grandmother lost all of her teeth during her life, and my parents lost many of theirs.
They used to pop their dentures into a mug of whitener every night.
Of course, dental maladies have not been eliminated.
Today, 30% of those aged 65-75 worldwide are toothless, with poor and disadvantaged groups recording the highest rates.
But the overall rate is falling.
My friend’s young daughter, who recently asked if she would ever have “in and out” teeth like her grandparents, can be relatively confident that she will not.
Even if she did, however, she would not face the barriers that people with poor dental health confronted in the past.
Potential army recruits were turned away if they had tooth decay or missing teeth, because they would be unable to bite open a powder cartridge for a musket or use their teeth to remove a grenade’s safety clip; they would also struggle to eat properly.
During the Boer War, the British had to send mincing machines to South Africa, so that soldiers were not forced to choke down unmasticated lumps of meat.
It seems that the American writer and journalist P.J. O’Rourke had a point when he argued that the best thing about living in the twenty-first century, versus some “golden age” of the past, is modern dentistry.
Why not take teeth – their relative cleanliness and health – as a mark of economic progress and human happiness?
It is, of course, unlikely that dental health will ever secure a place on the United Nations development agenda.
But it does offer a straightforward indicator of relative wellbeing.
And given how painful a dental condition can be, dentistry deserves a place of honor on next spring’s UN-sponsored International Day of Happiness.
Whatever political horrors may be afflicting the world, there is something for many of us to smile about: a clean, healthy, and pain-free set of pearly whites.
Charting Our AI Future
OXFORD – Galileo viewed nature as a book written in the language of mathematics and decipherable through physics.
His metaphor may have been a stretch for his milieu, but not for ours.
Ours is a world of digits that must be read through computer science.
It is a world in which artificial-intelligence (AI) applications perform many tasks better than we can.
Like fish in water, digital technologies are our infosphere’s true natives, while we analog organisms try to adapt to a new habitat, one that has come to include a mix of analog and digital components.
We are sharing the infosphere with artificial agents that are increasingly smart, autonomous, and even social.
Some of these agents are already right in front of us, and others are discernible on the horizon, while later generations are unforeseeable.
And the most profound implication of this epochal change may be that we are most likely only at the beginning of it.
The AI agents that have already arrived come in soft forms, such as apps, web bots, algorithms, and software of all kinds; and hard forms, such as robots, driverless cars, smart watches, and other gadgets.
They are replacing even white-collar workers, and performing functions that, just a few years ago, were considered off-limits for technological disruption: cataloguing images, translating documents, interpreting radiographs, flying drones, extracting new information from huge data sets, and so forth.
Digital technologies and automation have been replacing workers in agriculture and manufacturing for decades; now they are coming to the services sector.
More old jobs will continue to disappear, and while we can only guess at the scale of the coming disruption, we should assume that it will be profound.
Any job in which people serve as an interface – between, say, a GPS and a car, documents in different languages, ingredients and a finished dish, or symptoms and a corresponding disease – is now at risk.
But, at the same time, new jobs will appear, because we will need new interfaces between automated services, websites, AI applications, and so forth.
Someone will need to ensure that the AI service’s translations are accurate and reliable.
What’s more, many tasks will not be cost-effective for AI applications.
For example, Amazon’s Mechanical Turk program claims to give its customers “access to more than 500,000 workers from 190 countries,” and is marketed as a form of “artificial artificial intelligence.”
But as the repetition indicates, the human “Turks” are performing brainless tasks, and being paid pennies.
These workers are in no position to turn down a job.
The risk is that AI will only continue to polarize our societies – between haves and never-will-haves – if we do not manage its effects.
It is not hard to imagine a future social hierarchy that places a few patricians above both the machines and a massive new underclass of plebs.
Meanwhile, as jobs go, so will tax revenues; and it is unlikely that the companies profiting from AI will willingly step in to support adequate social-welfare programs for their former employees.
Instead, we will have to do something to make companies pay more, perhaps with a “robo-tax” on AI applications.
We should also consider legislation and regulations to keep certain jobs “human.”
Indeed, such measures are also why driverless trains are still rare, despite being more manageable than driverless taxis or buses.
Still, not all of AI’s implications for the future are so obvious.
Some old jobs will survive, even when a machine is doing most of the work: a gardener who delegates cutting the grass to a “smart” lawnmower will simply have more time to focus on other things, such as landscape design.
At the same time, other tasks will be delegated back to us to perform (for free) as users, such as in the self-checkout lane at the supermarket.
Another source of uncertainty concerns the point at which AI is no longer controlled by a guild of technicians and managers.
What will happen when AI becomes “democratized” and is available to billions of people on their smartphones or some other device?
For starters, AI applications’ smart behavior will challenge our intelligent behavior, because they will be more adaptable to the future infosphere.
A world where autonomous AI systems can predict and manipulate our choices will force us to rethink the meaning of freedom.
And we will have to rethink sociability as well, as artificial companions, holograms (or mere voices), 3D servants, or life-like sexbots provide attractive and possibly indistinguishable alternatives to human interaction.
It is unclear how all of this will play out, but we can rest assured that new artificial agents will not confirm the scaremongers’ warnings, or usher in a dystopian science-fiction scenario.
Brave New World is not coming to life, and the “Terminator” is not lurking just beyond the horizon, either.
We should remember that AI is almost an oxymoron: future smart technologies will be as stupid as your old car.
In fact, delegating sensitive tasks to such “stupid” agents is one of the future risks.
All of these profound transformations oblige us to reflect seriously on who we are, could be, and would like to become.
AI will challenge the exalted status we have conferred on our species.
While I do not think that we are wrong to consider ourselves exceptional, I suspect that AI will help us identify the irreproducible, strictly human elements of our existence, and make us realize that we are exceptional only insofar as we are successfully dysfunctional.
In the great software of the universe, we will remain a beautiful bug, and AI will increasingly become a normal feature.
Humanity’s Stake in Gaza
Amman – Wasted time is always to be regretted.
But in the Middle East, wasting time is also dangerous.
Another year has now passed with little progress in bridging the divide between Palestinians and Israelis.
The current air strikes on Gaza, and continuing rocket attacks on Askelon, Sderot and other towns in southern Israel, only prove how dire the situation is becoming.
The security impasse that exists between Israel and the Gazan-Palestinian leadership has also led to blockades of food aid by Israel that have left Gaza’s 1.5 million people facing conditions of real hunger.
Israel, it seems, is once again emphasizing the primacy of “hard” security in its dealings with the Palestinians of Gaza, but this focus only serves to block non-violent opportunities for creative solutions to the Israel-Palestine dispute.
Making matters worse, Israeli politicians remain committed to further enlargement of Israel’s West Bank settlements.
Pushed to the wall in this way, many Palestinians are beginning to see no other option for fulfilling their national aspirations than radical tactics.
Given that this risks renewed violence, it is critical that Israel’s regional partners and international actors understand that Palestinians will not be diverted from their strategic objective of achieving an independent state.
The Palestinian people will never abandon their national struggle.
Both Israelis and Palestinians must understand that the mere application of force will never be enough to achieve their long-term ends.
What is needed is a viable option for the opposing party to adopt in order for violence not to be deployed.
Although force sometimes has its uses, a stable and lasting peace can be delivered only by an integrative, compromise solution.
Conflict resolution, if it is to be successful, requires channeling the energy generated by conflict toward constructive and nonviolent alternatives.
This diversion of the energy of war can take place at any stage of the cycle of escalation, but if preventive peace building is not launched at the first sign of trouble, and problems remain unaddressed as the conflict intensifies (especially if it turns violent), some type of intervention will be needed.
Only then can conciliation, mediation, negotiation, arbitration, and collaborative problem-solving processes establish themselves.
In the end, reconstruction and reconciliation are the only viable means to bring stability, since it cannot be imposed.
None of this is surprising. But it begs the question of why there has not been a more concerted and concentrated focus on transforming the situation in Gaza and Palestine.
An international protectorate for the area to protect the Palestinians from their own more dangerous elements, the Palestinians from the Israelis, and perhaps even the Israelis from themselves, has been proposed, but has received scant acknowledgement.
It is this lack of a coordinated attempt to structure an agreement between Israelis and Palestinians – a structure based on an inclusive, interdisciplinary, and systemic approach that can shift the variables and lead to a peace that both peoples regard as equal and fair – that most concerns those of us who work in international crisis resolution.
One key element in building up a structure for reconciliation must be economic growth.
As the World Bank has emphasized repeatedly, there is a strong correlation between poverty and conflict.
So bridging the human dignity deficit, the divide between haves and have-nots, will be essential to reaching any viable political settlement between Palestinians and Israelis.
Yet the efforts here are piecemeal – and thus insufficient to offer real hope for better lives.
Palestinians and Israelis need to establish viable dialogues across the huge social fissures that divide them, as well as dialogues between the authorities and ordinary people who live in a state of confusion about what is being done in their name.
Trust needs to be rebuilt if we are to help the parties understand how to overcome past enmities.
Only the beginning of public trust will allow problems to be correctly diagnosed and addressed.
Of course, Israel’s need for security must be understood by all sides, but confidence-building measures are needed from all sides as well.
What is now needed most of all is a clear message that dialogue, not violence, is the way forward in these very tense times.
In Gaza, mankind’s basic morality is at stake.