Indeed, this is one of the factors that contributed to Moody’s decision – following Standard &amp; Poor’s – to strip France of its AAA credit rating.
Finally, adverse contagion is extending beyond the 17 countries in the eurozone.
The region’s debt crisis is undermining cooperation within the larger 27-member European Union, resulting in the spectacular failure of the recent summit on the EU budget.
It has also contributed to the economic slowdown in China, raising concerns (which I believe are exaggerated) that the country’s new leadership may have problems engineering a soft landing for an economy accustomed to double-digit (or high single-digit) growth.
This lack of peace would have resulted in outright economic and financial war if not for the critical – and growing – role played by the European Central Bank.
Under the bold leadership of Mario Draghi, the ECB has committed to provide as much time as possible for most governments to get their acts together.
And it has done so by relying on innovative measures that substitute its elastic balance sheet for those of over-extended governments, gun-shy private investors, and fleeing bank depositors.
Yet it would be a grave mistake to assume that the ECB can deliver lasting economic peace.
It cannot.
If governments continue to dither and bicker, the most that it can do is delay the war for a while.
Like Egypt’s war of attrition, the eurozone’s underlying economic, financial, and social ferment continues.
If governments continue to stumble from one patchwork remedy to another – a probability that remains uncomfortably high – the delay in implementing a comprehensive solution will eventually overwhelm the defenses that the ECB has so courageously put in place.
Some say that, just as Egypt’s war of attrition eventually gave way to a full-scale war and then a peace treaty, Europe needs a major crisis to move forward.
But this is a dangerous notion, one that entails not just massive risks, but also unacceptably high interim human costs.
European governments are well advised to use the financial cease-fire that the ECB is willing to buy for them.
Allowing it to expire without progress toward permanent stability would expose Europe to disruptions that would diminish significantly its prospects for long-term economic stability, growth and job creation.
Europe’s Market-Led Integration
BERLIN – For two years now, one European summit after another has ended with assurances that – at long last – the necessary measures for containing the eurozone’s sovereign-debt crisis have been taken.
Most were publicly portrayed as breakthroughs, though they were nothing of the sort.
As a rule, it took about three days before markets caught on and the crisis entered another round.
Because Europe’s political leaders have failed to manage the crisis effectively, the cost of ending it has risen.
Indeed, an easily manageable financial crisis in Greece was allowed to grow into a life-threatening emergency for the states on the southern periphery of the European Union – and for the European project as a whole.
This was statecraft at its worst, for which most of the blame can be laid at German Chancellor Angela Merkel’s door.
Indeed, prior to the European summit in Brussels in December, the stock of trust in the European Council had become so depleted that no one seemed to take its decisions seriously.
Of course, it could be that the United Kingdom’s veto of the summit’s proposed changes to the EU’s Lisbon Treaty drowned out all else, while further increasing distrust on the part of the public and financial markets of a divided Europe.
But talk about an EU split is nonsense.
No British prime minister could consent to a treaty change to create a fiscal union without having to call a referendum at home, the outcome of which would force the UK to withdraw from the EU. And no EU leader in his or her right mind could have any interest in that.
The UK has every interest in ending the crisis and preserving a strong euro, just as Europeans on the continent need the British inside the EU.
So it has been clear for months that a legally binding basis for moving toward a European fiscal union, while indispensible, could only take place outside the framework of the Lisbon Treaty, namely on an intergovernmental basis and as an EU-17 or EU-17+, as has just happened.
Moreover, alarmist talk of a “split” overlooks the reality that the EU and the monetary union have long been moving at different speeds.
The British veto, and the hullabaloo that it caused, is thus something that Europe could have done without, and Cameron will soon be sorry that he offered himself up as a hostage to his Euroskeptic backbenchers. Strengthening them will drastically weaken the UK’s influence in the EU.
That is all the more true because the Brussels summit flung open the door to a fiscal union for the EU-17+.
If a new treaty is negotiated by March 2012 and ratified in the following months, the EU will have taken a remarkable step forward – indeed, only one step away from a real political union, which will have to follow if Europe is to end the crisis for good.
And yet confidence in the recent decisions taken in Brussels remains low, owing not only to dissipated trust and the fuss about the British veto, but also to the apparent absence of measures to intervene in the current crisis.
But this, too, is a misconception.
If one reads through the decisions taken in Brussels, one immediately notices that Germany and the EU’s other rich countries received all the stability mechanisms and guarantees that they had previously requested, leaving them no reason to continue to refuse crisis-intervention measures, including appropriate financial guarantees.
The recent summit in Brussels opened the way to a fiscal union, including both a stability pact and – critically important – a liability pact.
In Germany, none of this has yet registered at all.
In the short term, the liability union is to be implemented by the European Central Bank, whose independence will once again be held up as sacred in Berlin, providing a European fig leaf for Germany’s domestic-policy priorities.
From this point of view, Merkel should be grateful to Cameron for the distraction that he created in Brussels.
And whom do we have to thank for all this European progress?
Do we owe it to the wisdom of Europe’s political leaders, particular that of the “Merkozy” odd couple of Merkel and French President Nicolas Sarkozy?
Unfortunately not: progress resulted almost exclusively from the pressure of the much-maligned financial markets.
Just as former Italian Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi was brought down not by political opponents, but by jittery investors, it was the markets, not European leaders, that opened the door to European fiscal and political union.
That is no cause for celebration. On the contrary, it reflects European politicians’ lack of sufficient strategic vision and courage in dealing with the eurozone crisis – and also in regulating the markets.
Europe’s Military Injustice
LONDON – The cost of sending troops and military hardware around the world to provide security when and where it is needed is causing major financial headaches across Europe.
Indeed, Europe’s finance ministries face a dilemma over how much of their stretched national budgets to allocate to the military; and European defense officials must somehow ensure that precious funding is spent in the most efficient manner.
The problem is acute in Britain, not only because of our current troop deployments in Afghanistan and Iraq, but also because of the unfair systems by which NATO-led missions and military operations under the European Security and Defense Policy (ESDP) are financed.
Under both systems, those who accept responsibility to take military action also take on the lion’s share of the financial burden.
It is time our collective security alliances overhauled these inequitable funding methods and made sure that all member states pay a proportionate price for global security.
It is no secret that Britain’s Ministry for Defense is facing a funding crisis.
Better military and financial burden-sharing within both NATO and the ESDP would not only benefit the United Kingdom, but would also help to alleviate some of the pressure on other national defense budgets in Europe.
We must take full advantage of our organized security structures to ensure that the global security burden is shared in a fair and proportionate manner.
To date, this has not happened.
For NATO to work properly, its members must be prepared not only to supply troops and equipment for NATO-led military operations, but also to fund and sustain these operations until missions are completed.
Instead, certain members now do a disproportionate amount of the fighting, funding, and dying.
This is not sustainable.
All NATO countries must understand that membership brings implicit and explicit responsibilities to ensure that their military forces have the capability to fight and win on the modern-day battlefield.
They must recognize the need to create a sounder financial system for alliance operations.
There is currently common funding for certain shared costs, such as headquarters, with contributions linked to the member states’ GDPs.
But the amounts covered by common funding are only a small part of an operation’s total cost.
All other expenses “lie where they fall”: the more troops and equipment a country contributes to a mission, the more it ends up paying.
The cost to the UK for its contribution to the NATO operation in Afghanistan, for example, totals £3.1 billion – a heavy burden on British taxpayers.
Because of the expeditionary nature of today’s military operations, that system is an anachronism.
Yet fixing the problem is easier said than done.
NATO has been trying for years – without success – to get its member states to spend the required 2% of GDP on defense.
Compliance would mean an estimated $67 billion increase in Alliance-wide defense spending, or roughly the equivalent of adding another British or French defense budget – no panacea, but very helpful nonetheless.
Last April, the leader of the UK’s opposition Conservative Party, David Cameron, explained why we should establish a real operational fund for NATO expeditionary missions, with every member state required to contribute.
Doing so would provide some reimbursement to countries that currently carry an unduly large part of the burden.
It would also offer potential funding to countries that might deploy forces but face short-term financial difficulties in meeting the cost.
The new NATO operational fund would clearly be more equitable than today’s system, which penalizes proactive member states and rewards members that prefer to do nothing.
Why should the few carry the many?
Common security implies common commitment.
Moreover, solving NATO’s burden-sharing problem is not enough.
The European Union’s crisis management missions face similar issues when military forces are involved.
EU civilian crisis management is funded directly from the Common Foreign and Security Policy budget.
But, apart from the common costs of an operation (usually less than 8% of the total), the ESDP uses the same funding method as NATO, which means that the bulk of the money for both ESDP and NATO-led military operations comes out of the same defense pot in each member state.
So there is no point in fixing one funding mechanism without simultaneously fixing the other.
Interestingly, there was some discussion under the French presidency about reforming the so-called Athena Mechanism, which is the means used to determine the amount that each EU member state contributes to the common costs of a mission.
Like the NATO common fund, EU contributions are largely based on GDP.
The French also called for the “costs lie where they fall” concept to be abandoned in the name of financial solidarity.
Any change made to the Athena Mechanism must include reforms to its rules and procedures.
Currently, non-EU members of NATO that contribute troops to an operation cannot vote – or even be present at votes – when the Athena Special Committee sets the mission budget, even though their troops will fight and possibly die.
This is discriminatory, undemocratic, and no way to treat important allies like Norway and Turkey.
Collective security alliances are just that – collective.
It is time that everyone contributed their fair share to the common good.
Europe’s Misguided “Growth Pessimists”
Such is the deep pessimism in Europe about the economy that the better the economy does today, the worse people think it will do tomorrow.
This year has been an excellent one for Europe’s economic growth.
Yet instead of thinking that the momentum building in 2006 will carry forward and make 2007 an even better year, Europe’s gloomy experts are predicting a significant slowdown.
For them, it seems out of the question that Europe can have two good years in a row.
Of course, every year has its growth challenges, and 2007 will be no exception.
What motivates – or frightens – the growth pessimists, in particular, are (1) higher European interest rates, (2) the slowing US economy, and (3) the increase in the German value-added tax (VAT) from 16% to 19% set for the beginning of the year.
But they are wrong to be frightened by these factors.
Fear over the growth effects of the European Central Bank’s 2006 rate increases is based on confusion between real and nominal interest rates.
By the end of the year, European interest rates will have been raised 150 basis points (to 3.5%, from 2% in January).
But European inflation is growing at approximately the same rate.
This means that real interest rates – interest rates measured in terms of goods and services – have stayed the same.
And it is the real interest rate – not the money rate – that counts for economic growth.
Europe must ask itself: how can interest rates induce a slowdown in 2007 when real interest rates have hardly budged despite an economically healthy 2006?
Moreover, because profits are high in Europe, likely future increases in real interest rates needed to ensure price stability easily can be financed out of profits without economic disruption.
The truth of the matter is that interest rates – both nominal and real – are too low in Europe, not too high.
As for the United States, plummeting gas prices – an extraordinary 25% decline in roughly one month – have increased consumer confidence and spending at a time when consumers were supposed to be in full retreat because of the housing market decline.
Moreover, former Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan says the housing market correction is already almost over.
Pessimistic Europeans are behind the curve.
They are bracing for a 2007 US growth slowdown that already has taken place with little consequence for both the US and European economies.
Of course, falling gas prices are occurring in Europe as well, and this will help take the sting out of the controversial VAT increase engineered by German Chancellor Angela Merkel.
The German Chancellor has been lucky.
The falling gas price and Germany’s high profits will “finance” the tax increase, which should prove little more than a speed bump for the German economy, at least if lower gas prices hold into the coming year.
Indeed, the German government is slowly coming to realize that its pessimism about the economy has been misplaced, which is reflected in continuous “upward revisions” of growth forecasts throughout 2006.
Recently, the government raised its growth forecasts for this year and next, from 1.6% to 2.3% for 2006, and from 1% to 1.4% for 2007.
Expect further upward revisions as the government continues to be surprised by the economy’s ongoing strength.
An important by-product of Europe’s good growth is that it is making the need for structural reform an urgent matter.
The lack of structural reform of Europe’s labor markets, competitive practices, and so on means that European potential economic growth – its growth ceiling – is lower than it should be.
With a low growth ceiling, strong economic performance generates inflationary pressures at a relatively early stage in the growth process.
This makes it hard for Europe to enjoy an extended period of high growth without inflation.
Premature inflationary pressures are a prime reason that both ECB presidents, the late Wim Duisenberg and now Jean-Claude Trichet, have consistently pressed for structural reform in their press conferences and speeches.
It is the ECB, after all, that must fight the inflation caused by Europe’s lack of structural reform.
Growth pessimists have a point if they are wary about Europe’s prospects for structural reform to raise the growth ceiling.
Europe’s politicians simply refuse to take the lead on this all-important issue.
They are wrong, however, about Europe’s prospects for achieving its restricted growth potential.
Europe’s actual economic growth has been quite good and – thanks to low gas prices, low real interest rates, solid profits, and strong growth momentum – promises to get better before the ceiling is hit and inflationary pressures set in.
Call me a “growth optimist”, but Europe looks poised for another good growth year in 2007.
Provincial Europe
BERLIN – Multitasking is not exactly the strong point of Europe’s current generation of leaders.
They have rightly given the eurozone crisis – the central question bearing on the European Union’s future – top priority.
But all other important issues – above all, a common foreign and security policy – have been almost completely ignored.
And it is here – Europe’s external relations, an issue absolutely vital to the future of all EU citizens – that renationalization is rearing its ugly head again.
Today, we can recognize the outlines of a post-American international (dis)order – not only its emerging structures, but also its risks, threats, and conflicts, all of which are intensifying.
For Europe – and for the rest of the world – the financial crisis has proven to be an accelerant of far-reaching changes.
In East Asia, the world’s most dynamic and dominant region in terms of future global economic development, confrontation is escalating between the key powers – China, Japan, South Korea, and Taiwan – over border issues, territorial claims, prestige, and unfinished historical business.
Add to this the perennial crisis on the Korean peninsula and the Taiwan conflict, which could flare up again anytime.
East Asia’s regional powers operate almost without any multilateral framework, a state of affairs comparable to that of Europe toward the end of the nineteenth century.
Only the United States’s military and political presence ensures regional stability.
Yet, at least in the medium term, that presence implies a significant risk of inciting a global confrontation between China and the US.
Moreover, Russia – which extends to East Asia, but, owing to its economic and political weakness, has been a background player there – would certainly seek to benefit from this development.
Europe, however, will play no part in the region, simply because any attempt to do so would place too much strain on its reach and resources.
Yet, given Europe’s growing economic dependence on East Asia, its interests are massively engaged – a mismatch that could cause the EU considerable discomfort in the medium term.
The same is true, to varying degrees, of Europe’s relationship with South Asia; but here the India-Pakistan conflict, a looming “post-American” Afghanistan in 2014, and uncertainty concerning Iran and the Persian Gulf have a direct security impact on the EU.
This is where discomfort meets danger.
Russia, under Vladimir Putin’s third presidency, has made its choice.
Under the banner of a “Eurasian Union,” and relying on the renationalized oil and gas sectors as both a carrot and a stick, the Kremlin wants to tie as many of the former Soviet territories as possible to the Motherland.
At the center of this policy is Ukraine, the linchpin of Europe’s post-Soviet order.
Yet Putin is caught in a fundamental contradiction.
His Great Russia policy requires economic strength, and therefore successful modernization of the country.
But, to achieve this, he must encourage reforms that would lead to a strong middle class, which, as can already be seen in Russia’s big cities, opposes Putin’s clientilist “guided democracy” and the massive corruption that comes with it.
Putin’s dilemma poses a real challenge for the EU and the US – but also an opportunity, if they choose significant long-term engagement.
On both sides of the Atlantic, however, ignoring the issue seems to have been mistaken for a policy.
That is a grave oversight, for it is clear that Russian foreign policy has again taken a provocative and confrontational turn.
Russia remains a steadfast supporter of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad, and is not shying away from conflict with Turkey, or from forging a de facto alliance with Iran, in order to defend the Assad regime.
Together with the war clouds hovering over the Iranian nuclear program, the failed Israeli-Palestinian peace process, and radical political change throughout the wider Middle East, the conflict in Syria shows that Europe’s southeast will continue to be a major security challenge.&nbsp; Yet, despite Russia’s ambitions for reshaping its neighborhood – and despite decreasing US involvement in the Middle East – Europe is hardly prepared to act.
Clearly, the relationship between Turkey and the EU needs its own “reset.”
Otherwise, both sides will find themselves among the losers.
Turkey is currently confronting the limits of its possibilities, while the EU finds that it can do very little in this region without Turkey.
And, to Europe’s immediate south, across the Mediterranean, new risks are emerging in the vastness of North Africa and the Sahara, including the threat of an Al Qaeda state in northern Mali.
If one adds to this European sketch of global development the fact that, whatever the outcome of the US election, America will shift its strategic focus to East Asia (and otherwise mainly look after itself), nearly everything cries out for a robust EU foreign and security policy.
Unfortunately, exactly the opposite is happening: here, too, renationalization is uppermost in the minds of Europe’s peoples and decision-makers.
In Berlin, the question asked more and more often is, “What does this mean for Germany?” rather than, “What does this mean for Europe?”
The same is true in other European capitals.
But the wrong question leads to wrong answers, because Europe’s security interests can be defended only within a European and Western context, not at the national level.
That is why it is high time for Europeans to abandon their provincialism, launch a common foreign policy worthy of the name, and finally start to invest properly in their future security.
Europe must grow up and develop the capacity to defend its own interests, because the day is fast approaching when others will be less able and willing to do this for us than they once were.
Europe’s Moment of Decision
BRUSSELS &#45;&#45; Is amnesia an integral part of politics?
When it comes to the treaty to reform the Union’s institutions, which will be finalized in November, recent events suggest that amnesia does play a central role.
Let’s examine the “illness” that leads certain EU leaders with questionable scruples to forget even the recent past.
Busy with domestic political affairs, they do not hesitate to use Europe as a scapegoat to avoid breaking bad news to their fellow citizens.
Some display separatist tendencies that worry, and frustrate, their electorates.
No surprise, then, that many EU citizens refuse, or at least hesitate, to embrace the European cause.
This form of political racketeering may win elections, but it sabotages any opportunity to experience, or to perceive, politics as a process that can contribute to global development.
Consider Gordon Brown, Britain’s new prime minister, according to whom globalization strips the European project of any meaning, a form of political autism that in fact will prevent the EU from adapting to change and from being able to find solutions to globalization’s challenges.
Fortunately, openly anti-European political programs are not the norm, at least not yet.
In fact, if, on the eve of the 2009 European Parliament elections, the new Reform Treaty enters into force, each member country will be forced to clarify and justify its position.
The Treaty will be essential not only to the proper functioning of Europe’s institutions, but also to their further “deepening” – something that many call for without necessarily really wanting to achieve.
Thanks to “reinforced cooperation,” recalcitrant states will no longer hinder those seeking to make progress, and could even resort to an “opt-out” process and “liberate” themselves from the EU, perhaps by means of a referendum.
Then there are those who believe that EU enlargement has prevented greater “deepening,” and who, with scant regard for the past or the future, argue that pursuing the latter requires abandoning the former.
But who can reasonably claim to know what shape the EU will need to take to meet the challenges of the next 50 or 100 years?
Already, issues like climate change and energy supply demonstrate the futility of isolated national action and the critical importance of both deepening and enlarging the EU.
Having suffered from disruptions in oil and gas supplies following disputes between Russia and Ukraine and then Belarus, the EU’s members have finally understood that their survival depends on their capacity to diversify their energy sources.
Further EU enlargement is undoubtedly in Turkey’s interest, and in Europe’s, too.
In addition to the constructive role that Turkey could play, especially in the Middle East, its membership is vitally important in terms of energy.
Moreover, admitting Turkey would demonstrate the EU’s political consistency, while representing a qualitative step forward in the European project.
For politicians like French President Nicolas Sarkozy, such considerations may be meaningless.
But what if Turkey were to abandon its European ambitions and align itself strategically with Russia or even Iran?
The consequences for European security would be severe.
Then there is Britain’s political leadership, for whom enlargement is a way to avoid deepening, and, indeed, to dissolve political Europe.
While such ideas are not for everyone, certain Continental countries secretly prefer Britain’s disjointed scenarios, with some heads of governments even considering their countries’ commitments reversible.
What, for example, should we make of Poland’s governing Kaczynski brothers?
The quick-tempered twins took issue with the reform treaty’s proposed voting system for the Council of Ministers, and then stole the limelight from papacy with their own homophobic declarations, proclamations that seem to exclude any possibility of integrating the EU’s Charter of Rights into Poland’s domestic law.
Russian President Vladimir Putin may be the only one who welcomes this desertion from Europe’s community of values.
In this climate, Dutch Prime Minister Peter Balkenende, still bogged down in his country’s “no” vote on the EU’s draft constitutional treaty in 2005, has been seeking to win British, Czech, and Polish support for measures to make it possible to diminish the EU’s areas of responsibility.
Indeed, he may not even object to ruining the EU’s entire legislative engine by granting national parliaments a veto.
What we Europeans now need most of all is to embark on precisely the opposite course.
Only by enlarging the scope of EU decision-making, backed by the commitment of equally responsible partners, can Europe meet the shared challenges of a common future.
Western Europe’s long-held position as the world’s most important concentration of military power after the United States and Russia appears to be over.
The US faces no serious challenge (not yet, at least) as the world’s dominant military power. After all, the US spends almost as much on its armed forced as the rest of the world combined.
But the picture is changing with the rapid growth of China’s military expenditures.
The official growth rate of China’s military expenditure – 15% per year over the last decade – has increased substantially, and there is much hidden military spending as well.
Growing anxiety among China’s neighbors, particularly India, has led to remarkable increases in defense spending by other Asian powers as well.
Europe’s problem is not only a lack of military spending, but also poor effectiveness when it comes to the purpose of that spending: the use of force when and where necessary.
Europe’s capability of deploying combat forces is simply too small relative to the number of men and women in uniform. It is often half-jokingly pointed out that the number of generals and admirals in some European countries (none mentioned, none forgotten) is glaringly disproportionate to the number of fighting troops.
European military effectiveness is also curbed by different procurement policies, as those countries that produce military hardware prefer to keep orders at home.
This is true of weaponry as well as logistical capabilities, where, despite immense efforts over the years to get more out of the shrinking funds, there is still great potential for integration and standardization.
The defense treaties concluded recently by France and the United Kingdom appear to be a good example of what can be obtained through greater cooperation and integration – even though it is a strictly bilateral affair with no direct links to either NATO or the European Union.
But the value of the new “Paris-London Entente” will be limited if both countries cut their defense expenditures so much that their combined strength remains at best unchanged.  That Britain plans to fund construction of a new aircraft carrier, but not the planes to fly off of it, suggests that resources for the new entente will be sorely lacking.
Still, French-British cooperation if it does take on real substance could be an inspiration to others, though the challenges to making the agreement viable are formidable.
British “Tommies” have to learn to speak French, and French legionnaires will have to learn English – and the limits on the spirit of cooperation will no doubt be found at the entrance to every army, navy, and air force canteen.
After all, can anyone imagine French sailors eating “spotted dick” or any other culinary peculiarity of the Royal Navy?
Somewhat more promising is the possible invitation to India to participate in developing, alongside France, Germany, and Britain, the new joint Euro-fighter.
India’s commitment to defense spending, and its desire to acquire advanced military production processes, may provide the kind of energy that Europe has been lacking.
But with Germany’s Luftwaffe planning heavy cuts to its procurement of Euro-fighters, India may have second thoughts about taking part in the project.
The kind of energy and commitment to defense spending that India represents needs to be injected into Europe, because European rhetoric about playing a strategic global role remains in high gear.
But it seems ages since a Belgian foreign minister (as chairman of the EU Council of Ministers) declared at an ASEAN meeting in Singapore in 1993: There are now only two superpowers left, the US and Europe!
If Europeans want their ambitions to be taken seriously, they must find ways to deal with the decline in Europe’s military power. Political leaders will have to tell their constituents that there are limits to how much military budgets can be cut, as the “peace dividend” from the Cold War’s end was digested long ago.
Europeans may have to embrace new modes of cooperation among their national armed forces in order to put them to effective use.
Otherwise, not only will Europe’s global political ambitions become untenable, but its allies on the other side of the Atlantic will lose patience with Europeans’ refusal to shoulder their share of the security burden.
Europe’s Neo-Liberal Challenge
For over 20 years I have argued that Western Europe’s high unemployment rates are unsustainable.
At the end of the 1970’s, monetarists bet that only a transitory and modest increase in unemployment could rein in the creeping – and trotting – inflation of the industrial west, and that in retrospect the cost of returning to effective price stability would be judged worthwhile.
In Britain and the United States, this monetarist bet turned out well.
In Western Europe, it did not.
Over the past 25 years in Europe, unemployment rose as monetary policy was tightened and interest rates were raised to fight inflation.
But after inflation succumbed, unemployment did not fall – or not by much.
If unemployment was not stuck quite at Great Depression levels, it remained high enough to make long-term joblessness or the fear of long-term joblessness a defining experience.
Societies in which the official unemployment rate stands at 10% or more for generations are societies in which government economic management has failed.
So, for 20 years it has seemed to me that Western Europe’s underlying political equilibrium – corporatist bargaining and ample social insurance, on the one hand, and tight monetary policies, on the other – must crack.
Twin fears appear to be paralyzing European policymakers.
Europe’s central bankers fear that their political masters will order them to loosen monetary policy, that the structural reforms needed to free up aggregate supply will not be forthcoming, and that the result will be a return to the inflation of the 1970’s.
In short, they fear that all of the sacrifices made for price stability will have been in vain.
West European politicians, for their part, fear the opposite outcome.
They worry that even after undertaking structural reforms to reduce the attractiveness of unemployment benefits and increase the ability of workers to move to jobs and of firms to move to workers, central bankers will continue to insist on tight money.
In short, they fear that, with no expansion of output or employment, the net effect will simply be an increase in poverty.
Of course, these fears are accompanied by the hope that structural reforms and monetary expansion work in harmony, boosting employment and output without raising inflation by much.
But the reality is that steps toward looser monetary policies are non-existent – especially with the fledgling European Central Bank anxious to establish its inflation-fighting credibility – and that steps toward structural reforms are half-hearted, hesitant, and small.
For 20 years, I have been wrong: West European polities have remained stable despite the exclusion of a large proportion of citizens from meaningful participation in much of economic life.
West European economies have continued to grow – albeit not as rapidly as they might have – despite bearing the heavy burden of the unemployed 10% or more of the labor force.
Now, though, it looks like I may finally be right – or at least right to worry, if not to panic.
The French rejected the European Union constitution, primarily – or so it appears – because further European integration, it is feared, must bring in its wake the huge costs and disruptions of neo-liberalism.
It is one thing to back the “European project” when the idea is to bind Germany so tightly to France that never again will anybody think it worthwhile to wage a war over what language is spoken in Alsace-Lorraine.
It is another when the European project means that French workers face competition from Polish plumbers, Romanian farmers, and Turkish shop clerks.
In Germany, the electorate seems poised to eject Chancellor Gerhard Schroeder out of discontent with his tepid allegiance to the neo-liberal project.
The problem is that the electorate will then get four years of rule by a chancellor, Angela Merkel, whose commitment to the neo-liberal project is almost as strong as mine.
I think that Germany would be better off in a decade under more neo-liberal policies.
But this does not seem to be what the German electorate wants, and this makes the complexion of German politics four years from now incalculable.
Coupled with all this is northern European discontent with the central bankers, specifically with the ECB and the euro.
It is not that the end of European Monetary Union is on the agenda; it is merely that people have begun thinking about possible low-probability futures in which the end of EMU might be placed on the agenda.
That is enough to shake asset prices worldwide.
Western Europe’s accomplishments since World War II are among the most heartening and impressive success stories in world history.
Everyone should want today’s undivided Europe to build on these accomplishments, rather than for generations of high unemployment to jeopardize them.
But this will require a shift in the ECB’s attitude.
Europe needs a monetary policy that views aiding employment growth in northern Europe as more important than continental price stability.
There will, after all be inflation in southern and eastern Europe – there must be, for as regions develop and industrialize their terms of trade must improve, and under a monetary union regional inflation is how this can happen.
The ECB should not try to balance inflation in the south and east with deflation in the north in order to hit artificial continent-wide targets.
Europe\u0027s Never-Ending Constitution
On October 29, leaders of the European Union will gather in Rome to sign the Union's new Constitutional Treaty.
Praise for the document's uniqueness will undoubtedly be heard, and in this they won't be boasting, because the EU Constitution is unlike any other constitution ever written.
Most constitutions - including the American one - aspire to "freeze history," or to set up a lasting institutional order that will resist the winds of change.
Indeed, a constitution is by its nature an attempt to "tame" history, to make it follow the laws of man rather than its own logic, including unwelcome contingencies and the whims of fate.
By contrast, the EU Constitution is written with the unspoken understanding that the institutions it is setting up are transitory, that they are far from optimal, and that it would be desirable to change them right now if political realities allowed it.
But the realities of politics in today's Europe do not allow for the sort of document the signatories really wanted to draft, so the constitution that they did write is designed to establish a process of evolutionary change that will motivate further improvements along the way - improvement that will, it is hoped, one day obliterate the very arrangements today's EU Constitution is setting up.
Indeed, from the start, the architects of the Union's Constitutional Treaty never seriously expected that their draft would endure in the form in which they wrote it. Instead, they saw themselves as following Europe's long established pattern of step-by-step integration.
This pattern began at the start of the 'European project' over half a century ago.
Spillover effects from the original Coal and Steel Community of the 1950's led to the creation of the European Economic Community, then to the European Community, and finally to the creation of the Union.
Each step led to progressively greater integration.
Even milestone documents such as the Single European Act and the Treaties of Maastricht, Amsterdam, and Nice, were never envisaged as achieving the kind of permanence (or even semi-permanence) that we normally associate with a constitution. The same is true of developments like the Union's common foreign and security policy or Monetary Union, with its Euro and European Central Bank.
No sooner did one intergovernmental conference produce a "settlement" than the wheels started turning to prepare for a successor conference and a successor settlement. This mechanism for the deliberately progressive construction of a unified polity out of nominally sovereign states is unprecedented in human history.
When nations embark on a program of ever closer integration, the end result is always likely to look unfinished if they put aside - on an ongoing basis - any resolution of the ultimate destination.
Indeed, the only thing that seemed clear from the start of the European integration process was that the states involved - along with whatever new partner states they might pick up along the way - would continue wheeling and dealing to construct their ever more integrated polity.
As a result, every set of treaty amendments was the product of the type of untidy political haggling typical of intergovernmental decision-making.
Indeed, even under the Constitutional Treaty, all states know that their partners have the express right to withdraw if they should ever become sufficiently disenchanted or come to look upon the EU as a bad bargain.
But will the Union's new Constitutional Treaty put an end to this pattern of evolutionary constitution building?
It may do so to some degree, but not nearly as much as if the treaty's architects had done more to separate constitutional matters, such as the Charter of Fundamental Rights and the competences of Union bodies and member states, from the stuff of everyday politics, like agricultural and fisheries policies or the technicalities of judicial cooperation in civil and criminal matters.
A great opportunity to segregate what is permanent and durable (i.e., "constitutional") about the Union from what is impermanent and changeable (i.e., "political") was missed.
With nothing set in concrete, Europe's constitutional process continue to rely not on any transcendent document, but on balancing political relations and calculations so that the whole thing does not fall apart.
This process will probably carry the cost of prolonging the emergence of a single European political loyalty (if one ever does emerge).
This will be considered tragic only for those who see a stable European federation as Europe's manifest destiny.
For the rest of us, notwithstanding the Union's unprecedented eastward enlargement, the schisms that erupted over the Iraq war, and the other frictions that are bound to result from Europe's flexible, evolutionary approach to constitution-making, there is also a lot of hope in this extended struggle for self-definition.
The recent collective sense across Europe of the urgency of being able to speak with one voice in external affairs may provide the next breeze, and enough glue, to keep the enterprise afloat.
Europe\u0027s New Dawn
Today in Rome, the heads of state and government of the EU's 25 member states will sign the Treaty establishing a Constitution for Europe.
We have come a long way since the six founding members formed the European Economic Community back in March 1957 - also in Rome.
After the Treaty is signed, it will go before the national parliaments for approval. So it is crucially important to understand why the Treaty deserves to be ratified.
Simply put, it places the interests of Europe's citizens more than ever at the heart of the European Union's activities. It does so in four ways.
First, the Constitutional Treaty guarantees that the Union's institutions will respect the fundamental rights of everyone within the EU.
The "catalogue of fundamental rights" included in the Constitution is extensive, centering on respect for human dignity, freedom, and equality, and also on the principles of democracy and the rule of law.
By enshrining them in the Constitution, these fundamental rights and principles become legally binding, and citizens will have greater scope for bringing appeals to the Court of Justice.
In this respect, the EU leads the world in the protection of fundamental rights.
Second, the Treaty makes the EU more democratic and brings government closer to Europe's citizens.
The Union has no business interfering in matters that can be dealt with successfully at the local, regional, or national level.
The EU's objectives are precisely those that countries are unable to achieve on their own, for example, a stronger economy and greater security.
The Constitutional Treaty includes guarantees to ensure that the EU adheres to this principle strictly.
National parliaments will be able to call a time-out if Brussels makes proposals that seem to interfere unnecessarily.
Should one-third of national parliaments so wish, the European Commission will be required to reconsider a proposal.
In addition, the Constitutional Treaty gives citizens the right to ask the European Commission to take action on a specific point.
A citizens' initiative of this kind will require one million signatures, obtained in different countries.
At the same time, the European Parliament will have far greater powers.
It will have joint decision-making authority in many more areas, including the budget.
As a result, European citizens' elected representatives will be better able to scrutinize the work of the Commission.
Third, the Treaty makes the EU more open and more transparent.
Citizens want powers to be clearly defined and decisions to be taken openly in a way that they can understand.
Many people despair of finding their way through the maze of current EU treaties and their numerous amendments.
Outside Brussels, few people can explain the "pillar" structure and the distinction between the Union and the Community.
The Constitution consigns these complexities to history.
It also gives people far greater access to official information, extending their right of access to documents from all institutions, organs, and bodies.
Finally, the Treaty will make Europe more effective.
This is essential if the issues that affect people's lives are to be tackled successfully.
Two themes that people consider crucial are a stronger European economy (more jobs and more growth) and greater security (reducing cross-border crime).
European countries are heavily reliant on each other in addressing these issues.
People are counting on Europe to take action.
But, because EU decisions often have to be taken unanimously, this can be difficult.
Moreover, the means to work together effectively are often lacking.
The Treaty introduces major improvements here, enabling us to work together more effectively to achieve our aims.
In sum, the Constitutional Treaty firmly enshrines fundamental rights in law, and also makes the EU more democratic, more transparent, and more effective.
This makes it a good deal for everyone - for people who expect more cooperation and more concrete results from the Union, but also for those concerned about excessive interference by Europe in questions that can be better dealt with by the member states themselves.
Next year, we will celebrate 60 years of peace across a large part of Europe.
Never before in our history have we enjoyed such a long period of concord, a period that has seen an enormous growth in prosperity.
Democracy has taken root in almost every corner of Europe, and Europeans now have far greater freedom to live, work, and study where and how they wish.
These achievements are largely due to European cooperation.
The Constitutional Treaty is a reflection of our wish to continue in the same vein, to carry on working together.
We want to reaffirm our commitment to a life without war and injustice, and to the freedom that we hold so dear.
The Constitutional Treaty provides solid foundations for our shared future.
Peace, security, and prosperity are as vulnerable as they are valuable.
This Treaty makes them stronger. And that makes us stronger.
The signing ceremony is therefore a message of hope.
It is a new beginning.
Europe’s New Donald Rumsfeld
Russia’s Duma elections this December are almost certain to cement the power of forces loyal to Vladimir Putin.
That outcome is likely to confirm Russia’s emergence as the most divisive issue in the European Union since Donald Rumsfeld split the continent into “old” and “new” Europe.
In the 1990’s, EU members found it easy to agree on a common approach to Russia.
They coalesced around a strategy of democratizing and westernizing a weak and indebted Russia.
That policy is now in tatters.
Soaring oil and gas prices have made Russia more powerful, less co-operative, and less interested in joining the West.
Today, Europeans cannot even agree on the nature of the Russian regime, let alone what policy to adopt towards it.
Part of the confusion lies in Putin’s skillful political positioning.
On the one hand, he needs to maximize his control of the economy and society in order to raise wages and pensions and to keep opponents down, while nourishing the long-tail of patronage that keeps him in power.
On the other hand, Moscow’s elite – who fear that their assets may be expropriated by a future government – wants to avoid international pariah status so that they can see out their sun-set years in the safety of the West if the need arises.
A tightly knit group of political consultants has helped Putin resolve his conundrum.
Rather than establish a dictatorship, they helped Putin use the trappings of liberal democracy to consolidate power.
By establishing fake opposition political parties that are under the Kremlin’s thumb, creating pseudo pressure groups and organizations such as Nashi (“Ours”), and recasting the rule of law as an instrument of political power, Putin has tightened his control in a more effective and subtle way than many autocratic regimes.
The possibility that he may run for prime minister in order to prolong his rule when his presidential mandate expires is a logical continuation of this approach.
Though the EU has failed to change Russia during the Putin era, Russia has had a big impact on the EU.
On energy, it is picking off individual EU member states and signing long-term deals that undermine the core principles of the EU’s common strategy.
On Kosovo, Russia is blocking progress at the United Nations.
In the Caucasus and Central Asia, the Kremlin has effectively shut the EU out of regions where it has an interest in promoting political reform, resolving conflicts, and forging energy partnerships.
In Ukraine and Moldova, the Kremlin has worked hard, with some success, to blunt the appeal of Europe.
In the eyes of some neighboring countries, Russia is emerging as an ideological alternative to the EU that offers a different approach to sovereignty, power, and world order.
Whereas the European project is founded on the rule of law, Russia believes that when the balance of power changes, the laws should be changed to reflect it.
Moreover, Russia is trying to build a relationship of “asymmetric interdependence” with the EU.
While EU leaders believe that peace and stability is built through interdependence, Russia’s leaders are intent on creating a situation in which the EU needs Russia more than Russia needs the EU, particularly in the energy sector.
The first approach risks giving Russia easy access to all the benefits of cooperation with the EU, without insisting that Russia abide by stable rules.
Open hostility toward Russia, however, will make it hard for the EU to draw on Russia’s help to tackle a host of common problems - from environmental pollution and illegal migration, to nuclear proliferation and Kosovo’s final status.
The EU urgently needs a new approach.
Rather than attempt to democratize or contain Russia, the Union should settle on the more limited goal of turning Russia into a reliable partner, bound by the rule of law.
A common approach will give the EU many powerful levers to ensure that Russia honors treaties and mutual agreements.
At the diplomatic level, Europeans could threaten to deprive Russia of the prestige it draws from participating in G8 and EU-Russia Summits.
They should also aim to strengthen democracy and the rule of law in the European neighborhood by tightening relations with countries such as Georgia and Ukraine.
Economic leverage should be applied as well.
Europeans should subject Russian investments in EU markets to greater scrutiny and use competition law to launch investigations into monopolistic practices and money laundering for existing investments.
At the same time, EU members could target the interests of the individuals in the Kremlin elite by scrutinizing their purchases of Western assets, and even ban travel to the EU for human rights abusers.
So long as the EU continues to sway between integration and containment, it will continue to appear to the Kremlin as weak and directionless.
That, in turn, will merely encourage Russia to become even more assertive.
Europe’s Next Single Market
The current European Commission has made clear its commitment to reducing bureaucratic red tape by adopting an approach to regulation that keeps the number of laws we propose to an absolute minimum.
We are serious about this.
But our commitment to reducing the amount of legislation must be matched by an equal commitment to making what we have really count.
This is a shared responsibility, and member states have to play their part.
Until laws adopted in Brussels are enacted in national law and properly enforced, they remain paper tigers, entirely without teeth. 
Most laws adopted in Brussels allow a grace period – generally about two years – for member states to act.
Member states set this deadline themselves, so it should be more than enough time.
After that, there should be no excuses.
What is more, all member states have made progress, with Denmark and Latvia – both five directives away from a perfect record – sharing first place. 
This is an important achievement, but it should not be taken as a signal to relax.
On the contrary, we should ask whether the time has not come to set even more stringent targets.
And it is also time to take a more detailed look at where we continue to fall short. 
When member states sign up to laws in Brussels, they accept an absolute obligation to be bound by them.
When they fail to live up to their commitments, they fail in their duty to the consumers and businesses that stand to benefit.
Nor should good overall results be permitted to mask problems in particular areas – public procurement, for example, which accounts for between 15% and 20% of Europe’s GDP.
Opening up markets and applying European rules properly produces savings for governments and delivers better value for taxpayers’ money.
I am, therefore, deeply disappointed that a package of measures adopted in this area in 2004 – aimed at simplifying and modernizing procedures – has not been transposed within the agreed deadline by several member states.
I warn those that have not yet acted that I will take whatever steps are necessary to make them act.
We cannot continue to commit ourselves to delivering a more competitive Europe while denying ourselves the means to achieve it. 
But reducing the transposition deficit, while important, is not the end of the game.
Getting laws onto national statute books is one thing, ensuring they are properly applied and enforced is another.
And while the story is good on transposition, it is less rosy when it comes to how things are working on the ground.
Eight member states have managed to reduce the number of infringement cases taken against them by the Commission, but 17 have as many or more than they did this time last year. 
I appreciate that close cooperation and partnership with member states are required, and I am ready to work with them in whatever way I can to help them to transpose and apply EU law correctly.
I prefer to avoid infringement cases, which are costly and time consuming.
But member states should know by now that I am not a soft touch.
My job is to ensure that the law is enforced without fear or favor, and that is what I will continue to do.
The single market is one of the European Union’s greatest achievements.
Removing barriers to the free movement of people, goods, services, and capital has brought greater prosperity to people across the Continent, hones our skills internally, and gives us weight internationally.
When we made the big push for the single market 20 years ago, there were just 12 member states.
Now there are 27.
Europe is a very different place. 
We have also undergone a communications and technological revolution that has touched every aspect of our lives.
While immense new opportunities have opened up for Europe's citizens and businesses, global competition for trade and investment has never been tougher. 
Later this year, the Commission will bring forward a review of the single market to ensure that Europe is ready for what lies ahead.
This is an important opportunity for reform and renewal.
A modern single market should reflect modern needs, and we should concentrate our efforts where they can have most effect. 
We need a set of priorities that responds to what people want and expect – jobs, growth, and security.
To cope with rapid change, we need to be flexible when it comes to regulation.
We need to accept that not everything can be run from the center, which means more trust and more partnership, but also more willingness to shoulder responsibility further down the line. 
Indeed, if we are to succeed in creating a single market that is open to the world, builds on its internal strengths, and is at the cutting edge when it comes to shaping the international environment, our efforts at the EU level have to be matched by efforts at the national level.
I commend the member states for the efforts they have made, but we can all do better.
Europe’s Next Steps
Terrorism in London and the French and Dutch rejections of the European Union’s Constitutional Treaty have brought Euro-pessimism back into fashion.
The failure of the June EU summit and the bitter clashes between Tony Blair and Jacques Chirac have even inspired some to proclaim the beginning of the end for Europe.
They are wrong.
Europe is neither dead nor dying.
But recent events do spell the end of one version of European integration – the vision of an “ever closer union” producing a federal country that would become a new superpower.
That vision, however, was not in the cards even before the recent setbacks.
Once the original six core countries began to expand to include northern, southern, and, most recently, eastern European countries, the old federal vision was doomed.
The constitution was designed to make a Europe of 25 members more efficient, not produce a strong federal state.
Chirac’s rhetoric often includes references to a “multi-polar world” in which the United States is no longer the only superpower.
A recent Pew poll found that many Europeans have lost their attraction to the US and would like Europe to play a larger role in world politics.
But even if America has lost some of its attractive “soft power,” Europe’s post-industrial publics are not willing to pay the price – a doubling or tripling of defense spending as a share of GDP – to invest in the military power that would be required to balance its hard power.
Even so, the picture for Europe is not as bleak as pessimists assume.
Power in world politics today is distributed like a three-dimensional chess game that is played vertically as well as horizontally.
On the top board of military relations among states, the US is the world’s only superpower with global reach.
Europe or China are unlikely to overtake the Americans in the next two decades.
Here the world is uni-polar.
On the middle board of economic relations, the world is already multi-polar.
This is the board where Europe acts as a union, and other countries like Japan and China play significant roles.
The US cannot reach a trade agreement or settle anti-trust cases without the approval of the EU Commission.
Just recently, after the World Trade Organization ruled in favor of a European complaint, the US Congress had to rewrite billions of dollars of tax legislation.
This hardly fits the description of a uni-polar world.
The bottom board includes transnational relations that cross borders outside the control of governments – everything from drugs to infectious diseases to climate change to transnational terrorism.
On this board, power is distributed chaotically among non-state actors.
No government can control outcomes without the cooperation of others.
Here the US needs the help of Europeans, and it makes no sense to call this world uni-polar, either.
On this bottom board, the degree of close civilian cooperation is also important, which is affected by a country’s attractiveness or soft power.
Here European countries are well endowed, having overcome centuries of animosity and developing a large successful market.
One danger of the recent setbacks is a halt to EU enlargement.
At the Cold War’s end, East European countries did not try to form local alliances, as they did in the 1920’s, but looked toward Brussels as the magnet for their futures.
Similarly, countries like Turkey and Ukraine have adjusted their policies because they are attracted to Europe.
The loss of soft power implied by rejection of further enlargement would be a setback for Europe, the Balkans, and international stability.
What will the EU do next?
Some counsel retreating to the original six countries as an inner core that creates a federation within the larger union.
This approach appeals to those who think that the French and Dutch referendums were a rejection of the British liberal economic model.
But that diagnosis is suspect, because polls show that many who voted “non” were objecting to Chirac and/or to high rates of unemployment.
Turning backward and inward to the original six EU members is unlikely to meet such concerns, and augurs poorly for the liberalization of labor markets that Europe’s economies need to get moving.
A better path for the EU is to show that Europe still works.
This means a compromise on a new budget that curtails some of the expenditure on the common agricultural policy and devotes funds to integrating the new members who joined last year.
It also means carrying on with the important role that Europe plays in foreign policy such as attracting Serbia to reach agreement on the future status of Kosovo, or continuing efforts to persuade Iran to give up its plans for the enrichment of uranium.
Equally important will be to press ahead with the Doha round of WTO trade talks, and to follow through with past commitments regarding aid to Africa.
Eventually, after the dust has settled, it may be possible to reach inter-governmental agreements to tidy up some of the institutional arrangements that would have been settled if the new constitution had been approved. 
Such a practical, effective EU may not reach the lofty rhetorical aspirations beloved by politicians, but it will not be moribund.
On the contrary, such a Europe has a lot to gain for itself as well as to contribute to the rest of the world.
Europe\u0027s Obama Challenge
PARIS – Will the year 2009 and the beginning of Barack Obama’s presidency mark the beginning of a new era in transatlantic relations, or will the old divisions linger, nurtured by the depth and gravity of the economic crisis?
Will the crisis lead to nationalistic and selfish attitudes on both sides of the Atlantic, stymieing the long-awaited rapprochement, if not a full reconciliation?
It is, of course, too early to tell.
Even if the left wing of the European left – like the most liberal of America’s Democrats – voices concerns that Obama has selected a far too centrist cabinet, a classical form of anti-Americanism is bound to recede in Europe.
It is very unlikely that Europeans will take to the streets to denounce the “essence” of the United States – what America is as much as what America does – as they did during the Bush era and even during the Clinton years.
America’s image in Europe has changed profoundly since November 4, and the style of Obama’s diplomacy once he becomes president will probably confirm that change.
Yet in the realm of transatlantic relations, as is true globally, it is unwise to expect too much from a single man, whatever his exceptional qualities.
Fundamental problems remain, and new ones are likely to emerge.
First, whatever the brutal style of the new Russia under Vladimir Putin and Dmitri Medvedev, the Soviet Union no longer exists and no longer constitutes the common threat that was the “glue” of the Alliance until 1989.
Unless something very wrong happens, a new cold war is not about to start.
Second, there is a continuing structural imbalance between the way Europe looks at America, i.e., with passion and concern, and the way America looks at Europe, i.e., with mild interest giving way to growing indifference.
During the Cold War, Europe was America’s first line of defense.
In the current global age, Asia, the Middle East, and even maybe Africa will constitute greater priorities for the US.
Third, even if America under Obama praises and even practices multilateralism, Americans are far from ready to accept the reality of a multi-polar world.
They may write about it conceptually, but its meaning – a world in which their country is only “primus inter pares” – has not really penetrated the national psyche.
America’s internationalism remains grounded in the idea of American “exceptionalism” – a unique role and sense of mission.
It is an approach to the world with which Europeans have great difficulty coming to terms.
Even with Obama as president, they may be quick to denounce the combination of arrogance and hypocrisy that they see as linked to America’s view of her “special and unique mission.”
Fourth, if US diplomacy changes in style and content, will Europe be ready to face the challenge when America calls for help?
One early test is likely to be Afghanistan, when a smiling but firm Obama turns to Europe and says directly: “You have backed me in immense numbers.
I thank you for it.
But now I do not need your symbolic votes; I need your concrete support.
I need the further engagement of your troops in Afghanistan!”
I suspect that European leaders will not respond eagerly.
Most are convinced that there is no military solution in Afghanistan and they know that public opinion, especially in time of great economic hardship, has no appetite for such operations.
Europeans have a traditional tendency to denounce American military adventurism while relying on the US as their protector.
Fifth, to these “old” problems one must add a new one: the likely impact on transatlantic relations of the worst financial crisis in decades.
Protectionism in the classical sense of the term is unlikely. We have learned the lessons of 1929.
But public subsidies to “national champions” may prove to be as destabilizing for the climate of international cooperation as tariff barriers were in the past.
The temptation to “appease” suffering populations with populist, selfish measures may grow as the crisis deepens.
Paradoxically, too, the “greening” of America – an America that discovers late but with passion its responsibility for the planet’s survival – may lead to a competitive transatlantic race for first prize in ecological good behavior.
And one could multiply the subjects of possible tensions, from nuclear disarmament – too much for the French, too little for many others – to the best ways to deal with Iran, Russia, and China.
The essential issue lies elsewhere.
For Europe, the election of Barack Obama is a crucial test.
Will Europe rise to the occasion and seize the opportunity created by America’s daring and exhilarating choice to prove to itself and to the world that the old continent can exist as a power and a united actor?
Fiscal Austerity Versus European Society
WASHINGTON, DC – Over the last five years, the eurozone has, without explicit popular consent, maintained a strict policy focus on fiscal austerity and structural reforms – despite serious social repercussions, not only in the Mediterranean periphery and Ireland, but even in a “core" European Union country like France.
Unless eurozone leaders rethink their approach, the radical Syriza party's success in Greece's recent general election could turn out to be just one more step toward a future of social fragmentation and political instability in Europe.
Or it could mark the beginning of a realistic and beneficial re-orientation of Europe's economic strategy.
Of course, fiscal sustainability is vital to prevent a disruptive debt refinancing and inspire confidence among investors and consumers.
But there is no denying that it is much easier to support fiscal austerity when one is wealthy enough not to rely on public services or be at serious risk of becoming mired in long-term unemployment.
(The wealthy also remain largely in control of the media, the public discourse, and cross-border capital flows.)
For the millions of workers – and especially young people – with no job prospects, fiscal sustainability simply cannot be the only priority.
When unemployment benefits are slashed, they are the ones who suffer.
And when budget cuts extend to education, it is their children who are unable to gain the skills they need to reach their future potential.
Austerity-induced suffering is particularly extreme in Greece.
Severe pension cuts are preventing the elderly from living out their lives with dignity.
A large burden has been placed on those who actually pay their taxes, while many – often the wealthiest, who long ago stashed their money abroad – continue to evade their obligations.
Health care has lapsed, with many cancer patients losing access to life-saving treatment.
Suicides are on the rise.