According to UNHCR official Alessandra Morelli, the tens of thousands of Syrian refugees arriving on the Greek island of Lesbos “know exactly where they have to go, who they have to talk to.
They know what to buy.”
Facebook posts showed them what kinds of tents to purchase, which routes to take, and what tactics to implement, such as slashing the rubber boats they arrived in to avoid being pushed back out to sea by Greek officials.
The question remains, however, whether robots or gene sequencing or micro-sensors can help refugees integrate into European societies that are increasingly hostile to them, or else help them get back home.
It is easy enough to imagine tagging and tracking them in various ways.
After all, the Unique Identification Authority of India has enrolled nearly a billion Indians in its biometric identification program, which relies on scanning the irises of participants’ eyes.
Combine iris identification with new phones (already issued by Microsoft) that use it to authenticate their users, and any refugee using his or her smartphone to connect to social media to find out where to go would also be signaling his or her location to border authorities.
As the EU struggles to strengthen its border security in order to preserve citizens’ freedom of movement across internal frontiers, tracking and finding refugees and economic migrants before they reach European soil will become a priority.
Yet, aside from the civil-liberties problems with this kind of tracking, no technology can successfully address the underlying problem: the conflicts from which millions of people are seeking refuge.
Historically, we have been far more ingenious at developing new technologies to kill people than we have been at protecting them.
Early in the Syrian civil war, when President Bashar al-Assad’s government was claiming that the many pictures of atrocities that opposition members posted to social media were fake, it would have been possible to develop a United Nations platform with verification procedures to ensure the authenticity of photos and videos posted.
But no technology can overcome some governments’ lack of political will to hold other governments to account.
Likewise, no technology can compel combatants to negotiate a peace.
Even the atomic bomb, which did force Japan to surrender and ended World War II, depended on Harry Truman’s will to use it.
P.W. Singer and August Cole’s novel Ghost Fleet, set in a future war between the United States and China, is remarkable in that the authors describe all of the astonishing technologies that both sides use on the basis of publicly available information from actual US and Chinese military sources (micro-drones, robots, and holograms abound).
But the outcome of the war is still determined by human will, courage, and determination, which are the same attributes needed to stop human suffering in any age.
Tradable Prosperity
MILAN – The global economy is experiencing a major growth challenge.
Many advanced countries are attempting to revive sustainable growth in the face of a decelerating global economy.
But the challenges across countries are not the same.
In particular, the tradable and non-tradable parts of a range of economies differ in important ways.
In the non-tradable sector (60-70% of the economy in advanced countries), the main growth inhibitors are weak demand, as in the United States following the financial crisis, and structural and competitive impediments to productivity, as in Japan.
In the tradable sector, growth depends on a country’s productivity relative to incomes and competitiveness.
At the global level, there can also be a shortage of aggregate demand on the tradable side.
The Nobel laureate economist Robert Solow has shown that growth comes from three sources: the working population, capital investment, and technological progress.
A growing young population helps to maintain fiscal balance and ensure intergenerational equity, but it does not by itself increase incomes.
On the other hand, economic growth below the sum of growth in the working population and the labor-saving part of technological change fuels unemployment.
Developing countries, once they enter rapid-growth mode, generate growth from capital deepening via investment, in a sense making up for past underinvestment.
And it is possible for advanced countries to fall behind by under-investing, particularly in the public sector, relying instead on less sustainable debt-fueled means of generating demand.
So a legitimate part of a strategy to restore growth is investment.
But, as Solow noted, investment has its limits, owing to diminishing marginal returns.
Often, these limits are not binding, but, once capital deepening is exhausted, technological progress, which makes inputs more productive in creating final value, is the long-run driver of growth.
The challenge is to apply these insights in a world characterized by global economic interdependence, major imbalances, and a worsening growth and employment problem.
It is a world in which economies are connected directly in the tradable sector of the global economy, and indirectly through the demand and employment linkages between the tradable and non-tradable sectors of individual economies.
In the short run, the non-tradable sector is, by definition, subject to domestic-demand constraints.
A shortfall in non-tradable demand inevitably limits growth on that side of the economy.
Government can, of course, bridge the gap via deficit spending (preferably focused on employment-generating investment that enhances future growth).
But the advanced countries are, to varying degrees, fiscally constrained by relatively high and rising public debt, largely owing to fiscal imbalances that were hidden from view until defective growth models broke down in the crisis of 2008.
Just how fiscally constrained these countries are remains subject to debate.
Italy and Spain are clearly constrained by the absence of private capital in their respective sovereign-debt markets, with rising yields threatening their fiscal stability and reform programs.
They need the eurozone core and the International Monetary Fund as temporary lenders of last resort until they restore policy credibility and regain investors’ confidence.
The US sovereign-debt market shows no similar evidence of having reached a limit yet.
But bond markets do not issue many early warning signals: witness the sudden run-up of yields in Italy and Spain a year ago.
The more complex growth issues have to do with the tradable part of the global economy, where global aggregate demand – and the derived demand that lands in various places in global supply or value-added chains – is the target of competition.
Total demand and its growth do matter, but so does market share.
Given the growth patterns across advanced and developing countries prior to the crisis, and then the large negative shock, it is likely that there is a shortfall of tradable global aggregate demand, impeding an important component of global growth.
But, for individual economies, relative productivity versus income levels determines the share of global tradable aggregate demand that is accessible.
Unlike the non-tradable side of the economy, the domestic component of global tradable demand is not an absolute constraint on growth; nor is the rate of growth of global tradable demand an absolute constraint, given the possibility of increasing share.
Of course, not everyone can gain share at the same time.
Fortunately, if countries increase productivity with the aim of boosting relative productivity and growth potential on the tradable side, this will increase incomes and accelerate the growth of global aggregate demand.
It may look like a zero-sum game, but it is not.
When incomes get significantly out of line with productivity levels (as they have recently), reviving growth requires resetting the terms of trade, which can be done with exchange rates, whether managed or set by markets.
In the eurozone, where countries with competitiveness problems do not have the exchange-rate adjustment mechanism, restrained income growth and productivity-boosting reforms are probably needed, as was the case in Germany between 2000 and 2006, and now in several southern European countries.
What is true for countries on the tradable side is also true for workers, who are differentially affected by the evolution of global supply chains.
The efficient integration of global supply chains has created employment opportunities in developing countries and in the higher value-added sectors of advanced countries.
But it has also reduced employment options for a subset of middle-income people in the tradable sectors of advanced economies.
Many countries are struggling to adapt their growth patterns to the new challenges they face in a slowing global economy.
To be effective and properly targeted, policies need to include an accurate diagnosis of growth potential and impediments in both the tradable and non-tradable parts of the economy.
Focusing on one (say, the competitiveness problem in the tradable sector) to the exclusion of the other (perhaps a serious non-tradable demand shortfall or stagnant absolute productivity) will not be enough.
Can Trade Agreements Stop Currency Manipulation?
WASHINGTON, DC – It is impossible to deny that trade and exchange rates are closely linked.
But does that mean that international trade agreements should include provisions governing national policies that affect currency values?
Some economists certainly think so.
Simon Johnson, for example, recently argued that mega-regional agreements like the Trans-Pacific Partnership should be used to discourage countries from intervening in the currency market to prevent exchange-rate appreciation; Fred Bergsten has made a similar argument.
But the United States Treasury and the Office of the US Trade Representative continue to argue that macroeconomic issues should be kept separate from trade negotiations.
As it stands, the relevant international institutions – the World Trade Organization and the International Monetary Fund – are not organized to respond effectively to possible currency manipulation on their own.
Incorporating macroeconomic policies affecting exchange rates into trade negotiations would require either that the WTO acquire the technical capacity (and mandate) to analyze and adjudicate relevant national policies or that the IMF join the dispute-settlement mechanisms that accompany trade treaties.
To be sure, since 2007, the IMF has prohibited “large-scale intervention in one direction in the exchange market,” in a decision on “bilateral surveillance” that also identifies “large and prolonged” current-account imbalances as a reason for review.
But neither that decision nor later IMF policy papers on multilateral surveillance provide specific and comparative quantitative indicators that would eliminate the need for case-by-case judgment.
The situation is complicated by the multitude of mechanisms whereby treasuries and central banks can drive down their exchange rates to gain a competitive trade advantage.
The most direct method is purchases of foreign assets.
But, in a world of large short-term capital flows, central-banks’ policy interest rates – or even just announcements about likely future rates – also have a major impact.
Moreover, quantitative easing affects exchange rates and trade, even if central banks purchase only domestic assets, as demonstrated by recent movements in the exchange rates of the dollar, the euro, and the yen.
One could go even further.
An income-tax hike will reduce private demand (unless one believes in perfect Ricardian equivalence), including demand for other countries’ exports.
Other macroeconomic policies of all kinds influence the current-account balance.
In short, for “policies affecting the exchange rate” to become part of trade agreements, monetary and fiscal policies would have to become part of trade agreements.
In that case, there would be no trade agreements at all.
Consider the problem that would be posed by the eurozone – an economy that faces major challenges in reconciling its members’ divergent monetary, fiscal, and exchange-rate needs.
Germany’s current-account surplus has stood near 7% of GDP – bigger than China’s – for two years, and is likely to grow even larger, owing to the euro’s recent depreciation.
Meanwhile, most other eurozone countries have lately been forced to tighten fiscal policy, thereby reducing or eliminating their current-account deficits.
As a result, the total eurozone trade surplus is now massive.
Because individual eurozone members have no monetary-policy tools at their disposal, the only way that Germany can reduce its surplus while remaining in the eurozone is to conduct expansionary fiscal policy.
The economist Stefan Kawalec has explicitly referred to the current policy mix in the eurozone as “currency manipulation.”
Trade negotiations are hard enough to conclude.
The need to wrestle with macroeconomic-policy issues could easily cause talks to bog down – and give protectionist lobbies the political ammunition they need.
That is why the Trade Representative is wisely trying not to add macroeconomic policy into the bargaining, despite demands from powerful voices in the US Congress.
None of this means that macroeconomic policies that affect exchange rates are not problematic.
They are.
But trade negotiations are not the right forum for discussing the causes and consequences of current-account imbalances and reaching agreements on macroeconomic-policy coordination; that is what the IMF and the G-20 are for.
In fact, the issue of large actual or potential discrepancies between aggregate savings and investment in countries or monetary zones, reflected in current-account imbalances, is at the heart of the IMF’s emerging multilateral surveillance role; it has been a focus of the G-20 as well.
The G-20 “mutual assessment process” – established to analyze national economic policies’ effects on other countries and on global growth, with the goal of formulating individual adjustment commitments – has highlighted the difficulty of reaching agreement on macroeconomic policies with significant spillover effects.
Indeed, it is even more difficult than reaching trade agreements, which must cover issues like tariffs, quotas, quality standards, regulatory regimes for particular sectors, and relevant microeconomic issues.
Merging all of these challenging topics into a single negotiation process is a recipe for deadlock.
A better approach would include strengthening the IMF’s multilateral surveillance role.
Doing so would broaden discussions of macroeconomic policy to include employment issues – specifically, the potential impact of large foreign-trade surpluses on domestic jobs.
And it would give trade negotiations a chance to succeed.
Trade More than Aid
The recent G-8 meeting in Scotland, as well as concerts and celebrity activism, has put a spotlight on the amount of international assistance reaching the countries and peoples of Africa.
This is understandable in light of the continent’s persistent poverty, seemingly endless conflicts, and the prevalence of HIV-AIDS and other infectious diseases.
If properly targeted and conditioned on reforms, international aid can make a positive difference.
But aid is no panacea.
The fact that so many problems persist despite tens of billions of dollars of assistance and years of effort is a sad reminder that aid can allow governments to undertake foolish investments that accomplish little, or can easily be siphoned off by corrupt officials.
Moreover, aid is inherently uncertain, leaving Africans at the mercy of outside forces beyond their control.
Another problem with the emphasis on aid (in addition to the near impossibility of accurately measuring the scale of the flows from all sources) is that the political effort to increase it absorbs attention that would be better spent on a more powerful instrument of economic development: trade.
Trade is the all-but-forgotten weapon in the battle against poverty, but it can provide more help to the poor than aid can.
If rich countries – in particular, the United States, the 25 members of the EU, and Japan – really want to help poor people, they will open their markets to what poor countries produce, especially textiles, apparel, agricultural products, and commodities.
Phasing out tariffs and import quotas for poor countries’ exports – and phasing out subsidies for their own producers of agricultural products – would have a dramatic effect on the lives of hundreds of millions of people in Africa and elsewhere.
Private businesses would develop, jobs would be created, and incomes would rise.
Moreover, trade benefits the world in many other ways, providing a major boost to the advanced economies of the world.
One recent study estimates that incomes in the US alone could rise by $500 billion a year if global trade were to become truly free.
Similarly, incomes around the world would rise significantly from liberalizing more global trade in both goods and services.
Trade is also an engine of political and economic reform.
What countries must do to join the World Trade Organization is precisely what they must do to become productive and democratic: accept the rule of law, reduce corruption, and become open, accountable, and transparent.
At the same time, increased trade can help create and sustain a middle class – precisely the social group that often stands at the forefront of movements for democratic reform.
Trade has a strategic benefit as well, for it gives countries a stake in good relations with one another and in maintaining order and stability.
A China that trades extensively with the US and its Asian neighbors will think twice before it pursues any policy that would place those relationships at risk.
Likewise, trade between India and Pakistan could contribute to the normalization of ties between these long-estranged neighbors.
But if the case for expanding world trade is compelling, the prospects for actually doing so are clouded, owing to a simple but nonetheless fundamental political reality: those who gain from trade, which is almost everyone, are not always aware of it. The benefits of freer trade, such as job creation, lower inflation, and greater consumer choice, are often invisible or only partly visible. 
By contrast, those who lose from trade, or who fear that they could lose, while relatively small in number, are anything but invisible.
They feel the threat acutely and act accordingly, often dominating their country’s political process.
Highly motivated minorities can and do overwhelm the general interests of majorities who are not seized with an issue.
What is needed, therefore, is a pledge by governments to make global trade liberalization a much higher political priority.
This will happen only if all of the major trading countries demonstrate a commitment to play by the rules.
For China, this means respecting and enforcing intellectual property rights, allowing non-Chinese firms to compete on an equal basis, and setting its currency at a fair level rather than one that is artificially low.
For the US, the EU, and Japan, it means ending massive subsidies to farmers and curtailing other forms of protection provided to uncompetitive sectors.
Governments can take these steps if they introduce and expand programs designed to assist those who would lose their jobs as a result of trade liberalization.
Displaced farmers and workers must be provided with the education and training required to enter new jobs, as well as the funds, health care, and other essential services that they need to tide them through the transition.
There is urgency in all of this.
The current (Doha) round of global trade negotiations is behind schedule; the next session, to be held in Hong Kong, is only months away.
Where are the many people who benefit from trade, including the celebrities who care so deeply about alleviating poverty and promoting development?
Live Trade, anyone?
The Chimera of Currency Manipulation
CAMBRIDGE – US President Barack Obama is still pressing to obtain Trade Promotion Authority and use it to conclude negotiations for the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) and the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP) with the European Union.
But many in the US Congress insist that provisions must be added to the agreements to prevent currency manipulation.
Let’s be clear: If the US were to insist that “strong and enforceable currency disciplines” be part of trade agreements, no deals would be concluded.
Other countries would refuse – and they would be right.
Linking efforts to prevent currency manipulation to trade agreements has always been a bad idea, and it still is.
True, there are times when particular countries’ currencies can be judged to be undervalued or overvalued, and there are times when their trading partners have a legitimate interest in raising the issue.
But even when currency misalignment is relatively clear, trade agreements are not the right way to address it.
More suitable venues for resolving exchange-rate issues include the International Monetary Fund, the G-20, the G-7, and bilateral negotiations.
For example the undervalued renminbi was successfully addressed in bilateral China-US discussions from 2004 to 2011.
China allowed the currency to appreciate 35% over time.
Today it is well within a normal range.
But the fact remains that it is mostly impossible to tell whether a currency is overvalued or undervalued.
Manipulation is not like the existence of a tariff or quota that can be verified by independent observers.
A necessary condition for concluding that a country is manipulating its currency is that its authorities are intervening in the foreign-exchange market.
The People’s Bank of China, for example, bought a record quantity of dollars from 2004 to 2014, thereby preventing the renminbi’s exchange rate from appreciating as fast as it otherwise would have done.
But the Chinese are not doing that anymore.
If anything, they have been selling dollars over the last year, keeping the renminbi’s value higher than it would otherwise be.
Moreover, there are often legitimate reasons for intervening in foreign-exchange markets.
For example, under the Plaza Accord, the US joined with Japan, Germany, and other G-7 countries in 1985 to intervene cooperatively to weaken the dollar.
Indeed, a majority of countries pursue either fixed exchange rates, exchange-rate targets, or managed floating, all of which by definition entail buying and selling foreign exchange to moderate or eliminate exchange-rate fluctuations.
China is not a party to the TPP, but Japan is, and many congressional critics cite it as the target of their insistence that provisions to prevent currency manipulation be included in the deal.
The yen has depreciated sharply over the last year, and some US economic interests, particularly the auto industry, accuse Japan of manipulation to keep the currency undervalued.
But the last time the Bank of Japan intervened in the foreign exchange market was in 2011.
In 2013, Japan joined other G-7 countries in agreeing to a proposal by the US Treasury to refrain from foreign-exchange intervention.
The euro, too, has depreciated significantly against the dollar over the last year, and some US trade critics want provisions to prevent currency manipulation added to the TTIP.
But the European Central Bank has not intervened in the foreign-exchange market since 2000 – and that was to support the euro, not weaken it.
Critics who accuse Japan and other countries of currency manipulation presumably know that they have not been intervening in the foreign-exchange market in recent years.
They generally point instead to recent monetary loosening.
The predictable side effect of quantitative easing (QE) – that is, the purchase of domestic bonds – by the BOJ and the ECB has been the depreciation of the yen and the euro.
But central banks can hardly be enjoined from easing monetary policy when domestic economic conditions warrant it, as has obviously been the case in Japan and Europe (and in the US when the Federal Reserve embraced QE).
If monetary expansion does not merit the charge of currency manipulation, still less do other sorts of economic policies.
Some have argued that even though the PBOC has stopped buying US and other foreign assets, China’s sovereign wealth funds still do, and that this, too, counts as manipulation.
But it is perfectly sensible and legitimate for China to put some of its savings abroad.
(The US would become worried if China and other countries did not want to buy its assets.)
Every country makes policy decisions of many sorts every week, many of which can be expected to have an indirect effect on the exchange rate in one direction or the other.
The mere fact that a particular policy might weaken the currency does not make that country a manipulator.
Finally, provisions that target other central banks could also be applied against the US.
This would not be a case of misusing a tool (a frequent occurrence in trade policy when interest groups lobby for protection against foreign competition); rather, it would be a case of using the tool in precisely the intended way.
This is worth bearing in mind, given that the Fed’s adoption of QE in 2008 (which it continued to pursue until last year) had the effect of weakening the dollar from 2009 to 2011, prompting the same accusations of “beggar thy neighbor policies” against the US that congressmen now level against others.
Such charges are always on shaky ground, regardless of their origin.
Monetary stimulus in one country may even have a beneficial effect on the rest of the world, as its own restored income growth boosts imports from its trading partners.
Whether one considers the accusations of currency manipulation against the US in 2010, its trading partners in 2015, or a future defendant, designating some trade agency to rule on them would merely cause trouble.
Trading In Hate
NEW YORK – The massacre in Norway in July 2011 and the recent attack on a Sikh temple in Oak Creek, Wisconsin, were the work of right-wing extremists who sought to remake the world in their neo-Nazi image.
Likewise, the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, were the work of Islamist extremists who view other religions and cultures as a threat.
But it would be simplistic to believe that our leaders do not add fuel to the fire of hatred, even if their chauvinism takes a more “civilized” form.
Just ask the Japanese, who were continually denounced in the 1980’s as wicked traders.
Or consider how the unceasing refrain against outsourcing nowadays has demonized India.
This is not new.
Japan’s heavy burden of atrocities during World War II effectively erased from America’s popular memory the Immigration Act of 1924 and other federal legislation aimed at excluding the Japanese and the Chinese from the United States, as well as racist state legislation, such as California’s 1913 Alien Land Act.
With the war’s outbreak, Americans of Japanese origin were expropriated and herded into concentration camps.
California Attorney General Earl Warren championed the measures – the same Earl Warren, who, a decade later, as Chief Justice of the US Supreme Court, would oversee the rejection of the separate-but-equal doctrine at the heart of America’s segregation of its black citizens.
The anti-Japanese hysteria of the 1980’s fell on fertile ground.
Many in the US feared that, just as the nineteenth century had been British and the twentieth century had been American, the twenty-first century would be Japanese.
But, unlike the British or the Americans, the Japanese allegedly were gaining ground in nefarious ways, exporting aggressively to the US and unfairly excluding US exports from their domestic market.
Virtually every Japanese policy was interpreted in the worst possible light.
The propaganda was bipartisan in the US, and, with few noteworthy exceptions, was widely disseminated by the country’s uncritical and pseudo-patriotic media.
I recall the Nobel laureate Paul Samuelson – alongside John Maynard Keynes, arguably the greatest economist of his time – remarking that anti-Japanese propaganda had gone so far that Japan’s critics would argue that the Japanese bow in greeting Westerners to make it easier to cut them off at the knees.
The effect, particularly given a long history of anti-Japanese sentiment, was a predictable wave of racist violence, including the destruction of Japanese cars.
The beating death of Vincent Chin, a Chinese-American who was mistaken for a Japanese, also resonated historically, recalling a pseudo-scientific article on how to distinguish the Chinese from the Japanese that Life magazine published in December 1941.
The Indian situation in the US today is different; there is no baggage of unpleasant memories on which prejudice and violence can draw.
Yet, like a desert cactus, hate can thrive on very little.
Unfortunately, US President Barack Obama’s administration has continually harped on outsourcing to India as a cause of American job losses.
Similarly, Senator Charles Schumer of New York has indulged in Japan-bashing, China-bashing, and India-bashing – a singular record of truculence and economic illiteracy – while Senator Barbara Boxer of California attacked her most recent electoral opponent, Carly Fiorina, for eliminating 30,000 jobs at Hewlett Packard during her stewardship of the company.
In fact, in a highly competitive world, Hewlett-Packard managed to save 150,000 jobs by sacrificing those 30,000.
In the current presidential election campaign, the Democratic Party is attacking Obama’s Republican challenger, Mitt Romney, on the same specious grounds, with a complacent media acquiescing in the Democrats’ de facto India-baiting.
The net result has been to fuel resentment against India that spills over into occasional violence.
Groups calling themselves “dot-busters” have attacked Indian women.
When I have written in favor of freer trade and liberal immigration, I have been denounced as a “curry nigger.”
Nor has the Obama administration helped matters by shifting the blame for the failure of the Doha Round of multilateral trade negotiations onto India.
Outside the US, it is well known that Obama himself pulled the plug on Doha.
The notion that “we are open and others are closed,” a cherished belief of US politicians and media – and an article of faith with the current administration – also feeds the notion that countries like India are wicked traders, much like the Japanese in the 1980’s.
Much of the world expected more elevated behavior from Obama.
Unfortunately, it has gotten a much lower standard than it anticipated.
Trading up Global Trade Talks
In the year since the breakdown of the trade talks in Cancun, sentiment has increasingly grown in the developing world that no agreement is better than a bad agreement.
But what would a good agreement look like?
The British Commonwealth recently posed this question to me and the Initiative for Policy Dialogue, an international network of economists committed to helping developing countries.
Our first message was that the current round of trade negotiations, especially as it has evolved, does not deserve even to be called a Development Round.
Well before the riots that marked the World Trade Organization talks in Seattle in 1999, I called for a true "development round" of trade talks to redress the inequities of previous rounds.
The advanced countries, with their dominant corporate and financial interests, had set the agenda for those negotiations. Whether or not developing countries benefited was of little concern.
Indeed, in the last round of trade negotiations, the Uruguay Round, the world's poorest region, sub-Saharan Africa, was actually made worse off.
Our second message was optimistic: if the agenda of the current round is reoriented towards development, and if assistance is provided to manage implementation and adjustment costs, developing countries can gain much.
We analyzed which reforms in the international trade regime would most benefit those in the developing world, and we presented an alternative agenda based on our findings.
The results were perhaps obvious: more people live from agriculture in the developing world than from manufacturing, so agricultural liberalization must be high on the agenda.
But genuinely beneficial agricultural reform would need to go further than merely transforming export subsidies into other types of subsidies, because many supposedly non-distorting subsidies lead to more output, which hurts producers in developing countries by lowering prices.
Trade reforms must be sensitive to the effects on developing countries, many of which are net importers of subsidized agricultural commodities.
But some subsidies, like cotton subsidies in the United States, are rightly emblematic of America's bad faith.
Eliminating this subsidy would help 10 million poor cotton farmers in sub-Saharan Africa. American taxpayers would also benefit.
The only losers would be the 25,000 rich farmers who currently divvy up $3-4 billion in government handouts each year.
Developing countries also need access for the unskilled labor-intensive services in which they have a comparative advantage.
These were off the agenda in earlier trade rounds, as the US pushed for liberalization of financial services - thus serving its own comparative advantage.
Today, unskilled services remain largely off the agenda.
Developing countries' alleged gains from capital market liberalization have been widely discussed (although recent studies raise some doubts about these benefits).
Nevertheless, the global gains from allowing freer flows of unskilled labor (even temporarily), let alone the benefits to developing countries, far outweigh the benefits from capital market liberalization.
But this issue too is not on the agenda.
The trade talks in Cancun raised new subjects - the so-called Singapore issues.
But even a cursory look at these items reveals that they primarily reflect the interests of developed countries.
Indeed, poor countries' development would arguably have been set back if they had acquiesced in some of the demands.
Consider the issue of government procurement.
The single largest area of US government procurement is defense, a sector in which even the European Union has found it difficult to make inroads.
Are developing countries really targeting this area in the next few years?
Clearly, this issue is not high on their agenda.
Competition is another example.
Without competition, lowering tariffs may merely be reflected in higher profit margins for a monopoly importer.
The most important competition issue for developing countries, however, is reform of dumping duties.
The US and EU keep out products from developing countries, alleging that they charge less than the cost of production.
But why would anyone knowingly sell at a loss?
This could only be rational if the seller can hope to establish a monopoly position and extract large profits in the future.
But few developing countries are in a position to establish such monopoly positions, so the dumping charges are mostly bogus.
As tariff barriers have come down, the unfair "fair trade" laws are increasingly being used as America's favored protectionist tool.
Treating foreign and domestic firms the same with respect to competitive practices would stop these abuses.
This, too, should be a high priority of a true development round.
The breakdown of the Cancun talks may yet provide an opportunity for deeper reflection.
Now that rich countries no longer need to worry about losing the developing world to Communism, they have an opportunity to redefine the global economic order according to the same principles on which they built successful national economies: fair competition and social justice.
Unfortunately, this opportunity was squandered in the Uruguay Round, as developed countries advanced their own interests at the expense of less developed countries.
The round of trade negotiations begun in Doha in November 2001 was launched in a different spirit.
It aspired to promote trade as a vehicle of partnership between developed and developing countries.
Regrettably, in spite of its name, the Development Round has offered far less to developing countries than one would have hoped.
Closing Asia’s Emerging Skills Gap
SEOUL – Asia is facing a human-capital challenge.
Over the last three decades, significant gains in workforce size and quality helped Asia to become a hub of global supply chains – and thus to sustain rapid progress toward advanced-economy income levels and living standards.
But with workers increasingly unable to meet the demands of the labor market, the region’s remarkable development success could be derailed.
Asia has plenty of educated young workers.
But, at a time of industrial upgrading and ever-increasing technological sophistication, the knowledge and skills gained in school are often insufficient.
As a result, youth unemployment, underemployment, and job dissatisfaction are on the rise.
Throughout Asia, a significant share of workers feel they are over- or under-educated for their jobs, while employers often lament a lack of qualified graduates.
A Manpower Group survey shows that 48% of employers had difficulty filling vacancies in Asia in 2015, compared to 28% in 2006.
Meanwhile, many university graduates – including a whopping 45% in South Korea – are struggling to find jobs.
Despite variations among countries in Asia, some weaknesses in policies and systems designed to boost skills development are endemic.
Among the most damaging is the inability of many countries to impart the right skills through pre-employment and on-the-job training.
In India, for example, only 0.8% of students, on average, participated in formal technical and vocational education at the secondary level from 2006 to 2010.
The country’s technical and vocational education and training (TVET) system has enough capacity to train less than one-quarter of the 13 million people entering the labor market each year.
TVET is rarely available to workers in small and medium-size enterprises (SMEs) or the informal sector, and it receives too little public financing.
Moreover, across Asia, a lack of involvement by private companies – that is, potential employers – further undermines the ability of TVET systems to respond adequately to changes in the labor market, thereby reducing graduate employability.
In Bangladesh, Indonesia, and Sri Lanka, less than one-quarter of companies conduct formal in-house training.
A dearth of well-qualified teachers and ineffective governance exacerbates the situation.
Governments across Asia must devise ways to transform their education and training systems, so that workers acquire the skills they need to boost economic growth and productivity – the key to better jobs and higher wages.
Most important, governments must make skills acquisition a central feature of national development policies.
At a time of rapid change, education and skills training should be coordinated with, say, trade and industrial policies to improve the chances that emerging labor-market requirements will be met.
Moreover, general education and TVET systems need to be restructured.
In many Asian countries, formal education is often overly academic or simply low-quality, undermining not only graduates’ employability, but also their capacity to reap the benefits of further TVET.
To be effective, secondary and tertiary schools must produce graduates with both soft skills, such as communication and teamwork, and relevant technical skills.
Here, stronger partnerships between educators and employers to develop curriculum standards, create internship opportunities, and provide financing would be help significantly.
As for TVET systems, both their capacity and quality must be improved.
As governments improve their capacity for supervision, coordination, and regulation of the TVET system, actual skills training should be shifted to the private sector, thereby transforming the current supply-driven system to one that responds effectively to changing market demand.
To this end, governments should encourage public-private partnerships focused on, for example, identifying the labor market’s unmet needs, setting TVET policy priorities, developing curricula and national standards, training TVET teachers, and implementing cost-sharing mechanisms.
Governments must also ensure better access to TVET systems for disadvantaged groups, including children from poor families and rural areas and employees in SMEs and the informal sector.
Given that the challenge of upgrading educational and skills-training systems is shared across Asia, national governments should not be working in isolation.
More knowledge-sharing, especially with regard to curriculum development and teacher training, as well as expert and student exchanges and improved technology-sharing, would strengthen everyone’s efforts considerably.
Moreover, promoting greater student/worker mobility and improving labor-market flexibility, both within countries and across the region, would help to improve the allocation of skilled workers.
In the coming decades, Asia will continue to contribute a large number of workers to the global labor market.
How well equipped these workers are to meet ever-evolving market needs will be a key factor influencing not only Asia’s trajectory, but also that of the entire global economy.
Transatlantic Drift
BERLIN – On the banks of the Rhine and in Prague, NATO and the European Union will pay homage to the new American president in early April.
There will be pretty pictures and lofty speeches on the future of the transatlantic relationship – in other words, business as usual.
But prior to the Strasbourg and Prague summits, transatlantic relations will be put to the test at the G-20 summit in London.
Barack Obama’s election was meant to improve everything – or so it was hoped.
The drift in transatlantic relations during the eight years of George W. Bush’s presidency was meant to be stopped – and even reversed.
That hope is fading, as the global economic crisis brings the differences between America and Europe to a head.
Of course, at the end of the London summit, the assembled leaders will agree on a joint statement, because nobody can afford failure.
But differences will remain.
The US wants to resolve the global crisis by providing substantially more financial help, which Europe is refusing to commit, preferring to focus on financial regulatory reform.
In the end, a formulaic compromise will be found to include both in the statement.
The media will then praise their respective governments’ “courage” and “assertiveness,” and cast the outcome as “win on points.”
But what will fall by the wayside is a forceful global response to the gravest crisis since 1929.
For that battle, there is still no leadership in sight.
The main reason for the new dose of transatlantic drift is that the crisis is being experienced differently.
America fears deflation; Europe – driven by its largest economy, Germany – fears national debt and inflation.
The US has made a complete U-turn in ideological and practical terms, relying on Keynes and massive debt-financed public demand to rein in further economic decline.
But Europeans, while having launched national recovery plans, remain unwilling to take on a similar debt risk.
Moreover, the European welfare state will cushion the impact of the economic crash, at least for some time.
But political tactics also play a role.
Obama has just been elected for four years, and his political fate depends on whether he can engineer an economic recovery.
Any hesitation could have profound and irreparable consequences for him.
In Europe, however, leaders face very different imperatives.
British Prime Minister Gordon Brown is in a hopeless situation.
The economic crash in the United Kingdom is at least as severe as in America, forcing the government to rely almost entirely on deficit spending to prevent a complete meltdown of its financial system.
Brown has few options left, and the UK is nowhere near the worst of the crisis.
Only a miracle can save him.
Brown’s fate has far-reaching effects for both Germany and France, because it is seen as the writing on the wall.
German Chancellor Angela Merkel and French President Nicolas Sarkozy don’t want to gamble away their own political futures.
Merkel will play the central role in deciding how Europe positions itself, not only because she is the leader of the EU’s largest economy, but also because she wants to be re-elected in September.
The outcome of that election is increasingly uncertain, and Merkel is now in a very uncomfortable position, which could grow into a real predicament.
If Merkel opts for substantial deficit spending now , she will lose support, which is already fading fast because of increased state debt, nationalization, stimulus programs, etc.
But if unemployment shoots up in the early summer and some household-name companies go under, she could be seen as having done too little, allowing the Social Democrats to grab the election.
It remains to be seen whether the outcome will be decided on the basis of unemployment or state debt.
But Merkel will do whatever she can to avoid committing herself prematurely, and the London summit is much too early.
This kind of legitimate and yet petty-minded thinking has serious international consequences.
The quarrel between Europe and America is blocking concerted action by the two main Western economies, thereby weakening the West as a whole.
Moreover, it is driving the US away from Europe and further in the direction of China.
This will undermine the transatlantic relationship even more, enhance China’s role in the global handling of the crisis, and in all probability ensure that the Chinese emerge as its biggest winner.
The world will have changed once the global economic crisis is over, and the Europeans will not be able to complain about it then.
The world will be more Pacific and less transatlantic, and the new axis of global politics will be formed by the Sino-American tandem.
Secretly, the hope in Berlin, Paris, and other European capitals appears to be that Obama will still sort things out.
If he succeeds as a super Keynes, no one will have had to take any risks with their own political future.
If he fails, well, thank God one wasn’t involved.
Both stances are equally dangerous as far as Europe’s vital interests are concerned.
If Europe sees its role in this crisis – which might yet turn into a full-blown depression – as that of a free-rider, it will be treated accordingly in the future.
Transforming Science Education
CHICAGO – Throughout the West, declining standards in science education are threatening future prosperity.
Since the mid-nineteenth century, the West has depended on technical innovation and scientific derring-do for its influence and growth.
But the West now faces serious competition from the rising nations of Asia, where education in math and science is flourishing.
In general, competition in science and technology is a blessing – the more advanced a nation is, the better a customer it is.
And collaboration and exchange of people make for profitable businesses and higher standards of living.
But it must be recognized that falling educational standards will eventually hit economic growth.
The West, particularly the United States, has lived through such a moment of recognition before, when the USSR launched Sputnik in 1957.
The so-called “Sputnik shock” convinced America and the West of the need for radical reform of science education, particularly recruitment, training, and retention of teachers.
One reform that demands priority today concerns high school science.
Mathematics, the foundation for all science, depends on its concise language and logical ordering.
Physics, once the subject most dependent on mathematics, provides knowledge about the structure of atoms, and the use of mathematics there has now spread to chemistry and biology.
Essentially all phenomena in chemistry find explanations in the quantum atom, while chemistry and physics undergird molecular biology, which, since the discovery of DNA in the 1950s, dominates modern biology.
All other sciences – geology, astronomy, neuroscience, oceanography, and myriad hyphenated subjects – depend upon overlapping combinations of biology, chemistry, and physics.
Yet today, the vast majority of high schools start the study of science with biology.
In America, the requirement is usually for three years of science study, and, today, most U.S. students take science in this order: biology, chemistry, physics.
This sequence of study was devised in 1893.
I believe that it is obsolete, pedagogically disastrous, and ignores the tremendous scientific advances of the twentieth century.
Other industrial nations may cycle through pieces of the disciplines, missing the essential coherence of the P-C-B sequence.
Studying science should begin with physics, not biology.
In studying physics, students study algebra simultaneously, motivating them with a sense of the power of mathematics.
Moreover, physics begins with everyday phenomena requiring few new words (as opposed to conventional ninth-grade biology): motion, velocity, acceleration, falling objects, a sense of gravity as a force, and some new concepts, e.g. mass, momentum, and energy, but with crisp definitions.
Ninth-grade physics, unlike ninth-grade biology, illustrates the grand sweep of the laws of nature, and the power of an equation to describe a vast number of different phenomena can be taught at this level.
Classroom experiments make use of simple laboratory devices: inclined planes, pulleys, springs, simple pendulums, but the rules that are revealed have validity out in the real world.
The fall of a weight (or an apple!) can be connected to the moon’s orbit around the earth and even to the structure of galaxies holding billions of solar systems.
Indeed, we can study, on a convenient classroom scale, the same forces that move atoms and planets.
The last month or more of ninth-grade physics introduces atoms, invisible to the naked eye but with strong indirect support.
Here physics introduces scales of distances, atoms to galaxies, scales of time, nanoseconds to centuries, and scales of energy from electron volts to megajoules.
These orders of magnitude require metaphors and repetition, but they serve as crucial concepts in our world, especially in cosmology and in evolutionary biology.
Tenth-grade chemistry makes use of ninth-grade physics, deepening and enriching the student’s grasp, but no basic chemical or biological principles are required for ninth-grade physics.
Instead, qualitative applications of physics to chemistry and biology heighten interest and emphasize the connections.
Chemistry is largely a study of molecules, and when they are complex, there is the mysterious transition to life and biology.
At all stages of the science curriculum, basic questions must be asked.
How does something work?
How do we know?
What are the common laws?
It was not a physicist, but a biologist, Julius Meyer, who first proposed the law of conservation of energy from a study of biological energy processes.
The chemist Dalton first gave a proof of the existence of atoms and the engineer Sadi Carnot first gave a proof of the Second Law of Thermodynamics.
The sequence Physics-Chemistry-Biology implies that continuous collegial professional development for teachers is essential.
Teachers (including those in mathematics) should meet regularly to plot the evolution of their courses, their essential coherence, and the inclusion of stories that illustrate how science works.
Teachers need time to talk together.
I know of more than 1,000 high schools that have implemented the P-C-B sequence.
There is almost universal joy as students begin to grasp the whole picture.
Elective science courses zoom up in popularity.
Because this sequence is for all students, what will be retained in the future are the stories and, most importantly, a scientific way of thinking.
There is no job, no profession, civic activity that will not profit from this kind of education.
But to restore the vitality of science, we need to look at the entire educational system: teachers from pre-school through high school, state and national standards, productive and educationally reinforcing assessments, teaching materials and educational technology, and progress in the neurosciences, cognitive psychology, developmental biology, and nutrition.
And leadership for this huge revolutionary effort will probably have to come from visionary business executives whose profits depend on education and rationality.
The Trans-Pacific Free-Trade Charade
NEW YORK – As negotiators and ministers from the United States and 11 other Pacific Rim countries meet in Atlanta in an effort to finalize the details of the sweeping new Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP), some sober analysis is warranted.
The biggest regional trade and investment agreement in history is not what it seems.
You will hear much about the importance of the TPP for “free trade.”
The reality is that this is an agreement to manage its members’ trade and investment relations – and to do so on behalf of each country’s most powerful business lobbies.
Make no mistake: It is evident from the main outstanding issues, over which negotiators are still haggling, that the TPP is not about “free” trade.
New Zealand has threatened to walk away from the agreement over the way Canada and the US manage trade in dairy products.
Australia is not happy with how the US and Mexico manage trade in sugar.
And the US is not happy with how Japan manages trade in rice.
These industries are backed by significant voting blocs in their respective countries.
And they represent just the tip of the iceberg in terms of how the TPP would advance an agenda that actually runs counter to free trade.
For starters, consider what the agreement would do to expand intellectual property rights for big pharmaceutical companies, as we learned from leaked versions of the negotiating text.
Economic research clearly shows the argument that such intellectual property rights promote research to be weak at best.
In fact, there is evidence to the contrary: When the Supreme Court invalidated Myriad’s patent on the BRCA gene, it led to a burst of innovation that resulted in better tests at lower costs.
Indeed, provisions in the TPP would restrain open competition and raise prices for consumers in the US and around the world – anathema to free trade.
The TPP would manage trade in pharmaceuticals through a variety of seemingly arcane rule changes on issues such as “patent linkage,” “data exclusivity,” and “biologics.”
The upshot is that pharmaceutical companies would effectively be allowed to extend – sometimes almost indefinitely – their monopolies on patented medicines, keep cheaper generics off the market, and block “biosimilar” competitors from introducing new medicines for years.
That is how the TPP will manage trade for the pharmaceutical industry if the US gets its way.
Similarly, consider how the US hopes to use the TPP to manage trade for the tobacco industry.
For decades, US-based tobacco companies have used foreign investor adjudication mechanisms created by agreements like the TPP to fight regulations intended to curb the public-health scourge of smoking.
Under these investor-state dispute settlement (ISDS) systems, foreign investors gain new rights to sue national governments in binding private arbitration for regulations they see as diminishing the expected profitability of their investments.
International corporate interests tout ISDS as necessary to protect property rights where the rule of law and credible courts are lacking.
But that argument is nonsense.
The US is seeking the same mechanism in a similar mega-deal with the European Union, the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership, even though there is little question about the quality of Europe’s legal and judicial systems.
To be sure, investors – wherever they call home – deserve protection from expropriation or discriminatory regulations.
But ISDS goes much further: The obligation to compensate investors for losses of expected profits can and has been applied even where rules are nondiscriminatory and profits are made from causing public harm.
Philip Morris International is currently prosecuting such cases against Australia and Uruguay (not a TPP partner) for requiring cigarettes to carry warning labels.
Canada, under threat of a similar suit, backed down from introducing a similarly effective warning label a few years back.
Given the veil of secrecy surrounding the TPP negotiations, it is not clear whether tobacco will be excluded from some aspects of ISDS.
Either way, the broader issue remains: Such provisions make it hard for governments to conduct their basic functions – protecting their citizens’ health and safety, ensuring economic stability, and safeguarding the environment.
Imagine what would have happened if these provisions had been in place when the lethal effects of asbestos were discovered.
Rather than shutting down manufacturers and forcing them to compensate those who had been harmed, under ISDS, governments would have had to pay the manufacturers not to kill their citizens.
Taxpayers would have been hit twice – first to pay for the health damage caused by asbestos, and then to compensate manufacturers for their lost profits when the government stepped in to regulate a dangerous product.
It should surprise no one that America’s international agreements produce managed rather than free trade.
That is what happens when the policymaking process is closed to non-business stakeholders – not to mention the people’s elected representatives in Congress.
Good Trade Intentions Gone Bad
WASHINGTON, DC – The debate in the United States about trade has taken an unfortunate turn.
Instead of discussing the detailed issues on their merits, President Barack Obama’s administration has chosen to emphasize the need for fast-track procedures (also known as trade promotion authority, or TPA) to negotiate any trade agreement.
The administration may win that fight, but there could be real damage as a result.
The current battle is over the precise content of the Trans-Pacific Partnership, a complex 12-country free-trade agreement.
Unfortunately, the TPP’s provisions remain secret – meaning that it cannot be seen or discussed by members of the public.
(Members of Congress may read the technical text, under restricted conditions, but are not allowed to describe its contents in detail.)
Anyone who raises legitimate concerns about any aspect of the TPP deal is immediately branded “protectionist.”
The line from the White House is: TPP will lower barriers to US exports, and thus increase jobs and wages.
Everything else, in this view, is a distraction.
In fact, TPP will do little for exports – and for an obvious reason.
The US already has standard tariff-lowering agreements with almost all of the participating countries.
Almost all tariffs on trade among Canada, Mexico, and the US are long gone – that was the effect of the North American Free Trade Agreement.
Under the Australia and Singapore free-trade agreements as well, almost all tariffs on US goods sold in those countries have been eliminated.
Goods from the US have entered Chile without tariffs since January 1; and most tariffs imposed by Peru have already been phased out.
The TPP will amount to a free-trade agreement with Brunei Darussalam (with a population of less than 500,000) and New Zealand (less than five million).
Encouraging exports to these countries is surely desirable, but the economic impact on the US is unlikely to be more than a rounding error.
That leaves three larger countries where the issues are more complex: Japan (about 125 million people), Malaysia (around 30 million people), and Vietnam (90 million people).
Japan resists reducing import tariffs on hundreds of agricultural goods, including meat from the US.
In addition, non-tariff barriers have long impeded, for example, the export of American-made cars to the Japanese market.
It remains unclear to what extent TPP will really open the Japanese market for auto-related products.
And Japan has had a history of currency intervention, holding down the yen’s exchange rate to boost exports and discourage imports – with major negative consequences for the US, among others.
Japan does not engage in such currency manipulation currently, and TPP represents a good opportunity to ask the Japanese for a commitment to abandon the practice.
Unfortunately, the Obama administration has declined to go down this path – currency manipulation is off the table as far as it is concerned.
As for Malaysia, important issues regarding forced labor in the export sector have emerged – and there should be full compliance with labor standards before the TPP deal is signed.
There are some grounds for optimism here, but promises to implement changes in labor standards after a trade agreement takes effect are seldom fulfilled.
In Vietnam, moving large subsidies provided to state-owned enterprises onto a measurable, market basis would be a sensible goal.
Workers’ rights are also a significant issue.
Indications are that the TPP negotiations are making little progress – though, again, key details and potential agreements remain highly confidential.
In addition to trade, TPP includes important provisions related to investment, the most prominent of which concern intellectual property rights, such as patents.
Although Obama says that the TPP is the most progressive trade agreement in history, Sander Levin, the ranking Democrat on the House Ways and Means Committee – and someone will full access to the text – disagrees.
He says that access to low-cost medicine in poor countries, for example, will be restricted.
Médecins Sans Frontières, the Nobel Peace Prize-winning humanitarian organization, agrees.
(These and related issues were raised at a recent event on Capitol Hill in which I took part.)
And TPP will also confer special status on foreign investors, allowing them to sue for financial judgments against host-country regulations.
Why we would want to provide such differential protection to non-domestic companies is a mystery.
Creating a quasi-legal process outside the regular court system, just for foreigners, can go wrong in many ways.
As Levin recently argued in a detailed and persuasive speech, the US should be having a full and open debate about these dimensions of the TPP deal.
It needs thoughtful, public deliberation about the provisions that are included, as they can have important consequences for the US and its trading partners.
Unfortunately, the Obama administration prefers to avoid public debate on substantive issues, instead merely insisting on using the fast-track TPA procedures for whatever TPP is agreed.
That is a mistake.
If the administration gets a trade agreement and it goes bad – on workers’ rights, access to medicines, state subsidies, or anything else – how does that help trade, America’s foreign partners, or the US economy?
The Trans-Pacific Shell Game
ROME – The Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) trade agreement is being portrayed as a boon for all 12 of the countries involved.
But opposition to the agreement may be the only issue that the remaining US presidential candidates can agree on, and Canada’s trade minister has expressed serious reservations about it.
Are the TPP’s critics being unreasonable?
In a word, no.
To be sure, the TPP might help the US to advance its goal of containing China’s influence in the Asia-Pacific region, exemplified in US President Barack Obama’s declaration that, “With TPP, China does not set the rules in that region; we do.”
But the economic case is not nearly as strong.
In fact, though the TPP will bring some benefits, they will mainly accrue to large corporations and come at the expense of ordinary citizens.
In January, it declared that TPP would augment total GDP by 0.5% over the next 15 years.
In a World Bank study released the same month, the authors of the PIIE research projected a 1.1% average increase in GDP in TPP member countries by 2030.
Something is clearly amiss.
A closer look reveals that these studies’ findings concerning the TPP’s purported benefits lack supporting economic theory, credible modeling, or empirical evidence.
The only advantages presented that are consistent with mainstream research methodology are tariff-related trade benefits.
But if the PIIE authors had used conventional methods to estimate total gains from trade, such benefits would comprise a very small share of the alleged gains from the TPP.
According to the PIIE and the World Bank, about 85% of overall growth from the TPP is due to “non-trade measures” and related foreign investments.
Meanwhile, the studies ignore employment and income distribution – where some of the leading risks of trade liberalization lie.
Instead, they simply assume that all countries are at full employment and have a consistent income distribution, trade balance, and fiscal position.
The ITC study, which used a slightly different model, predicts an increase in the trade deficit that would destroy 129,484 American jobs (yet, inexplicably, it estimates that the TPP would raise employment by 128,000 jobs).
It also projects a net increase in exports of $25.2 billion in 2032 (in 2032 US dollars), a small fraction of the PIIE’s projection of $357 billion in 2030 (in 2015 dollars).
For our study, my colleagues and I used the PIIE’s own 2012 estimates of trade-related gains, despite our reservations, along with more realistic economic specifications, including for income distribution and employment.
We projected downward wage pressure, which, by depressing domestic demand, would lead to lower employment and higher inequality in all country groupings.
And, unfortunately, that is not all they did.
Despite being portrayed as a trade deal, the TPP is not even really about trade.
Many TPP countries are already among the world’s most open economies, with most merchandise trade among them having already been liberalized by earlier agreements and unilateral initiatives.
The main remaining trade constraints involve non-tariff barriers, such as US agricultural subsidies, which the TPP does not address.
Instead, the TPP’s most important provisions strengthen, broaden, and extend intellectual property rights.
That will give pharmaceutical companies much longer monopolies on patented medicines and keep cheaper options – both generics and alternatives that are deemed too similar – off the market, hurting both consumers and governments that provide subsidies.
Moreover, the TPP weakens national regulation, such as over financial services, and strengthens the rights of foreign investors, at the expense of local businesses and the public interest.
Investor-state dispute settlement (ISDS) provisions allow foreign investors to pursue binding private arbitration against governments if new regulations reduce their expected future profits.
Governments that lose those lawsuits will be obliged to compensate foreign investors; but even those that win will incur high legal costs.
In fact, potential ISDS compensation payments or settlements alone could far outweigh the TPP’s limited economic benefits.
Fear of incurring such high costs are likely to weaken governments’ incentives to implement regulations that hurt foreign corporate interests, even if they serve the public good.
Finally, though the TPP’s biggest impact will lie outside the trade realm, the agreement has been used to undermine multilateral trade-liberalization efforts.
The most obvious victim has been the World Trade Organization’s ongoing Doha Development Round negotiations, but Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation and the ASEAN Economic Community will also suffer.
The TPP’s advocates have, for years, been grossly exaggerating the deal’s projected benefits, while downplaying its potentially high risks and costs, most of which will be incurred by ordinary citizens.
The reality is that the TPP will have a barely perceptible impact on GDP, benefit large corporations almost exclusively, and significantly constrain the policy space governments need to accelerate economic development and protect the public interest.
Some partnership that is.
Treason in the Air
COPENHAGEN – Discussions about global warming are marked by an increasing desire to stamp out “impure” thinking, to the point of questioning the value of democratic debate.
But shutting down discussion simply means the disappearance of reason from public policy.
In March, Al Gore’s science adviser and prominent climate researcher, Jim Hansen, proclaimed that when it comes to dealing with global warming, the “democratic process isn’t working.”
Although science has demonstrated that CO2 from fossil fuels is heating the planet, politicians are unwilling to follow his advice and stop building coal-fired power plants.
Hansen argues that, “the first action that people should take is to use the democratic process.