All available studies show that “welfare tourism” is a limited phenomenon, and that immigration fosters economic growth.
But these facts do not count when wages are stagnating (as in the UK) or unemployment continues to rise (as in France).
Populists can easily project these problems onto “Europe,” which in this case merely represents fear of the outside world in general.
The EU is thus caught between demands for more solidarity from the young in its southern members and dissatisfaction with open borders among the elderly in the north.
It is tempting to try to mollify both groups by relaxing austerity and ditching the border-free Schengen area.
But that is unlikely to swing the political pendulum back toward Europe, especially in countries like France and the UK.
The deeper roots of the surge of Euroskeptic and other protest parties originate with the general dissatisfaction with the state of the economy and dysfunctional national political systems.
Tinkering with austerity or the fundamental right of free movement within the EU will not make much of a difference.
Reform is needed at home, in national capitals.
In this context, the selection of the European Commission’s next president – now the focus of considerable attention – is a sideshow.
Whoever is chosen will be able to make the EU work only if French President François Hollande can build a domestic pro-reform consensus and British Prime Minister David Cameron can convince his electorate that immigrants (only one-third of whom come from the poorer EU member states) benefit the UK economy.
The EU does not have a significant budget, and it sets at most a general framework for economic and social rules that vary widely across a large and diverse continent.
Success and failure are largely determined at the national level.
That is where the problems lie and where they must be solved.
What has taken the form of an anti-EU vote constitutes in reality a protest against socio-economic problems at home.
The System is Working
MEDFORD, MASSACHUSETTS – As the latest G-20 meeting of finance ministers starts in Cairns, Australia, the Legion of Gloom is at it again.
Their conventional wisdom is that “the system” – global governance structures ranging from the World Trade Organization and the G-20 to the major central banks – is badly broken and in desperate need of repair.
In fact, the global economic order has worked remarkably well since 2008.
True, the first year of the Great Recession was more severe than the first year of the Great Depression.
But, despite this initial shock, the system responded in a surprisingly nimble fashion.
Compared to previous global downturns triggered by a financial crisis, the global economy bounced back robustly.
Trade and output levels exceeded pre-crisis levels in most countries a few years ago, and global poverty continues to decline rapidly.
One key to this rebound was that, in contrast to the 1930s, the global economy maintained existing conditions: trade barriers remained low, as did restrictions on foreign direct investment, and cross-border exchange continued to spread with the Internet.
As the McKinsey Global Institute noted, with the exception of cross-border finance, global flows are just as robust now as they were before the crisis.
There has even been a partial revamping of key global institutions, from the rise of the G-20 to reform of the International Monetary Fund.
Indeed, the resiliency of markets to geopolitical tensions in Ukraine or the South China Sea has begun to worry some Fed officials.
By any reasonable metric, multilateral institutions and great-power governments did what was necessary to preserve the global economy’s openness.
So why the widespread misperception that the system failed?
Here, we run into a dirty little secret of world politics: many commentators on international politics do not know much about economics or economic policy.
International-affairs professionals frequently talk about “high politics” and “low politics,” and they usually relegate economic issues to the latter category.
This ignorance matters when political commentators try to write about the global economy.
They will naturally rely on the most accessible facts as their guide.
To be fair, some of the most obvious data have indeed suggested fragmentation of the global economic order.
The dormancy of the Doha Round of WTO talks, the public deadlock of some G-20 summits, and stalemates at the United Nations Security Council seem like sufficient evidence to proclaim that the status quo is imperiled – even if facts beyond the headlines belie that consensus.
Consider the kerfuffle over “currency wars.”
In 2010, the Fed began hinting at a second round of quantitative easing, or QE2.
One of the policy externalities of QE – the Fed’s purchase of long-term financial assets – was a depreciating dollar.
Fearing domestic asset-price bubbles and upward pressure on their currencies from an inward rush of capital, many emerging-economy leaders complained loudly about what Brazilian Finance Minister Guido Mantega called an “international currency war.”
Lost in all of the hype was the fact that neither markets nor financial analysts were terribly perturbed about excessive exchange-rate volatility or the possibility of an actual currency war.
After the autumn of 2008, exchange-rate volatility slowly receded toward pre-crisis levels.
Another common reason for the collective misperception is misplaced nostalgia.
Former US National Security Adviser Brent Scowcroft encapsulated the post-crisis conventional wisdom in 2012: “The postwar leaders set up the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank, and the General Agreements on Tariffs and Trade to develop rules of the road.
The new G-20 is but a pale reflection of that once-brilliant institution building.”
But past efforts at building a global order have had their share of futility.
Anyone familiar with the history of the Bretton Woods institutions knows that they experienced as many misses as hits.
Compared to the past, the current order performed well above average.
A weak economy feeds perceptions that the system is broken, and that those in authority are not to be trusted.
So greater skepticism about all levels of governance in the OECD economies is not surprising.
Analysts might be looking first at their local circumstances, and then extrapolating from that to their assessments of global institutions.
Pessimism about slow national recoveries in the developed world is causing analysts to conflate poor domestic and regional governance with poor global governance.
But the primary causes for domestic economic weakness in Japan, the US, the United Kingdom, and the eurozone are not global in origin.
Japan’s economy had been stagnating for almost two decades when the 2008 crisis erupted.
Likewise, domestic policy stalemates and political uncertainty acted as a significant drag on the US recovery from the Great Recession.
Does the system’s remarkable resiliency since 2008 mean that it can withstand the next crisis?
In theory, yes – many of the post-2008 reforms have been designed to add shock absorbers to the global economy.
But, in international relations, collective misperceptions can create their own reality.
If pundits continue to insist that the system failed, wonks will devote time and effort to figuring out how to fix what is not broken.
Moreover, it is extremely difficult to correct misperceptions once they ossify – particularly if the topic in question is outside a pundit’s range of expertise.
Ironically, the only thing that might stop the system from continuing to work is the low confidence of its greatest proponents.&nbsp;&nbsp;
Rethinking Democracy
PRINCETON – By many measures, the world has never been more democratic.
Virtually every government at least pays lip service to democracy and human rights.
Though elections may not be free and fair, massive electoral manipulation is rare and the days when only males, whites, or the rich could vote are long gone.
Freedom House’s global surveys show a steady increase from the 1970s in the share of countries that are “free” – a trend that the late Harvard political scientist Samuel Huntington dubbed the “third wave” of democratization.
The dissemination of democratic norms from the advanced countries of the West to the rest of the world has been perhaps the most significant benefit of globalization.
Yet not all is well with democracy.
Today’s democratic governments perform poorly, and their future remains very much in doubt.
In the advanced countries, dissatisfaction with government stems from its inability to deliver effective economic policies for growth and inclusion.
In the newer democracies of the developing world, failure to safeguard civil liberties and political freedom is an additional source of discontent.
A true democracy, one that combines majority rule with respect for minority rights, requires two sets of institutions.
First, institutions of representation, such as political parties, parliaments, and electoral systems, are needed to elicit popular preferences and turn them into policy action.
Second, democracy requires institutions of restraint, such as an independent judiciary and media, to uphold fundamental rights like freedom of speech and prevent governments from abusing their power.
Representation without restraint – elections without the rule of law – is a recipe for the tyranny of the majority.
Democracy in this sense – what many call “liberal democracy” – flourished only after the emergence of the nation-state and the popular upheaval and mobilization produced by the Industrial Revolution.
So it should come as no surprise that the crisis of liberal democracy that many of its oldest practitioners currently are experiencing is a reflection of the stress under which the nation-state finds itself.
The attack on the nation-state comes from above and below.
Economic globalization has blunted the instruments of national economic policy and weakened the traditional mechanisms of transfers and redistribution that strengthened social inclusion.
Moreover, policymakers often hide behind (real or imagined) competitive pressures emanating from the global economy to justify their lack of responsiveness to popular demands, and cite the same pressures when implementing unpopular policies such as fiscal austerity.
One consequence has been the rise of extremist groups in Europe.
At the same time, regional separatist movements such as those in Catalonia and Scotland challenge the legitimacy of nation-states as they are currently configured and seek their breakup.
Whether they do too much or too little, many national governments face a crisis of representation.
In developing countries, it is more often the institutions of restraint that are failing.
Governments that come to power through the ballot box often become corrupt and power-hungry.
They replicate the practices of the elitist regimes they replaced, clamping down on the press and civil liberties and emasculating (or capturing) the judiciary.
The result has been called “illiberal democracy” or “competitive authoritarianism.”
Venezuela, Turkey, Egypt, and Thailand are some of the better-known recent examples.
When democracy fails to deliver economically or politically, perhaps it is to be expected that some people will look for authoritarian solutions.
And, for many economists, delegating economic policy to technocratic bodies in order to insulate them from the “folly of the masses” almost always is the preferred approach.
With its independent central bank and fiscal rules, the European Union has already traveled far along this road.
In India, businessmen look wistfully at China and wish their leaders could act just as boldly and decisively – that is, more autocratically – to address the country’s reform challenges.
In countries like Egypt and Thailand, military intervention is viewed as a temporary necessity in order to put an end to the irresponsibility of elected leaders.
These autocratic responses are ultimately self-defeating, because they deepen the democratic malaise.
In Europe, economic policy needs more democratic legitimacy, not less.
This can be achieved either by significantly strengthening democratic deliberation and accountability at the EU level, or by increasing the autonomy of the member states to set economic policy.
In other words, Europe faces a choice between more political union and less economic union.
As long as it delays making the choice, democracy will suffer.
In developing countries, military intervention in national politics undermines long-term prospects for democracy, because it impedes the development of the necessary “culture,” including habits of moderation and compromise among competing civilian groups.
As long as the military remains the ultimate political arbiter, these groups focus their strategies on the military rather than one another.
Effective institutions of restraint do not emerge overnight; and it might seem like those in power would never want to create them.
But if there is some likelihood that I will be voted out of office and that the opposition will take over, such institutions will protect me from others’ abuses tomorrow as much as they protect others from my abuses today.
So strong prospects for sustained political competition are a key prerequisite for illiberal democracies to turn into liberal ones over time.
Optimists believe that new technologies and modes of governance will resolve all problems and send democracies centered on the nation-state the way of the horse-drawn carriage.
Pessimists fear that today’s liberal democracies will be no match for the external challenges mounted by illiberal states like China and Russia, which are guided only by hardnosed realpolitik.
Either way, if democracy is to have a future, it will need to be rethought.
A Class of Its Own
PRINCETON – The very rich, F. Scott Fitzgerald famously wrote, “are different from you and me.”
Their wealth makes them “cynical where we are trustful,” and makes them think “they are better than we are.”
If these words ring true today, perhaps it is because when they were written, in 1926, inequality in the United States had reached heights comparable to today.
During much of the intervening period, between the end of World War II and the 1980s, inequality in the advanced countries was moderate.
The gap between the super-rich and the rest of society seemed less colossal – not just in terms of income and wealth, but also in terms of attachments and social purpose.
The rich had more money, of course, but they somehow still seemed part of the same society as the poor, recognizing that geography and citizenship made them share a common fate.
As the University of Michigan’s Mark Mizruchi points out in a recent book, the American corporate elite in the postwar era had “an ethic of civic responsibility and enlightened self-interest.”
They cooperated with trade unions and favored a strong government role in regulating and stabilizing markets.
They understood the need for taxes to pay for important public goods such as the interstate highway and safety nets for the poor and elderly.
Business elites were not any less politically powerful back then.
But they used their influence to advance an agenda that was broadly in the national interest.
By contrast, today’s super-rich are “moaning moguls,” to use James Surowiecki’s evocative term.
Exhibit A for Surowiecki is Stephen Schwarzman, the chairman and CEO of the private equity firm the Blackstone Group, whose wealth now exceeds $10 billion.
Schwarzman acts as if “he’s beset by a meddlesome, tax-happy government and a whiny, envious populace.”
He has suggested that “it might be good to raise income taxes on the poor so they had ‘skin in the game,’ and that proposals to repeal the carried-interest tax loophole – from which he personally benefits – were akin to the German invasion of Poland.”
Other examples from Surowiecki: “the venture capitalist Tom Perkins and Kenneth Langone, the co-founder of Home Depot, both compared populist attacks on the wealthy to the Nazis’ attacks on the Jews.”
Surowiecki thinks that the change in attitudes has much to do with globalization.
Large American corporations and banks now roam the globe freely, and are no longer so dependent on the US consumer.
The health of the American middle class is of little interest to them these days.
Moreover, Surowiecki argues, socialism has gone by the wayside, and there is no need to coopt the working class anymore.
Yet if corporate moguls think that they no longer need to rely on their national governments, they are making a huge mistake.
The reality is that the stability and openness of the markets that produce their wealth have never depended more on government action.
In periods of relative calm, governments’ role in writing and upholding the rules by which markets function can become obscured.
It may seem as if markets are on autopilot, with governments an inconvenience that is best avoided.
But when economic storm clouds gather on the horizon, everyone seeks shelter under their home government’s cover.
It is then that the ties that bind large corporations to their native soil are fully revealed.
As former Bank of England Governor Mervyn King aptly put it in the context of finance, “global banks are global in life, but national in death.”
Consider how the US government stepped in to ensure financial and economic stability during the global financial crisis of 2008-2009.
If the government had not bailed out large banks, the insurance giant AIG, and the auto industry, and if the Federal Reserve had not flooded the economy with liquidity, the wealth of the super-rich would have taken a severe blow.
Many argued that the government should have focused on rescuing homeowners; instead, the government chose to support the banks – a policy from which the financial elite benefited the most.
Even in normal times, the super-rich depend on government support and action.
It is largely the government that has financed the fundamental research that produced the information-technology revolution and the firms (such as Apple and Microsoft) that it has spawned.
It is the government that enacts and enforces the copyright, patent, and trademark laws that protect intellectual property rights, guaranteeing successful innovators a steady stream of monopoly profits.
It is the government that subsidizes the higher-education institutions that train the skilled work force.
It is the government that negotiates trade agreements with other countries to ensure that domestic firms gain access to foreign markets.
If the super-rich believe that they are no longer part of society and have little need of government, it is not because this belief corresponds to objective reality.
It is because the prevailing story line of our time portrays markets as self-standing entities that run on their own fuel.
This is a narrative that afflicts all segments of society, the middle class no less than the rich.
There is no reason to expect that the super-rich will act less selfishly than any other group.
But it is not so much their self-interest that stands in the way of greater equality and social inclusion.
The more significant roadblock is the missing recognition that markets cannot produce prosperity for long – for anyone – unless they are backed by healthy societies and good governance.
The Real Heroes of the Global Economy
PRINCETON – Economic policymakers seeking successful models to emulate apparently have an abundance of choices nowadays.
Led by China, scores of emerging and developing countries have registered record-high growth rates over recent decades, setting precedents for others to follow.
While advanced economies have performed far worse on average, there are notable exceptions, such as Germany and Sweden.
“Do as we do,” these countries’ leaders often say, “and you will prosper, too.”
Look more closely, however, and you will discover that these countries’ vaunted growth models cannot possibly be replicated everywhere, because they rely on large external surpluses to stimulate the tradable sector and the rest of the economy.
Sweden’s current-account surplus has averaged above a whopping 7% of GDP over the last decade; Germany’s has averaged close to 6% during the same period.
China’s large external surplus – above 10% of GDP in 2007 – has narrowed significantly in recent years, with the trade imbalance falling to about 2.5% of GDP.
As the surplus came down, so did the economy’s growth rate – indeed, almost point for point.
To be sure, China’s annual growth remains comparatively high, at above 7%.
But growth at this level reflects an unprecedented – and unsustainable – rise in domestic investment to nearly 50% of GDP.
When investment returns to normal levels, economic growth will slow further.
Obviously, not all countries can run trade surpluses at the same time.
In fact, the successful economies’ superlative growth performance has been enabled by other countries’ choice not to emulate them.
But one would never know that from listening, for example, to Germany’s finance minister, Wolfgang Schäuble, extolling his country’s virtues.
“In the late 1990’s, [Germany] was the undisputed ‘sick man’ of Europe,” Schäuble wrote recently.
What turned the country around, he claims, was labor-market liberalization and restrained public spending.
In fact, while Germany did undertake some reforms, so did others, and its labor market does not look substantially more flexible than what one finds in other European economies.
A big difference, however, was the turnaround in Germany’s external balance, with annual deficits in the 1990’s swinging to a substantial surplus in recent years, thanks to its trade partners in the eurozone and, more recently, the rest of the world.
As the Financial Times’ Martin Wolf, among others, has pointed out, the German economy has been free-riding on global demand.
Other countries have grown rapidly in recent decades without relying on external surpluses.
But most have suffered from the opposite syndrome: excessive reliance on capital inflows, which, by spurring domestic credit and consumption, generate temporary growth.
But recipient economies are vulnerable to financial-market sentiment and sudden capital flight – as happened recently when investors anticipated monetary-policy tightening in the United States.
Consider India, until recently another much-celebrated success story.
India’s growth during the past decade had much to do with loose macroeconomic policies and a deteriorating current account – which recorded a deficit of more than 5% of GDP in 2012, having been in surplus in the early 2000’s.
Turkey, another country whose star has faded, also relied on large annual current-account deficits, reaching 10% of GDP in 2011.
Elsewhere, small, formerly socialist economies – Armenia, Belarus, Moldova, Georgia, Lithuania, and Kosovo – have grown very rapidly since the early 2000’s.
But look at their average current-account deficits from 2000 to 2013 – which range from a low of 5.5% of GDP in Lithuania to a high of 13.4% in Kosovo – and it becomes evident that these are not countries to emulate.
The story is similar in Africa.
The continent’s fastest-growing economies are those that have been willing and able to allow yawning external gaps from 2000 to 2013: 26% of GDP, on average, in Liberia, 17% in Mozambique, 14% in Chad, 11% in Sierra Leone, and 7% in Ghana.
Rwanda’s current account has deteriorated steadily, with the deficit now exceeding 10% of GDP.
The world’s current-account balances must ultimately sum up to zero.
In an optimal world, the surpluses of countries pursuing export-led growth would be willingly matched by the deficits of those pursuing debt-led growth.
In the real world, there is no mechanism to ensure such an equilibrium on a continuous basis; national economic policies can be (and often are) mutually incompatible.
When some countries want to run smaller deficits without a corresponding desire by others to reduce surpluses, the result is the exportation of unemployment and a bias toward deflation (as is the case now).
When some want to reduce their surpluses without a corresponding desire by others to reduce deficits, the result is a “sudden stop” in capital flows and financial crisis.
As external imbalances grow larger, each phase of this cycle becomes more painful.
The real heroes of the world economy – the role models that others should emulate – are countries that have done relatively well while running only small external imbalances.
Countries like Austria, Canada, the Philippines, Lesotho, and Uruguay cannot match the world’s growth champions, because they do not over-borrow or sustain a mercantilist economic model.
Theirs are unremarkable economies that do not garner many headlines.
But without them, the global economy would be even less manageable than it already is.
In Praise of Foxy Scholars
PRINCETON – We live in a complicated world, so we are forced to simplify it.
We categorize people around us as friends or foes, classify their motives as good or bad, and ascribe events with complex roots to straightforward causes.
Such shortcuts help us navigate the complexities of our social existence. They help us form expectations about the consequences of our and others’ actions, and thereby facilitate decision-making.
But, because such “mental models” are simplifications, they are necessarily wrong.
They may serve us well as we navigate our daily challenges, but they leave out many details and can backfire when we find ourselves in an environment in which our categorizations and ready-made explanations fit less well.
The term “culture shock” refers to situations in which our expectations about people’s behavior turn out to be so wrong that we find ourselves jolted by the experience.
And yet, without these shortcuts we would be either lost or paralyzed.
We have neither the mental capacity nor the understanding to decipher the full web of cause-and-effect relations in our social existence.
So our daily behavior and reactions must be based on incomplete, and occasionally misleading, mental models.
The best that social science has to offer is in fact not much different.
Social scientists – and economists in particular – analyze the world using simple conceptual frameworks that they call “models.”
The virtue of such models is that they make explicit the chain of cause and effect, and therefore render transparent the specific assumptions on which a particular prediction rests.
Good social science turns our unexamined intuitions into a map of causal arrows.
Sometimes it shows how those intuitions lead to surprising, unanticipated results when extended to their logical conclusions.
Fully general frameworks, such as economists’ beloved Arrow-Debreu model of general equilibrium, are so broad and encompassing that they are totally unhelpful for real-world explanation or prediction.
Useful social-science models are invariably simplifications.
They leave out many details to focus on the most relevant aspect of a specific context. Applied economists’ mathematical models are the most explicit example of this.
But, whether formalized or not, simplified narratives are social scientists’ bread and butter.
Stylized historical analogies often play a similar role.
For example, international-relations scholars use the famous meeting between Neville Chamberlain and Adolf Hitler in Munich in 1938 as a model of how appeasing a power bent on expansionism can be futile (or dangerous).
But, as inevitable as simplification is for explanation, it is also a trap.
It is easy to get wedded to particular models and fail to recognize that changed circumstances require a different model.
Like other humans, social scientists are prone to over-confidence in their preferred model of the day.
They tend to exaggerate the support for the model and discount new evidence that contradicts it – a phenomenon known as “confirmation bias.”
In a world of diverse and changing circumstances, social scientists can do real harm by applying the wrong model.
Neoliberal economic policies, predicated on well-functioning markets, misfired in developing countries – just as planning models, presuming competent and capable bureaucrats, failed in an earlier era. The efficient-markets theory led policymakers astray by encouraging them to undertake excessive financial deregulation.
It would be costly to apply the analogy of Munich in 1938 to a specific international conflict when the underlying situation is more reminiscent of Sarajevo in 1914.
So how should we choose among alternative simplifications of reality?
Rigorous empirical tests may eventually settle questions such as whether the US economy today is suffering more from Keynesian lack of demand or from policy uncertainty.
Yet often we need to make decisions in real time, without the benefit of decisive empirical evidence.
My research on growth diagnostics (with Ricardo Hausmann, Andrés Velasco, and others) is an example of this style of work, showing how one can identify in a specific context the more binding among a multitude of growth constraints.
Unfortunately, economists and other social scientists get virtually no training in how to choose among alternative models. Neither is such an aptitude professionally rewarded.
Developing new theories and empirical tests is regarded as science, while the exercise of good judgment is clearly a craft.
The philosopher Isaiah Berlin famously distinguished between two styles of thinking, which he identified with the hedgehog and the fox.
The hedgehog is captivated by a single big idea, which he applies unremittingly.
The fox, by contrast, lacks a grand vision and holds many different views about the world – some of them even contradictory.
We can always anticipate the hedgehog’s take on a problem – just as we can predict that market fundamentalists will always prescribe freer markets, regardless of the nature of the economic problem.
Foxes carry competing, possibly incompatible theories in their heads.
They are not attached to a particular ideology and find it easier to think contextually.
Scholars who are able to navigate from one explanatory framework to another as circumstances require are more likely to point us in the right direction.
The world needs fewer hedgehogs and more foxes.
Erdoğan’s Self-Inflicted Crisis
PRINCETON – The dramatic battle between Turkey’s ruling Justice and Development Party (AKP) and its erstwhile ally, the “Hizmet” religious movement led by the self-exiled cleric Fethullah Gülen, has begun to expose the massive rule-of-law violations that these two groups employed to consolidate their power.
Prosecutors widely thought to be Gülen sympathizers have launched a wide-ranging corruption probe that has so far ensnared four ministers and reaches all the way to Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdoğan’s son.
Erdoğan and his advisers have now hit back.
They accuse the Gülenists of mounting a “bureaucratic coup” and engaging in a wide range of dirty tricks, from “planting evidence” against generals who were convicted last year of plotting to overthrow Erdoğan’s government to “extensive unauthorized wiretap[ping].”
Turkey’s landmark trials of the alleged military-coup plotters are now widely recognized for what they were – witch hunts based on evidence that was flimsy at best, and often simply concocted.
The trials were stage-managed by Gülenist police, prosecutors, and media.
But they had crucial support from Erdoğan’s government, which put its weight behind them.
The Erdoğan camp’s current effort to wash its hands of these trials and put the full blame on the Gülenists is disingenuous to say the least.
Erdoğan once famously declared that he was the prosecutor on the “Ergenekon” case, which was supposedly aimed at exposing and combating the Turkish “deep state” composed of military officials and secular nationalists, but that targeted a wide range of political opponents.
When the horrifying – but entirely fabricated – documents behind the generals’ fictitious “Sledgehammer” coup plot came out, Erdoğan lent credence to them by saying that he had been aware of such plots.
His ministers attacked the defendants and pilloried the lone judge who issued a pre-trial ruling in their favor.
Beyond such public statements, the Erdoğan government did everything in its power to ensure that these and other political trials (including a massive one involving hundreds of Kurdish activists) would proceed to their preordained conclusion.
In particular, the higher echelons of the judiciary were filled with judges who were either Gülenists or ready to do their bidding.
Endless complaints about flagrant violations of the rule of law fell on deaf ears.
Erdoğan and his advisers sound very different these days.
The new line is that these trials were marred by irregularities, that there had been a plot against the military, and that the Gülenists have established a state within the state.
The reason for the conversion is clear: Erdoğan needs to isolate and embarrass the Gülenists, with whom he is now engaged in a bitter struggle for power.
The Gülenists have dressed up their campaign against Erdoğan in the guise of a corruption probe.
No one who is familiar with Turkey would be surprised to learn that there was large-scale corruption surrounding construction projects.
But the corruption probe is clearly politically motivated, and Erdoğan is right to question the prosecutors’ motives.
The current round of judicial activism is as much about rooting out corruption as previous rounds were about prosecuting the “deep state” and real coups – which is to say, not much at all.
But Erdoğan is the one who gave a free pass to the Gülen movement in the first place.
More than three years ago, Erdoğan had a golden opportunity in the aftermath of the August 2010 constitutional referendum.
His handy win confirmed that he was securely in power and had little to fear from the military and other elements of the ultra-secularist old guard.
He could have renounced the judicial dirty tricks and media manipulation that had enabled his regime to take hold.
At the time, I wrote that if he did not change course, “the country will descend deeper into authoritarianism, political divisions will become irreconcilable, and yet another political rupture may become inevitable.”
Alas, that prediction has now been fulfilled.
Today, Erdoğan has fewer good options, but he could still turn the situation around.
Gülenist machinations in the judiciary and other parts of the bureaucracy have created a broad spectrum of opposition; pretty much everyone – nationalists, Kurdish activists, secularists, traditional Islamists, socialists, and liberals – has been at the receiving end of these intrigues at one time or another.
Erdoğan could, in principle, mobilize a coalition that transcends his own AKP to support reforms aimed at returning the judiciary to its proper role.
Of course, none of these groups would mind watching Erdoğan go down in flames; so all of them would want something in return for joining such a coalition.
Those concessions would be the necessary price for Erdoğan to pay – and just desserts for leading Turkey into its present mess.
But at least he would have the chance to ameliorate the harsh judgment that historians will pass on his leadership.
Unfortunately, Erdoğan seems intent on missing this opportunity as well.
He has chosen to respond by tightening his autocratic grip, with the body that appoints prosecutors and judges set to become a mere appendage of the justice ministry.
His supporters have been launching smear campaigns against Gülenists that are reminiscent of Gülenist tactics.
He seems to believe that he can retain enough popularity to ride out the crisis without expanding his coalition.
The battle between Erdoğan and the Gülen movement has escalated to the point where it is hard to imagine a reconciliation.
The good news is that this tooth-and-nail fight is laying bare the corruption and judicial manipulation on which Erdoğan’s regime was based.
The bad news is that regardless of who wins, Turkish democracy will be the loser – at least in the short run, until truly democratic forces emerge.
How the Rich Rule
PRINCETON – It is hardly news that the rich have more political power than the poor, even in democratic countries where everyone gets a single vote in elections.
But two political scientists, Martin Gilens of Princeton University and Benjamin Page of Northwestern University, have recently produced some stark findings for the United States that have dramatic implications for the functioning of democracy – in the US and elsewhere.
The authors’ research builds on prior work by Gilens, who painstakingly collected public-opinion polls on nearly 2,000 policy questions from 1981 to 2002.
The pair then examined whether America’s federal government adopted the policy in question within four years of the survey, and tracked how closely the outcome matched the preferences of voters at different points of the income distribution.
When viewed in isolation, the preferences of the “average” voter – that is, a voter in the middle of the income distribution – seem to have a strongly positive influence on the government’s ultimate response.
A policy that the average voter would like is significantly more likely to be enacted.
But, as Gilens and Page note, this gives a misleadingly upbeat impression of the representativeness of government decisions.
The preferences of the average voter and of economic elites are not very different on most policy matters.
For example, both groups of voters would like to see a strong national defense and a healthy economy.
A better test would be to examine what the government does when the two groups have divergent views.
To carry out that test, Gilens and Page ran a horse race between the preferences of average voters and those of economic elites – defined as individuals at the top tenth percentile of the income distribution – to see which voters exert greater influence.
They found that the effect of the average voter drops to insignificant levels, while that of economic elites remains substantial.
These disheartening results raise an important question: How do politicians who are unresponsive to the interests of the vast majority of their constituents get elected and, more important, re-elected, while doing the bidding mostly of the wealthiest individuals?
Part of the explanation may be that most voters have a poor understanding of how the political system works and how it is tilted in favor of the economic elite.
As Gilens and Page emphasize, their evidence does not imply that government policy makes the average citizen worse off.
Ordinary citizens often do get what they want, by virtue of the fact that their preferences frequently are similar to those of the elite.
This correlation of the two groups’ preferences may make it difficult for voters to discern politicians’ bias.
But another, more pernicious, part of the answer may lie in the strategies to which political leaders resort in order to get elected.
A politician who represents the interests primarily of economic elites has to find other means of appealing to the masses.
Such an alternative is provided by the politics of nationalism, sectarianism, and identity – a politics based on cultural values and symbolism rather than bread-and-butter interests.
When politics is waged on these grounds, elections are won by those who are most successful at “priming” our latent cultural and psychological markers, not those who best represent our interests.
Karl Marx famously said that religion is “the opium of the people.”
What he meant is that religious sentiment could obscure the material deprivations that workers and other exploited people experience in their daily lives.
In much of the same way, the rise of the religious right and, with it, culture wars over “family values” and other highly polarizing issues (for example, immigration) have served to insulate American politics from the sharp rise in economic inequality since the late 1970s.
As a result, conservatives have been able to retain power despite their pursuit of economic and social policies that are inimical to the interests of the middle and lower classes.
Identity politics is malignant because it tends to draw boundaries around a privileged in-group and requires the exclusion of outsiders – those of other countries, values, religions, or ethnicities.
This can be seen most clearly in illiberal democracies such as Russia, Turkey, and Hungary.
In order to solidify their electoral base, leaders in these countries appeal heavily to national, cultural, and religious symbols.
In doing so, they typically inflame passions against religious and ethnic minorities.
For regimes that represent economic elites (and are often corrupt to the core), it is a ploy that pays off handsomely at the polls.
Widening inequality in the world’s advanced and developing countries thus inflicts two blows against democratic politics.
Not only does it lead to greater disenfranchisement of the middle and lower classes; it also fosters among the elite a poisonous politics of sectarianism.
Africa’s Structural Transformation Challenge
PRINCETON – Long viewed as an economic basket case, Sub-Saharan Africa is experiencing its best growth performance since the immediate post-independence years.
Natural-resource windfalls have helped, but the good news extends beyond resource-rich countries.
Countries such as Ethiopia, Rwanda, and Uganda, among others, have grown at East Asian rates since the mid-1990’s.
And Africa’s business and political leaders are teeming with optimism about the continent’s future.
The question is whether this performance can be sustained.
So far, growth has been driven by a combination of external resources (aid, debt relief, or commodity windfalls) and the removal of some of the worst policy distortions of the past.
Domestic productivity has been given a boost by an increase in demand for domestic goods and services (mostly the latter) and more efficient use of resources.
The trouble is that it is not clear from whence future productivity gains will come.
The underlying problem is the weakness of these economies’ structural transformation.
East Asian countries grew rapidly by replicating, in a much shorter time frame, what today’s advanced countries did following the Industrial Revolution.
They turned their farmers into manufacturing workers, diversified their economies, and exported a range of increasingly sophisticated goods.
Little of this process is taking place in Africa.
As researchers at the African Center for Economic Transformation in Accra, Ghana, put it, the continent is “growing rapidly, transforming slowly.”
In principle, the region’s potential for labor-intensive industrialization is great.
A Chinese shoe manufacturer, for example, pays its Ethiopian workers one-tenth what it pays its workers back home.
It can raise Ethiopian workers’ productivity to half or more of Chinese levels through in-house training.
The savings in labor costs more than offset other incremental costs of doing business in an African environment, such as poor infrastructure and bureaucratic red tape.
But the aggregate numbers tell a worrying story.
Fewer than 10% of African workers find jobs in manufacturing, and among those only a tiny fraction – as low as one-tenth – are employed in modern, formal firms with adequate technology.
Distressingly, there has been very little improvement in this regard, despite high growth rates.
In fact, Sub-Saharan Africa is less industrialized today than it was in the 1980’s.
Private investment in modern industries, especially non-resource tradables, has not increased, and remains too low to sustain structural transformation.
As in all developing countries, farmers in Africa are flocking to the cities.
The public sector dominates investment, and the bulk of public investment is financed by foreign grants.
Foreign aid has caused the real exchange rate to appreciate, compounding the difficulties faced by manufacturing and other tradables.
None of this is to dismiss Rwanda’s progress in reducing poverty, which reflects reforms in health, education, and the general policy environment.
Without question, these improvements have raised the country’s potential income.
But improved governance and human capital do not necessarily translate into economic dynamism.
What Rwanda and other African countries lack are the modern, tradable industries that can turn the potential into reality by acting as the domestic engine of productivity growth.
The African economic landscape’s dominant feature – an informal sector comprising microenterprises, household production, and unofficial activities – is absorbing the growing urban labor force and acting as a social safety net.
But the evidence suggests that it cannot provide the missing productive dynamism.
Studies show that very few microenterprises grow beyond informality, just as the bulk of successful established firms do not start out as small, informal enterprises.
Optimists say that the good news about African structural transformation has not yet shown up in macroeconomic data.
They may well be right.
But if they are wrong, Africa may confront some serious difficulties in the decades ahead.
Half of Sub-Saharan Africa’s population is under 25 years of age.
According to the World Bank, each year an additional five million turn 15, “crossing the threshold from childhood to adulthood.”
Given the slow pace of positive structural transformation, the Bank projects that over the next decade only one in four African youth will find regular employment as a salaried worker, and that only a small fraction of those will be in the formal sector of modern enterprises.
Two decades of economic expansion in Sub-Saharan Africa have raised a young population’s expectations of good jobs without greatly expanding the capacity to deliver them.
These are the conditions that make social protest and political instability likely.
Economic planning based on simple extrapolations of recent growth will exacerbate the discrepancy.
Instead, African political leaders may have to manage expectations downward, while working to increase the rate of structural transformation and social inclusion.
The Perils of Economic Consensus
PRINCETON – The Initiative on Global Markets, based at the University of Chicago, periodically surveys a group of leading academic economists, of varying political persuasions, on the issues of the day.
Its latest roundup asked whether President Barack Obama’s stimulus plan helped to reduce unemployment in the United States.
Officially known as the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009, the plan entailed government spending of more than $800 billion on infrastructure, education, health, and energy, tax incentives, and various social programs.
Implemented in the midst of an economic crisis, it was the classic Keynesian response.
The economists were virtually unanimous.
Thirty-six of the 37 top economists who responded to the survey said that the plan had been successful in its avowed objective of reducing unemployment.
The University of Michigan economist Justin Wolfers cheered the consensus in his New York Times blog.
The virulent public debate about whether fiscal stimulus works, he complained, has become totally disconnected from what experts know and agree on.
“If all the economists were laid end to end,” George Bernard Shaw famously quipped, “they would not reach a conclusion.”
Frustrated by the conflicting and hedged advice that he was receiving from his advisers, President Dwight Eisenhower is said to have asked once for a “one-handed economist.”
No doubt, there are many public-policy questions that economists debate vigorously.
What should the top income-tax rate be?
Should the minimum wage be raised?
Should the fiscal deficit be reduced by raising taxes or cutting spending?
Do patents stimulate or impede innovation?
On these and many other issues, economists tend to be good at seeing both sides of the issue, and I suspect that a survey on such questions would reveal little consensus.
A consensus among economists can arise for both good and bad reasons.
Sometimes a consensus is innocuous enough, as when you hear economists argue that one ignores the role of incentives at one’s peril.
Can anyone really disagree with that?
Sometimes it is restricted to a particular episode and is based on evidence accumulated after the fact: Yes, the Soviet economic system was hugely inefficient; yes, the Obama fiscal stimulus of 2009 did reduce unemployment.
But when a consensus forms around the universal applicability of a specific model, the critical assumptions of which are likely to be violated in many settings, we have a problem.
Consider some of the areas of widespread agreement that I listed above.
The proposition that trade restrictions reduce economic welfare is certainly not generally valid, and it is violated when certain conditions – such as externalities or increasing returns to scale – are present.
Moreover, it requires that economists make value judgments on distributional effects, which are better left to the electorate itself.
Likewise, the proposition that rent controls reduce the supply of housing is violated under conditions of imperfect competition.
And the proposition that floating exchange rates are an effective system relies on assumptions about the workings of the monetary and financial system that have proved problematic; I suspect a poll today would find significantly less support for it.
Perhaps economists tend to agree that certain assumptions are more prevalent in the real world.
Or they think that one set of models works better “on average” than another.
Even so, as scientists, should they not adorn their endorsements with the appropriate caveats?
Shouldn’t they worry that categorical statements such as those above may prove to be misleading in at least some settings?
The problem is that economists often confuse a model for the model.
When that happens, a consensus is certainly not something to cheer about.
Two kinds of mischief may then follow.
First, there are errors of omission – cases in which blind spots in the consensus prevent economists from being able to see troubles looming ahead.
A recent example is the failure of economists to grasp the dangerous confluence of circumstances that produced the global financial crisis.
The oversight was not due to the lack of models of bubbles, asymmetric information, distorted incentives, or bank runs.
It was due to the fact that such models were neglected in favor of models that stressed efficient markets.
Then there are the errors of commission – cases in which economists’ fixation on one particular model of the world makes them complicit in the administration of policies whose failure could have been predicted ahead of time.
Economists’ advocacy of neoliberal “Washington Consensus” policies and of financial globalization falls into this category.
What happened in both cases is that economists overlooked serious second-best complications, such as learning externalities and weak institutions, which blunted the reforms and, in some cases, caused them to backfire.
Disagreements among economists are healthy.
They reflect the fact that their discipline comprises a diverse collection of models, and that matching reality to model is an imperfect science with a lot of room for error.
It is better for the public to be exposed to this uncertainty than for it to be lulled into a false sense of security based on the appearance of certain knowledge.
South Korea’s Japanese Mirror
SEOUL – Given the daunting challenges facing Japan, one can only admire Prime Minister Shinzo Abe’s determination to end the country’s two-decade-long period of economic stagnation.
His strategy – the “three arrows” of massive monetary expansion, increased government spending, and structural reform – is theoretically sound.
But only one and a half arrows have been launched so far.
The stimulus package is being offset by consumption-tax hikes aimed at reducing Japan’s massive debt burden – a process that will lead many Japanese consumers to adjust their spending downward.
The promised structural reforms of the energy sector, labor market, and competition policy have yet to be introduced, and appear unlikely to take effect anytime soon.
Even more worrisome are larger immutable realities – like a rapidly aging and shrinking population – that will limit Japan’s economic growth in the coming decades.
But Japan’s problems are not unique.
Indeed, its neighbor and historical rival, South Korea, is headed down a similar path.
The difference is that South Korea may still have time to ameliorate these trends, and avoid a Japanese-style quagmire of permanent low growth and long-term decline.
South Korea – the seventh-largest trading country in the world, and one of the most prominent economic success stories of the last 50 years – is at risk of such a bleak future as a result, first and foremost, of demographics.
South Korea’s working-age population is falling by 1.2% annually – the fastest decline among OECD countries.
While there are many reasons for South Korea’s low fertility rate, two economic factors stand out.
First, household-debt levels are enormous, capturing a quarter of income, with mortgage payments taking the lion’s share.
The ratio of housing prices to incomes is more than double that of the United States.
Second, South Korean families feel compelled to spend a large share of their income (10%, on average) on education.
With households already saving only around 4% of their disposable income, compared to 20% in 1988, there is little room for additional expenditure.
A concomitant feature of South Korea’s labor market is that women’s labor-force participation rate – a paltry 33% for women aged 30-39 – is among the lowest in the OECD.
This partly reflects the difficulty of balancing child rearing with work in South Korea, compared to, say, Europe or the US.
South Korea’s female labor-force participation rate is even lower than in Japan, where there are waiting lists for childcare.
Moreover, South Korea has underinvested in day-care centers, with firms rarely offering childcare support.
Given that South Korean women tend not to hold lucrative jobs, the cost of childcare is often prohibitive.
The recent increase in South Korea’s minimum normal retirement age has done little to improve the labor-market outlook.
Wages in the small and medium-size enterprises (SMEs) that employ 88% of workers still lag behind those of major conglomerates, the chaebols; and the middle class is shrinking in terms of its share of earnings.
But South Korea does have some advantages over Japan.
Although the government’s stimulus policies have increased the national debt, the debt/GDP ratio remains relatively low, at roughly 37%.
Public debt in Japan, by contrast, exceeds 220% of GDP.
Moreover, despite South Korea’s dependence on exports, domestic consumption is robust.
And ample spending on research and development, together with an unrelenting drive to be at the forefront of technological innovation, implies a brisk pace of innovation.
This creates room to address one of the economy’s two main challenges: low productivity in services.
As it stands, productivity in services is six times lower than in manufacturing.
The operations of South Korea’s chaebols – which dominate production, if not employment – should be adjusted to support productivity gains in the increasingly dominant services sector.
The key here, as in Japan, is to foster greater competition in services.
If the chaebols continue to do their own advertising, financing, and IT, they will starve SMEs.
A review of industrial concentration is warranted, as is a major government effort to foster SME growth in new ventures by offering incentives, ensuring access to capital, and lowering barriers to market entry.
More employment in higher-end service jobs, especially for women, would also improve South Korea’s prospects considerably.
In the longer term, however, South Korea’s prospects hinge largely on the labor force.
The rising dependency ratio – expected to exceed 50% by 2030, when 36% of the population will be above the age of 65 – could spell disaster for the country.
Health-care costs will rise, increasing the strain on budgets.
While increased immigration could help to ease labor-force pressures, it would be met with public resistance.
Structural reform cannot wait.
Nationalism should be channeled toward securing public support for deep economic and social reforms.
South Korea’s leaders do not have to look far to find out what will happen if they fail to address looming challenges quickly and resolutely.
Can Palestine Win the Peace?
RAMALLAH – The rollout of the war-ending ceasefire agreement between Israel and Palestine last month was impressive.
With almost perfect synchronization, Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas announced the end of the war on Gaza in a televised broadcast from his Ramallah headquarters, while Hamas leaders called on Palestinians in Gaza to take to the streets to celebrate their supposed victory.
Of course, with more than 2,200 Palestinians – mostly civilians – killed, over 10,000 injured, and thousands of homes, schools, mosques, and other structures destroyed, the war’s outcome can hardly be called a victory.
Nonetheless, this is the first time that Palestinians have been able to create something close to mutual deterrence with the Israelis.
Strengthening Palestine’s position further is the United Nations General Assembly’s recognition of Palestine as a non-member observer state, which Palestinian diplomats can use to exert political pressure on Israel to take their national aspirations seriously.
Palestine’s membership in UN agencies,&nbsp;not to mention the possibility of joining&nbsp;the International Criminal Court,&nbsp;has also boosted its leaders’ bargaining power.
All of these levers – not to mention the tremendous sympathy and support Palestinians have received from international observers – will be essential to ensure that the high price Palestinians paid during the 51-day war was not in vain.
But the levers will be useless if the leaders of Hamas and Fatah, the two dominant Palestinian factions, fail to maintain a united front.
The effectiveness of such a cooperative approach was apparent in the Egypt-sponsored indirect talks with Israel.
The unified Palestinian delegation was convenient for Egypt and Israel, both of which consider Hamas a terrorist organization, and for Palestine, because it helped to bring an end to the violence.
And it was a political boon for Abbas, who was able to field a delegation headed by one of his confidants, Azzam al-Ahmad, and thus claim the right to announce the ceasefire.
Having withstood the test of war, the Palestinian unity government that was created less than two months before the conflict began will now become the main vehicle for Gaza’s reconstruction.
But Prime Minister Rami Hamdallah will face considerable challenges – beginning with Gaza, where his executive authority is severely limited.
More broadly, the unity government’s success depends on the ability of the Fatah-led Palestinian government and Hamas – and, to whatever extent possible, Islamic Jihad – to cement their cooperation by agreeing on a path toward liberation and freedom.
A clear, realistic strategy will be integral to Palestine’s efforts to win support from regional and international actors eager to end the decades-old conflict with Israel.
This will, of course, require compromises from all sides.
Hamas must reconsider its refusal to recognize Israel.
For its part, the Palestinian leadership must pursue active resistance alongside negotiations with Israel, while defending more vigorously Palestinians’ right of return, which it has often ignored in an effort to appease the Israelis.
But establishing a unified strategy is only the first step.
Ordinary Palestinians, who will undoubtedly have to make sacrifices, must be brought on board – especially given the heavy price they incurred during the recent conflict, in which they had no say.
With broad public support, Palestine’s unity government will be able to rally the international community behind its fair and reasonable demands for a truly independent state, free of sieges, separation barriers, and foreign settlements – demands that fall squarely within the realm of basic human rights.
Just as the international community isolated South Africa until it abandoned apartheid, it can put pressure on Israel through boycotts, divestment, and sanctions, while calling upon Israel’s allies to stop providing aid and arms.
If Palestine’s leaders truly want to end the cycle of violence in Gaza, they must begin by resolving their own internal disagreements and present themselves as a cohesive, reliable, and committed negotiating party.
They must band together behind the simple but powerful goal expressed by UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon to the General Assembly in New York: “We will build again, but this must be the last time to rebuild.”
For Palestine’s unity government, the time to begin the rebuilding process is now.
If Fatah and Hamas are willing to do what it takes to achieve peace, this may well be their best chance.
Today’s Dark Lords of Finance
LONDON – In his Pulitzer-Prize-winning book, Lords of Finance, the economist Liaquat Ahamad tells the story of how four central bankers, driven by staunch adherence to the gold standard, “broke the world” and triggered the Great Depression.
Today’s central bankers largely share a new conventional wisdom – about the benefits of loose monetary policy.
Are monetary policymakers poised to break the world again?
Orthodox monetary policy no longer enshrines the gold standard, which caused the central bankers of the 1920s to mismanage interest rates, triggering a global economic meltdown that ultimately set the stage for World War II.
But the unprecedented period of coordinated loose monetary policy since the beginning of the financial crisis in 2008 could be just as problematic.
Indeed, the discernible effect on financial markets has already been huge.
The first-order impact is clear.
Institutional investors have found it difficult to achieve positive real yields in any of the traditional safe-haven investments.
Life insurers, for example, have struggled to meet their guaranteed rates of return.
According to a recent report by Swiss Re, had government bonds been trading closer to their “fair value,” insurers in America and Europe would have earned some $40-$80 billion from 2008 to 2013 (assuming a typical 50-60% allocation to fixed income).
For public pension funds, an additional 1% yield during this period would have increased annual income by $40-50 billion.
Investors have responded to near-zero interest rates with unprecedented adjustments in the way they allocate assets.
In most cases, they have taken on more risk.
For starters, they have moved into riskier credit instruments, resulting in a compression of corporate-bond spreads.
Once returns on commercial paper had been driven to all-time lows, investors continued to push into equities.
Approximately 63% of global institutional investors increased allocations in developed-market equities in the six months prior to April 2015, according to data from a recent State Street survey – even though some 60% of them expect a market correction of 10-20%.
Even the world’s most conservative investors have taken on unprecedented risk.
Japan’s public pension funds, which include the world’s largest, have dumped local bonds at record rates.
In addition to boosting investments in foreign stocks and bonds, they have now raised their holdings of domestic stocks for the fifth consecutive quarter.
These allocation decisions are understandable, given the paltry yields available in fixed-income investments, but the resulting second-order impact could ultimately prove devastating.
The equity bull market is now six years old.
Even after the market volatility following the crisis in Greece and the Chinese stock market’s plunge, valuations appear to be high.
The S&P 500 has surpassed pre-2008 levels, with companies’ shares trading at 18 times their earnings.
As long as the tailwinds of global quantitative easing, cheap oil, and further institutional inflows keep blowing, equities could continue to rally.
But at some point, a real market correction will arrive.
And when it does, pension funds and insurance companies will be more exposed than ever before to volatility in the equity markets.
This overexposure comes at a time when demographic trends are working against pension funds.
In Germany, for example, where 20% of the population is older than 65, the number of working-age adults will shrink from about 50 million today to as few as 34 million by 2060.
Among emerging markets, rapidly rising life expectancy and plunging fertility are likely to double the share of China’s over-60 population by 2050 – adding roughly a half-billion people who require support in their unproductive years.
If the combined effect of steep losses in equity markets and rising dependency ratios cause pension funds to struggle to meet their obligations, it will be up to governments to provide safety nets – if they can.
Government debt as a percentage of global GDP has increased at an annual rate of 9.3% since 2007.
In Europe, for example, Greece is not the only country drowning in debt.
In 2014, debt levels throughout the eurozone continued to climb, reaching nearly 92% of GDP – the highest since the single currency’s introduction in 1999.
If pensions and governments both prove unable to provide for the elderly, countries across the continent could experience rising social instability – a broader version of the saga playing out in Greece.
The new Lords of Finance have arguably been successful in many of their objectives since the financial crisis erupted seven years ago.
For this, they deserve credit.
But, when an emergency strikes, large-scale policy responses always produce unintended consequences typically sowing the seeds for the next full-blown crisis.
Given recent market turmoil, the question now is whether the next crisis has already begun.