Some smaller countries have abdicated their role in influencing Europe’s future.
But it is surprising to see a country with such a long history of global leadership as Britain suddenly withdrawing into itself.
Having abandoned its historical role in shaping Europe’s future, will the UK really be content to remain on the sidelines?
A British Tragedy in One Act
OXFORD – Thursday night is said to have been momentous for those who campaigned to leave the European Union and turn Britain’s back on the twenty-first century.
On that, at least, I can agree.
As Cicero wrote: “O wretched and unhappy was that day.”
The decision to leave the EU will dominate British national life for the next decade, if not longer.
One can argue about the precise scale of the economic shock – short- and long-term – but it is difficult to imagine any circumstances in which the United Kingdom does not become poorer and less significant in the world.
Many of those who were encouraged to vote allegedly for their “independence” will find that, far from gaining freedom, they have lost their job.
So, why did it happen?
First, a referendum reduces complexity to absurd simplicity.
The tangle of international cooperation and shared sovereignty represented by Britain’s membership of the EU was traduced into a series of mendacious claims and promises.
The British people were told there would be no economic price to pay for leaving, and no losses for all those sectors of its society that have benefited from Europe.
Voters were promised an advantageous trade deal with Europe (Britain’s biggest market), lower immigration, and more money for the National Health Service and other cherished public goods and services.
Above all, Britain, it was said, would regain its “mojo,” the creative vitality needed to take the world by storm.
One of the horrors that lie ahead will be the growing disappointment of “Leave” supporters as all of these lies are exposed.
The voters were told that they would “get their country back.”
I do not believe they will like what it turns out to be.
A second reason for the disaster is the fragmentation of Britain’s two main political parties.
For years, anti-European sentiment has corroded the authority of Conservative leaders.
Moreover, any notion of party discipline and loyalty collapsed years ago, as the number of committed Conservative supporters dwindled.
Worse is what has happened in the Labour Party, whose traditional supporters provided the impetus behind the big “Leave” votes in many working-class areas.
With Brexit, we have now seen Donald Trump-style populism come to Britain.
Obviously, there is widespread hostility, submerged in a tsunami of populist bile, to anyone deemed a member of the “establishment.”
Brexit campaigners like Justice Secretary Michael Gove rejected every expert as part of a self-serving conspiracy of the haves against the have-nots.
So, whether it was the governor of the Bank of England, the Archbishop of Canterbury, or the President of the United States, their advice counted for nothing.
All were portrayed as representatives of another world, with no relationship to the lives of ordinary British people.
That points to a third reason for the pro-Brexit vote: growing social inequity has contributed to a revolt against a perceived metropolitan elite.
Old industrial England, in cities like Sunderland and Manchester, voted against better-off London.
Globalization, these voters were told, benefits only those at the top – comfortable working with the rest of the world – at the expense of everyone else.
Beyond these reasons, it doesn’t help that for years hardly anyone has vigorously defended British membership in the EU.
This created a vacuum, allowing delusion and deception to blot out the benefits of European cooperation, and encouraging the view that the British had become the slaves of Brussels.
Pro-Brexit voters were fed a ludicrous conception of sovereignty, leading them to choose pantomime independence over the national interest.
But moaning and rending one’s garments won’t do any good now.
In grim circumstances, concerned parties must honorably try to secure what is best for the UK.
One hopes the Brexiteers were at least half right, as difficult as that is to imagine.
At any rate, one must make the best of the hand that has been dealt.
Still, three immediate challenges come to mind.
First, now that David Cameron has made clear that he will resign, the Conservative Party’s right wing and some of its sourer members will dominate the new government.
Cameron had no choice.
He could not possibly have gone to Brussels on behalf of his backstabbing colleagues to negotiate something he didn’t support.
If his successor is a Brexit leader, Britain can look forward to being led by someone who has spent the last ten weeks spreading lies.
Second, the bonds that hold the UK together – particularly Scotland and Northern Ireland, which both voted to stay in Europe – will come under great strain.
I hope the Brexit revolt will not lead inevitably to a vote for the breakup of the UK, but that outcome is certainly a possibility.
Third, Britain will need to begin negotiating its exit very soon.
It is difficult to see how it can possibly end up with a better relationship with the EU than it has now.
All Britons will have their work cut out for them to convince their friends around the world that they have not taken leave of their moderate senses.
The referendum campaign revived nationalist politics, which in the end is always about race, immigration, and conspiracies.
A task we all have in the pro-Europe camp is to try to contain the forces that Brexit has unleashed, and to assert the sort of values that have in the past earned us so many friends and admirers around the world.
All of this began in the 1940s, with Winston Churchill and his vision of Europe.
The way it will end can be described by one of Churchill’s more famous aphorisms: “The trouble with committing political suicide is that you live to regret it.”
In fact, many “Leave” voters may not live to regret it.
But the young Britons who voted overwhelmingly to remain a part of Europe almost certainly will.
Football, Brexit, and Us
CAMBRIDGE – Of the 24 teams that qualified for this year’s UEFA European Cup football (soccer) tournament, only one came from Germany.
Three came from the United Kingdom: England, Wales, and Northern Ireland.
That seems rather odd.
After all, East and West Germans reunited only in 1991, and Bavarians united with Prussians only in 1871, whereas the annexations/unions of Ireland, Wales, and Scotland to the Kingdom of England go back to 1177, 1542, and 1707, respectively.
So why do Thuringians, Saxons, and Swabians root for the same German team, while UK citizens root for so many?
(Scotland and even Gibraltar have their own teams as well.)
Wouldn’t they have a stronger team if they chose the best players to represent them all?
Presumably, British citizens understand this, but they prefer to have their own national teams rather than a stronger UK team – even if this means losing to tiny Iceland.
After all, if it is only about the strongest team, you might as well root for Barcelona.
For a team to represent “us,” it somehow has to be us.
Seen in this light, the Brexit vote is less surprising.
The “Remain” campaign focused on the economic benefits of staying in the European Union and the costs of leaving, some of which fell due immediately after the results were announced: the British pound plummeted and stock markets wiped out a couple of trillion dollars of wealth.
And yet 52% of those who voted preferred a country where Poles and Romanians would not be permitted to live, work, and compete for a position on the economic team.
Letting them in might produce a better team, but it would no longer be our team.
From one perspective, this is just another case of emotion defeating economic logic.
But our emotions are the algorithms, bequeathed by evolution, by which we make most decisions, including political ones; economic cost-benefit analysis that does not connect to our emotional compass does not move the needle.
At the core of the issue is the sense of “us.”
What does it mean to be a member of the EU, Nigeria, Iraq, Turkey, Switzerland, or any other political entity?
The sense of us is a subroutine of the brain based on the sense of self, which is one of our brain’s many creations: a sensation of being an ongoing entity that experiences things, remembers its history, can act, and has feelings and goals – what the eminent neuroscientist Antonio Damasio calls an autobiographical self.
Our brain is also acutely aware of the existence of other selves, with their feelings and intentions, and it is particularly good at reading what others are thinking, feeling, and planning.
We use this same mental apparatus to develop a sense of “us”: the people we care about and root for.
We think of this “us” as if it were a person with an autobiography, a temperament, predispositions, and aspirations.
We regard firms as legal persons, and we talk about countries as if they were a composite person with clear characteristics: Germans love order, Italians are passionate, and Brits possess a stiff upper lip.
And, obviously, the sense of “us” implies a sense of “them”: those whose welfare we consider less fundamental than our own.
As Joshua Greene, Director of Harvard University’s Moral Cognition Lab, has argued, our moral sentiments evolved to support human cooperation.
Just as evolution gave us sexual desire, rather than rational arguments, to ensure procreation, so we have evolved feelings of empathy, affection, disgust, and rage to respond to one another’s behavior.
Our moral sentiments both limit individuals’ abuse of the common good, expressed in the conflict between “me” and “us,” and maintain the coherence of the group, to support the competition between “us” and “them.”
Technological and cultural development has required an ever-expanding sense of “us.”
Over the past 10,000 years, as we moved from small hunter-gatherer bands to agricultural settlements, urbanization, and beyond, the network of people with whom we must interact and cooperate expanded, from small bands to nations-states and eventually to an entity like the EU.
When humans lived from subsistence agriculture, their radius of interaction was small: they did not have to talk to one another, and as a consequence, languages diverged.
That is why Cameroon, a country slightly smaller than Spain, is home to 230 languages.
By contrast, when the Industrial Revolution increased the value of larger markets, Italy (1861-1871) and Germany (1870-1871) were created by unifying smaller states on the basis of nationalist sentiment and a common language, both of which actually had to be created.
A shared sense of us obviously makes life much easier for political entities.
Without it, on whose behalf would the state – which is supposed to make decisions, define and protect rights, and impose obligations – be acting?
If “us” includes only, say, the Alawites in Syria, the Kikuyu in Kenya, or Han Chinese in China, everyone else has an incentive to rebel.
Clearly, countries that have a shared language and religion may develop a sense of “us” more easily than others.
But the world is full of states that are very diverse in these two dimensions, in which an alternative sense of “us” evolves and is constantly redefined by politics.
In the United States, for example, the sense of “us” initially included only white Anglo-Saxon Protestants, not Irish, Italian, or Polish Catholics or Jews – and especially not African-Americans.
Largely through politics, a more inclusive sense of “us” developed.
In the absence of a common language and religion, the EU’s sense of “us” must be based on shared values and culture, born of centuries of interaction.
And what a heritage it is: the Renaissance, the Enlightenment, several industrial revolutions, fantastic science, art, and most sports.
One wonders why euro bills are adorned with indistinct motifs, rather than with figures of universal appeal – da Vinci, Newton, Voltaire, Rembrandt, Cervantes, Chopin, or Beethoven – who best represent Europe’s cultural patrimony.
The European project will succeed only when it creates a European sense of “us” so powerful that it feels right that, say, Bulgarians should be permitted to live and work in Birmingham.
When all are European, all may live wherever in Europe they please.
They might even become the team to beat.
Brexit and the Special Relationship
NEW YORK – The decision whether to remain part of the European Union is obviously one for the British people and their elected representatives to make.
But more than British and European interests will be affected by the outcome, so it is both legitimate and appropriate for other parties to weigh in.
So let me exercise my right as an outsider with a stake in what happens to express a clear opinion: From my perspective (and that of many other Americans), a decision by the United Kingdom to exit the EU would be undesirable – indeed, highly undesirable.
I am aware of the irony some are sure to note in this, given that the United States’ own independence came about when the American colonies exited Great Britain.
But that was then, and this is now, and the UK’s exit from Europe would be greeted with equal parts regret and concern by its closest ally.
There are several reasons for this.
One reason why the US values its ties to the UK as much as it does is the UK’s role in Europe.
Britain is important not just as a bilateral partner, but because more often than not it can be counted on to argue for and support positions in Brussels consistent with, or at least not far from, those of the US.
The so-called “special relationship” has already become considerably less so in recent years, with Parliament’s refusal until December to support military action in Syria taking a particularly heavy toll in this regard.
Britain has become – and is widely perceived to be – a less dependable and less capable ally, and reality and perception would intensify if the UK were to take a step that would marginalize its role on the continent.
It is hard to envision Brexit resulting in anything other than a more parochial and less influential UK.
In addition, an EU without the UK would be one in which Germany would have even more influence that it does now.
Such a preponderance of power cannot be healthy in the long run, as it will fuel resentment of Germany and likely leave the EU less willing and able to act together on the world scene.
The result would be a weaker Europe at a time when the US needs a stronger one.
Even worse, it is highly probable that Americans advocating for a reduced US role in the world would seize on Brexit as further evidence that traditional allies were not doing their fair share, and that a US facing growing deficits and massive domestic needs should not be expected to make up the difference.
A simple reality must be kept in mind: The European integration project that began in the wake of World War II has helped to bring unprecedented stability and prosperity to much of the continent for nearly three-quarters of a century.
A British decision to sue for divorce would add to centrifugal forces already in evidence.
Nationalism and populism, already on the rise for both economic and social reasons, would gather even more momentum.
It is difficult to feel confident of the outcome, however uncertain that may be.
A decision by the British people to leave the EU would also put the question of Scotland’s independence squarely back on the agenda.
Indeed, many in Scotland would argue for independence in order to remain an EU member – a popular refrain that could well result in a vote to secede from the UK.
To say the least, Americans would not welcome a difficult, controversial public debate with Scotland’s leaders over the stationing of nuclear weapons and submarines on their territory at a time when Russia is again seen as a threat to Europe.
Fragmentation would be unlikely to stop there.
What happened in Scotland could well have ripple effects across what remained of the disunited United Kingdom.
In particular, Great Britain’s departure from the EU and Scotland’s departure from the UK would add to tensions in Northern Ireland between pro-UK Unionists and Republicans seeking to join Ireland.
Raising the profile of “final status” issues at a time when the two sides have shown themselves unable to face up to the past, or work together in the present, is not a recipe for progress.
Finally, Great Britain’s decision about its relationship with the EU will not happen in a vacuum.
In fact, the timing could hardly be worse.
Europe is already facing a perfect storm of fiscal strains, anemic economic growth, massive inflows of migrants and refugees, and renewed Russian aggression.
As if that weren’t enough, there is the unraveling Middle East, advancing climate change, terrorism, and now a new disease – the Zika virus – on the march.
There will also be a new US president elected this year.
The last thing he or she will need is to have America’s closest partner distracted and drained by a difficult divorce.
And that is what will happen if Brexit moves from possibility to reality.
Nietzsche and the British Referendum
CAMBRIDGE – Terrorist attacks.
Tensions over religious and ethnic minorities.
Growing support for extremist political parties.
A widening North-South divide.
A powerful German chancellor.
An aggressive Russia expanding its territorial reach.
A United Kingdom embroiled in distant wars, asking itself whether it should disengage from continental Europe.
A young political order, born of a series of devastating international wars, threatening to implode.
The list of problems facing Europe today is long, but this is not unprecedented.
Indeed, in many respects, contemporary conditions look strikingly similar to those confronting Otto von Bismarck’s Germany.
At that time, the fear was that southern Catholic minorities would undermine the unity of the newly founded German empire, intended to bring stability in the face of a rising radical socialist party, after a series of bloody wars (most recently against the French) and assassination attempts on the Kaiser.
Germany was sandwiched between an imperialist Russia and a vengeful France.
Meanwhile, Britain was entangled in military adventures in Asia and the Middle East.
Today, as Europe faces difficult questions about its future, exemplified in the UK’s upcoming referendum on its European Union membership, perhaps Germany’s experience in the late nineteenth century can be brought usefully to bear.
If so, there are few better guides to that experience – and our own – than Friedrich Nietzsche, one of the most perceptive thinkers of his time.
Nietzsche was a fearsome critic of the “blood and iron” power politics by which Bismarck had brought about German unity.
He called it an example of the “slave morality” that he lambasts in his great work On the Genealogy of Morality – a “lowly” approach to morality, focused simply on relieving suffering.
Nietzsche knew what he was talking about: he had volunteered as a cavalry officer during the Franco-Prussian War.
Though a bad fall kept him from combat, he did serve as a medical orderly – and gained first-hand experience of the trauma of war.
The militaristic Germany that emerged from that war, in Nietzsche’s view, had lost touch with its original cultural mission.
In Beyond Good and Evil, Nietzsche went further, exploring how a superior political system – based on “master morality,” which transcends simplistic notions of “good” and “bad” to develop values from a position of nobility and strength – would look.
He envisioned a united Europe, led by a trans-European cultural elite focused not on grandeur, but on the development of a new European culture.
Only through unification, Nietzsche argued, could continental Europe have a strong voice in world affairs, which at that time meant being on an equal footing with the British and Russian empires in their strategic “great game,” the winner of which would control Afghanistan and northern India.
The alternative – the power politics in which Bismarck was engaged – was “petty,” as it was premised upon European fragmentation and disintegration.
Nietzsche thought hard about how his new politics might come about, speculating that a growing threat from Russia could spur unification.
He also believed that continental Europe would have to “come to an understanding” with Britain, whose colonies were important trade partners for Europe.
The details may have changed, but many of the core issues – from the threat posed by Russia to the strategic benefits of European integration – remain the same.
As for Britain, while it no longer has an empire, it remains hugely important to Europe’s economy; indeed, the logistics of trade following a British exit from the EU is a key issue in the debate surrounding the referendum.
And, though Nietzsche could not have predicted the level of integration between the UK and continental Europe, he did warn against precisely the kind of fragmentation that the British referendum threatens to advance.
Much of the debate about the UK’s “Brexit” referendum has little relation to Nietzsche’s ideas.
But, with the political, economic, and social cases from both sides having so often been guided by fear, it seems that that debate would benefit from some more philosophical depth.
With Nietzche’s ideas in mind, British voters might recognize that the real question they must answer on June 23 is whether to endorse petty and divisive power politics or the great and noble politics of unification.
The Causes and Consequences of Brexit
MADRID – The prospect of a British exit from the European Union is well and truly upon us.
It seems increasingly likely that the upcoming European Council meeting will result in a deal on the conditions of the United Kingdom’s EU membership – a deal that will be put before British voters in a referendum, possibly as early as this summer.
But, just as everything rushes forward, Britain and the EU need to take a moment to think carefully.
After all, despite assurances from both sides, no one knows how the referendum will unfold, much less how to navigate the aftermath if British voters chose to leave.
The referendum is the most immediate unknown.
Past experience shows that, when voters make such decisions, they rarely focus on the issue at hand.
In referenda on the EU’s draft constitution in 2005, for example, the Dutch focused on the euro, while the French worried that Polish plumbers would take their jobs.
So far, the signs indicate that the upcoming British referendum will follow the same pattern, with voters focusing more on simplistic ideas, prejudices, and emotions than pragmatic considerations.
And the anti-EU camp has been by far the more passionate – and the more inflammatory in its rhetoric – side.
From a European perspective, this is deeply worrying.
It is well known that a British departure would deal a devastating blow to European integration, possibly causing an already-fragile process to unravel.
But the British should also be worried about the consequences of withdrawal, if only because of how little is known about what it would entail.
The problem is that most Britons have little awareness of the turbulence that “Brexit” would generate.
Beyond the impact on Scotland’s independence movement, Ireland’s Good Friday Agreement, and the UK’s “special relationship” with the United States, there are important questions regarding the future of UK-EU relations.
Many advocates of withdrawal cherry-pick policies and regulations, such as provisions of the EU’s free-trade agreements with Canada and Singapore, to cobble together a vision of what life would like be for the UK outside of Europe.
They want Britons to believe not only that the City of London would remain Europe’s top financial center, but also that the UK would retain access to the EU’s single market, even without free movement of labor.
This is pure fantasy.
Although the UK would retain its strong international standing in terms of defense and foreign policy, its clout in negotiating trade and investment agreements – including with the EU itself, which accounts for half of British trade – would be severely diminished.
That has been the experience of non-EU countries like Switzerland and Norway.
In fact, EU leaders are already unhappy with Switzerland’s access to the single market; the idea that they would give the UK such access, especially after being slapped in the face, is not convincing.
Some claim that a Brexit could resemble Greenland’s easily negotiated 1985 withdrawal from the European Economic Community (EEC), the only such withdrawal that has ever taken place.
But the circumstances could not be more different.
The limited EEC of 30 years ago does not compare to the robust EU of today, just as Greenland pales in comparison with the UK in economic size or political significance.
Furthermore, Greenland’s withdrawal was eased considerably by its constitutional ties with EEC member Denmark, which continued to represent its interests in European bodies.
With no equivalent patron to smooth the way for the UK, negotiations following a vote for withdrawal would be complicated and acrimonious, dragging out over a number of years.
All of this uncertainty would take its toll, on both businesses and ordinary citizens.
Who would commit to a long-term investment in the UK without knowing what legal arrangements will be in place?
To avoid this outcome, the European Council should affirm the UK’s far more stable prospects as an EU member, while demonstrating Europe’s fundamental flexibility.
Already, the UK has been allowed to opt out of the Schengen Area, the euro, and justice and home affairs.
Now the EU has shown its willingness to seek reasonable compromises on British Prime Minister David Cameron’s demands.
In some areas, such as boosting competitiveness and streamlining regulation, consensus will be relatively easy to achieve.
Agreement is also possible on giving national parliaments a greater role in guiding EU legislation.
As for Cameron’s demand to end Britain’s treaty obligation to work toward an “ever-closer union,” the key to compromise may be nuance.
Rather than moving to integrate member states more deeply, perhaps the EU should shift its focus to uniting, increasingly closely, the peoples of Europe.
The final issue may be the thorniest: immigration and welfare.
Cameron has called for a four-year “timeout” on in-work and child benefits for EU migrants working in the UK – an approach that many agree is discriminatory.
One shift that may ease the way toward a compromise on this highly fraught topic would be to enforce a clear division between this discussion and debates on the ongoing refugee crisis.
The focus must remain on Poles and Latvians, not Syrians.
In 1953, Winston Churchill famously declared, “We are with Europe, but not of it; we are linked, but not compromised.”
If the upcoming European Council can achieve a compromise that reflects this sentiment, Brexit may be avoided, benefiting everyone.
But, with the referendum looming, even a good deal may not be enough.
With fantasy and manipulation continuing to dominate the British debate, the UK – and Europe – may be in for a very sobering surprise.
The Brexit Balance Sheet
BRUSSELS – Prime Minister David Cameron’s offer to British citizens to hold a referendum on whether to leave the European Union might have seemed like a reasonably safe gamble just a few years ago.
Most people then probably would have voted to stay.
That was before the Greek crisis created havoc in the eurozone, and the arrival of hundreds of thousands of refugees caused the EU (although not the United Kingdom) to lose control of some of its borders.
Cameron might actually get other European leaders to agree to his demands for reform, without which he has said he would not campaign to keep his country in the EU.
They are not extreme: a guarantee that non-eurozone members gain full access to the single market; less red tape at the EU level; a British exemption from “ever-closer union.”
His last demand – fewer benefits for EU migrants – will be the hardest for EU leaders to accept.
Despite this reform push, some British Euroskeptics have criticized Cameron for being too soft.
The temptation in Britain simply to abandon what appears to be a sinking ship and go it gloriously alone is growing stronger.
This is understandable.
The question is whether “Brexit” would be as glorious as its proponents like to imagine.
Unleashed from the rule of Brussels, the sirens of Brexit promise, Britain would once again be a beacon of freedom in the world, respected by China, tied to the United States in the bilateral “special relationship,” and all the while retaining friendly commercial ties with the European continent.
Business would boom, the City of London would prosper, and Britons never would be slaves, not of the EU or anyone else.
In fact, things might not work out so well.
As Cameron himself stated after a recent visit to Iceland, the Norwegian option of engaging in free trade with the EU as a non-member is far from ideal.
Norway, like Switzerland, still has to abide by EU single-market rules, without having any say in formulating them.
Norway also pays large amounts of money to the EU budget, and must accept free movement of people (including refugees) across its borders.
As far as the US is concerned, President Barack Obama has already said that he would take Britain more seriously inside the EU than outside it.
Similarly, US Trade Representative Michael Froman recently observed that the US would not be interested in negotiating a separate free-trade deal with Britain.
All this, by the way, assumes that post-Brexit Britain would still be Britain.
The Scots would almost certainly want to break away from England and rejoin the EU as an independent member, giving further encouragement (as if that were needed) to separatists in Catalonia and other frustrated European regions.
England would be left to wave its flag of St. George over Wales and Northern Ireland, a rather sour prospect.
But there are more potential supporters of Brexit: some keen European Unionists who have found the UK’s often-obstructive membership increasingly annoying.
Good riddance, they might say, once the divorce finally comes through; now the true Europeans can finally unite in peace.
This, too, strikes me as misguided.
A Brexit would most likely be as damaging to the EU as it would be to Britain itself.
Contrary to popular perception, the EU is not ruled by the European Commission in Brussels.
National governments still make the most important decisions in the European Council, where leaders wheel and deal to advance their countries’ interests.
Germany, Britain, and France, as the EU’s three major powers, form a crucial balance.
Without Britain, the EU becomes a Franco-German enterprise, with Germany very much the dominant partner, and all the smaller member states squeezed between the two.
This is not really what anybody wants, not even the Germans, who are reluctant hegemons.
Moreover, Britain and Germany are natural allies in balancing the statist tendencies of France.
Britain has in fact had a largely positive impact on the EU.
Europe has benefited from Britain’s democratic traditions, its openness to the rest of the world, its impatience with bureaucratic obstruction, and even its skepticism toward abstract utopian schemes.
If any city feels like a European capital now, it is not Brussels, Berlin, or even Paris, but London, home to almost a half-million French citizens, as well as millions of other foreigners.
There is one more reason, however, why Brexit would be a disaster for Europe.
It is generally agreed that European countries cannot cope alone with the major problems of our time, such as climate change, immigration, the challenges of a globalized economy, and, above all, security.
Since 1945, Pax Americana has papered over Europe’s incapacity to manage its own security.
Europeans like to talk about the values of peace and compromise, while US military might takes care of their safety.
This has created a degree of dependency that should be redressed, if only to relieve the Americans of their burden and give Europe the political influence to match its economic clout.
For this to be achieved, the EU must establish a common security policy and military force.
This will be a long and difficult process.
Germany, for obvious reasons, will not take the lead.
Only France and Britain have enough military strength to provide a sound basis for European defense.
Britain could, in this vital matter, be the savior of Europe.
Without it, there is no hope.
Alas, Cameron is singularly ill equipped to make such a positive argument.
He leads a party that is increasingly opposed to any European project apart from trade.
And he would have to battle a folk memory that has lasted several generations: the last time Britain helped to save Europe, it stood very much, and very proudly, alone.
Where Europe Still Lives
LVIV – The outcome of the United Kingdom’s Brexit referendum shocked populations across Europe.
But watching the response in Lviv, in Western Ukraine – a hub of enthusiasm about the European Union – was particularly jarring.
At a time when irresponsible opportunists and populists in the UK are taking a wrecking ball to their country’s own institutions, and those of Europe, Ukrainian reformers are trying to build something new.
Whereas the UK’s “Leave” campaign peddled trumped-up dangers from immigration to make its case, activists in Ukraine are facing very real threats as they work toward a civil-society framework that can stand up to internal pressure from the oligarchs and external influence from Russia.
Historically, Lviv, perhaps more than any city, reminds us of Europe’s capacity to self-destruct.
Around its picturesque squares, every cobblestone and ornamental façade has borne silent witness to the bloodletting that accompanied empires’ rise and fall.
Yet Lviv is also where one can find hope for the promise of Europe.
Lviv is a deeply anti-Russian and pro-European city; but, for five days each summer, it hosts the Alpha Jazz Festival, sponsored by a Russian bank.
At a time when Russia and Ukraine are still very much at war, policymakers, local citizens, members of the Ukrainian diaspora, and even some Russians pack the streets of Lviv to celebrate world-class jazz.
Beyond its vital cultural life and geographical location, Ukraine is strategically important to the West.
It is a key front in the global confrontation between democracy and autocracy.
For Europe, it represents a unique opportunity to promote the rule of law, transparency, free trade, and good governance beyond its borders.
Ukraine is a large country, with ample human capital, natural resources, and growth potential in many sectors.
More important, successful reforms in Ukraine make positive developments in Russia more likely.
Still, Ukraine’s economy has shrunk by two-thirds (in dollar terms) since 2006, making it the poorest country in Europe.
After the 2014 ouster of pro-Russian President Viktor Yanukovych, the European dream suddenly seemed less remote for many Ukrainians, who had hoped for visa-free travel and employment opportunities in the EU sometime in the near future.
With the Brexit vote, that hope is now diminished, as is a European model that has long inspired societies emerging from the post-Soviet fog.
There was a palpable sense of despair and disbelief among Ukrainians enjoying jazz in Lviv as they watched Europe self-destruct once again.
Brexit gives the forces of autocracy an undeserved boost.
Europe’s ability to project soft power is weakened, as is its appetite to do so.
The benefits of a post-Arab Spring and post-European world are not lost on its dictators, who can now rest easier.
Still, there is reason for hope.
Meaningful reforms in Ukraine can still succeed, and more has been achieved in the last two years than was accomplished in the preceding 20.
For starters, the economy has at least stabilized, and the fighting in the east has receded.
Ukraine’s current prime minister, Volodymyr Groysman, is committed to pushing through additional reforms to combat corruption, including abolishing energy subsidies and shifting to a more transparent monetary policy (from exchange-rate targeting to inflation targeting).
To the east, Russia’s economy is suffering from low energy prices and Western sanctions, neither of which will change any time soon.
Even without these external conditions, Russia’s economy was plagued by rising costs and a lack of productivity growth.
But at least some close to the inner circle of Russia’s leadership have hinted at a new willingness to discuss matters of regional or global concern.
To the west, the EU can still regain its composure, provided it moves quickly to resolve the current post-Brexit uncertainty.
If it succeeds in this, it can pursue investment opportunities in Ukraine and southeast Europe that stand to replenish its political capital and renew its productivity growth.
The EU should recognize Brexit as an opportunity to move forward with its own fundamental reforms, which have stalled in part because of UK opposition.
Opinion polls show that EU citizens understand the need for a Europe-wide framework to control the financial sector (particularly cross-border banking), manage refugee flows, and implement measures to fight climate change and mitigate its effects.
For the citizens of Lviv, the European project provides a model not only for rebuilding their own society, but also for joining something bigger.
That larger vision is one the UK’s “Remain” campaign, with the notable exception of former Prime Minister Gordon Brown’s “Lead – Not Leave” speech, did not offer to its own constituency.
Even pro-Europeans in the UK questioned if it was worth voting to remain, given such weak engagement by the UK government in leading the EU.
What the UK needed – and still needs – is a vision, put to the people, of how to make itself better by making the EU better.
As Ukrainian reformers bravely continue to build new institutions, they are looking to the EU, and especially to the UK, for blueprints.
One hopes that we will someday look to Lviv – where every citizen feels a sense of ownership over every stone – for inspiration as well.
Brexit, Trump, and Globalization’s Have-Nots
CAMBRIDGE – Two political events that are attracting global attention these days – the vote in the United Kingdom to leave the European Union and Donald Trump’s presidential campaign in the United States – have much in common.
Just over half of UK voters chose “Brexit,” a result that has cast a long shadow over their country’s political system and economic prospects.
Perhaps understanding the parallels between the two campaigns will help US voters avoid taking a similar path in November.
One parallel is that both campaigns were thoroughly underestimated, especially by experts and establishment figures.
Just as the possibility of Brexit was initially dismissed, few political elites, Republican and Democratic alike, took seriously Trump’s bid for the Republican nomination.
Another similarity is that both campaigns have been based largely on implausible, even absurd, promises.
In the UK, “Leave” campaigners assured voters that the UK could maintain access to the single market after withdrawing from the EU, while limiting the entry of European workers to the UK.
They also declared that the £350 million ($465 million) supposedly sent to the EU each week would be reallocated to the cash-strapped National Health Service.
Within hours of the referendum result, the “Leave” campaign’s leaders began to backtrack, spurring anger among many voters, particularly those whose support for Brexit had been driven by the desire to cut immigration.
Yet Trump’s own implausible promises – including his pledges to construct a wall between the US and Mexico and bring back manufacturing jobs from overseas – still seem credible to many voters.
These parallels point to one conclusion: many working- and middle-class voters, who feel left behind by globalization, are far angrier than establishment leaders realized.
They can no longer be dismissed; instead, leaders must figure out how to address their concerns.
There are winners and losers in globalization.
But a fundamental proposition in economics holds that when individuals are free to engage in trade, the size of the economic pie increases enough that the winners could, in theory, compensate the losers, leaving everyone better off.
Globalization skeptics are right that, in practice, the compensation tends to remain hypothetical.
But the suggestion that we should try to roll back globalization is problematic for a simple reason: globalization can’t be undone.
Any effort to put the genie back in the bottle might not only trigger trade wars, with serious consequences for economic growth, but would also fail to reduce trade to the levels of 50 years ago.
No national leader could restore, say, steel-industry employment to what it was in 1966.
Fortunately, there is a better option.
We can take globalization as a given, and adopt measures to help compensate those who might naturally lose out.
In the US, measures that could help to achieve that include Trade Adjustment Assistance, a program aimed specifically at helping those who have lost their jobs due to trade.
More important programs – which could help those left behind by trade, technology, or something else – include an expanded Earned Income Tax Credit and health insurance.
Democrats, including President Barack Obama and Hillary Clinton, the presumptive Democratic nominee to succeed him, largely support these policies.
Yet Republicans have opposed them.
It seems likely that Trump would reject such efforts as well, even as he claims to be the savior of the working class.
Trump’s rise reflects the extent to which political polarization in the US has deepened during the last eight years.
As political moderates have been pushed out, policy gridlock has worsened, with presidential initiatives routinely blocked by congressional Republicans, even when such proposals were consistent with Republican ideas.
None of this bodes well for the losers of globalization; they need leaders – of both parties, in Congress and the executive branch – who can come together to protect their interests.
Until recently, the British electoral system seemed to represent an admirably balanced approach.
The two largest parties largely operated under competent and consistent leadership and represented relatively well-defined policy stances – center-right for the Conservatives, and center-left for Labour.
In this environment, voters could base their choices on the issues at hand.
And, under the parliamentary system, victorious prime ministers could work to carry out the policies on which they had campaigned.
Yet even Britain’s “competent” leaders sometimes made fatefully ill-advised decisions.
From Margaret Thatcher’s introduction of a poll tax to Tony Blair’s support for the US-led invasion of Iraq, to David Cameron’s decision to hold the Brexit referendum, such decisions have undermined the British system.
What is left now, after Cameron, is a mess.
The new crop of politicians shows little clarity or consistency.
When the next election is held, voters could well be asked to choose between parties that do not correspond in any clear way to the relevant policy decisions that Britain must make – mainly, whether to seek to negotiate a relatively close association with the EU or to separate completely.
In this sense, American voters might still be better off than their British counterparts.
Though Trump’s appearance indicates that the US political system has also deteriorated markedly, the Democrats still favor policies like wage insurance and universal health insurance, and the Republicans still oppose them.
So, in November, American voters are still making a choice about one of the leading issues on their minds: whether to address the reality of globalization by helping those who have been left behind, or to tilt at windmills, like the Brexiting British.
The BRICS Fallacy
MADRID – The recent downgrade of Brazil’s credit rating to junk status was followed by a raft of articles heralding the crumbling of the BRICS (Brazil, Russia, India, China, and South Africa).
How predictable: schadenfreude almost always follows bad news about the BRICS, whose members were once hailed as the world’s up-and-coming economic powerhouses and next major political force.
There is something deeper going on here.
The world’s seeming obsession with the BRICS’ perceived rise and fall reflects a desire to identify the country or group of countries that would take over from the United States as global leader.
But, in searching for the “next big thing,” the world ignores the fact that the US remains the only power capable of providing global leadership and ensuring some semblance of international order.
The story of the BRICS is a familiar one.
It began as a technical grouping in 2001, when the British economist Jim O’Neill lumped them together (without South Africa) and gave them their catchy name for the sole reason that they were all large, rapidly growing emerging economies.
But, recognizing that economic power could translate into political influence, the BRICS held their first informal meeting in 2006, and their first leaders’ summit in 2009.
The bloc was going places – or so it seemed.
But seven years, seven summits, and one new member (South Africa joined in 2010) later, the significance of the BRICS remains hotly debated.
The disparities among the BRICS are well known.
China’s economic output is nearly twice that of the rest of the BRICS combined, and roughly 30 times that of South Africa.
Their governance models are vastly different, from India’s robust democracy to Russia’s illiberal model to China’s one-party system.
Russia and China, both permanent members of the UN Security Council, have offered, at best, lukewarm support for the other BRICS’ aspirations to join them.
And then there are its members’ bilateral disagreements, including a heated territorial dispute between India and China.
Nonetheless, the BRICS have acted in concert on more than one occasion.
Last March, amid near-universal condemnation of Russia’s annexation of Crimea, the country’s BRICS counterparts – even those that had long supported the inviolability of borders and non-intervention – abstained from a UN General Assembly resolution affirming Ukraine’s unity and territorial integrity.
Three months later, the BRICS released their “Leaders’ Summit Declaration” condemning the imposition of economic sanctions on Russia by the European Union and the US.
Most concretely, the long-anticipated New Development Bank, run jointly and equally by the five BRICS countries, opened its doors in Shanghai in July.
Clearly, the BRICS are a thing.
They are just not the thing.
The BRICS arose at a time when much of the world, especially the advanced economies, was mired in crisis.
The “fall of the West” narrative ran alongside that of the “rise of the rest.”
But the story has not played out quite as anticipated.
Economically, the BRICS are facing serious challenges.
In addition to a well-documented growth slowdown, China has lately experienced considerable stock-market turmoil and currency devaluation.
The Brazilian and Russian economies are contracting; South Africa’s growth has slowed; and India, though maintaining relatively strong growth, must undertake important reforms.
The BRICS have also failed to fulfill their promise of international leadership.
At the beginning of the decade, Brazil showed a certain aspiration, along with Turkey, to press ahead with an alternative nuclear deal with Iran.
But that proposal fell apart, and, amid pressure from corruption scandals and falling commodity prices, Brazil left the global stage.
South Africa and India also continue to punch below their apparent weight internationally (notwithstanding Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s visibility).
As for Russia, the only traditional world leader of the bunch, the Kremlin’s Ukraine policy has done severe damage to the country’s international profile – damage that not even its possible diplomatic coup in Syria can undo.
Only China has displayed an inclination to lead, as exemplified by President Xi Jinping’s visit to Washington, DC last week, which produced major announcements on climate action, cyber security, and international development.
China has also been pursuing initiatives like the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank and the revitalization of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization.
But China’s growing assertiveness, particularly in the South China Sea, has fueled the perception that it is more of a threat than a leader.
All in all, the BRICS no longer seem to be rising.
At the same time, the core of the West no longer seems to be declining.
Although Europe remains mired in crisis and existential self-doubt, and Japan is still finding its feet after two decades of economic stagnation, the US is as relevant as ever.
Indeed, no major global challenge – from conflict in the Middle East to climate change to global financial regulation – can be confronted without American engagement.
America’s enduring dominance will rile many, and with good reason.
A quarter-century after the Cold War’s end, the world should have arrived at a more equitable and balanced way of getting things done.
But it has not, and no other single power is in a position to take America’s place.
Europe is too inward looking; China inspires too much suspicion; and India, despite showing signs that it is preparing for a greater global role, lacks enough international authority on its own.
As a result, nearly 20 years after former US Secretary of State Madeleine Albright dubbed her country “indispensable,” it remains so.
The imperative now is for the US and the world to recognize this.
Rather than focusing our attention on alternatives to US leadership, we should be emphasizing its importance – an approach that would help to spur the US to rededicate itself to its international responsibilities.
There have been hints that this impulse still exists – notably, the Iranian nuclear deal – but they remain inadequate to the challenges confronting the world.
The international order is at a crossroads.
It needs the US to guide it – with ingenuity, initiative, and stamina – in the direction of peace and prosperity.
Obsessing about who might eventually replace America is bound to get us all lost.
The Bloom Is off the BRICS
STANFORD – A few years ago, pundits and policymakers were predicting that the BRICS countries – Brazil, Russia, India, China, and South Africa – would be the new engines of global growth.
Naive extrapolation of rapid growth led many people to imagine an ever-brighter future for these economies – and, thanks to them, for the rest of the world as well.
But now the bloom is off the rose.
The economies of Brazil and Russia are contracting, while those of China and South Africa have slowed substantially.
Only India’s growth rate has stayed up, now slightly exceeding China’s.
Will the BRICS fulfill their former promise?
Or are continued problems inevitable?
Given that low-income economies typically have little fixed capital (computers, factories, infrastructure) and human capital (education and training) per worker, they tend to have higher potential returns to capital investment.
That means they can grow more rapidly than wealthier economies, until their per capita income catches up.
While China, India, and Brazil still have very large rural populations, they have made great strides in reducing poverty, with several hundred million people (the largest proportion in China), escaping it in the last few decades.
And these countries’ middle classes are growing fast as well.
Rapid progress in the emerging economies has contributed to economic pessimism in Europe and North America.
After all, the developing economies’ combined GDP now exceeds that of the advanced economies – a situation that would have been unimaginable a generation ago.
Moreover, the hundreds of millions of low-cost workers who joined the global labor force when China, India, and Eastern Europe opened their economies are still putting pressure on the wages of all but the most skilled workers in the advanced economies.
As the Nobel laureate economist Paul Samuelson observed in 1948, international trade leads to factor-price equalization, with wages, adjusted for skill levels, equilibrating across countries.
But, for the BRICS, continued rapid progress may become more difficult.
Experience shows that there is a point – usually when per capita income levels reach about $15,000-20,000 (roughly one-third the level in the United States) – when growth tends to slow.
In recent decades, only a few economies – notably, South Korea, Taiwan, and Singapore – have managed to escape the so-called “middle-income trap” and continue to increase their prosperity.
Beyond the problems that almost all developing economies confront – for example, weak institutions and poor governance – each of the BRICS countries faces a unique set of challenges.
For example, Brazil must contend with a recession, low oil prices, and an unprecedented corruption scandal at Petrobras, the state oil company.
Given this, freer trade, such as with the NAFTA countries (Canada, the US, and Mexico), and more hospitable terms for foreign investment, especially in energy, should top President Dilma Rouseff’s agenda.
Russia, too, is feeling the pressure of lower oil prices, both on its current budget and in terms of its ability to pursue further energy-sector development.
Compounding the challenge are the economic sanctions imposed by the US and Europe in response to President Vladimir Putin’s aggressive policies toward Russia’s immediate neighborhood.
Finally, Russia has a staggering demographic problem, characterized by a shrinking population, life expectancy far below the advanced-country average, and a growing brain drain.
India, at least for the moment, has the best short-run economic conditions.
Inflation, a major threat to the economy until recently, is down under the guidance of the Reserve Bank of India’s governor, Raghuram Rajan.
And growth is projected at 7.5% for this year.
But India’s fiscal position remains challenging, and the country’s population, which will soon overtake China’s, remains mostly rural and impoverished.
Despite the looming challenges, Prime Minister Narendra Modi has been slow to implement the promised economic reforms.
Indeed, although he has made some small improvements in regulation, privatization, and cash transfers to the poor, bolder land and labor-market reforms remain elusive.
China, for its part, is attempting a difficult economic rebalancing, from an export-led to a consumption-based growth model.
In poker terms, Chinese President Xi Jinping is attempting to pull an inside straight, gambling that a growing middle class will demand enough manufactured goods to prevent the economy’s immense excess capacity in basic industries from leading to widespread unemployment.
At under 40% of GDP – compared to at least 60% in advanced economies – Chinese household consumption certainly has space to grow.
But China’s economy remains prone to considerable risks.
As occurred in Japan decades ago, China is starting to face lower-cost competition, such as from Vietnam; its stock market is frothy; and Xi’s anti-corruption program, though popular with ordinary citizens, has led to widespread uncertainty about the “rules of the game.”
Finally, South Africa’s problems reflect a loss of confidence in the government, endemic corruption, massive infrastructure needs, and restrictive labor-market and foreign-investment regulation.
And, in terms of reform, President Jacob Zuma is not headed in the right direction.
The BRICS are – and always have been – subject to the same forces as other economies.
But, although they have increased their dependence on market forces, their governments continue to dictate too many major economic decisions, increasing the risk of imbalances or even crises.
Their ability to develop institutions that support greater economic freedom, with more reliance on market competition and less on government, will likely be the main determinant of their long-term success.
China’s BRICS Balancing Act
BEIJING – As much of the world focuses on Greece’s travails, the BRICS countries – Brazil, Russia, India, China, and South Africa – have been working to advance their own economic agenda, most recently at their seventh annual summit in the Siberian city of Ufa. But, though Russia hosted the meeting, it is China that was viewed as dominating the grouping.
Indeed, the BRICS has already proved to be a force multiplier for Chinese diplomacy, and can remain so if China is careful not to push its national interests too hard.
So far, China has played a pivotal role in driving progress toward real cooperation among the BRICS countries.
In recent weeks, its members have each pledged $10 billion to their New Development Bank, which should start lending next year; released a common strategy for economic and trade cooperation; and agreed to a $100 billion contingency fund to provide temporary assistance to members facing balance-of-payments pressures.
But the BRICS’ future remains uncertain, owing to strong economic headwinds.
Brazil is wracked by corruption scandals and stagnating output.
Russia is probably in recession, owing largely to Western sanctions imposed in response to its intervention in Ukraine.
India has been suffering from a depreciating currency and soaring public debts.
China’s GDP grew by only 7.4% last year, the lowest rate in 24 years.
And South Africa’s growth has been weak, not least due to energy shortages.
Given these developments, many Western observers have come to believe that the BRICS are broken.
Morgan Stanley’s Ruchir Sharma has emphasized that the winners of the last decade may not continue to win in this one.
Even Jim O’Neill, who coined the term “BRIC,” has turned his attention to the “MINT” economies – Mexico, Indonesia, Nigeria, and Turkey – the BRICS’ key emerging-country competitors.
But not everyone is bearish about the BRICS’ prospects and global influence, whether taken individually or as a grouping.
The journalist Gideon Rachman has suggested that “the rise of non-Western economies is a deeply rooted historic shift that can survive any number of economic and political shocks.”
China seems to be counting on that being true.
In fact, the BRICS countries remain an economic force to be reckoned with, accounting for 25.7% of world GDP, 42% of the global population, and 17% of total trade.
They attract more than 18% of the global total of foreign investment, hold 40% of all foreign-exchange reserves, and account for 30% of total foreign holdings of US Treasury bonds.
Moreover, the BRICS consumption markets are worth more than $4 trillion, equivalent to those of the eurozone.
And, according to Goldman Sachs, about 85% of the world’s middle class will be living in the BRICS and other developing countries by 2030.
Moreover, with many of the factors that have fueled the BRICS’ rapid growth – including relatively low labor costs, rising productivity, trade liberalization, and the free flow of information and capital – still in play, writing off the BRICS would be premature.
Still, the BRICS have work to do.
The Chinese government is now going further, urging the rest of the BRICS to institutionalize their cooperation, not just pursue domestic reform.
China contends that a stronger BRICS grouping would help to safeguard the interests of all developing countries.
To that end, the country is also spearheading the effort to reform the global economic architecture, including by pushing for reforms to the International Monetary Fund’s weighted voting system.
But despite such efforts’ potential benefits for emerging and developing economies, they have provoked considerable anxiety among China’s BRICS partners, which fear that its leadership could quickly morph into domination.
Beyond fundamental differences in the BRICS’ countries political systems, social values, and cultural traditions – factors that undermine trust and cohesion – there is the obvious fact that China’s economy (not to mention its military) dwarfs the others’.
Indeed, bilateral trade between China and the other four BRICS accounts for 85% of total intra-BRICS trade.
Furthermore, China’s BRICS partners face keen competition from cheap Chinese-manufactured goods (intensified by what many view as China’s undervalued currency).
Most trade-related complaints against China in the World Trade Organization in recent years were lodged by developing countries, including India and Brazil.
China’s relationship with India is particularly fraught, owing to their seemingly intractable territorial dispute, as well as disagreements over the reform of the United Nations Security Council.
If China wants the BRICS to continue to deepen their ties, it should seek to act as a guiding hand within the grouping, adopting an approach that is more prudent than pushy.
That means, above all, curbing its geopolitical competition with India and Russia.
At the same time, in dealing with its advanced-country counterparts, it should be open and pragmatic, championing an inclusive global policy agenda that connects the developed and developing worlds.
A united anti-West bloc would not serve China’s interests any more than a grouping characterized by antagonism and divisions.
What China – and the rest of the emerging and developing economies – needs is a nimble and cohesive BRICS grouping with a strong reputation as a leading provider of global public goods.
Bridging the Infrastructure Gap
SAINT PETERSBURG, RUSSIA – Every day, millions of people across the developed and developing world inch through gridlock or squeeze into packed subway cars to get to and from work.
And that is likely to be only one of many frequent – if not daily – confrontations with infrastructure systems that are bursting at the seams.
In advanced and emerging economies alike, roads and bridges need repair, water systems are aging or inadequate, and power grids are overburdened, leading to blackouts.
Too many countries have been underinvesting in infrastructure for decades, resulting in everyday inconveniences and, worse, creating roadblocks to economic growth.
While a major infusion of funding is needed to address infrastructure gaps, finding the money is only part of the solution.
Governments also need to reform infrastructure planning and oversight.
The public can no longer afford to accept projects with costs that spiral out of control.
Infrastructure projects’ unique ability to create jobs in the short term and boost productivity in the long term is well known to policymakers.
Yet talk has rarely translated into action, despite the record-low interest rates of the past eight years.
The world needs to increase investment in transportation, power, water, and telecom systems from $2.5 trillion a year to $3.3 trillion every year through 2030 just to support projected economic growth, according to new estimates from the McKinsey Global Institute.
But despite the obvious need for action, infrastructure investment has actually declined in 11 of the G20 economies since the 2008 global financial crisis.
The conventional wisdom is that fiscal concerns make it impossible to marshal enough public funding.
In fact, there is substantial scope to increase public infrastructure investment, particularly while borrowing costs remain historically low.
In some cases, funding can be found without raising taxes: governments can create revenue streams by instituting user charges, capturing increases in property value, or selling existing assets and recycling the proceeds.
Public accounting standards also could allow infrastructure assets to be depreciated over their life cycle, rather than immediately adding their costs to fiscal deficits during construction.
Governments can also do much more to encourage private investment, starting by providing regulatory certainty and the ability to charge prices that produce an acceptable risk-adjusted return.
Even more broadly, they can take steps to create a market that more efficiently connects institutional investors seeking stable, long-term returns and projects that need financing.
Given that these investors have some $120 trillion in assets under management, the bottleneck is not a shortage of capital, but rather a dearth of well-prepared, bankable projects.
One way to clear it would be to develop the regulatory and institutional groundwork needed to enable funding to flow more smoothly from institutional investors in advanced economies to projects in the emerging world, where huge populations still need access to essential infrastructure services.
Beyond financing, making the infrastructure sector more efficient represents an even bigger opportunity.
Delays stretching into years, and cost overruns soaring into the billions of dollars, are a sadly familiar story in public works.
And when bridges turn into boondoggles, the public grows more reluctant to invest.
Every dollar allocated to infrastructure needs to stretch much further.
Part of that effort involves demanding better performance from the construction industry, where productivity growth has been flat for decades.
There are some positive signs of innovation, from accelerated bridge building to pre-fabrication and modular construction techniques. But the sector as a whole needs a major push in terms of modernization, technology adoption, and standardization.
Governments must also transform the institutions and processes under their direct control.
Our work with governments around the world has demonstrated that stronger governance and oversight of infrastructure projects can lower infrastructure costs by as much as 40%.
This starts with taking a systematic and data-driven approach to choosing the right projects.
Top-performing countries such as Singapore and South Korea do not consider projects in isolation; they consider how each supports their policy objectives, and they weigh it against other projects that might yield better returns.
As projects move down the pipeline toward realization, it is critical to tighten management of the delivery and execution stages.
Accelerating environmental reviews, approval processes, and land acquisition can minimize the costs and delays that mount before ground is ever broken.