These voters are less likely to support scrapping the bills; indeed, some of them may be mollified if Abe is successful in amending the constitution.
There is also a simple, practical answer that explains why opponents of the laws may not be in favor of efforts to repeal them.
Many in Japan would like to avoid a divisive debate that could distract the government’s attention from other priorities.
Japan’s economy shrunk more than expected in the final quarter of 2015, and its stock market has been in turmoil since the beginning of this year.
No matter how unenthusiastic the Japanese might be about Abe’s security bills and his attempts to change the constitution, they would prefer that the issue be relegated to a back burner.
That way, the government can focus on what voters really care about: turning the economy around and saving the country’s social security programs.
A Japanese Ponzi Scheme?
TOKYO – In the early years of the twentieth century, Charles Ponzi, an Italian migrant to North America, had a seemingly brilliant moneymaking idea.
He would offer huge returns on worthless investments, thereby convincing a growing number of people to give him their money, which was used, in lieu of profit, to pay off earlier investors.
Ponzi’s eponymous scheme was essentially a way to enable businesses to rack up debt forever.
But, of course, it was ultimately just a scam – and, indeed, it landed Ponzi in prison.
A century later, pyramid schemes like Ponzi’s are still regarded as fraud, at least when they are pursued by private businesses.
Yet few seem to recognize the role such schemes play in the public sector.
In fact, governments in many countries, including the United States and Japan, survive on what are essentially Ponzi schemes.
Of course, there are crucial differences.
A traditional private-sector Ponzi scheme, despite its potential short-run returns, always breaks down for a simple reason: the number of potential investors is finite.
But in a government-run Ponzi scheme, the investor is the taxpayer.
And a stable government, with all the coercive means at its disposal, can reasonably expect to continue collecting taxes, which it can use to repay its earlier debts, for generations to come.
But the fact that a public-sector Ponzi scheme can be sustained for a longer time does not make it foolproof.
Excessive public debt weighs down an economy, leaving it vulnerable to shocks.
Given this, many analysts have called for aligning the rules for public debt more closely with those governing the private sector.
Yet it is important to take a nuanced approach.
That is not what has happened in the US, where Republican Party leaders decided that curtailing debt accumulation was the top priority.
By blocking the passage of budgets, Republican lawmakers caused brief shutdowns of the federal government – an approach that succeeded only in spooking markets.
If anything, the party’s embrace of such a radical stance contributed to the emergence of Donald Trump – the erratic and recalcitrant “billionaire” who claims that he can convince creditors to accept haircuts on America’s debt – as a contender for the US presidency.
Just as a fast-moving cyclist cannot simply stop pedaling, governments cannot suddenly halt all borrowing.
To remain upright and in control, they must eliminate their deficits gradually.
That is a lesson that Japan has taken to heart.
With net debt of around 130% of GDP – much higher than in other advanced economies – the country is currently forced to allocate a large share of government expenditure toward servicing its liabilities.
While very low (sometimes even negative) interest rates helped to limit that share to 22% of the total budget during the last fiscal year, a rate increase would force taxpayers to pay a lot for fewer benefits.
Clearly, Japan has an incentive to reduce its debt burden.
But the Japanese economy is currently being buffeted by strong headwinds.
China’s economic fragility, together with the threat of a British exit from the European Union, is generating significant uncertainty globally.
Moreover, while the decline in the price of crude oil is, in itself, beneficial for Japan, a major net importer, its negative impact on other major economies is spilling over onto Japanese exporters.
Then there is the US Federal Reserve’s hesitation to reverse its monetary policy fully, which has hurt prospects for a more competitive exchange rate and growth in Japan’s equity market.
Against this background, Prime Minister Shinzo Abe was recently faced with a key decision: whether to follow through with a planned consumption-tax hike, from 8% to 10%.
Though the hike would have ostensibly served the objective of balancing Japan’s budget, it also would have undermined consumption, which has yet to recover from the last tax hike, from 5% to 8%, implemented in 2014.
Abe decided to keep pedaling: he postponed the hike for two and a half years.
Since launching his economic revitalization strategy – so-called “Abenomics” – in 2011, Abe has presided over a roughly ¥12 trillion ($115 billion) increase in government revenues.
The labor market is now in its best shape in many years, with an unemployment rate of just over 3% and a high vacancy-to-applicant ratio.
Only the consumption component of GDP is weak.
Abe knew better than to allow the pressure to reduce debt to drive him to risk the gains of Abenomics.
The announcement of Abe’s decision to postpone the tax hike did not, as some feared, cause the market rates of Japanese government bonds to rise substantially – an indication that investors do not view the bonds as increasingly risky.
It seems that, like Abe, markets recognized the need to balance the imperatives of debt reduction and economic growth.
Japan’s Fiscal Crisis Comes of Age
TOKYO – Has Japan’s political paralysis finally lifted?
The recent agreement, after a long debate, between the government and leading opposition parties to double the consumption tax – from 5% to 8% in 2014, and then to 10% in 2015 – suggests that it has.
But there is a real risk that the government will mistake this measure for the end of the reform process.
In fact, it is – or should be – only the beginning.
By virtually any measure, official Japanese debt is the highest in the world.
The total outstanding volume of Japanese Government Bonds (JGBs) is an almost unfathomable $9 trillion, only just below the $10.5 trillion in outstanding debt for the full 17-country eurozone, which has more than triple the population.
So grim has Japan’s fiscal position become that bond issuance has exceeded tax revenue since 2009.
Taxes cover less than half of government spending.
And last year’s earthquake, tsunami, and nuclear disaster only made a grim fiscal picture worse by requiring huge new spending on reconstruction.
Japan issued a record ¥55.8 trillion ($693.5 billion), or 12% of nominal GDP, in government bonds during the last fiscal year.
Of course, Japan’s fiscal problems have been mounting for decades.
Annual tax revenue has fallen 30% since the country’s property bubble burst in 1989, owing to slow growth and deflation, with tax cuts implemented as stimulus measures during the 1990’s recession playing a subsidiary role.
The only reason that Japan has been able to sustain its fiscal position is that 93% of its debt is domestically held (with the Bank of Japan now buying close to one-third of the JGBs issued each year).
Indeed, in contrast to the foreign capital flight that has so damaged Europe, willing foreign buyers of JGBs are currently plentiful, pushing interest rates to their lowest levels ever.
Moreover, Japan’s private sector – its households and companies – sits atop a mountain of savings, which is mostly used to purchase JGBs.
Because the government can still borrow mainly from the Japanese people, its balance sheet remains stable.
But, given Japan’s aging population, how long can that continue?
Most leading Japanese economists believe that the situation cannot be sustained, given that the large number of households formed by pensioners is increasingly drawing down savings.
The share of those aged 65 or over has nearly doubled over the past two decades, to 23%, compared to 13% for the United States and 16% for Europe.
If this trend continues, as seems likely, the captured market that JGBs have had for decades will begin to shrink dangerously.
At that point, foreign purchasers are unlikely to pick up the slack.
In reaching the agreement to raise the consumption tax, the opposition Liberal Democratic Party insisted that the main squeeze on the budget deficit – the amount spent on social-security benefits for Japan’s retirees – begin to be addressed.
But the agreement actually does nothing to fix that problem.
The large number of elderly and retired people means that spending on health care and social security now consumes 29.2% of the budget, a one-third increase since 2000.
To meet these demands, Japan’s government has been slashing spending on education and research, the two areas in which the country’s post-war economic rise was forged.
And the old jibe that Japan cannot resist building bridges to nowhere if the government is paying rings less true nowadays.
Public works and pork-barrel spending fell to 5.1% of the budget this year, from 13% in 2000.
Of course, the tax system will also need to be addressed.
Just as Japan’s deficit is monumental by any measure, Japanese income earners are clearly under-taxed.
Even after the proposed doubling of the consumption tax, the rate will remain half the 20% (or more) that almost all European countries levy.
Overall tax revenue is roughly 27% of GDP, putting Japan in 28th place among the 35 OECD countries.
The government must not overestimate how much revenue can be gained by the consumption-tax increase, and thus how much of the budget hole can be closed.
Moreover, it has so far shrugged off any concern that the tax increase might have a chilling effect on consumption, and thus on economic growth.
Hiromichi Shirakawa, the chief economist at Credit Suisse AG in Tokyo, suggests that the revenue increase from the consumption-tax hike will soon begin to evaporate – and disappear completely in 5-7 years.
If he is right, the increase will turn out to be little more than a finger in the dyke of Japan’s budget problems.
Despite its two decades of economic malaise, Japan remains the world’s third-largest economy, and will grow by about 2% this year and 1.5% in 2013.
Given the economic doldrums in which the world finds itself, that may not seem so bad.
But, if Japan is ever to address its fiscal dilemma effectively, it will need to sustain faster growth than that.
Such growth presupposes a credible strategy to pare the deficit, which means a plan that recognizes the reality of the growing cohort of pensioners.
Japanese authorities will also need to launch bold liberalizing reforms to unshackle the many areas of the economy that are shielded from competition.
These reforms must aim to boost greater workforce participation by women; induce corporations to invest more at home; and increase competition in cosseted sectors of the economy.
If any country has the political tools to undertake a program of comprehensive reform, it is Japan.
The unity with which the Japanese population met last year’s disaster demonstrated once again that, when called upon, the national spirit can work miracles.
And Japan’s “greatest generation” – the men and women who rebuilt a war-shattered country into an economic powerhouse – should not be deemed unwilling to sacrifice for the greater good.
After all, they saved their country once; they are more than capable of doing it again.
Japan’s Kamikaze Isolation
It almost seems as if Japan is bent on self-isolation in Asia.
After a few months during which Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi ostensibly sought to improve his country’s relations with China, his fifth visit to the controversial Yasukuni Shrine has again raised tempers.
China and South Korea both cancelled meetings of their foreign ministers with their Japanese counterpart.
Once again, Japan has missed a chance to rebuild trust in a part of the world where, in the absence of cooperative international institutions, trust is all there is.
Why does Japan still not understand that the way it treats its history echoes across every part of Asia that Japan’s military occupied in the first part of the 20th century?
Japanese reactions reveal an extraordinary degree of stubborn self-righteousness.
As Japan’s government never ceases to point out, the Yasukuni shrine, built in 1869, venerates the 2.5 million Japanese who have died for their country, not just the 14 judged as war criminals after WWII.
But, while many Japanese feel (with some justification) that South Korea and, in particular, China, exploit the Yasukuni issue to reduce Japan’s influence in the region and to pander to their publics’ strong nationalism, they are missing the point.
Indeed, domestic politicking seems to be at least as important to Japan’s leaders as to South Koreas’s or China’s.
Koizumi’s visit to the shrine, officially presented as that of a private citizen, was intended to impress the Japanese public, regardless of its effects abroad.
But the country now is isolated, which affects the whole fabric of stability in the region.
Japan’s diplomatic isolation strengthens those in the Chinese leadership who have long sought to marginalize what is economically and militarily still Asia’s most powerful nation, while sucking other states in the region deeper into China’s shadow.
Japan’s isolation also increases its dependency on its only ally, the United States, and undermines the fragile chance of developing a framework in Asia to address future regional crises in a spirit of cooperation rather than confrontation and rivalry.
Because Japan’s isolation is a matter not only for the Japanese, it must be a matter for Western policy.
The record, however, is not impressive.
The US administration, fashionably worried over China’s growing regional influence, seems quite happy with a closely-tied Japan that could help balance China.
But this is obviously a shortsighted approach, for a Japan that is tied exclusively to America will lose, not gain, against China in the region, thus making the balancing act even harder.
The Europeans have no Japan policy at all, not even a shortsighted one.
Fixated on the promise of an ever growing Chinese market, they give little thought to the stability of the region.
They seem to think of the powers in the region as unconnected islands, and of their own behavior towards one as devoid of political consequence for the others.
When the European Union last year considered lifting its symbolic arms embargo against China, none of the governments driving the proposal bothered to consider that this, too, would be symbolic, sending a message all over Asia that Europe was putting its political weight behind Chinese regional policies.
Japanese demands to reconsider fell on deaf ears, and the initiative was put on ice only when US congressmen threatened economic repercussions and China increased pressure on Taiwan.
Instead of exploiting Japan as a regional aircraft carrier, as the US tries to do, or neglecting her politically, as Europeans do, both need to work out a new, strategic approach – if possible, jointly.
The aim must be to prevent a clash of nationalisms and encourage a cooperative framework in which the region’s major countries interact and develop respect for each other’s interests.
Such a framework can emerge in Asia only with Japan’s active involvement, not on the basis of her isolation.
Of course, Japan must lead the way.
Japan’s leaders must recognize that the mindlessness with which they still treat the sensitivities of societies that suffered from Japanese imperialism in the twentieth century is as morally deaf as it is strategically damaging.
But this process of realization is more likely to succeed if Japan does not feel it stands with its back against a wall.
Friends from abroad, therefore, can assist this process by ensuring that Japan does not to feel alone.
Far from endorsing Japanese lack of sensitivity, active Western political engagement – for its own credibility in Asia – must convey that Japan’s future depends on gaining the trust of the region.
That is not too much to ask.
After all, Japan was a political ally throughout the half-century of the Cold War.
In a part of the world where democracy is gradually advancing, Japan can point to firm democratic traditions and institutions.
Its economic clout remains formidable, and its commercial and cultural ties to the West are broad and varied.
Japan may have shied away for decades from sharing the task of maintaining international order, but a new awareness of international responsibility is steadily emerging.
For those who want a stable Asia, the interest in establishing close links with Japan should be obvious.
This should not come at the expense of similar links with others, such as China and India, but these ties must not be acquired at the price of isolating Japan.
Japan\u0027s Leadership Muddle
OSAKA – Having seen a new prime minister every year for five consecutive years, Japan has just narrowly avoided having its third in 2010.
Prime Minister Naoto Kan has been elected President of the ruling Democratic Party of Japan (DPJ), surviving a challenge from Ichiro Ozawa, the DPJ’s most potent behind-the-scenes power broker. Had Nan lost to Ozawa, he would have lost the premiership to him as well.
With DPJ lawmakers almost equally split, Kan’s victory is being attributed to the support of general and associate party members.
Their vote was more in line with recent public-opinion polls, which showed popular support running at seven-to-two in favor of Kan over Ozawa.
Only three months ago, Kan was chosen as the DPJ’s top leader to restore its public image, which had been severely tarnished by political-financing scandals involving his predecessor as prime minister, Yukio Hatoyama, and a separate scandal involving Ozawa.
Hatoyama’s mismanagement of Japan’s relations with the United States, centered on the relocation of a Marine base in Okinawa, had also dented the DPJ’s standing.
From the moment the DPJ took power in 2009, Kan was tacitly slated to be Hatoyama’s successor, given that he was concurrently Hatoyama’s deputy prime minister and treasury minister.
In these posts, Kan avoided involvement with the two issues that wrecked Hatoyama’s premiership: the controversial base relocation issue, and debates over budget cuts.
Consequently, he was aloof from the DPJ’s feud with Japan’s powerful bureaucratic mandarins, who are desperately trying to safeguard the longstanding bureaucratic/cabinet system in which the once-ruling Liberal Democratic Party (LDP) passed mandarin-drafted, cabinet-sponsored bills and budgets, almost continuously, for five decades.  
Surprisingly, Kan, who entered politics to dismantle the old system, now has switched to the mandarins’ side.
The DPJ suffered a bitter defeat in this summer’s upper-house election, after Kan abruptly proposed a significant increase in the highly unpopular consumption tax.
That increase would enable Treasury mandarins to maintain their latitude in setting fiscal policy, while making it unnecessary to streamline special-account budget financing for gargantuan public corporations, into which retiring bureaucrats parachute for lucrative jobs.
Moreover, Kan’s approach to the base relocation issue revived the old LDP plan, which the DPJ had previously denounced.
Kan’s retreat means that the mandarins continue to hold the reins of foreign and defense policy.
Even if Kan had failed to win the upper-house election, the mandarins would have faced a weakened DPJ.
Either way, they won.
Small wonder, then, that Hatoyama advocated replacing Kan with Ozawa, even though Hatoyama insisted that Ozawa resign when he was forced from the premiership three months ago.
Both are openly opposed not only to the tax increase, but also to the continuing presence of the US Marine base on Okinawa.
While committed to the bilateral US-Japan alliance, Ozawa has said that Japan’s security requires the continued presence only of the US Seventh Fleet, not of US ground troops.
Evidently, he is trying to redefine the relationship, probably with a view to enhancing Japan’s freedom of maneuver in foreign and security policy.
Despite his confusing signals, Ozawa’s stance is neither pro-China nor anti-American, given that he most recently emphasized Japan’s sovereignty over the Senkaku islands as an integral part of its territory – a position that China strongly disputes.
Logically, Ozawa’s approach involves a significant military buildup, but he remains silent about how to maintain effective deterrence once the US Marines leave Okinawa.
Kan’s status quo approach to alliance management won’t hold up long, because Hatoyama’s bungling has inflated Okinawans’ expectations about evicting the Marines.
The current governor will likely block any construction to relocate a base on the island, exercising a de facto veto, particularly with the gubernatorial election due in late November.
Only by equivocating about the relocation plan could Kan appease both the governor and US President Barack Obama, who is scheduled to meet Kan in Tokyo the same month.
Japan and America can now agree only on what will not be implemented.
The DPJ is caught between a rock and a hard place, and Kan’s premiership will surely reach a stalemate.
Because the DPJ has neither an upper-house majority nor the two-thirds lower-house majority needed to override upper-house votes, his government will be unable to pass budget and/or appropriation bills by the end of the current fiscal year, March 31, 2011.
Ozawa, had he become prime minister, would inevitably have been subjected to not only similar obstruction in Diet sessions but also to interrogation about his financing scandal, while fearing prosecution.
An Ozawa government might be stable only if he could form a grand coalition.
Yet, given strong public sentiment against Ozawa, that is impossible.
Meanwhile, Ozawa’s electoral challenge has left the DPJ more divided than ever.
In order to ride out the hung Diet, Kan will have to reconstruct party unity by replacing at least the incumbent anti-Ozawa party chief or Chief Cabinet Secretary, and, possibly, by appointing a pro-Ozawa Justice Minister – i.e., someone who can block Ozawa’s prosecution in the financing scandal.
Appeasing Ozawa, however, is contrary to public sentiment and detrimental to the DPJ’s hopes of regaining popular support.
For the moment, Japan’s political situation is stable, but that will last for the next six months, at most.
The time is fast approaching when the public becomes entirely disillusioned with both the LDP and the DPJ, which comprise a two-party system in name only, in which legislators shift allegiance for reasons centered on attachment to or enmity against the LDP.
Without a grand reorganization of the major political parties along ideological lines, Japan’s domestic and foreign policies – including relations with the US – will remain a muddle.
Can Japan Reboot?
CAMBRIDGE – Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe’s recent policy decisions – to increase monetary stimulus dramatically, to postpone a consumption-tax increase, and to call a snap election in mid-December – have returned his country to the forefront of an intense policy debate.
The problem is simple: How can aging advanced economies revive growth after a financial crisis?
The solution is not.
It is now clear that the first round of Abe’s reforms – known as “Abenomics” – has failed to generate sustained inflation.
Hopes for continued recovery have now given way to two consecutive quarters of negative growth.
The question is whether Abenomics 2.0 will put Japan’s economy back on the path to renewed prosperity.
My own view is that the “three arrows” of Abenomics 1.0 basically had it right: “whatever it takes” monetary policy to restore inflation, supportive fiscal policy, and structural reforms to boost long-run growth.
But, though the central bank, under Governor Haruhiko Kuroda, has been delivering on its side of the bargain, the other two “arrows” of Abenomics have fallen far short.
There has been no significant progress on supply-side reforms, especially on the core issue of how to expand the labor force.
With an aging and shrinking population, Japan’s government must find ways to encourage more women to work, entice older Japanese to remain in the labor force, and develop more family-friendly labor policies.
Above all, Japan needs to create a more welcoming environment for immigrant workers.
There has been some movement on immigration.
Panicked by deadlines for the 2020 Summer Olympics in Tokyo, the government managed to clear the import of foreign construction workers (though the decision had to make its way through a half-dozen ministries).
But overall progress has been slow.
Japan desperately needs more nurses and hospice workers to care for its aging population, but bureaucratic and political resistance to immigration is deeply entrenched.
When I first started asking my Japanese academic friends about Abe’s supply-side reforms, they said, “Don’t worry, they’re coming.”
Then, after a while, they would say, “Don’t worry, they’re coming – but slowly.”
Recently, the mantra has changed to, “Don’t worry, we still think they’re coming.”
One can only hope so.
Without structural reforms, especially of the labor market, Abenomics cannot succeed in the long run.
The timing of the April 2014 consumption-tax hike (from 5% to 8%) was also unfortunate.
It would not have been easy for Abe to postpone the move, given that it had been locked in place by broad-based political agreement before he took office.
But the government could have engaged in more aggressive fiscal stimulus to counteract the hike’s short-term effects.
Instead, two successive quarters of negative growth have had a dispiriting psychological impact.
True, the slump is partly an illusion: the earlier boom was fueled by Japanese households’ effort to beat the tax by front-loading purchases of consumer durables – a nuance that seems to have been lost in the public debate.
But the big picture remains: Abenomics so far has failed to turn around a deflationary mindset.
Mind you, Japan’s outsize government debt and undersize pension assets are a huge problem, and only the most reckless and crude Keynesian would advise the authorities to ignore it.
For the moment, the risks are notional, with interest rates on ten-year government debt below 0.5%.
But saying that Japan’s debt is irrelevant is like saying that a highly leveraged hedge fund is completely safe; the risks may be remote, but they are not trivial.
Think about what would happen if the Bank of Japan actually managed to convince the public that inflation will average 2% on a sustained basis.
Would ten-year interest rates still be 0.5%?
What if other factors – say, a sharp decline in emerging-market growth – led to a sharp rise in global real interest rates, or a rise in risk premia on Japanese debt?
In principle, Japan could weather such shocks without high inflation or other extreme measures, but it is folly to deny the country’s vulnerability.
A hedge fund can simply go out of business; that is not an option for a great nation.
Fiscal sustainability requires an eventual rise in the consumption tax, and of course Japan should not wait until international investors start doubting its willpower.
The problem is in the timing and tactics.
Postponing the second consumption-tax increase seems like a good compromise between pushing Abenomics to escape velocity and maintaining long-run credibility.
But this brings us back to Japan’s deeper problems.
Demand policies alone will not alone prevent two more lost decades, much less guarantee two golden ones.
Demographic decline was a key factor in setting off Japan’s 1992 financial crisis and the long malaise that followed.
Japan is still a rich country, but its ranking in terms of real per capita income has now slipped below that of many other advanced economies – including the United Kingdom, by some measures – and far below that of the United States.
Japan’s experience holds important lessons for Europe, the main one being that stimulus policies, though necessary in the short run to support demand, cannot address long-term structural deficiencies.
If Abenomics 2.0 fails to embrace deep structural reform, it will fare no better than the original.
Four More Years for Abe
TOKYO – In the December snap election initiated by Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe, the Liberal Democratic Party (LDP) and its junior coalition partner, the Komeito Party, won 326 of the Diet’s 475 seats, retaining their constitutional majority in the lower house of parliament.
It was an extraordinary achievement – one that Japan has not witnessed in decades.
Japan’s opposition parties offered no convincing alternative to the Abe government’s policies.
The Democratic Party of Japan (DPJ), which led the government less than three years ago, was unable even to field enough candidates to contest every seat.
Its road back to political relevance appears long and bleak.
Of course, under the single-seat constituency system, minor parties in Japan are at a distinct disadvantage.
Indeed, a landslide victory on the scale of Abe’s may very well lead to some of them completely disappearing from political life.
The only opposition party that made significant gains in the recent vote was the Japanese Communist Party, which nearly tripled its seat total, from eight to 21.
The JCP has recently sought to position itself as a “reliable opposition” to the LDP – though it has never proved particularly “reliable,” at least not in promoting realistic policies.
Given this, the JCP’s gains were probably fueled more by disgruntled voters’ desire to signal their frustration to Abe.
In fact, in those districts where the election pitted JCP and LDP candidates against each other, many citizens did not take the trouble to vote.
This contributed to record-low voter turnout of 52% – the one real blemish on the LDP’s victory.
The main actor in the election was undoubtedly Abe himself, whose bold macroeconomic strategy, so-called “Abenomics,” has attracted considerable attention since its initiation two years ago.
But three other actors also played important roles in securing Abe’s victory.
The first was Saudi Arabia.
At an OPEC meeting in the run-up to the election, the group’s dominant producer, Saudi Arabia, shelved plans to restrict oil production to counteract the rapid decline in world prices, allowing them to continue to fall.
This has brought considerable benefits to the oil-importing advanced economies – including Japan.
Had the Saudis decided to reduce output, Japan would have suffered the double blow of increased oil prices and a sudden sharp depreciation of the yen.
That would have exposed Abe’s government to widespread criticism, particularly in automotive industry hubs.
The second important actor in Abe’s campaign was China.
The appearance of more than 200 ships harvesting precious red coral around Japan’s Ogasawara islands in November opened the eyes of many Japanese to the risks of China’s growing power.
Such skepticism about China’s peaceful intentions has intensified criticism of the DPJ for what many consider an excessively soft approach to managing relations with the People’s Republic.
The third important actor was Japan’s labor unions.
The current problem facing Abenomics, as it aims to save Japan’s economy from deflation, is that wage hikes have not kept pace with the April 2014 consumption-tax increase (from 5% to 8%) or the rise in import prices associated with a weaker yen.
Organized labor’s representatives in wage negotiations, which are conducted every spring, usually come from unions that support the DPJ.
But Abe himself has supplanted the unions in demanding big pay rises from companies, helping him to attract significantly more votes from union members in this election than in 2011.
These three players’ interventions have helped Abe secure four more years in power.
After decades of rotating leadership, with eight prime ministers in just ten years, Japan finally has a stable government.
Though Japan’s parliamentary system distinguishes it from its neighbors, this aligns more closely with norms in the region, where presidential executives serve for six years in Russia and five years in South Korea and China.
(North Korea’s leader, of course, has no fixed term in office.)
Abe now has more political capital – and thus more freedom to maneuver – than perhaps any Japanese leader since the end of the Pacific War.
He must use it to follow through on the promise of Abenomics, finally enacting the structural reforms that Japan needs to reinvigorate its economy.
With such a powerful mandate, there can be no excuses.
Japan’s New Model Political Leadership
AMSTERDAM – Amid the horrifying news from Japan, the establishment of new standards of political leadership there is easy to miss – in part because the Japanese media follow old habits of automatically criticizing how officials are dealing with the calamity, and many foreign reporters who lack perspective simply copy that critical tone.
But, compared to the aftermath of the catastrophic Kobe earthquake of 1995, when the authorities appeared to wash their hands of the victims’ miseries, the difference could hardly be greater.
This time, Prime Minister Naoto Kan’s DPJ (Democratic Party of Japan) government is making an all-out effort, with unprecedented intensive involvement of his cabinet and newly formed specialized task forces.
The prime minister himself is regularly televised with relevant officials wearing the work fatigues common among Japanese engineers.
In 1995, Kobe citizens extricated from the rubble were looked after if they belonged to corporations or religious groups.
Those who did not were expected to fend mostly for themselves.
This reflected a ‘feudal’ like corporatist approach, in which the direct relationship between the citizen and the state played no role.
This widely condemned governmental neglect of the Kobe earthquake victims was among the major sources of public indignation that helped popularize the reform movement from which Kan emerged.
Unfortunately, today’s Japanese media are overlooking that historical context.
For example, the newspaper Nihon Keizai Shimbun recently lamented the shortcomings of the Kan government’s response, emphasizing the poor lines of command running from the cabinet to officials carrying out rescue and supply operations.
But it failed to point out that the feebleness of such coordination, linked to an absence of cabinet-centered policymaking, was precisely the main weakness of Japan’s political system that the founders of the DPJ set out to overcome.
When the DPJ came to power in September 2009 it ended half-a-century of de facto one-party rule by the Liberal Democratic Party (LDP).
But even more significantly, its intentions addressed a cardinal question for Japan: who should rule, bureaucratic mandarins or elected officials?
The LDP, formed in 1955, had not done much actual ruling after helping to coordinate postwar reconstruction, which extended without debate into an unofficial but very real national policy of, in principle, unlimited expansion of industrial capacity.
Other possible priorities hardly ever entered political discussions.
The need for a political steering wheel in the hands of elected politicians was highlighted in 1993, when two major political figures bolted from the LDP with their followers.
By doing so, they catalyzed the reformist political movement that resulted in the DPJ, the first credible opposition party that – unlike the Socialists who engaged in mere ritualistic opposition – was prepared to win elections and actually govern rather than merely maintain the façade of government that had become the norm under the LDP.
Lowering the prestige of the government right now is the fact that Kan has not shown any talent for turning himself into a TV personality who can project a grand image of leadership.
But his government is dealing without question as best it can in the face of four simultaneous crises, its efforts encumbered by huge logistical problems that no post-World-War-II Japanese government has ever faced before.
The efforts of Kan’s government are obviously hampered by a rigid and much fragmented bureaucratic infrastructure.
The DPJ has had scant time to make up for what the LDP has long neglected. Its seventeen months in power before the current catastrophe have been a saga of struggle with career officials in many parts of the bureaucracy, including the judiciary, fighting for the survival of the world they have always known.
Other countries could learn much from the DPJ’s attempt to alter a status quo of political arrangements that has had half a century to form and consolidate.
But it was the United States that first undermined the DPJ administration, by testing the new government’s loyalty with an unfeasible plan – originally the brainchild of the George W. Bush-era US defense secretary, Donald Rumsfeld – to build a new base for the US Marines stationed on Okinawa.
The first DPJ prime minister, Yukio Hatoyama, miscalculated in believing that a face-to-face meeting with the new American president to discuss long-term matters affecting East Asia could settle the issue. He was steadily rebuffed by the American government.
As Hatoyama could not keep his promise to safeguard the interests of the Okinawan people, he followed up with a customary resignation.
Japan’s main newspapers have mostly backed the status quo as well.
Indeed, they now appear to have forgotten their role in hampering the DPJ’s effort to create an effective political coordinating body for the country.
A half-century of reporting on internal LDP rivalries unrelated to actual policy has turned Japan’s reporters into the world’s greatest connoisseurs of political factionalism. It has also left them almost incapable of recognizing actual policy initiatives when they see them.
The rest of the world, however, has marveled at the admirable, dignified manner in which ordinary Japanese are dealing with terrible adversity.
I am repeatedly asked why there is no looting or signs of explosive anger.
The term “stoicism” appears over and over in media coverage of Japan’s calamity.
But, in my half-century of close acquaintance with Japanese life, I have never thought of the Japanese as stoic.
Rather, the Japanese behave as they do because they are decent people.
Being considerate, they do not burden each other by building themselves up as heroes in their own personal tragedies.
They certainly deserve the better government that the DPJ is trying to give them.
Japan’s Nuclear Morality Tale
NEW DELHI – The troubles of the Fukushima nuclear-power plant – and other reactors – in northeast Japan have dealt a severe blow to the global nuclear industry, a powerful cartel of less than a dozen major state-owned or state-guided firms that have been trumpeting a nuclear-power renaissance.
But the risks that seaside reactors like Fukushima face from natural disasters are well known. Indeed, they became evident six years ago, when the Indian Ocean tsunami in December 2004 inundated India’s second-largest nuclear complex, shutting down the Madras power station.
Many nuclear-power plants are located along coastlines, because they are highly water-intensive.
Yet natural disasters like storms, hurricanes, and tsunamis are becoming more common, owing to climate change, which will also cause a rise in ocean levels, making seaside reactors even more vulnerable.
For example, many nuclear-power plants located along the British coast are just a few meters above sea level.
In 1992, Hurricane Andrew caused significant damage at the Turkey Point nuclear-power plant on Biscayne Bay, Florida, but, fortunately, not to any critical systems.
All energy generators, including coal- and gas-fired plants, make major demands on water resources. But nuclear power requires even more.
Light-water reactors (LWRs) like those at Fukushima, which use water as a primary coolant, produce most of the world’s nuclear power. The huge quantities of local water that LWRs consume for their operations become hot-water outflows, which are pumped back into rivers, lakes, and oceans.
Because reactors located inland put serious strain on local freshwater resources – including greater damage to plant life and fish – water-stressed countries that are not landlocked try to find suitable seashore sites.
But, whether located inland or on a coast, nuclear power is vulnerable to the likely effects of climate change.
As global warming brings about a rise in average temperatures and ocean levels, inland reactors will increasingly contribute to, and be affected by, water shortages.
During the record-breaking 2003 heat wave in France, operations at 17 commercial nuclear reactors had to be scaled back or stopped because of rapidly rising temperatures in rivers and lake.
Spain’s reactor at Santa María de Garoña was shut for a week in July 2006 after high temperatures were recorded in the Ebro River.
Paradoxically, then, the very conditions that made it impossible for the nuclear industry to deliver full power in Europe in 2003 and 2006 created peak demand for electricity, owing to the increased use of air conditioning.
Indeed, during the 2003 heat wave, Électricité de France, which operates 58 reactors – the majority on ecologically sensitive rivers like the Loire – was compelled to buy power from neighboring countries on the European spot market.
The state-owned EDF, which normally exports power, ended up paying 10 times the price of domestic power, incurring a financial cost of €300 million.
Similarly, although the 2006 European heat wave was less intense, water and heat problems forced Germany, Spain, and France to take some nuclear power plants offline and reduce operations at others.
Highlighting the vulnerability of nuclear power to environmental change or extreme-weather patterns, in 2006 plant operators in Western Europe also secured exemptions from regulations that would have prevented them from discharging overheated water into natural ecosystems, affecting fisheries.
France likes to showcase its nuclear power industry, which supplies 78% of the country’s electricity. But such is the nuclear industry’s water intensity that EDF withdraws up to 19 billion cubic meters of water per year from rivers and lakes, or roughly half of France’s total freshwater consumption.
Freshwater scarcity is a growing international challenge, and the vast majority of countries are in no position to approve of such highly water-intensive inland-based energy systems.
Nuclear plants located by the sea do not face similar problems in hot conditions, because ocean waters do not heat up anywhere near as rapidly as rivers or lakes.
And, because they rely on seawater, they cause no freshwater scarcity.
But, as Japan’s reactors have shown, coastal nuclear-power plants confront more serious dangers.
When the Indian Ocean tsunami struck, the Madras reactor’s core could be kept in safe shutdown condition because the electrical systems had been ingeniously installed on higher ground than the plant itself.
And, unlike Fukushima, which bore a direct impact, Madras was far away from the epicenter of the earthquake that unleashed the tsunami.
The central dilemma of nuclear power in an increasingly water-stressed world is that it is a water guzzler, yet vulnerable to water.
And, decades after Lewis L. Strauss, the Chairman of the United States Atomic Energy Agency, claimed that nuclear power would become “too cheap to meter,” the nuclear industry everywhere still subsists on munificent government subsidies.
While the appeal of nuclear power has declined considerably in the West, it has grown among the so-called “nuclear newcomers,” which brings with it new challenges, including concerns about proliferation of nuclear weapons.
Moreover, with nearly two-fifths of the world’s population living within 100 kilometers of a coastline, finding suitable seaside sites for initiation or expansion of a nuclear-power program is no longer easy.
Fukushima is likely to stunt the appeal of nuclear power in a way similar to the accident at the Three Mile Island plant in Pennsylvania in 1979, not to mention the far more severe meltdown of the Chernobyl reactor in 1986.
If the fallout from those incidents is a reliable guide, however, nuclear power’s advocates will eventually be back.
America’s Bickering Asian Allies
ATLANTA – American diplomats like to portray their country’s allies in glowing terms.
So the world should take note when they do not – such as when US Under Secretary of State Wendy Sherman, at a recent conference in Washington, DC, on Asian security, publicly scolded South Korea for its seemingly endless vilification of Japan.
According to Sherman, South Korea’s stance – reflected in its demand that Japan apologize, once again, for forcing Korean women to provide sexual services to the Imperial Army during World War II – has produced “paralysis, not progress.”
But Sherman’s criticism could also be leveled against Japan.
Prime Minister Shinzo Abe has rarely missed an opportunity to provoke Japan’s Korean critics, whether by visiting Tokyo’s Yasukuni shrine, where the “souls” of 14 Class A war criminals are interred, or embracing revisionist critiques of previous official apologies for Japanese aggression.
Instead of working together to help their American ally confront the challenges posed by a rising China and the North Korean nuclear threat, South Korea and Japan have allowed their rancor to stymie effective action.
This seemingly endless tension has been frustrating – and worrying – American leaders for years, especially as it has undermined the United States’ strategic “pivot” toward Asia.
Since President Barack Obama announced the pivot five years ago, the US has been attempting to bolster its forces and alliances in Asia, thereby reinforcing its strategic role in a region that China is increasingly attempting to dominate.
But the relentless sniping by its two most important Asian allies has blocked the kind of concrete cooperation needed to help it achieve its main goals, including ensuring a durable, long-term military presence in the region.
Intelligence sharing is a case in point.
In December, US officials, seeking to better their understanding of North Korea’s missile and nuclear programs – and enable commanders to react swiftly if potential threats materialize – announced a new information-sharing agreement with South Korea and Japan.
But the deal could be a script for a situation comedy: Japan and South Korea refuse to provide intelligence data to each other, leaving the US to play the middleman.
The US has accentuated the positive, calling the agreement an important step forward.
But, though it does represent progress from 2012, when popular opposition in South Korea to the idea of military cooperation with Japan caused a similar agreement to collapse, the latest effort is inefficient, at best.
China has been eager to capitalize on the animosity between Japan and South Korea to undermine America’s security interests in Asia.
During a visit to South Korea last July, President Xi Jinping highlighted not only the two countries’ deepening economic relationship, but also their shared views regarding Japan’s wartime past.
Other Chinese officials have picked up the theme, dropping hints that China’s 70th anniversary celebration of the end of World War II could exclude Japan – unless, that is, Japan is more contrite about its historic transgressions.
It is time for the US to tell its Asian allies to get over it.
As the underwriter of both Japan’s and South Korea’s national defense, the US simply cannot allow their historical animosities to impede action to address urgent threats in this critical region.
The timing could not be better, as rising security fears are altering public perceptions.
Recent opinion polls suggest that at least half of all South Koreans are worried enough about regional tensions to support closer military ties with Japan.
And, indeed, the security risks facing Asia are only growing – exemplified in China’s move from military expansion to blatant assertiveness.
Most notably, in the South and East China Seas, China has been staking its claim to disputed island territories, deploying advanced military hardware, and aggressively patrolling an expanded security zone.
Meanwhile, leaks from Chinese think tanks have suggested that if the North Korean regime collapses, China could well send troops to preserve the country’s stability.
Asia’s new security landscape places a premium on seamless cooperation among US allies – a prospect that the sustained bickering between South Korea and Japan calls into question.
It could even be said that their longstanding dispute makes America’s Asian alliance system worth less than the sum of its parts.
Repairing relations between South Korean and Japan could not be more urgent.
Even with good will on both sides, it will take time to build a strong defense partnership.
Effective military cooperation requires personal ties that take years to build, and, aside from some joint naval and air exercises, the two countries have little experience working together.
Boosting technical interoperability also will take considerable time, though both countries maintain sophisticated defense forces with great potential to be linked together.
Effective cooperation will also require a broader scope for joint action – an imperative that is not reflected in the recent intelligence-sharing agreement.
The risks to stability in Northeast Asia extend well beyond North Korea’s nuclear weapons and missile programs, and a joint intelligence agenda should address them.
How will the allies respond to the threat of a conventional military attack by – or instability in – North Korea?
What if the North Korean regime collapses, and China does intervene militarily?
After spending the last six decades defending South Korea and Japan, the US has every reason – and plenty of leverage – to demand that its two long-time allies enhance their military cooperation.
Simply focusing on the positive – America’s classic approach to alliance diplomacy – is no longer enough.
Whatever their historical disagreements, South Korea and Japan both face serious risks in their immediate neighborhood.
It is up to the US to ensure that they work together to protect themselves – and ensure long-term stability throughout Asia.
Japan’s Recovery Bonds
TOKYO – The tsunami raced through the town at eight meters per second, the speed of a gold-medal sprinter.
The wave’s height reached 15 meters, towering above even the highest pole-vault bars.
Ships were heaved onto hills, and cars floated like boats.
After the wave passed, a chaotic mountain of debris was all that was left of Kamaishi, Japan’s oldest steel-manufacturing town, in Iwate prefecture.
It looked like the aftermath of the firebombing of Tokyo, or like Hiroshima and Nagasaki after the atomic bombs fell.
Similar scenes can be found throughout the Tōhoku region, along Japan’s northeastern Sanriku Coast.
For example, in the quiet rural city of Rikuzentakata, with a population of 23,000, it is believed that 5,000 of its 8,000 households disappeared in the disaster.
The only buildings that remain standing are the town hall and one supermarket.
Sendai airport, near the coast in Miyagi Prefecture, now looks more like a seaport.
The enormous earthquake that hit the Tōhoku region on March 11, with a magnitude of 9.0 on the Richter scale and its epicenter off the coast of Sanriku, was the largest in Japan’s recorded history.
The number of victims and the extent of the damage remains unknown, but the human loss is expected to exceed 23,000, and economic damage is estimated to be around ¥25 trillion.
Tsunami is originally a Japanese word.
Patrick Lafcadio Hearn (known as Koizumi Yakumo after his naturalization as a Japanese citizen), an Englishman born on the Greek island of Lefkada, first introduced it in his novel A Living God.
Hearn’s depiction of the Meiji-Sanriku earthquake, which in 1896 took 22,000 lives in the same region as the recent quake, was later included in elementary school textbooks under the title of “The Burning of the Rice Field.”
In Hearn’s novel, Gohē, a village headman who lives atop a hill in his village, notices an approaching tsunami wave when he sees seawater being drawn out rapidly from the shore.
In order to warn his fellow villagers, who are busy with festival preparations, Gohē uses a torch to set fire to his recently cut sheaves of rice.
The villagers who gather on the hill to put out the fire soon see below them the tsunami wreaking havoc on their town.
Gohē’s quick leadership and sacrifice saved all of the villagers.
This story has influenced Japan ever since.
Indeed, when Japan provided relief to the countries hit by the Sumatra earthquake in 2004, which claimed 250,000 lives, it was keenest to promote an early warning system for tsunamis.
But Japan’s long history of earthquakes and tsunamis – and now advanced forecasting technology – had made people complacent.
Moreover, no one imagined that such a huge tsunami would ever hit Japan.
The most unforeseen event occurred at the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power plant.
The facility’s robust design is similar to that of the Kashiwazaki-Kariwa nuclear power plant, the world’s largest, in Niigata, which was unscathed by the Chūetsu offshore earthquake (measuring 6.8 on the Richter scale) in July 2007.
Fukushima Daiichi withstood the earthquake, but no one considered the possibility of ten-meter-high tsunami waves hitting a nuclear plant.
Now we know that the unthinkable is possible.
As a result, the Fukushima Daiichi plant’s problems have brought the worldwide rush toward nuclear-power generation to a screeching halt.
There are currently 443 nuclear power plants worldwide – a number that was set to double in the next 15 years.
China alone had been planning to add 50 new power plants to the 27 plants it already has.
It is Japan’s responsibility, particularly of political leaders like me, to ensure that our experiences are reflected in the creation of safe building codes and standards for such plants worldwide.
As for Japan, once the initial economic panic subsides, bipartisan agreement will be necessary to design and approve a budget aimed at bringing about the quickest possible recovery.
Furthermore, Japan must find a way to compensate for the ten-million-kilowatt shortfall that the loss of the Fukushima plant implies.
Indeed, Japan must now reevaluate its entire national energy strategy, including a review of the different usage levels in eastern and western Japan.
And, because the affected regions were already suffering from depopulation and rapid aging – problems typical of much of today’s Japan – recovery will require a new rural-development program that moves the country away from its Tokyo-centric economic model.
But, in working towards recovery, Japan has a great advantage.
The key word for recovery in Japanese is kizuna (bonds).
Even when faced by the vast confusion created by disaster on the scale of the recent earthquake and tsunami, Japanese relied on kizuna to help and reassure each other.
When implementing forced blackouts in the region, for example, there were few major traffic accidents, even though traffic lights had stopped working.
I hope that one day, after the story of Japan’s recent calamity has been written, kizuna will become even more widely known than “tsunami.”
Japan’s Resilience Lessons
NEW YORK – Buried in the coverage of last year’s Great East Japan Earthquake is a success story of which the world should not lose sight, because it tells us much about how we manage risk in the twenty-first century.
It is the story of how the Japanese people, through centuries of memory and shared experience, have built up their resilience to natural disasters.
Indeed, as the sea reared up to ravage the country’s coast on March 11, 2011, more than 90% of the population in the affected areas had already fled to safety.
That safety was further endangered by the meltdown of nuclear reactors at the Fukushima Daiichi power plant, a catastrophe with which Japan is still coping.
Nevertheless, the country can take heart that so many of its people, children in particular, are alive today because of early-warning systems, safety drills, and a strong emphasis on disaster-risk reduction in the school curriculum.
The world has been paying greater attention to reducing loss of life from disasters.
And yet, while mortality risk relative to population size is falling, the lives of more than 200 million people continue to be disrupted each year by disasters.
Moreover, economic costs are soaring, with insured losses reaching a record-high $380 billion last year.
The broader lesson should be clear: when a natural hazard wreaks havoc on a power grid, there is a high potential for cascading impacts on dependent systems, such as banking and finance, government services, transport and communications, and drinking water.
Moreover, as new drivers of risk emerge and interact, longstanding assumptions about disasters are being called into question.
In 2010, western Russia experienced July temperatures almost 8°C above the long-term average, which, combined with lack of rainfall, led to wildfires across 800,000 hectares of parched fields, forests, and peat lands.
Moscow and its surroundings, with a population of more than 15 million inhabitants, were covered by smoke for many weeks.
People with cardiovascular and respiratory diseases, the elderly, and the very young were particularly affected.
During and after the wildfires, Russia’s mortality rate rose 18%.
Floods in Thailand last year threw 700,000 people out of work and had knock-on economic effects around the world.
The following month, 168 countries adopted an international blueprint for disaster-risk reduction at the World Conference on Disaster Reduction, hosted by the city of Kobe, Hyogo Prefecture, the scene in 1995 of one of Japan’s worst earthquakes, with more than 5,000 lives lost.
The resultingamp Hyogo Framework for Action 2005-2015amp was a watershed moment in establishing disaster-risk reduction and climate-change adaptation as hallmarks of good governance.
Most of the countries that stand to benefit from the Hyogo Framework do not have Japan’s long historical experience of battling natural hazards.
The Framework can help them to understand their exposure and vulnerability in today’s hazardous world, and to set priorities for action in developing a culture of prevention.
That is why, as the Hyogo Framework comes to an end, it is important to start thinking now about its replacement, which will guide us through the thicket of risks emerging in the urbanized, interdependent world of the twenty-first century.
The United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction has already started to talk with governments, local government partners, and a broad spectrum of civil-society organizations to prepare a new framework in time for the next World Conference on Disaster Reduction in 2015, which, not surprisingly, will again be hosted by Japan.
The outcome will certainly reflect what was learned from last year’s earthquake and tsunami, and seek to encourage deeper political and economic commitment to disaster-risk reduction and resilience worldwide.
Japan’s Road to Harmonious Decline
PARIS – Forget what you have heard about the hard-working Japanese salaryman: since the early 1990’s, the Japanese have drastically slackened their work habits.
Indeed, Tokyo University economist Fumio Hayashi has demonstrated that the main reason behind Japan’s 20 years of stagnation has been the decrease in the quantity of work performed by the Japanese.
The government itself has led the way here, starting with its decision to close public administration buildings on Saturdays.
Japan’s banks followed suit.
From 1988 to 1993, the legal work week fell 10%, from 44 hours to 40.
This, as much as anything, helped to bring Japan’s long-running post-WWII economic “miracle” to its knees.
In the service sector, the decline is even worse than in manufacturing, because services are heavily regulated and partially closed to foreign competition.
In the retail sector, which employs a huge number of Japan’s unskilled workers – the so-called “mom and pop” shops – Japanese productivity is now 25% lower than in Western Europe.
Former Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi (in power between 2000 and 2004) and his chief economic adviser and minister of finance, Heizo Takenaka, understood all too well that Japan was losing ground in terms of productivity.
They sought to counter the trend toward less work through privatization and deregulation.
Japan’s powerful bureaucrats, nostalgic for the 1960’s model of development, whereby government and its business cronies nurtured the Japanese miracle, strongly opposed this bold, free-market solution.
But their model is obsolete, because Japan now competes directly with many other Asian and non-Asian countries, where work habits are of the type that used to prevail among the Japanese.
Moreover, public opinion never supported Koizumi’s policy, which was alleged then, as it is now, to be a source of inequality.
But that is a canard: real-estate speculation, not privatization, has been the real source of undeserved wealth in Japan.
Nonetheless, the newly victorious Democratic Party of Japan (DPJ) has been able to make the accusation stick to free-market policies.
The recent electoral triumph of Yukio Hatoyama’s untested DPJ thus confirmed the popular wish not to follow America’s free-market model.
Hatoyama makes no economic sense in declaring that growth is important but that happiness comes first.
Nevertheless, this sentiment does reflect the mood of many Japanese.
Assuming that Hayashi and Takenaka are right about the causes of Japan’s stagnation, one must ask whether today’s Japanese are willing to work more in order to catch up with the United States and to lead Asia development?
Stagnation is a tacit collective choice made by a country’s majority.
Have the Japanese people opted for it?
Nearly half of the Japanese population is either retired or near retirement age, and they worked very hard to achieve a high level of comfort.
Thanks to them, despite the blighted economy of the “lost decade,” Japanese income is still higher than it is in Europe.
Moreover, unemployment is low compared to the Western world, because the unproductive distribution sector absorbs young people who cannot find better jobs.
Stagnating Japan has thus remained a peaceful and rather conservative society.
By contrast, a higher growth rate would require fewer golf breaks for salarymen and significant immigration in a nation that is unaccustomed to foreign intrusion and different cultural habits.
Are the Japanese really ready to accept such a cure?
Most Japanese, mostly among the old generation, are satisfied with the kind of society they have built.
They perceive Americans and Europeans as being obsessed with money and material ambition, and they seem ready to accept some stagnation as the price of remaining truly Japanese.
Hatoyama understands this, which is why he won the recent election.
Hatoyama’s talk about a “new age,” which sounds strange from a Western perspective, is in harmony with the Japanese way: this is a country where thousands of cult leaders offer myriad paths to Happiness, in particular a glib mishmash of New Age and Zen Buddhism.
How long can Japan sustain this period of harmonious stagnation?
Japan’s high-tech industries remain competitive, and the country is still the world’s second largest exporter.
It retains a highly innovative economy, which registers more new patents each year than all European countries combined – second only to the US and eons ahead of China and India.
Japan’s 150 million people still produce far more than 2.5 billion Chinese and Indians.
In ten years or so, however, Japan could lose its status vis-à-vis the rest of Asia.
Stagnation is already having a big impact on Japan’s young, for whom it is becoming hard to find a job, let alone life-long employment in a leading global company.
Teenagers know that they will have fewer opportunities than their parents had.
How they will pay for their parent’s pensions and health care is unknown.
Most troubling is the absence of open debate about these matters.
Japan is a hush-hush society, where everyone is supposed to guess what is going on, and the media are careful not to provoke social division.
Hard questions are not to be asked, and straightforward answers are considered too rude and crude to be given.
Foreigners are welcome to make comments, but their advice will usually be ignored.
It may seem to most Japanese that their continuing economic power affords them the luxury of indulging such ingrained habits.
Perhaps they should bear in mind Ernest Hemingway’s description of how a man goes broke: “slowly, then all at once.”
Japan’s Rubble Economy
TOKYO – On March 11, a year will have passed since Japan was struck by the triple tragedy of an earthquake, tsunami, and nuclear accident.
According to figures announced by the country’s National Police Agency, the Great East Japan Earthquake left behind 15,848 dead and 3,305 missing – the largest loss of life due to natural disaster in Japan since World War II.
Searches for the missing – mainly at sea – are still continuing.
The number of buildings affected by the earthquake or the tsunami include 128,582 completely destroyed, 243,914 partly destroyed, 281 completely or partly burned, 33,056 flooded (including 17,806 above the ground floor, and 674,641 with other types of damage.
Approximately 320,000 people lost their homes, of which more than 90% continue to live in temporary housing.
Where to rebuild their homes remains undecided.
The Great Hanshin Earthquake that struck western Japan in 1995 took 6,343 lives, in part because the city’s mazelike streets prevented access by emergency workers.
In the aftermath, the city was reborn in a dramatically different and safer form.
Despite numerous difficulties, recovery from that earthquake was faster than expected: there was no tsunami to complicate matters, and rebuilding efforts could be focused on buildings that had collapsed in the earthquake.
Moreover, the government provided strong leadership and official agencies responded rapidly, ensuring, among other things, a rapid cleanup of the rubble.
Indeed, aside from fiscal issues, disposal of rubble is the greatest obstacle preventing reconstruction after natural disasters everywhere.
The rubble produced in the Great Hanshin Earthquake was equivalent to the amount that Japan normally processes in roughly eight years.
Difficulties like damaged waste-disposal facilities were overcome by local governments’ cooperation and burden-sharing.
And, fortunately, plans to build Kobe Airport on an artificial island near the coast ensured demand for landfill.
In Japan, waste disposal relies mainly on incineration, but use of landfill off the coast made it possible to process the waste more quickly.
Even so, disposal of the waste took approximately three years, at a cost to the central government of ¥324.8 billion.
Compared to the Great Hanshin Earthquake, reconstruction after the Great East Japan Earthquake is moving at a snail’s pace.
Rubble is equivalent to 11 years of waste in Iwate prefecture, and 19 years of waste in Miyagi prefecture – enormous volumes that exceed these regions’ disposal capacity.
The cost of waste disposal, estimated at ¥776.7 billion, will be more than double the disposal cost following the Great Hanshin Earthquake.
Unlike the relatively rapid cleanup after the Great Hanshin Earthquake, only 5% of the total amount of rubble created by last year’s disaster has been processed so far.
Temporary sites for rubble in affected areas are being piled with the remnants of building materials and domestic appliances and furnishings, creating little mountains here and there, as rules on recycling instituted since 1995 require sorting waste by material.
Moreover, there are no plans to build an artificial island to use up the rubble, as was done with Kobe airport.
Owing to the tsunami, some of the refuse will ride the waves of the Pacific, reaching Hawaii and the West coast of the United States in a year or so.
But the damage caused by the tsunami also caused significant delays in reconstruction.
Local governments worry about how far from the coast new residential areas should be built, amplifying concerns about the future for people who are being forced to live with strangers in temporary housing in an unfamiliar area.
But the main reason for reconstruction delays is concern about radiation from the destroyed Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power plant.
Fear of radioactive contamination has stoked strong opposition from residents in areas that would need to accept rubble – even when the rubble is from areas nowhere near Fukushima.
In addition, although incineration greatly decreases the volume of waste, the concentration of radioactive cesium has been increasing over the past year, making it difficult to find suitable final disposal sites.
The heads of local governments in various regions are attempting to convince residents not to fear radiation and to allow for dispersal of rubble.
But the unseen enemy has aroused concerns – particularly among mothers of young children – that are more a matter of psychology than of science.
As the world’s only victim of a nuclear attack, Japan’s allergy to radiation is stronger than anywhere else.
Nevertheless, with the exception of the special circumstances caused by the Fukushima catastrophe, Japan is hardly the only country with a mess to clean up before it can reconstruct.
Thailand, which earlier this year suffered prolonged flooding, is also facing the need to dispose of rubble as it works to rebuild.
Measures to prevent flooding and steps to repair damaged areas of Bangkok cannot even begin until the rubble is cleared.
Haiti and New Zealand have also encountered similar problems.
Reconstruction constitutes a special kind of public-works project.
The disposal of rubble, given its labor-intensive character, has a particularly marked effect on job creation, at least in the short term.
One might call this “rubble economics.”
It is the inevitable formula for recovery – one shovel load at a time.