To answer this question, US and Japanese policymakers should rely on the “calculus of participation,” which dictates that the first step in choosing whether to join an international initiative or regime is to consider the last step in the process: the outcome.
In short, a country’s leaders should ask whether, ultimately, their country would be better or worse off.
This “backward induction” approach may seem obvious, but the AIIB’s members seem to have ignored it.
Indeed, beyond the fact that China will be in charge, almost nothing is known about the bank or its financing rules.
Given this, it seems logical for countries like Japan to wait and see before deciding whether to join the AIIB.
Of course, there is a counter-argument.
Just as talks between the US and Iran, while far from perfect, have helped build mutual understanding and deterred Iran’s quest for nuclear weapons, closer integration among Japan and its Asian neighbors could help to align their actions and interests.
The merits of this “community” approach – which reflects a more Eastern perspective than the backward-induction approach – cannot be overestimated, especially in a highly fraught situation like that with Iran, where the consequences of stubborn silence could be catastrophic.
But the potential cost to Japan of delaying participation in the AIIB seems to be quite limited.
There is another strong reason why Japan should wait: macroeconomic stability.
As it stands, the misallocation of capital and poor investment decisions in China raise serious risks, which increasingly seem to be on par with those in the US that triggered the 2008 financial crisis.
If the AIIB begins with nothing more than vague criteria for monitoring international investment and an implicit Chinese veto, these domestic risks may spread to China’s neighbors, raising the danger of another large-scale international crisis.
European countries may join the AIIB to deepen their business and political ties with China, but their financial stakes in the outcome are limited.
The same cannot be said for Japan.
Given this, Japan should not join the AIIB until the criteria for monitoring its investments are clear.
For now, Japan’s best bet is to make no bet at all.
Japan As Number Three
TOKYO – China has now officially supplanted Japan as the world’s second largest economy.
The question for Japan is whether or not the country will continue to tumble down the list of the world’s great economies, or whether its politicians will return to a path of reform that can revive growth.
That the ruling Democratic Party of Japan now seems trapped in a power struggle between Prime Minister Naoto Kan and party power broker Ichiro Ozawa suggests that serious economic reform is not at the top of the DPJ agenda.
In the 1980’s, Japan’s annual GDP growth averaged 4.5％; since the early 1990’s, the economy has been virtually stagnant, averaging barely 1% annual growth.
In the 1990’s, Japan’s government, grossly misjudging the sources of the economy’s difficulties, vastly increased government expenditures on public works, but ignored supply-side adjustments.
This policy created new vested interests, and thus a new political environment, as construction companies and other beneficiaries of government contracts began donating heavily to the ruling Liberal Democratic Party.
This kept the LDP’s coffers brimming, but posed the risk of a serious financial crisis in the late 1990’s.
It was in these circumstances that Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi took office in April 2001.
Under Koizumi’s leadership, insolvent banks were made whole again.
At the start of Koizumi’s government, 8.4% of bank loans in Japan were non-performing.
By the end of his tenure, the rate was down to 1.5%, restoring the country’s potential for growth.
Indeed, this was one reason why Japan was so little affected by the “Lehman Shock” that incited the global financial crisis.
But macroeconomic reform came to a screeching halt after Koizumi stepped down in 2006.
A series of short-term prime ministers began a pattern of huge government outlays.
Not surprisingly, the economy deteriorated.
Frustrated by the long-ruling LDP’s poor political and economic management, voters opted last year for change at the top.
But the pattern of economic mismanagement, far from being reversed, has only become worse.
Huge spending increases were directed at farmers and households.
As a result, the share of tax revenue to total spending this fiscal year slipped below 50%, something unseen in Japan’s entire post-war history.
Despite the parlous fiscal position, for now the market for Japanese government bonds (JGBs) remains stable.
But this is because government bonds are purchased mostly by domestic organizations and households.
In another words, the government’s negative saving is financed by the private sector’s positive savings.
But that private-sector safety net of savings is fraying.
Japanese households hold savings of about ¥1.1 trillion in net monetary assets.
In about three years, however, the amount of JGBs will exceed the total assets of Japanese households.
Government debt will no longer be backed up by taxpayers’ assets.
Confidence in the JGB market will likely decline.
Moreover, as Japan’s society ages, the household savings rate will decrease dramatically.
This will make it difficult, if not impossible, for the domestic private sector to finance the budget deficit indefinitely.
And new demands for fiscal expenditures are expected to grow as the country ages.
In about five years, all baby boomers will be over 65, but pressure on government expenditures for pensions and health care is expected to start sooner, around 2013.
Japan’s new government, led by Prime Minister Naoto Kan, started discussing a consumption-tax hike to offset the growth in spending.
But a consumption-tax hike is no panacea, particularly given the government’s lack of a growth strategy.
Although a tax increase will undoubtedly be needed, it is the wrong priority at the moment – and could prove counter-productive if it causes the economy to decline dramatically.
Indeed, Koizumi’s government demonstrated the best way to tackle fiscal consolidation.
Koizumi decided that a primary budget balance should be restored in 10 years.
And he came close to being successful, as the primary deficit of ¥28 trillion in 2002 was reduced to just ¥6 trillion in 2007.
Had this effort been continued for two more years, a primary surplus could have been realized.
Without a strategy for growth, which includes efforts to reduce government expenditures and a policy to stop deflation, Japan’s economy will remain in the doldrums.
But Kan still seems unwilling to focus on growth.
Instead, like so many other leaders before him, he proclaims his desire to find a “third way.”
But, as history has shown, no third way exists.
Kan continues to believe that a large government, with growing social-welfare expenditures, is the way to get the economy moving.
This should not be surprising.
He used to be involved in civic movements and groups – like environmental organizations – that take little heed of the need for economic growth.
Increasing the tax burden seems almost a natural part of such a mindset, as does ignorance of the need for increased economic competition.
Without that, and a renewed focus on growth, Japan will continue to climb down the global ladder of success.
Indeed, any Japanese who thinks that complacency is an option should look to Argentina.
A hundred years ago, Argentina was arguably the world’s second wealthiest economy.
Now, thanks to bad policies, and even worse politicians, it ranks among the world’s also-rans.
Japan’s Economic Quandary
CAMBRIDGE – The Japanese economy is a paradoxical mixture of prosperity and failure.
And, in a significant way, its prosperity makes its failures difficult to address.
Despite near-zero borrowing costs, the fiscal deficit is running at nearly 7% of GDP, and government debt exceeds 230% of GDP.
The population and the labor force are shrinking, implying even higher debt ratios in the future.
When Prime Minister Shinzo Abe took office in December 2012, he announced a strategy – comprising three “arrows” – to overcome the economy’s combination of slow growth and low inflation: very easy monetary policy, a short-term fiscal stimulus, and structural reforms to labor and product markets.
But the government’s economic policies (so-called Abenomics) have not fixed Japan’s problems and are unlikely to do so in the future.
After Abe appointed Haruhiko Kuroda as the new head of the Bank of Japan (BOJ) and charged him with getting the inflation rate to 2%, Kuroda loosened monetary policy immediately and dramatically, by slashing interest rates and launching large-scale purchases of long-term government bonds.
This caused a sharp fall in the value of the yen and sent the interest rate on ten-year bonds toward zero.
The more competitive exchange rate raised the profits of Japanese exporters, but not their output, while the weaker yen also raised import prices, reducing the real incomes of most Japanese households.
In January, the BOJ went further and introduced negative deposit rates on commercial banks’ mandatory reserves, which markets interpreted as a confusing act of desperation.
That had the adverse effect of weakening household and business demand.
And, despite the BOJ’s easing, global financial conditions soon caused a rise in the value of the yen, which rose nearly 10% relative to the dollar.
This week, the BOJ surprised markets by making no policy change at its meeting, contrary to the widespread expectation of a significant further easing of monetary conditions.
Markets reacted sharply, with the yen strengthening by 2% against the dollar and the Japanese stock market falling 3%.
Abe began his fiscal policy with a substantial spending program, focused primarily on repairing and replacing infrastructure affected by the 2011 earthquake.
But he also raised the value-added tax (VAT) from 5% to 8% to address the enormous deficit and growing national debt.
The result was an economic downturn, with two quarters of declining GDP.
The level of real GDP now is no higher than it was in 2008.
The third arrow of Abenomics – structural policies aimed at boosting potential growth – has barely been launched.
The good news is that there has been some increase in female labor-force participation and in the number of tourists visiting Japan.
And a variety of reforms are intended to overhaul the highly protected agricultural sector, though substantial change depends on ratification of the Trans-Pacific Partnership trade agreement (and even then the changes would be phased in only over several decades).
Japan’s declining population and shrinking labor force is a major long-term challenge – reflected in Abe’s call for more women to work outside the home.
Although a system of temporary permits allows foreign workers to be employed in Japan for up to three years, the country will not seek to ameliorate adverse demographic trends by opening itself to permanent immigration.
Reluctance to expand the number of foreign workers and to change work customs to encourage more married women to join the labor force may reflect the relative affluence that Japan currently enjoys.
The Japanese public may prefer to maintain its current lifestyle and cultural homogeneity, even though doing so is preventing more rapid economic growth.
Japan’s biggest immediate problem, however, is the budget deficit and government debt.
If the BOJ succeeds in achieving a 2% inflation rate, the deficit will rise rapidly, as the interest rate on government debt would increase from the current zero level.
Failure to implement the spending cuts and revenue increases needed to reduce the budget deficit would undermine confidence in the economy’s prospects and increase speculation that the government would eventually resort to some form of debt repudiation.
Abe thus faces a dilemma in deciding whether to raise the VAT further, from 8% to 10%, as planned.
Doing so is undoubtedly hard at a time when GDP has declined and CPI inflation has turned negative.
And yet failure to raise the VAT or to cut government spending means continued large deficits and soaring government debt.
Abe has said he would offset the immediate contractionary effect of the VAT hike with a short-term fiscal stimulus in the form of higher government spending.
That might allow the necessary permanent reduction of the deficit without causing a repeat of the economic downturn that accompanied the last VAT increase.
Another strategy that might help sustain aggregate demand would be to phase in the VAT increase at an annual rate of 1% for three or four years.
This would give consumers an incentive to increase spending, especially on large ticket items, before each increment raises prices.
There is no way to avoid shrinking the budget deficit without jeopardizing debt sustainability – and probably sooner rather than later.
If Abe can get public finances under control, Japan will be in a much stronger position to face its other economic challenges.
Japan’s Constitutional Albatross
TOKYO – The approach of the 70th anniversary of Japan’s defeat in World War II has sparked much discussion – and lamentation – of East Asia’s resurgent historical feuds.
But recent tensions in the region may partly reflect a lack of progress in another, overlooked area: Japanese constitutional reform.
Indeed, despite the powerlessness so vividly highlighted by the Islamic State’s beheading of two Japanese hostages, Japan has not adopted even one amendment to the “peace constitution” that the occupying American forces imposed on it in 1947.
At first glance, this may not be altogether surprising.
After all, the constitution served an important purpose: by guaranteeing that Japan would not pose a military threat in the future, it enabled the country finally to escape foreign occupation and pursue rebuilding and democratization.
But consider this: Germany adopted an Allied-approved constitution under similar circumstances in 1949, to which it has since made dozens of amendments.
Moreover, whereas Germany’s constitution, or Basic Law, authorized the use of military force in self-defense or as part of a collective security agreement, Japan’s constitution stipulated full and permanent relinquishment of “the threat or use of force as a means of settling international disputes.”
Japan is the only country in the world bound by such restrictions – imposed not just to prevent a militarist revival, but also to punish Japan for its wartime government’s policies – and continued adherence to them is unrealistic.
That is why Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe has made constitutional reform a high priority.
Having cemented his authority in December’s snap general election, in which his Liberal Democratic Party won a decisive victory, Abe is determined to pursue his goal of building a stronger, more competitive Japan – one that can hold its own against an increasingly muscular China.
Abe’s effort to “normalize” Japan’s strategic posture began with a reinterpretation of Article 9 of the constitution, according to which the country would henceforth be allowed to engage in “collective self-defense.”
Japan’s government approved the change last summer, and the United States backed the move as well.
With the Islamic State’s attempts to leverage the lives of two Japanese hostages, legislation to implement the reinterpretation is set to be submitted to the Diet.
Yet the reinterpretation has faced some resistance at home and abroad.
Chinese critics, in particular, have expressed concern that Japanese militarism could reemerge, though they neglect to mention that it is China’s military buildup that prompted Japan’s government to reassess its national defense policy.
In fact, the reinterpretation amounts to little more than a tweak: Japanese forces can now shield an American warship defending Japan, but they remain prohibited from initiating offensive attacks or participating in multilateral military operations.
Given that the United Nations charter recognizes individual and collective self-defense as an “inherent right” of sovereign countries, the change should be uncontroversial.
But significant obstacles continue to block wider constitutional reform.
Amendments require a two-thirds majority in both chambers of the Diet, and a majority in a popular referendum, making Japan’s constitution one of the world’s most difficult to revise.
To facilitate his ambitions, Abe hopes to scale down the requirement to simple majorities in both chambers or eliminate the need for a public referendum.
Given popular resistance to change, Abe’s task will not be easy.
Whereas citizens of most democracies regard their constitutions as works in progress – India, for example, has amended its constitution 99 times since 1950 – the Japanese largely treat their constitution as sacrosanct.
As a result, rather than ensuring that their constitution reflects social, technological, economic, and even ideological developments, they zealously uphold its precise provisions, like religious fundamentalists defending the literal truth of scripture.
Moreover, pacifism is deeply ingrained in the Japanese psyche, even among young people, largely owing to the painful legacy of Japan’s prewar militarism.
Even if Abe manages to relax the amendment requirements – no easy feat, given the likelihood that a popular referendum would reveal weak public support – he will probably have to leave the change to his successor.
But one factor could bolster Abe’s cause considerably.
Explicit US support for Japanese constitutional reform might not only blunt Chinese criticism, but could also reassure many Japanese that updating Article 9 would not amount to rejecting the postwar order that the Americans helped to establish in Japan.
Such a move would also serve US security interests.
A more confident and secure Japan would be better able to block China from gaining ascendancy in the western Pacific, thereby advancing the central US policy objective of ensuring a stable balance of power in Asia.
No other country in the region could act as a credible counterweight to China.
Today’s Japan – a liberal democracy that has not fired a single shot against an outside party in nearly seven decades, and that has made major contributions to global development during this period – is very different from the Japan of 1947.
Its constitution should reflect that.
Japan’s Vote for Bold Reform
TOKYO – With the powerful mandate of the Japanese people, demonstrated by their overwhelming vote of support in our country’s December 14 election, my government’s ability to act decisively has been strengthened immeasurably.
Indeed, we now not only have the authority to act, but a clear and definitive message from the electorate that we must do so.
In particular, we now have a mandate to launch what has become known around the world as the “third arrow” of so-called Abenomics: structural reform.
And it is structural reform that will unleash the competitiveness, and long-pent-up dynamism, of Japan’s firms and people.
By calling in November for a snap general election, my aim was to consolidate the government’s political capital – not in order to hoard it, but to spend it on the reforms that were first promised two years ago.
Now, with our renewed mandate, that is what we will do.
First, we intend to subject Japan’s tax regime to a fundamental review.
This entails not only an increase in the consumption-tax rate, the second round of which we have postponed, but also making the necessary adjustments so that our tax system no longer impairs investment incentives.
Some of the agro-business organizations – the epitome of vested interests – must change, and we will push them to do so.
Second, we must adapt Japan’s labor regulations to the norms of modern life almost everywhere, which means allowing every individual to strike a beneficial balance between life and work.
We Japanese will always work hard – I have no doubt about that.
But we also need to enable and encourage more Japanese women to participate in the workforce, whether at the beginning of their careers, or after choosing to have and raise children.
Moreover, it is not just bold domestic reforms that must be embraced.
Japan also needs to change how its economy interacts with the world.
Consider the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) and the Japan-European Union Economic Partnership Agreement.
Completion of both trade and investment deals are among the most urgent tasks we face, because Japan’s economy needs powerful external catalysts to spur change in how we compete at home and for export markets.
Japan has no alternative other than to do everything necessary and feasible to enhance its labor productivity.
We now have the Japanese public’s support to make all of these changes happen.
That support is based on explicit statements of the government’s intentions.
For example, it is now well understood – and approved – by voters that, come April 2017, my government will raise the consumption tax.
Until then, we will no longer be bogged down in debating the merits of this decision.
But we also know that the political space that we have secured is too precious to be squandered.
We must use it single-mindedly to implement reforms that enhance Japan’s long-term growth potential.
Our country’s global standing depends on it.
Over the last two years, I have traveled 354,200 miles, visited a total of 62 countries, and conducted 246 one-on-one meetings with heads of state and other national leaders.
These experiences have convinced me that there is an enormous amount of trust in the world about the path that postwar Japan has taken.
In particular, there is no doubt about the norms and principles that our people and our government have long upheld, such as popular sovereignty, respect for human rights, and peace – all pillars of the Japanese constitution.
Japan has also gained international credibility for the fact that, for seven decades, its diplomacy has not once sought to coerce or intimidate any other country with threats of military force.
Most significant, global trust in Japan reflects the modesty and decorum that countless Japanese have exemplified as they worked to make our economy one of the world’s three largest.
The faith that the world has placed in Japan and its people has been Japanese diplomacy’s most valuable asset.
Our mandate from the Japanese people is to ensure that this tradition continues, undiminished, into the future.
That is the oath I will be making as I assume leadership of Japan for the coming electoral term.
For me and my government, the main task ahead – working even harder to restore Japan’s economy – is inseparable from safeguarding our country’s position in the global vanguard of peace, progress, and prosperity.
Japan’s Beheaded Illusions
TOKYO – Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe was on a six-day tour of Egypt, Jordan, Lebanon, Israel, and Palestine, when the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) posted a video online threatening to murder two Japanese hostages, Haruna Yukawa and Kenji Goto, if his government did not pay $200 million within 72 hours.
Abe had no good options.
Indeed, when it comes to protecting its citizens overseas, Japan never does.
When Abe failed to bow to its demands, ISIL released a second video claiming that Yukawa, who was seized last August in Syria while reportedly preparing to establish a Japan-based private security company, had been beheaded.
Goto, a journalist who traveled to Syria last October to try to secure Yukawa’s release, will supposedly be spared if Japan secures Jordan’s release of a convicted terrorist.
In fact, Goto’s wife had received an email demanding a ransom of ¥2 billion ($17 million) in December.
But it seems that Abe’s Middle East tour presented a greater opportunity for ISIL to make the most of its Japanese hostages.
ISIL’s ransom demand was not just a bid for cash; it sent a powerful message.
Just three days before the demand was made, Abe pledged to provide $200 million in non-military humanitarian aid to frontline countries in the fight against ISIL, including Jordan, Syria, Iraq, and Lebanon, all of which have taken in large numbers of refugees.
ISIL explicitly directed the video to both Japan’s government and its citizens, evidently hoping that the largely pacifist Japanese would press their leaders to back down.
And, to some extent, their expectation was met; some opposition members of Japan’s Diet tweeted that Abe should cancel the promised aid.
Needless to say, Abe’s government ignored their advice.
When the ransom demand did not work, ISIL shifted its approach, but not its goal.
The prisoner whose release it has demanded in exchange for Goto is Sajida al-Rishawi, who faces the death penalty in Jordan for her role in hotel bombings in Amman in 2005.
The group seems to believe that forcing Japan and Jordan to negotiate such a trade could undermine the countries’ longstanding relationship.
ISIL probably knows that Japan has historically placed the safety of its own citizens above all other considerations – even if it meant bowing to terrorists’ demands.
When the Japanese Red Army hijacked a Japan Airlines flight to Dhaka Airport in Bangladesh in 1977, Prime Minister Takeo Fukuda not only paid the $6 million ransom; he also resorted to the “extralegal measure” of handing over imprisoned members of the faction.
“The weight of a human life,” he declared, “is heavier than the earth itself.”
This response stands in stark contrast to Israel’s behavior a year earlier, when the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine (PFLP) hijacked an Air France flight with 256 passengers.
Instead of giving the group what they wanted – the release of 53 militants imprisoned in Israel and four other countries – the Israeli Army launched Operation Thunderbolt, rescuing the hostages at Uganda’s Entebbe Airport.
Only three hostages and one Israeli commando – Yonatan Netanyahu, the elder brother of current Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu – were killed in the operation.
But Fukuda’s response was not entirely a matter of choice.
Under Japan’s constitution, neither the country’s self-defense forces nor the police would have had legal grounds to travel overseas to rescue endangered Japanese citizens.
In any case, neither force would have had the training necessary to pull off something like Operation Thunderbolt.
The Dhaka episode was hardly the first time that threats against Japanese citizens had exposed this shortcoming.
Seven years earlier, a forerunner to the Japanese Red Army hijacked another Japan Airlines flight – the “Yodogo” – and demanded to be taken to North Korea.
The Japanese authorities got lucky: When the pilot landed first in South Korea, the hijackers released their 129 hostages in exchange for permission to continue to Pyongyang, where they gained asylum.
Two years later, three&nbsp;members of the Japanese Red Army, recruited by the PFLP, attacked Tel Aviv’s Lod Airport, killing 26 people and injuring 80 others.
And, in the late 1970s and early 1980s, the wives of the Yodogo hijackers went to Europe, where they are suspected of abducting young Japanese students and taking them to North Korea.
As ISIL’s actions demonstrate, Japanese are still at risk – and their government still lacks adequate tools to protect them.
Fortunately, Abe – whose efforts to rescue Japanese citizens abducted by North Korea fueled his political rise – seems to recognize the need for change.
Since World War II, military considerations have barely factored into Japanese policy, and official development assistance, which began as war reparations, has placed international imperatives above domestic concerns.
But, after playing benefactor to the world for 60 years, Japan’s diplomatic and crisis-management capabilities have been severely weakened.
It is unacceptable for a government to be unable to protect its own citizens.
That is why Abe is determined to amend, or at least reinterpret, Japan’s constitution to allow for the kinds of defense maneuvers that other countries, from Israel to India, employ when their people are threatened.
As US Supreme Court Justice Robert Jackson once put it, a constitution is not a suicide pact.
Thomas Piketty’s Japanese Tour
TOKYO – Six months after Thomas Piketty's book Capital in the Twenty-First Century generated so much buzz in the United States and Europe, it has become a bestseller in Japan.
But vast differences between Japan and its developed counterparts in the West, mean that, like so many other Western exports, Piketty's argument has taken on unique characteristics.
Piketty's main assertion is that the leading driver of increased inequality in the developed world is the accumulation of wealth by those who are already wealthy, driven by a rate of return on capital that consistently exceeds the rate of GDP growth.
Japan, however, has lower levels of inequality than almost every other developed country.
Indeed, though it has long been an industrial powerhouse, Japan is frequently called the world's most successful communist country.
Japan has a high income-tax rate for the rich (45%), and the inheritance tax rate recently was raised to 55%.
This makes it difficult to accumulate capital over generations – a trend that Piketty cites as a significant driver of inequality.
As a result, Japan's richest families typically lose their wealth within three generations.
This is driving a growing number of wealthy Japanese to move to Singapore or Australia, where inheritance taxes are lower.
The familiarity of Japan, it seems, is no longer sufficient to compel the wealthy to endure the high taxes imposed upon them.
In this context, it is not surprising that Japan's “super-rich" remain a lot less wealthy than their counterparts in other countries.
In the US, for example, the average income of the top one percent of households was $1,264,065 in 2012, according to the investment firm Sadoff Investment Research.
In Japan, the top 1% of households earned about $240,000, on average (at 2012 exchange rates).
Yet Japanese remain sensitive to inequality, driving even the richest to avoid ostentatious displays of wealth.
One simply does not see the profusion of mansions, yachts, and private jets typical of, say, Beverly Hills and Palm Beach.
For example, Haruka Nishimatsu, former President and CEO of Japan Airlines, attracted international attention a few years ago for his modest lifestyle.
He relied on public transportation and ate lunch with employees in the company's cafeteria.
By contrast, in China, the heads of national companies are well known for maintaining grandiose lifestyles.
We Japanese have a deeply ingrained stoicism, reflecting the Confucian notion that people do not lament poverty when others lament it equally.
This willingness to accept a situation, however bad, as long as it affects everyone equally is what enabled Japan to endure two decades of deflation, without a public outcry over the authorities' repeated failure to redress it.
This national characteristic is not limited to individuals.
The government, the central bank, the media, and companies wasted far too much time simply enduring deflation – time that they should have spent working actively to address it.
Japan finally has a government, led by Prime Minister Shinzo Abe, that is committed to ending deflation and reinvigorating economic growth, using a combination of expansionary monetary policy, active fiscal policy, and deregulation.
Now in its third year, so-called “Abenomics" is showing some positive results.
Share prices have risen by 220% since Abe came to power in December 2012.
And corporate performance has improved – primarily in the export industries, which have benefited from a depreciated yen – with many companies posting their highest profits on record.
But Abenomics has yet to benefit everyone.
In fact, there is a sense that Abe's policies are contributing to rising inequality.
That is why Piketty's book appeals to so many Japanese.
For example, though the recent reduction in the corporate-tax rate was necessary to encourage economic growth and attract investment, it seems to many Japanese to be a questionable move at a time when the consumption-tax rate has been increased and measures to address deflation are pushing up prices.
To address this problem, the companies that enjoy tax cuts should increase their employees' wages to keep pace with rising prices, instead of waiting for market forces to drive them up.
Herein lies the unique twist that Piketty's theory takes on in Japan: the disparity is not so much between the super-rich and everyone else, but between large corporations, which can retain earnings and accumulate capital, and the individuals who are being squeezed in the process.
Japanese Lessons for China’s Currency
SHANGHAI – The question of how much China’s currency should appreciate to rebalance its trade has become a global hot-button issue.
But the answers have been all over the map, with some finding that the yuan is not undervalued at all, while others argue that it should appreciate against the dollar by more than 30%.
Clearly, there must be major differences in the macroeconomic models used to produce such a wide range of estimates.
But the one thing about which everyone seems to agree is the theoretically and empirically unjustified assumption that an equilibrium exchange rate actually exists.
The theoretical problem is simple: a country’s trade balance depends on a lot more than the value of its currency in the foreign exchange markets.
Interest rates, employment, aggregate demand, and technological and institutional innovation all play a role.
As the economist Joan Robinson pointed out in 1947, just about any exchange rate will be the equilibrium value for some combination of these other variables. The equilibrium exchange rate, she famously argued, is a chimera.
Not surprisingly, the empirical evidence that trade imbalances can be resolved through exchange rate changes alone is unconvincing.
In the case of China, the most useful precedent is probably that of Japan in the period from the end of the Bretton Woods fixed exchange-rate regime in August, 1971, to the collapse of its “bubble economy” in 1990.
During that period, the yen’s value more than doubled against the dollar, rising from its original fixed rate of 360 to 144 at the end of 1989.
Yet, even as Japan’s exports became much more expensive in dollar terms and its imports much cheaper in yen, its trade surplus rose from $6 billion in 1971 to $80 billion in 1989.
For two decades, expectations that an appreciating yen would restore external balance were repeatedly disappointed.
At the time of the December 1971 Smithsonian Agreement, 308 yen to the dollar was supposed to do the trick.
Fourteen years later, during the Plaza Accord negotiations, the Japanese argued for an eventual level of 200-210, while some US Treasury officials thought the final target should be as high as 165-170.
At the end of the 1980’s, some analysts thought rates as high as 120 might finally produce the long-sought equilibrium.
Yet, as Japan entered the “lost decade” of the 1990’s, its exports continued to grow faster than its imports.
Japan’s trade surplus peaked only in 1994, at $144 billion, just a few months before the yen’s April 1995 all-time high of 79.75.
In retrospect, it is easy to see why none of these supposed equilibrium exchange rates delivered external balance.
As the yen appreciated, Japan responded not by exporting less but by improving productivity and quality control through plant and equipment investment and innovations in factory management, making possible rapid growth in exports of high-value-added products.
Exchange-rate equilibrium calculations from the 1970’s and 1980’s, which could only have been based on the export sector’s contemporary structure, naturally would have little relevance subsequently.
The same is true of calculations at the beginning of the 1990’s, which would have forecast Japanese import growth based on extrapolations from the high GDP growth rates of the previous 40 years rather than on the decade of stagnation that ensued.
In China, changes in the export sector’s structure similar to those observed in Japan are now taking place.
These changes are likely to make today’s attempts to find an equilibrium yuan-dollar exchange rate seem just as chimerical in hindsight as previous calculations of the yen-dollar equilibrium rate.
For the 30 years since the beginning of China’s economic reforms, Chinese industry has achieved impressive efficiency gains by adopting new technologies and realizing economies of scale, leading to a huge expansion in locally made products suitable for export.
While an appreciating currency might eventually drive labor-intensive manufacturers out of business, if Japan’s economic history is any guide, they are likely to be replaced by producers of things like ships, machine tools, semiconductors, and doubtless new products yet to be invented.
The equilibrium yuan-dollar rate is a chimera not because China’s trade could never be balanced, but because the exchange rate alone does not determine equilibrium.
The structure of the entire economy matters, too.
As this is constantly evolving in unpredictable ways, there is no reason to expect that the assumptions underlying any particular macroeconomic model will ever remain valid long enough for its steady-state solution to be achieved in practice.
Abenomics for Asia
TOKYO – Once again, Japan is Asia’s odd country out.
For two decades, as one Asian economy after another boomed, Japan’s economy remained virtually stagnant.
Now, with GDP growth in Asia’s two giants, China and India, slowing precipitously – a decline that appears to be contributing to diminishing economic performance in much of the rest of Asia – Japan is recording its strongest growth since its 1980’s boom.
But, just as Japan’s post-war economic model became the template for the Asian economic miracles of recent decades, the reforms currently being implemented by Prime Minister Shinzo Abe (“Abenomics”) may offer Asian economies a path back to strong growth.
If the fallout from China’s slowdown is not to hit the entire region and jeopardize the economic integration that has already taken place, Asia’s governments – beginning with China – will need to embrace similar reforms.
How did Asia’s boom fade so quickly?
Economics is supposedly a cold-blooded subject.
Yet successful economies are prone to one of the most dangerous emotions of all: self-satisfaction, that excessive pride that Confucius condemned, which makes governments wary of reforming what has been a winning model, even when stresses begin to appear.
Japan has paid a high price for this attitude.
Even after its property bubble burst 24 years ago, the authorities continued to believe that the country’s growth model needed no adjustment.
The result was two lost decades of deflation and introspection before Japan finally embraced the reforms needed to kick-start a new, more open – and hence more vibrant – economic model.
China and India, it seems, have also succumbed to economic hubris.
Three decades of success in China, and a decade in which India supposedly overcame the old, slow, “Hindu rate of growth,” are ending with both economies slowing precipitously.
And both are slowing for the same reason: stalled reform, which is a direct result of governments being so satisfied with today’s conditions that they fail to address tomorrow’s rising dangers.
China’s government continues to turn a blind eye toward banks that lend to the politically well connected, or that tolerate companies – mostly state-owned – with poor financial discipline.
Indeed, total public- and private-sector debt in China is now around 200% of GDP, up by more than one-third in five years.
Reckless lending is undermining efficient allocation of capital and preventing China from drawing a line under the investment- and export-led growth model of the past three decades and basing future growth more on domestic consumption.
Likewise, India’s government, having embraced economic liberalization, has essentially pulled back from it in recent years.
Plans to allow foreign investment in retailing and other key economic sectors have been put on hold.
In critical industries – mobile communications and mining are perhaps the two most important examples – privatization has been corrupted by cronyism.
Moreover, India remains an inward-looking economy that attracts relatively little foreign investment and plays a much smaller role in world trade than it should.
Notwithstanding its renowned software industry, India plays little part in the production chains that underpin Asia’s regional trade patterns.
The result – as visible as it was predictable – has been a sharp slowdown in economic growth.
To be fair, there is a growing recognition in some countries of the need for change.
The need to restore economic dynamism was the focus of South Korea’s presidential election in 2012, which brought the country’s first-ever female president, Park Geun-hye, to power.
Today, the country is gripped by an important debate about how to reform the chaebol, the mammoth industrial conglomerates that did so much to lift the country out of poverty and into the front ranks of the world’s economies.
Park’s status as the daughter of former President Park Chung-hee, who put the chaebol at the center of South Korea’s economy, could give her the credibility needed to recast their economic role.
Elsewhere in Asia, including in China, the debate is only beginning.
But progress on reform, particularly in finance, must come quickly, because in most countries – India is the main exception – the demographic window of a growing working-age population is closing, if not already shut.
It is not necessarily bad for Asia’s traditionally high savings rates to fall; after all, consumption typically rises with an aging population.
But savings will need to be allocated far more efficiently than in the past.
Japan’s lost decades provide a grim lesson of the economic cost of neglecting such reform.
Moreover, borrowing in US dollars to finance current investment spending – as many emerging economies have done in recent years, as the US Federal Reserve’s policy of quantitative easing flooded emerging markets with cheap funds – is no substitute.
Indonesia, Thailand, and others are now finding it difficult to service these loans as their exchange rates fall against the dollar in the wake of the Fed’s plans to “taper” its policy.
Indeed, the debt build-up is so large that markets now fear a repeat of Asia’s financial crisis.
The Japanese precedent matters all the more, given that, 16 years after the Asian financial crisis nearly wiped out decades of hard-earned growth, Asia’s banks and capital markets remain inefficient.
Asia’s economies need deep, well-regulated capital markets, so that savings can be allocated to where they yield the highest returns.
Instead, today’s poorly regulated financial sectors – China is the biggest culprit – misprice capital.
Moreover, banks are too dominant: Asia (including Japan) accounts for more than half of the world’s population but barely a quarter of global capital-market capitalization.
Sixteen years ago, the Asian financial crisis erupted, following the Thai government’s decision to float the baht in the face of speculative attacks.
The response of governments to that crisis has shaped much of the region’s economic policymaking ever since.
If Asia is to avoid another crisis on a similar scale, or lost decades of growth, its governments will need to embrace the type of all-encompassing reforms that Japan is undertaking.
Abenomics, it seems, is for everyone.
Keynes Reborn
TOKYO – In the fourth century, Japan’s emperor looked out from a small mountain near his palace and noticed that something was missing: smoke rising from people’s kitchens.
While there were some faint trails here and there, it was clear that people were facing such harsh economic conditions that they could barely purchase any food to cook.
Appalled at the circumstances of the Japanese people, who were largely peasants, the emperor decided to suspend taxation.
Three years later, the palace gates were in disrepair and the stars shone through leaks in the roof.
But a glimpse from the same mountain revealed steady plumes of smoke rising from the peasants’ huts.
The tax moratorium had worked.
The people were so grateful to the emperor – who became known as Nintoku (Emperor with Virtue and Benevolence) – that they volunteered to repair his palace.
Almost two millennia later, the Japanese people are, again, under economic pressure.
A steep hike in the consumption tax in 2014, together with another hike expected in the near future, has undermined household spending.
As in the Nintoku story, it is the wealth of the people – not that of the government – that dictates consumption.
Of course, the wealth of the government does play a role in economic performance.
But excessive concern about government’s solvency can cause the private sector to be reluctant to spend.
That is what has happened in Japan.
Excessive government debt can be highly damaging.
In inflationary periods, high outstanding government liabilities impair fiscal policy, because higher taxes are needed to finance the same level of real government spending.
Making matters worse, governments can be tempted to inflate their debts away – a power that has been abused since the age of monarchs, resulting in a uniform inflation tax on asset holders.
But large public debts are not always bad for an economy, just as efforts to rein them in are not always beneficial.
The focus on a balanced budget in the United States, for example, has led some elements of the Republican Party to block normal functions of state and even federal authorities, supposedly in the name of fiscal discipline.
Likewise, the eurozone’s recovery from the 2008 financial crisis has been held back by strict fiscal rules that limit member countries’ fiscal deficits to 3% of GDP.
To understand the relationship between public debt and economic performance, we should look to the fiscal theory of the price level (FTPL), a macroeconomic doctrine that has lately been receiving considerable attention.
In August, at the annual conference of central bankers in Jackson Hole, Wyoming, Princeton’s Christopher Sims provided a lucid explanation of the theory.
As Sims explained, contrary to popular belief, aggregate demand and the price level (inflation) are not dictated only – or even primarily – by monetary policy.
Instead, they are determined by the country’s net wealth and the liabilities of the central bank and the government.
When government deficits are lower, investing in government debt becomes more attractive.
As the private sector purchases more of that debt, demand for goods and services falls, creating deflationary pressure.
If the central bank attempts to spur inflation by expanding its own balance sheet through monetary expansion and by lowering interest rates, it will cause the budget deficit to fall further, reinforcing the cycle.
In such a context, Sims argued, monetary policy alone would not be adequate to raise inflation; fiscal policy that increases the budget deficit would also be necessary.
The FTPL provides a clear diagnosis of the Japanese economy’s problems – and points to solutions.
When Abenomics was introduced in 2012, a massive injection of liquidity by the Bank of Japan was supposed to offset deflation.
But, as both traditional Keynesians and FTPL followers would note, quantitative easing – which amounts to an exchange of money for its close substitutes (zero-interest bonds) – becomes less effective in stimulating demand over time.
Add to that Japan’s fiscal tightening – and, especially, its consumption-tax hike – and it is no surprise that demand has remained repressed.
More recently, Japan’s negative-interest-rate policy worked rather well to push down market interest rates.
But the policy also impaired the private sector’s balance sheet, because it functioned as a tax on financial institutions.
As a result, it has failed to provide the intended boost.
During periods of recession or stagnation, additional interest payments by banks would burden the economy, whereas public debt may enable the economy to reach full employment.
(Neo-Ricardians would argue that public debt in the hands of people is worthless, because consumers internalize their children’s future tax payments by holding debt certificates.
But, as David Ricardo himself recognized, people are rarely that smart.)
John Maynard Keynes’ The General Theory of Employment, Interest, and Money,which argued for active fiscal policies, was published in 1936.
Forty years later, a counterrevolution took hold, reflecting sharp criticism of fiscal activism.
After another 40 years, Keynes’ key idea is back, in the form of the FTPL.
This may be old wine in a new bottle, but old wine often rewards those who are willing to taste it.
Shinzo Abe’s Pivot To Asia
LONDON – Over the past year, relations among East Asia’s three most successful economies – Japan, South Korea, and China – have been slowly but steadily improving.
This is notable, because their ties with one another have never been easy or smooth.
The history of the twentieth century and their longer-term rivalries have seen to that.
This August, when Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe gives a major speech to mark the 70th anniversary of the end of World War II, he has a chance either to accelerate the rapprochement or bring it to a halt.
Given his rightist pedigree and revisionist views about Japan’s wartime history, the region is bracing itself for a new bout of diplomatic turbulence surrounding his address.
Abe should remember that it is within his power to bring about a different outcome.
And, though not delivering a speech at all might have been the most prudent course, he can still use the occasion to reinforce an image of his country as a positive force in Asia.
He should take pains to present Japan as a strong country that looks forward rather than backward, and that wants to contribute to economic development, peace, and security around the world – and especially within Asia.
During the 1960s and 1970s, after Japan’s economy had recovered, the country dealt with its wartime history in large part by becoming a generous donor of overseas aid throughout Asia, including China.
Abe should place this type of generosity of spirit and action at the center of his speech.
The power of generosity can be disarming.
In 2007, I visited the “Museum of the War of Chinese People’s Resistance against Japanese Aggression,” an institution whose name reflects the sentiment expressed by the bulk of its exhibits.
So it was a pleasant surprise to see that the last exhibit on display was a wall of items acknowledging Japan’s aid and investment in China in recent decades.
Last month, Abe showed that he may be thinking along these lines when he announced a Japanese plan to invest $110 billion in infrastructure projects in Asia over the next five years.
The trouble was in the timing.
Both the United States and Japan have made the mistake of refusing to join the China-led Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB) and criticizing the more than 50 countries – including the United Kingdom, Germany, and France – that have done so.
That stance has left both countries isolated and looking somewhat churlish.
For Japan, it has had the additional effect of making its investment announcement look like a tit-for-tat response to the AIIB, even to the extent of topping the bank’s initial capitalization of $100 billion.
Abe would do even more damage to the region’s perception of Japan were he to use his speech to try to mollify right-wing supporters.
Chinese and Koreans, in particular, will be incensed should he avoid overt apologies for Japan’s behavior during World War II or question criticism of its conduct at the time, such as the Imperial Japanese Army’s sexual enslavement of Korean “comfort women.”
Instead, Abe should take a leaf from his speech to the US Congress in April.
There, he described a “deep repentance in his heart” when he visited a memorial to American soldiers who died in World War II, to whom he offered his “eternal condolences.”
Concerning Japan’s actions in Asia, however, Abe pledged only “to uphold the views expressed by the previous prime ministers in this regard,” without repeating their actual apologies.
In August, Abe should reiterate – and go beyond – his predecessors’ statements.
Words similar to those he used to address the subject of America’s war dead would demonstrate that Japan does not intend to rewrite history, and that Abe feels repentant toward not only its US ally, but also its neighbors in Asia.
Abe would then have an opportunity to pivot from the past to the future by declaring Japan’s intention to be generous and constructive.
He could talk about the sort of Asia he would like to help build and describe the kind of regional institutions that he believes are necessary.
One dramatic way to seize the initiative would be to build on Japan’s existing initiatives in post-conflict peace-building with a proposal for an inclusive plan for Asia’s defense and security.
Such a scheme would include joint military exercises and information-sharing arrangements not just with South Korea and the US, but also with China, India, the Southeast Asian countries.
Such a proposal might turn out to be too bold to realize; it would, after all, come up against Asia’s very real divisions.
But as a gesture for peace and a better future, it certainly would allow Japan to claim the moral high ground.
And that is where the country should aim to be.
Economic Policy Turned Inside Out
NEW HAVEN – The world economy is in the grips of a dangerous delusion.
As the great boom that began in the 1990s gave way to an even greater bust, policymakers resorted to the timeworn tricks of financial engineering in an effort to recapture the magic.
In doing so, they turned an unbalanced global economy into the Petri dish of the greatest experiment in the modern history of economic policy.
They were convinced that it was a controlled experiment.
Nothing could be further from the truth.
The rise and fall of post-World War II Japan heralded what was to come.
The growth miracle of an ascendant Japanese economy was premised on an unsustainable suppression of the yen.
When Europe and the United States challenged this mercantilist approach with the 1985 Plaza Accord, the Bank of Japan countered with aggressive monetary easing that fueled massive asset and credit bubbles.
The rest is history.
The bubbles burst, quickly bringing down Japan’s unbalanced economy.
With productivity having deteriorated considerably – a symptom that had been obscured by the bubbles – Japan was unable to engineer a meaningful recovery.
In fact, it still struggles with imbalances today, owing to its inability or unwillingness to embrace badly needed structural reforms – the so-called “third arrow” of Prime Minister Shinzo Abe’s economic recovery strategy, known as “Abenomics.”
Despite the abject failure of Japan’s approach, the rest of the world remains committed to using monetary policy to cure structural ailments.
The die was cast in the form of a seminal 2002 paper by US Federal Reserve staff economists, which became the blueprint for America’s macroeconomic stabilization policy under Fed Chairs Alan Greenspan and Ben Bernanke.
The paper’s central premise was that Japan’s monetary and fiscal authorities had erred mainly by acting too timidly.
Bubbles and structural imbalances were not seen as the problem.
Instead, the paper’s authors argued that Japan’s “lost decades” of anemic growth and deflation could have been avoided had policymakers shifted to stimulus more quickly and with far greater force.
If only it were that simple.
In fact, the focus on speed and force – the essence of what US economic policymakers now call the “big bazooka” – has prompted an insidious mutation of the Japanese disease.
The liquidity injections of quantitative easing (QE) have shifted monetary-policy transmission channels away from interest rates to asset and currency markets.
That is considered necessary, of course, because central banks have already pushed benchmark policy rates to the once-dreaded “zero bound.”
But fear not, claim advocates of unconventional monetary policy.
What central banks cannot achieve with traditional tools can now be accomplished through the circuitous channels of wealth effects in asset markets or with the competitive edge gained from currency depreciation.
This is where delusion arises.
Not only have wealth and currency effects failed to spur meaningful recovery in post-crisis economies; they have also spawned new destabilizing imbalances that threaten to keep the global economy trapped in a continuous series of crises.
Consider the US – the poster child of the new prescription for recovery.
Although the Fed expanded its balance sheet from less than $1 trillion in late 2008 to $4.5 trillion by the fall of 2014, nominal GDP increased by only $2.7 trillion.
Unsurprisingly, the wealth effects of monetary easing worked largely for the wealthy, among whom the bulk of equity holdings are concentrated.
For the beleaguered middle class, the benefits were negligible.
“It might have been worse,” is the common retort of the counter-factualists.
But is that really true?
After all, as Joseph Schumpeter famously observed, market-based systems have long had an uncanny knack for self-healing.
But this was all but disallowed in the post-crisis era by US government bailouts and the Fed’s manipulation of asset prices.
America’s subpar performance has not stopped others from emulating its policies.
On the contrary, Europe has now rushed to initiate QE.
Even Japan, the genesis of this tale, has embraced a new and intensive form of QE, reflecting its apparent desire to learn the “lessons” of its own mistakes, as interpreted by the US.
But, beyond the impact that this approach is having on individual economies are broader systemic risks that arise from surging equities and weaker currencies.
As the baton of excessive liquidity injections is passed from one central bank to another, the dangers of global asset bubbles and competitive currency devaluations intensify.
In the meantime, politicians are lulled into a false sense of complacency that undermines their incentive to confront the structural challenges they face.
What will it take to break this daisy chain?
As Chinese Premier Li Keqiang stressed in a recent interview, the answer is a commitment to structural reform – a strategic focus of China’s that, he noted, is not shared by others.
For all the handwringing over China’s so-called slowdown, it seems as if its leaders may have a more realistic and constructive assessment of the macroeconomic policy challenge than their counterparts in the more advanced economies.
Policy debates in the US and elsewhere have been turned inside out since the crisis – with potentially devastating consequences.
Relying on financial engineering, while avoiding the heavy lifting of structural change, is not a recipe for healthy recovery.
On the contrary, it promises more asset bubbles, financial crises, and Japanese-style secular stagnation.
Japan Stands Up
TOKYO – Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe has decided to extend the Diet’s current session for 95 days, until September 27 – making for the longest continuous session in the Japanese parliament’s postwar history.
The reason is clear: Abe is determined to pass a set of national security bills allowing a reinterpretation of Japan’s constitution that enables the country to play a greater role not only in enhancing its own security, but also in advancing world peace.
Abe’s actions in the Diet come on the heels of his performance at the recent G-7 summit in Germany, where he broke with Japanese tradition.
For the previous 39 years, Japanese representatives to the G-7 had focused on the economic discussions at such meetings, content to remain largely silent as the industrialized world’s other leaders surveyed the planet’s political hot spots and recommended action or, more often, inaction.
But the summit showed that Japan no longer intends to stand on the diplomatic sidelines.
On the two foreign-policy issues that dominated the agenda, Abe was a forceful participant, advocating a muscular response to Russia’s encroachment on Ukraine’s sovereignty – indeed, Abe visited Kyiv before the summit – and supporting efforts to roll back the Islamic State.
Abe’s interventions at the G-7, and his determination to create a legal framework for a more proactive security strategy, are proof that Japan, at long last, is constructing a foreign policy – a Weltpolitik – that reflects not only the global weight of its economy, but also the impact of faraway events on its national security.
This foreign-policy assertiveness is as revolutionary for Japan’s diplomacy as “Abenomics” has been for its economic policy.
It marks a stark contrast with the seven decades following Japan’s defeat in 1945 in the Pacific War, when successive governments mostly outsourced foreign policy to the United States.
Until the 1980s, this made sense.
By concentrating on reconstructing the country after the devastation of war, our leaders brought about an economic miracle.
Japan became the world’s second-ranking industrial power, and almost all Japanese enjoyed lifestyles and levels of social security that their parents could never have imagined.
Of course, there were jolts along the way.
In fact, the two greatest were administered by the US.
First came Henry Kissinger’s secret mission to meet Mao Zedong to prepare President Richard Nixon’s visit to China; then came the so-called Nixon Shock – the decision just a short time later to end the US dollar’s direct convertibility to gold (a pillar of the post-war international monetary system created at Bretton Woods in 1944).
The opening to China and the Nixon Shock confirmed the position of those in Japan who knew that the country could not remain on permanent sabbatical from its foreign-policy role and responsibilities.
Because successive Japanese governments badly underestimated its consequences, the rise of China has been the third and final shock to Japan’s policy of neo-isolationism.
Over much of the past three decades, Japanese firms and official agencies have happily invested hundreds of billions of dollars in China, hoping to bind the two economies together in a way that would end the lingering bitterness from World War II.
Instead, as the friction of recent years has amply attested, China continues to nurture the bitterness of its people, and those of other Asian countries, toward Japan.
Its hope is to rule out any Japanese role in resolving regional security issues, and to diminish the potency of the US-Japan alliance.
But it is not only China that has reawakened Japan’s foreign-policy ambitions.
Russia was a concern for Japan even before President Vladimir Putin unleashed his armed forces on Ukraine.
The Kremlin has maintained Russia’s illegal occupation of Japanese islands – our “Northern Territories” – seized by Stalin after Japan’s surrender in the Pacific War.
In the decades since, both the Soviet government and the Russian government of President Boris Yeltsin periodically engaged in diplomatic efforts to end their country’s estrangement from Japan.
But under Putin, Russia no longer makes even a pretense of talking.
Indeed, for the first time since the islands’ seizure, Russian leaders have actually visited them, reinforcing Russia’s spurious sovereignty claim.
Given Chinese and Russian actions, it should surprise no one that Japan has fundamentally rethought its diplomatic posture.
And now the world is witnessing the results, not only in Abe’s reinterpretation of Japan’s constitution to allow for greater military support of the country’s allies, but also in the reinvigorated mutual-defense pact that Abe and President Barack Obama signed in Washington, DC, in late April.
At the same time, Japan is moving out of America’s diplomatic shadow.
A strategic partnership with India has been gaining strength since Prime Minister Narendra Modi assumed office last year, and Abe has been deepening Japan’s strategic ties around Southeast Asia, particularly with countries such as the Philippines and Vietnam, which are confronting China’s hegemonic ambitions in the South China Sea.
Japan’s engagement with the world’s most vexing problems goes beyond Asia.
The country was the first of the world’s leading economies to provide financial assistance to Ukraine after Putin’s placeman, President Viktor Yanukovych, was ousted last year.
And it is beefing up its relations with emerging giants like Brazil, Mexico, Nigeria, and Turkey.
These initiatives reflect Japan’s recognition that the global framework that has kept the peace, and created opportunities for prosperity, for ever more countries – including China – is under threat.
Japan and likeminded countries must actively defend it.
The positions that Abe staked out in Germany represent an important step in that direction.
The Surrender of Japan’s Peace Constitution
WASHINGTON, DC – In February, Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe called on the National Diet to amend Article 9 of the country’s constitution, which renounces war as a means of settling disputes.
Drafted by the United States after World War II, the constitution contains “some parts [that] do not fit into the current period,” Abe said.
He is particularly concerned with the constitutional provision that prohibits Japan from maintaining “land, sea, and air forces,” arguing that it seems to be in direct contradiction with the existence of the country’s Self-Defense Forces.
At a glance, Abe’s proposal seems deeply unpopular.
According to one poll, some 50.3% of the Japanese public objects to amending Article 9.
Only 37.5% of those polled favor such action.
The good news for Abe, however, is that opposition to his efforts, though broad, does not seem to run deep.
Voters, it seems, are less concerned about the direction Abe is taking the country than they are about his decision to make the issue a top priority.
Revising the constitution would provide stronger legal grounding for Abe’s controversial defense measures.
Introduced last year, the new legislative provisions lift restrictions on deploying Japanese forces overseas and expand the definition of self-defense to include aiding an ally.
These, too, are unpopular – at least superficially.
Some 51% of Japanese voters disapprove of the measures, compared to 30% who support them.
And yet only 38% say they would like to see Abe reverse course and repeal the legislation.
To be sure, many in Japan are concerned about the implications of Abe’s agenda, feeling that it runs counter to the country’s national security and proper international stance.
They worry that Abe’s defense moves will make it more likely that Japan will be dragged into war, putting an end to its post-war pacifism.
Another avenue of criticism regards worries that Japan’s new defense doctrine will worsen its relationships with its neighbors.
Several countries have indeed already expressed concerns.
China’s Foreign Ministry spokesperson, Hong Lei, stated that Japan’s new approach was “out of step with the trend of the times featuring peace, development, and cooperation.”
His counterpart at South Korea’s foreign ministry commented that his country would “never tolerate” Japan’s exercise of the right to collective self-defense on the Korean peninsula “without the [Republic of Korea’s] request or consent.”
And North Korean state media reported that Abe’s reforms were intended to “pave the way for invading other countries.”
Not all of the opposition to Abe’s agenda, however, stems from substantive objections.
In some cases, concern focuses on the legitimacy of the process that produced the laws.
According to one poll, 67% of respondents disapprove of how the ruling coalition pushed the legislation through the Diet.
There is a widespread feeling in Japan that Abe’s cabinet “did not make a sufficient effort” to explain the legislation to the public.
By ignoring criticism from the majority of voters, Abe’s government allegedly discredited Japan’s democratic system.
Similarly, some 51% of respondents disapproved of the laws on constitutional grounds, believing them to be in violation of Article 9 of the constitution, the provision that Abe would like to alter.