The approach worked, but a little too well.
The surge in debt-enabled demand drove up real-estate prices, while banks’ greater willingness to lend led many people to purchase homes they couldn’t afford.
The collapse of the subsequent bubble – a major contributor to the 2008 global financial crisis – nearly tipped the world economy into a multi-year depression.
In China’s case, the government hoped that broader stock-market participation – achieved through efforts to bolster equity prices and promote lending for investment – would make citizens more open to pro-market reforms.
Again, the approach proved too effective, and a bubble formed.
Now, the government is trying to counter the risk of a disorderly deleveraging that would damage the Chinese economy and produce significant knock-on effects for the rest of the world.
America’s effort to expand access to student loans – a fundamentally good initiative, aimed at enabling more people to pursue higher education – carries similar risks.
Fortunately, there is still time to do something about it.
No one doubts that investment in education is vital.
Numerous studies have shown major returns for individuals and societies alike.
Higher levels of educational attainment improve overall economic wellbeing and prosperity, lower retirement burdens, and enhance social mobility and satisfaction.
The unemployment rate for college graduates in the US, at 2.5%, is roughly one-third the rate for those without a high school diploma.
What policymakers must determine is how to invest in education in ways that maximize these benefits, without creating new risks.
This is where the US risks falling short.
Over the last ten years, the combination of higher tuition fees, more student enrollment, and greater reliance on loans has caused the stock of outstanding student debt nearly to triple.
It now stands at well over $1.2 trillion, more than 60% of which is held by the bottom quartile of households (those with a net worth of less than $8,500).
Today, seven out of ten post-secondary students graduate with debt, with the total volume exceeding debt from credit cards and auto loans combined.
Moreover, student loans constitute 45% of federally owned financial assets.
Making matters worse, the return on investment in education is falling, because the economy is growing slowly and changing rapidly, making it difficult for some graduates to secure employment that takes advantage of their knowledge and skills.
Universities are often slow to adapt their curricula to the economy’s needs, while new technologies and business models are exacerbating the winner-take-all phenomenon.
If the return on investment in education continues to decline, the servicing of student loans will tend to crowd out other consumption and investment outlays, especially given that student debt has considerable seniority in the capital structure.
In this scenario, the risks of default and delinquency would rise, along with financial insecurity and general instability, all of which would exacerbate the inequality trifecta (income, wealth, and opportunity).
The good news is that, though some 10% of borrowers already face repayment problems, the macroeconomic and financial tipping points remain some way off.
But this is no excuse for complacency; it merely provides time for a concerted effort to implement measures that will ameliorate the destructive trends stemming from student loans.
First and foremost, US politicians need to take full responsibility for economic governance, seeking not only to boost growth, but also to avert a reduction in long-term growth potential.
After depending on unconventional monetary policy for far too long, the US Congress needs to adopt a more comprehensive approach, with measures aimed at improving worker training and retooling, modernizing education curricula, and incorporating transformational technologies more effectively into the economy.
Increased infrastructure investment, better corporate-tax policies, and an updated budgetary approach are also needed.
For their part, universities – which have benefited considerably from the wide availability of student loans – should rein in their costs, while offering more direct financial aid funded through philanthropy.
Some universities have already adopted “no loan” policies; students’ demonstrated financial need is met entirely with grants financed by the university and other donors.
Not all universities need to go this far – and most can’t, because they lack large enough endowments to cover the costs.
But a broader move in the direction of non-debt financing of higher education is needed.
Efforts could also be made to encourage households to save more, starting earlier, for education.
Student loan disclosures should be made more transparent, thereby enabling applicants to make responsible decisions, with lower-cost two-year community colleges serving as a useful stepping stone to a traditional college education.
And more could be done to expand income-based repayment schemes.
None of these measures will be easy.
But if implementation continues to lag behind realities on the ground, the challenges will be far greater down the road.
As borrowers’ growing debt burdens limit their financial flexibility and productive contribution to the economy, the policy emphasis will shift from mitigating future risks to reducing indebtedness directly through loan forgiveness and bailouts.
That would raise thorny issues of fairness and misaligned incentives, and could ultimately have the perverse effect of reducing educational access.
Afghanistan’s Unavoidable Partition
NEW DELHI – The United States, still mired in a protracted war in Afghanistan that has exacted a staggering cost in blood and treasure, will formally open peace talks with the Taliban, its main battlefield opponent, in the coming days (apparently despite last-minute opposition from Afghan President Hamid Karzai).
With the US determined to withdraw its forces after more than a decade of fighting, the talks in Doha, Qatar, are largely intended to allow it to do so “honorably.”
How the end of US-led combat operations shapes Afghanistan’s future will affect the security of countries nearby and beyond.
Here the most important question is whether the fate of Afghanistan, which was created as a buffer between Czarist Russia and British India, will be –&#160;or should be – different from that of Iraq and Libya (two other imperial creations where the US has intervened militarily in recent years).
Foreign military intervention can effect regime change, but it evidently cannot reestablish order based on centralized government.
Iraq has been partitioned in all but name into Shia, Sunni, and Kurdish regions, while Libya seems headed toward a similar tripartite, tribal-based territorial arrangement.
In Afghanistan, too, an Iraq-style “soft” partition may be the best possible outcome.
Afghanistan’s large ethnic groups already enjoy de facto autonomy, which they secured after their Northern Alliance played a central role in the US-led ouster of the Taliban from power in late 2001.
Having enjoyed virtual self-rule since then, they will fiercely resist falling back under the sway of the Pashtuns, who have ruled the country for most of its history.
For their part, the Pashtuns, despite their tribal divisions, will not be content with control of a rump Afghanistan consisting of its current eastern and southeastern provinces.
They will eventually seek integration with fellow Pashtuns in Pakistan, across the British-drawn Durand Line – a border that Afghanistan has never recognized.
The demand for a “Greater Pashtunistan” would then challenge the territorial integrity of Pakistan (itself another artificial imperial construct).
The fact that Afghanistan’s ethnic groups are concentrated in distinct geographical zones would simplify partition and make the resulting borders more likely to last, unlike those drawn by colonial officials, who invented countries with no national identity or historical roots.
Indeed, both geographically and demographically, Afghanistan’s non-Pashtun groups account for more than half of the country, with Tajiks, Uzbeks, and Hazaras alone making up close to 50% of the population.
After waging the longest war in its history, at a cost of tens of thousands of lives and nearly a trillion dollars, the US is combat-weary and financially strapped.
But the American effort to cut a deal with the Pashtun-based, Pakistan-backed Taliban is stirring deep unease among the non-Pashtun groups, which suffered greatly under the Taliban and its five-year rule.
(The historically persecuted Hazaras, for example, suffered several large-scale massacres.)
While Karzai has been fickle, to say the least, about cooperation with the Americans (indeed, he has since backed away from participation in the Doha talks), the rupture of his political alliance with non-Pashtun leaders has also fueled ethnic polarization.
Some non-Pashtun power brokers continue to support Karzai, but many others are now leading the opposition National Front.
These leaders are unlikely to accept any power-sharing arrangement that includes the Taliban.
In fact, they suspect that Karzai’s ultimate goal is to restore Pashtun dominance throughout Afghanistan.
Their misgivings have been strengthened by the “Peace Process Roadmap to 2015,” a document prepared by the Karzai-constituted Afghan High Peace Council that sketches several potential concessions to the Taliban and Pakistan, ranging from the Taliban’s recognition as a political party to a role for Pakistan in Afghanistan’s internal affairs.
The roadmap even dangles the carrot of cabinet posts and provincial governorships to prominent Taliban figures.
The most serious problem today is that the country’s ethnic tensions and recriminations threaten to undermine the cohesion of the fledgling, multiethnic Afghan Army.
Indeed, the splits today resemble those that occurred when Soviet forces withdrew from Afghanistan in 1989, an exit that led to civil war and the Taliban’s eventual capture of the capital, Kabul.
This time, the non-Pashtun communities are better armed and prepared to defend their interests after the US withdrawal.
Thus, in seeking to co-opt the Taliban, the US is not only bestowing legitimacy on a thuggish militia; it also risks unwittingly reigniting Afghanistan’s ethnic strife, which would most likely tear the country apart for good.
This raises a fundamental question: Is Afghanistan’s territorial unity really essential for regional or international security?
To be sure, the sanctity of existing borders has become a powerful norm in world politics.
Yet this norm has permitted the emergence of ungovernable and unmanageable states, whose internal wars spill across international boundaries, fueling regional tensions and insecurity.
With a war-exhausted US having run out of patience, outside forces are in no position to prevent Afghanistan’s partition along Iraqi (or even post-Yugoslav) lines, with the bloodiest battles expected to rage over control of ethnically mixed strategic areas, including Kabul.
In this scenario, Pakistani generals, instead of continuing to sponsor Afghan Pashtun militant groups (like the Taliban and their allies like the Haqqani network), would be compelled to fend off a potentially grave threat to Pakistan’s unity.
A weak, partitioned Afghanistan may not be a desirable outcome; but a “soft” partition now would be far better than a “hard” partition later, after years of chaos and bloodletting – and infinitely better than the medieval Taliban’s return to power and a fresh reign of terror.
Indeed, partition may be the only way to prevent Afghanistan from sliding into large-scale civil war and to thwart transnational terrorists from reestablishing a base of operations in the rubble.
Securing the Internet Commons
WASHINGTON, DC – Ever since Edward Snowden’s revelations about the National Security Agency’s spying on citizens and leaders around the world, a debate has raged in the United States about the proper balance between national security and individual privacy and liberty.
Most recently that debate has focused on encryption: whether technology companies should be able to develop programs that encrypt their users’ messages so securely that no one but their intended recipients – not even governments – can read them.
It is a debate to which governments and citizens everywhere should pay attention.
Not surprisingly, the US government’s national security officials oppose full encryption by American technology companies, arguing that the country will be less safe if the proper authorities have no “backdoor” – a piece of code that lets them in.
Software engineers call backdoors “vulnerabilities,” deliberate efforts to weaken security.
They regard a request for backdoors the same way an automobile manufacturer would view a request for a defective engine.
A large coalition of technology companies and civil-society organizations recently sent a letter to President Barack Obama arguing against backdoors.
In addition to “undermining every American’s cyber security and the nation’s economic security,” the signers argued, “introducing new vulnerabilities to weaken encrypted products in the US would also undermine human rights and information security around the globe.”
What supporters of encryption recognize is that “if American companies maintain the ability to unlock their customers’ data and devices on request, governments other than the United States will demand the same access, and will also be emboldened to demand the same capability from their native companies.”
The US government will not be able to object, given its own policies.
The result “will be an information environment riddled with vulnerabilities that could be exploited by even the most repressive or dangerous regimes.”
What is at stake is nothing less than the health of the “global digital ecosystem.”
The technology corporations that signed this letter understand that while they may be incorporated in the US, they are global players and have global responsibilities.
They also understand, in a more self-interested vein, that if foreign consumers believe that using American social media and search engines exposes them to the scrutiny of US intelligence agencies, those consumers will turn to other providers.
The response of many foreign governments has been to focus on how to ensure and protect their “technological sovereignty.”
Information may transcend borders, but servers and cables still have physical locations.
The Open Technology Institute at New America (which I head) is collaborating with the German Global Public Policy Institute (GPPI) on a series of transatlantic dialogues about “security and freedom in the Digital Age.”
An initial report identifies 18 proposals from more than a dozen European governments on subjects including new undersea cables, encryption, localized data storage, domestic industry support, international codes of conduct, and data protection laws.
Many of these proposals will not actually achieve their goals.
But the most important issues to sort out are less about feasibility than about desirability, from both a national and a global perspective.
As with US companies, it is important to differentiate among corporate, economic, and public interests at the national and global levels.
Citizens from around the world have a stake in getting this right.
For starters, digital protectionism should be as suspect as any other form of protectionism, albeit with exceptions for health, safety, and social solidarity.
“Technological sovereignty” can easily be a pretext for insisting that citizens buy only homegrown tech products.
Moreover, rules should be formulated globally and implemented nationally.
The Internet is essentially a country with both state and non-state actors as its citizens.
It is our task to ensure that it is a free, open, and universally accessible country that advances and safeguards universal human rights.
The point is less the specific wording or even content than the recognition that such principles are necessary for policymakers around the world.
From this perspective, it is not clear whether “technological sovereignty” is a helpful or harmful concept.
It makes digital space sound like airspace or territorial seas, something that is somehow derived from or adjacent to physical territory.
The New America-GPPI report is entitled “Technological Sovereignty: Missing the Point?”
The authors conclude that “data privacy and security depend primarily not on where data is physically stored or sent, but on how it is stored and transmitted.”
For data purposes, at least, we are in a post-territorial age.
Decoupling sovereignty from territory is hard to do, particularly after Snowden showed the world just how far one country’s technological tentacles can reach.
Still, the larger lesson is that differentiating between national security and global security in the digital world may be both impossible and deeply counter-productive.
We need new maps and mindsets and new coalitions of business, civic activists, and all those who understand that national security must include the protection of privacy and freedom of expression.
And we need new ways to engage both governments and citizens in a new, exhilarating, dangerous, and still largely unexplored world.
America’s Trade Deficit Begins at Home
NEW HAVEN – Thanks to fear mongering on the US presidential campaign trail, the trade debate and its impact on American workers is being distorted at both ends of the political spectrum.
From China-bashing on the right to the backlash against the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) on the left, politicians of both parties have mischaracterized foreign trade as America’s greatest economic threat.
In 2015, the United States had trade deficits with 101 countries – a multilateral trade deficit in the jargon of economics.
But this cannot be pinned on one or two “bad actors,” as politicians invariably put it.
Yes, China – everyone’s favorite scapegoat – accounts for the biggest portion of this imbalance. But the combined deficits of the other 100 countries are even larger.
What the candidates won’t tell the American people is that the trade deficit and the pressures it places on hard-pressed middle-class workers stem from problems made at home.
In fact, the real reason the US has such a massive multilateral trade deficit is that Americans don’t save.
Total US saving – the sum total of the saving of families, businesses, and the government sector – amounted to just 2.6% of national income in the fourth quarter of 2015.
That is a 0.6-percentage-point drop from a year earlier and less than half the 6.3% average that prevailed during the final three decades of the twentieth century.
Any basic economics course stresses the ironclad accounting identity that saving must equal investment at each and every point in time.
Without saving, investing in the future is all but impossible.
And yet that’s the position in which the US currently finds itself.
Indeed, the saving numbers cited above are “net” of depreciation – meaning that they measure the saving available to fund new capacity rather than the replacement of worn-out facilities.
Unfortunately, that is precisely what America is lacking.
So why is this relevant for the trade debate?
In order to keep growing, the US must import surplus saving from abroad.
As the world’s greatest economic power and issuer of what is essentially the global reserve currency, America has had no trouble – at least not yet – attracting the foreign capital it needs to compensate for a shortfall of domestic saving.
But there is a critical twist: To import foreign saving, the US must run a massive international balance-of-payments deficit.
The mirror image of America’s saving shortfall is its current-account deficit, which has averaged 2.6% of GDP since 1980.
It is this chronic current-account gap that drives the multilateral trade deficit with 101 countries.
To borrow from abroad, America must give its trading partners something in return for their capital: US demand for products made overseas.
Therein lies the catch to the politicization of America’s trade problems.
Closing down trade with China, as Donald Trump would effectively do with his proposed 45% tariff on Chinese products sold in the US, would backfire.
Without fixing the saving problem, the Chinese share of America’s multilateral trade imbalance would simply be redistributed to other countries – most likely to higher-cost producers.
I have estimated that Chinese labor compensation rates remain far less than half of those prevailing in America’s other top-ten foreign suppliers.
If those countries were to fill the void left by a penalty on China, like the one that Trump has proposed, higher-cost producers would undoubtedly charge more than China for products sold in the US.
The resulting increase in import prices would be an effective tax hike on the American middle class.
That underscores the futility of attempting to find a bilateral solution for a multilateral problem.
The same perverse outcome could be expected from the reckless fiscal policies proposed by other politicians.
Take, for example, the ten-year $14.5 trillion federal government spending binge proposed by Democratic presidential candidate Bernie Sanders – a program judged to be without any semblance of fiscal integrity by leading economic advisers within the very party whose nomination he seeks.
Government budget deficits have long accounted for the largest share of America’s seemingly chronic saving shortfall.
The added deficits of Sandersnomics, or for that matter those of any other politician, would further depress America’s national saving – thereby exacerbating the multilateral trade imbalance that puts such acute pressure on middle-class families.
Seen through the same lens, mega trade deals, such as the TPP, would also have an important bearing on pressures that squeeze American workers.
The TPP would effectively divert trade flows from those countries that are not a part of the agreement to those that are. With China excluded from the TPP, the same phenomenon noted above would result: American middle-class families would be taxed by the diversion of trade away from low-cost non-TPP producers such as China toward higher-cost TPP signatories such as Japan, Canada, and Australia.
In short, trade bashing is a foil for the vacuous promises that politicians of both parties have long made to American voters.
Saving is the seed corn of economic growth – the means to boost American competitiveness by investing in people, infrastructure, technology, and new manufacturing capacity.
The US government, through decades of deficit spending and advocacy of policies that encourage households to consume rather than save, has forced America to rely on foreign saving for far too long.
This has undermined US competitiveness, punishing workers with the job losses and wage compression that trade deficits invariably spawn.
America’s 101 trade deficits don’t exist in a vacuum. They are a symptom of a deeper problem: a US economy that has lived beyond its means for decades.
Saving is but a means to an end – in this case the sustenance of a thriving and secure middle class.
Without saving, the American Dream is in danger of becoming a nightmare.
The trade debate of the current presidential campaign heightens that risk.
An end to the Syrian war requires an honest accounting by the US of its ongoing, often secretive role in the Syrian conflict since 2011, including who is funding, arming, training, and abetting the various sides.
Such exposure would help bring to an end many countries’ reckless actions.
A widespread – and false – perception is that Obama has kept the US out of the Syrian war.
Indeed, the US right wing routinely criticizes him for having drawn a line in the sand for Syrian President Bashar al-Assad over chemical weapons, and then backing off when Assad allegedly crossed it (the issue remains murky and disputed, like so much else in Syria).
A leading columnist for the Financial Times, repeating the erroneous idea that the US has remained on the sidelines, recently implied that Obama had rejected the advice of then-Secretary of State Hillary Clinton to arm the Syrian rebels fighting Assad.
Yet the curtain gets lifted from time to time.
In January, the New York Times finally reported on a secret 2013 Presidential order to the CIA to arm Syrian rebels.
As the account explained, Saudi Arabia provides substantial financing of the armaments, while the CIA, under Obama’s orders, provides organizational support and training.
Unfortunately, the story came and went without further elaboration by the US government or follow up by the New York Times.
The public was left in the dark: How big are the ongoing CIA-Saudi operations?
How much is the US spending on Syria per year?
What kinds of arms are the US, Saudis, Turks, Qataris, and others supplying to the Syrian rebels?
Which groups are receiving the arms?
What is the role of US troops, air cover, and other personnel in the war?
The US government isn’t answering these questions, and mainstream media aren’t pursuing them, either.
On more than a dozen occasions, Obama has told the American people that there would be “no US boots on the ground.”
Yet every few months, the public is also notified in a brief government statement that US special operations forces are being deployed to Syria.
The Pentagon routinely denies that they are in the front lines.
But when Russia and the Assad government recently carried out bombing runs and artillery fire against rebel strongholds in northern Syria, the US notified the Kremlin that the attacks were threatening American troops on the ground.
The public has been given no explanation about their mission, its costs, or counterparties in Syria.
Through occasional leaks, investigative reports, statements by other governments, and rare statements by US officials, we know that America is engaged in an active, ongoing, CIA-coordinated war both to overthrow Assad and to fight ISIS.
America’s allies in the anti-Assad effort include Saudi Arabia, Turkey, Qatar, and other countries in the region.
The US has spent billions of dollars on arms, training, special operations forces, air strikes, and logistical support for the rebel forces, including international mercenaries.
American allies have spent billions of dollars more.
The precise sums are not reported.
The US public has had no say in these decisions.
There has been no authorizing vote or budget approval by the US Congress.
The CIA’s role has never been explained or justified.
The domestic and international legality of US actions has never been defended to the American people or the world.
To those at the center of the US military-industrial complex, this secrecy is as it should be.
Their position is that a vote by Congress 15 years ago authorizing the use of armed force against those culpable for the 9/11 attack gives the president and military carte blanche to fight secret wars in the Middle East and Africa.
Why should the US explain publicly what it is doing?
That would only jeopardize the operations and strengthen the enemy.
The public does not need to know.
I subscribe to a different view: wars should be a last resort and should be constrained by democratic scrutiny.
This view holds that America’s secret war in Syria is illegal both under the US Constitution (which gives Congress the sole power to declare war) and under the United Nations Charter, and that America’s two-sided war in Syria is a cynical and reckless gamble.
The US-led efforts to topple Assad are not aimed at protecting the Syrian people, as Obama and Clinton have suggested from time to time, but are a US proxy war against Iran and Russia, in which Syria happens to be the battleground.
The stakes of this war are much higher and much more dangerous than America’s proxy warriors imagine.
As the US has prosecuted its war against Assad, Russia has stepped up its military support to his government.
In the US mainstream media, Russia’s behavior is an affront: how dare the Kremlin block the US from overthrowing the Syrian government?
The result is a widening diplomatic clash with Russia, one that could escalate and lead – perhaps inadvertently – to the point of military conflict.
These are issues that should be subject to legal scrutiny and democratic control.
I am confident that the American people would respond with a resounding “no” to the ongoing US-led war of regime change in Syria.
The American people want security – including the defeat of ISIS – but they also recognize the long and disastrous history of US-led regime-change efforts, including in Afghanistan, Iraq, Libya, Syria, Central America, Africa, and Southeast Asia.
This is the main reason why the US security state refuses to tell the truth.
The American people would call for peace rather than perpetual war.
Obama has a few months left in office to repair his broken legacy.
He should start by leveling with the American people.
Pakistan’s Winnable War on Polio
LAHORE – I grew up in Pakistan throughout the 1980’s and 1990’s, and my parents, like parents everywhere, wanted me to be fit and healthy and to get the best start in life.
I was lucky enough to be brought up in a middle-class family with good sanitation facilities and clean water.
I was also given vaccines to prevent life-threatening infections such as polio and measles.
But I remember the many children in my neighborhood who were not vaccinated.
Those early experiences of children I knew contracting disease, especially the poliovirus that is so visibly impairing, shaped my views on the immense value of good health and the power of vaccines.
I live in London now, but my roots will always be in Pakistan.
As head of the British Pakistan Foundation, I help philanthropists from the Pakistani diaspora invest in sustainable and effective social development projects.
Over the last few weeks, I have been in my hometown of Lahore, the country’s second-largest city, discussing everything from the upcoming elections to everyday life challenges.
Last week, I visited an orphanage on the outskirts of the city, set up after the 2005 earthquake that killed an estimated 75,000 people. I was impressed and encouraged that roughly four-fifths of the 85 children were fully vaccinated.
National statistics on immunization back up the positive signs that I saw.
In 1994, Pakistan had roughly 25,000 cases of polio, many resulting in death or permanent disability. But, thanks to intensive vaccination campaigns, there were only 58 cases of polio in the entire country last year – down 70% from 2011.
And the government and international health officials have agreed on a plan to stop polio transmission in Pakistan completely by the end of 2014 – a historic accomplishment that would be a huge source of national pride.
The main driver of Pakistan’s dramatic reduction in polio cases over the last two decades has been leadership at all levels.
In 1994, Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto launched the first national vaccination drive by inoculating her baby daughter, Aseefa.
Nineteen years later, Aseefa is Pakistan’s Goodwill Ambassador on Polio Eradication and a powerful advocate of completing her mother’s dream of a polio-free country.
International public-private partnerships and an army of vaccinators are working on the frontlines to protect every last child.
Collectively, we are helping children and communities once considered unreachable.
With the recent progress on polio, Pakistan has a blueprint for future public-health interventions.
In fact, we are already seeing the new framework take shape.
For example, vitamin A drops – which provide infants with an essential micronutrient for vision and healthy growth – are now delivered twice yearly in conjunction with polio vaccines.
Moreover, last year Pakistan became the first country in the region to introduce the latest vaccine to protect children against pneumonia.
With pneumonia accounting for a shockingly high 20% of child deaths each year in Pakistan, widespread access to the new vaccine should have a major impact.
Major challenges remain.
According to UNICEF, Pakistan has the second-highest rate of child mortality in South Asia.
There is an important debate taking place in our country about how best to organize the health-care system so that it is accountable for serving the poorest and most marginalized communities.
The size of the challenges that we face was made clear at the beginning of this year, when a measles outbreak killed more than 300 children in Pakistan – most of whom had not received vaccines.
Just this month, we learned the tragic news that a guard accompanying health workers was killed during an immunization drive.
But we will not be deterred.
Those who advocate violence are a minority in Pakistan, and will not stand in the way of our people’s betterment.
With the upcoming elections, we have a valuable opportunity to reaffirm our commitment to vaccines by strengthening national leadership on health and increasing investment in the health-care system.
And, as I heard from the guardians at the orphanage, educating communities about the value of vaccines and mobilizing their support is critical for reaching every last child.
The cooperation of the Pakistani diaspora movement and international donors like the Islamic Development Bank (which in March signed a financing package of $227 million to fight polio in Pakistan), together with the vaccinators’ determination to reach all of the country’s children, is inspirational.
It is also changing lives for the better.
With continued support for vital vaccines from Pakistan’s government and people, I am hopeful that the next time I return home, there will be even more reasons to be optimistic about our children’s future.
Vaccination’s Lifetime of Blessings
CAPE TOWN – A world in which our children and their children grow up free from the threat of polio and other preventable diseases is a dream that everyone shares.
But, unlike most dreams, this one is achievable.
Over my lifetime, I have been fortunate to witness the extraordinary impact that vaccines have had on protecting children from illness and death – especially in the developing world.
Vaccines have always had a special meaning for me.
As a young child in South Africa, I nearly died from polio.
Back then – in the early 1930’s – there was no vaccine for this highly infectious disease.
With good reason, parents everywhere were terrified that poliovirus would reach their doorstep – like a plague – striking a child and causing irreversible paralysis in a matter of hours, or, worse, death in a matter of days.
The doctors told my parents that little could be done for me, so my father prepared for my funeral.
Fortunately, I recovered, except for the use of my right hand.
I have gone on to live a wonderful life, but the paralysis in my hand is a daily reminder of why we must urgently pursue the eradication of polio and ensure that all children have access to the vaccines that they need.
Just a quarter-century ago, polio was endemic in 125 countries – and paralyzed more than 1,000 children every day.
Today, we have the fewest cases of polio, in fewer countries, than ever before.
Last year, India – once thought to be the most difficult place to stop polio – was declared polio-free.
In the remaining three countries where polio has not yet been eliminated – Pakistan, Afghanistan, and Nigeria – there were just 223 reported cases in 2012.
This makes me optimistic that I will live to celebrate the day when this dreaded disease is stamped out forever.
The remarkable progress that we have made so far is the result of a sustained global effort, supported by significant resources committed by donor and affected countries, millions of dedicated health workers, and sustained political will to get the job done.
But we must finish what we have started.
Until the polio virus is eradicated everywhere, no country is safe from reinfection.
At the same time, we must make the most of scientific advances over the last half-century, which have made vaccines for other preventable diseases the most powerful and cost-effective health-care investment that currently exists.
Vaccines are inexpensive and easy to deliver, and they protect children for a lifetime.
Vaccines have already eradicated smallpox, and dramatically reduced child deaths and disease associated with measles, diphtheria, and tetanus.
Yet, sadly, a child still dies every 20 seconds from diseases like pneumonia, which can be prevented by a vaccine.
Most of them live in poor and remote communities that still lack access to the basic vaccines that are universally available in better-off countries.
This is one of the reasons why a child born in a high-income country is 18 times less likely than a child born in a low-income country to die before reaching the age of five.
Fortunately, the world is taking action.
This week in Abu Dhabi, Mohamed bin Zayed bin Sultan Al Nahyan, Crown Prince of Abu Dhabi – in partnership with United Nations Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and Bill Gates – is hosting the world’s first global summit dedicated to ensuring that all children everywhere have access to the full benefits of vaccines.
The vaccine summit builds on a commitment last year by nearly 200 countries to eradicate polio, develop new and improved vaccines at affordable prices, and deliver them to every child by 2020.
Ending polio will be a key milestone on the path to realizing this vision.
And the summit in Abu Dhabi has provided a clear plan to get there by 2018 – a strategy that complements other efforts to raise immunization coverage for diseases such as measles, pneumonia, and rotavirus.
Strengthening routine immunization will protect our gains against polio and enable us to reach the most vulnerable children in the hardest-to-reach and most underserved communities.
Having grown up in a country where nearly one in four children infected with polio died from the disease, my heart soars when I imagine a world in which all families have access to lifesaving vaccines, freeing them from the burden of preventable death and disease.
Now we need funds, commitment, and the resolve to implement the plan presented in Abu Dhabi.
When it comes to the health of our children, there must be no distance between rich and poor, and no distinctions among communities.
Following through on polio eradication by extending the reach of vaccines to all children who need them is an opportunity for all of us to stand together on behalf of our global community.
We must do it.
And when we succeed, it will be a triumph for humanity.
Vaccines Versus Superbugs
LONDON – The outbreak of the Zika virus, like Ebola before it, has highlighted the risk that infectious diseases can pose to the health of entire countries – and the importance of vaccines to the fight against fast-moving epidemics.
Indeed, efforts are already underway to find ways to inoculate people against both viruses.
But vaccines also have a crucial role to play in protecting us against a far deadlier and far more predictable threat: drug-resistant infections.
In contrast to unexpected, rapidly spreading outbreaks such as the Zika epidemic, antimicrobial resistance is like a slow-motion car crash that has already begun.
Resistant pathogens cause about 700,000 deaths every year.
If we fail to take the necessary precautions, they will be killing some ten million people a year by 2050.
Developing new antibiotics and putting in place methods to extend the lifespans of existing medications will help maintain a supply of effective treatments.
But vaccines offer a unique opportunity.
By reducing the number of infections, they limit the need for medication.
And because the use (or overuse) of antibiotics is what leads to drug resistance, the pressure on the pipeline of effective treatments will be alleviated.
Unfortunately, the value that vaccination can provide in this area has yet to be properly recognized.
As a result, we are not moving fast enough to develop the types of vaccines that could be used to prevent antimicrobial resistance.
Vaccine development takes a long time, often more than ten years.
It is a high-risk endeavor, with the vast majority of potential vaccines failing to reach the market.
Consequently, many vaccines are not commercially viable, even if they would be useful for society.
Indeed, there is no vaccine available for any of the three resistance threats that the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention considers “urgent”: Clostridium difficile, carbapenem-resistant enterobacteriaceae, and drug-resistant Neisseria gonorrhoeae.
Nor are there enough candidate vaccines against these pathogens undergoing clinical trials.
There have also been problems developing vaccines to combat tuberculosis or – more worrying still – multidrug-resistant TB.
The World Health Organization has warned that the Sustainable Development Goal of eradicating TB by 2035 will not be achieved unless new drugs, better diagnostics, and improved vaccines are developed.
And yet a new vaccine remains many years away, especially given that funding for TB vaccine research has declined in recent years.
Even vaccines that are already available are not being used widely enough to have a large impact on antibiotic use and resistance.
Every year, infections caused by the Streptococcus pneumoniae bacteria kill more than 800,000 children under the age of five.
These deaths are completely preventable – by a jab that is already available in many parts of the world, the pneumococcal conjugate vaccine.
Universal vaccination would save millions of lives and prevent 11.4 million days of antibiotic use per year in children younger than five.
Similarly, the rotavirus vaccine could be used to prevent outbreaks of diarrheal diseases, a chief cause of child mortality in developing countries and a major driver of antibiotic use.
Vaccines also have an important role to play in protecting livestock and fish from infections, optimizing the application of antibiotics in agriculture – where their overuse is an important cause of growing resistance.
Maximizing the potential of vaccines to fight antimicrobial resistance thus requires the wider application of existing vaccines in humans and animals.
But it also entails developing new vaccines, which, in the short-term, could be kick-started by a $2 billion Global Innovation Fund for early-stage research in vaccines and other viable alternatives to antibiotics.
And in areas where research and development is not an attractive proposition, developers must be provided an opportunity to make a return from useful products.
Depending on the characteristics of different products, possible interventions would include advance market commitments and market-entry rewards.
Vaccines hold the potential to have a huge impact on drug resistance, if they are included as part of a broad series of interventions to combat the problem.
Fortunately, awareness of this challenge is starting to take root.
At the World Economic Forum’s annual gathering in Davos last month, 85 companies, including vaccine developers, large pharmaceutical companies, diagnostic developers, and biotech firms, committed to further action to reduce drug resistance.
And later this year, the World Health Assembly, the G-7 and G-20 summits, and the UN General Assembly will all address the topic.
The momentum now gathering in the public and private sectors is creating an opportunity that must not be missed.
Vaksin untuk Populasi yang Menua
SEATTLE – Populasi dunia semakin bertambah banyak – dan menua.
Populasi lansia sudah hampir melampaui jumlah penduduk yang lebih muda – pada tahun 2050, jumlah populasi berusia 65 tahun ke atas dapat berjumlah tiga kali lebih banyak dari pada populasi yang berusia di bawah empat tahun – banyak orang khawatir bahwa beban anggaran pemerintah, sistem layanan kesehatan, dan ekonomi menjadi terlalu besar sehingga tidak lagi dapat dipenuhi pemerintah.
Tetapi, sesungguhnya ada yang dapat dilakukan guna meringankan beban tersebut: yaitu dengan meningkatkan kesehatan para lansia.
Ketika kita menua, tubuh kita mengalami perubahan yang kompleks yaitu, di antaranya, semakin melemahnya kemampuan tubuh untuk mengatasi infeksi dan membangun imunitas (hal ini disebut immunosenescence).
Itu sebabnya mengapa suatu penyakit ketika diidap oleh orang dewasa yang lebih tua cenderung menjadi lebih parah, dan lebih besar dampaknya terhadap kualitas hidup, disabilitas, dan mortalitas, jika dibandingkan dengan dampak yang dialami pasien yang lebih muda ketika mengidap penyakit yang sama.
Sederhananya, sistem imunitas orang dewasa yang menua membutuhkan bantuan tambahan.
Kebutuhan ini yang dapat dijawab oleh vaksin.
Vaksin paling sering dibahas ketika dikaitkan dengan anak-anak berusia dini, yang perlu menerima serangkaian inokulasi terhadap berbagai penyakit anak-anak seperti campak dan polio.
Vaksinasi di usia anak-anak adalah salah satu kisah keberhasilan terbesar di abad ke dua puluh , yang sering kali disebut dengan pembangunan imunitas kelompok (seluruh komunitas terlindungi secara tidak langsung, termasuk mereka yang tidak dapat diimunikasi karena alasan penyakit atau umur, karena sebagian besar dari anggotanya telah diimunisasi).
Tidak ada alasan mengapa orang dewasa tidak dapat memanfaatkan prinsip keilmuan yang sama.
Faktanya, orang dewasa dapat menuai manfaat yang lebih luas – termasuk perlindungan bagi keluarga dan tetangga mereka – ketika menerima vaksinasi.
Sayangnya, baru sedikit orang dewasa yang memanfaatkan layanan ini.
Orang dewasa perlu memahami bahwa beberapa infeksi yang umum yang rentan diidap oleh tubuh sesungguhnya dapat dicegah oleh vaksin.
Misalnya herpes zoster (shingles), infeksi yang dapat menular pada setiap orang yang pernah mengidap cacar air dalam siklus hidupnya (yaitu, 95% orang dewasa di seluruh dunia).
Di Amerika Serikat, kurang lebih sekitar sepertiga dari populasinya akan terkena herpes zoster suatu saat dalam masa hidupnya.
Kasus infeksi herpes zoster mungkin tidak membahayakan dan tidak terlalu menimbulkan rasa sakit ketika menyerang individu yang berusia tiga puluhan.
Tetapi, penyakit ini lebih sering menyerang individu yang berusia 50 ke atas – yang mana dapat menimbulkan rasa sakit yang cukup besar.
Orang dewasa yang lebih tua ketika mengidap herpes zoster dapat mengalami rasa sakit yang amat sangat dan komplikasi yang serius sehingga menyulitkan untuk tidur, keluar rumah, atau melakukan kegiatan sehari-hari.
Jika mereka telah diimunisasi – Pusat Pengendalian dan Pencegahan Penyakit / Centers for Disease Control and Prevention menganjurkan pemberian imunisasi ketika berusia 60 – maka kondisi yang menyakitkan dan terkadang sampai melumpuhkan ini dapat dihindari.
Influenza juga merupakan penyakit yang dapat dicegah dengan vaksin.
Meskipun virus influenza dapat menyebabkan penyakit pada semua orang di seluruh rentang usia, para lansia – yaitu mereka yang berusia di atas 65 tahun ke atas – jauh lebih besar jumlahnya ketika dilihat dari jumlah yang sampai meninggal dunia dan harus dirawat di rumah sakit, lansia dengan usia tertua akan memiliki risiko terbesar.
Permasalahannya, orang yang berusia lebih tua lebih besar kemungkinannya untuk mengidap satu atau lebih kondisi kesehatan yang menjadi penyebabnya, seperti penyakit jantung atau diabetes.
Akibatnya mereka juga lebih besar kemungkinannya untuk mengidap penyakit komplikasi yang terkait dengan influenza.
Analisis yang sistematis di antara populasi lansia menemukan bahwa vaksinasi influenza – yang harus diberikan setiap tahun, karena strain influenza yang baru terus bermunculan – tidak hanya berhasil melindungi orang-orang sehigga tidak terkena influenza, tetapi juga hemat dalam segi biaya.
Masih banyak penyakit lainnya yang dapat memperoleh manfaat dari vaksinasi.
Dipteri yang disebabkan oleh bateri aerobik Corynebacterium diphtheria gram positif, adalah sebuah penyakit akut, yang dimediasi racun yang dapat menimbulkan infeksi jalur pernapasan bagian atas atau infeksi kulit.
Sebagian besar komplikasi dipteri – seperti myocarditis (inflamasi lapisan tengah jantung) dan neuritis (inflamasi di sekitar saraf atau pada saraf) – disebabkan oleh dampak dari racun tersebut.
Tingkat kematian secara keseluruhan adalah 5-10%, tingkat kematian lebih tinggi pada populasi di bawah usia lima tahun dan di atas 40 tahun.
Tetanus, yang sering dikenal dengan sebutan “kejang-kejang / lockjaw,” adalah penyakit yang disebabkan oleh bakteri yang menyerang sistem saraf, menyebabkan penegangan otot yang menyakitkan di sekujur tubuh.
Penyakit ini tidak mengakibatkan jumlah kematian yang sangat tinggi di antara lansia; tetapi karena penyakit ini sesungguhnya dapat dicegah, maka tidak dapat diterima jika masih ada yang terjangkit.
Kemudian ada pertussis.
Belum diketahui secara tepat hingga sejauh mana penyakit ini mempengaruhi kelompok lansia, hal ini dikarenakan penyakit ini kurang terdiagnosis dan kurang terlaporkan di seluruh kelompok usia.
Tetapi Komite Penasihat untuk Praktik Imunisasi / Advisory Committee on Immunization Practicespercaya bahwa beban penyakit ini setidaknya 100 kali lebih besar dari yang dilaporkan saat ini.
Vaksin Tdap, yang melindungi orang dewasa dari dipteri, tetanus, dan pertussis, dapat mengurangi beban dengan cukup signifikan.
Vaksin lainnya, yang disebut Td, melindungi penerimanya dari tetanus dan dipteri, tetapi tidak dari pertussis.
Vaksin pendukung Td harus diberikan setiap sepuluh tahun.
Yang terakhir, penyakit yang disebut pneumokokus, adalah infeksi bakteri yang disebabkan oleh Streptococcus pneumoniae, yang dapat menyebabkan pneumonia, meningitis, atau infeksi aliran darah (sepsis), tergantung dari komplikasi yang ditimbulkan, gejala yang muncul dapat berupa batuk, timbulnya demam secara tiba-tiba, nyeri di dada,  menggigil, nafas pendek, leher kaku, disorientasi, dan sensitivitas terhadap cahaya.
Penyakit pneumococcal dapat mengakibatkan kerusakan otak, ketulian, kerusakan jaringan (bahkan memungkinkan perlunya dilakukan amputasi pada salah satu bagian tubuh), dan kematian.
Di AS saja, pneumococcal pneumonia, infeksi aliran darah, dan meningitis memakan puluhan ribu korban setiap tahunnya, termasuk 18,000 orang dewasa berusia 65 tahun ke atas.
Terdapat dua jenis vaksin pneumococcal utama untuk orang dewasa yang lebih tua –23-valent pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine (PPV23) dan pneumococcal conjugate vaccine (PCV13) – dapat memperbaiki situasi ini.
Berkat program imunisasi anak, jumlah anak-anak yang meninggal setiap tahunnya karena penyakit yang dapat dicegah oleh vaksin menjadi lebih sedikit.
Sekarang diperlukan upaya terkonsentrasi yang serupa untuk menghasilkan manfaat yang serupa untuk orang dewasa, terutama pada lansia.
Dengan memandang vaksinasi sebagai prioritas seumur hidup, kita dapat membantu setiap orang untuk tetap aktif dan produktif selama mungkin, sehingga memberikan manfaat pada diri mereka sendiri, komunitasnya, dan dunia.
They are right: the UN can deliver when it comes to national security, human security, and human dignity.
Overhauling Secretariat structures and processes to reduce duplication, waste, and irrelevance?
Forget it.
Changing the composition of the Security Council to ensure that it began to reflect the world of the twenty-first century, not that of the 1950’s?
No way.
But I have also had some exhilarating experiences of the UN at its best.
The peace plan for Cambodia in the early 1990’s, for example, dragged the country back from hellish decades of horrifying genocide and ugly and protracted civil war.
Likewise, the Chemical Weapons Convention, steered through the UN Conference on Disarmament in Geneva, is still the most robust arms-control treaty related to weapons of mass destruction ever negotiated.
Perhaps one experience stands out above all.
In 2005, on the UN’s 60th anniversary, the General Assembly, convening at head of state and government level, unanimously endorsed the concept of states’ responsibility to protect populations at risk of genocide and other mass atrocity crimes.
With that vote, the international community began to eradicate the shameful indifference that accompanied the Holocaust, Rwanda, Srebrenica, Darfur, and too many similar catastrophes.
What needs to be better understood publicly is just how many different roles the UN plays.
The various departments, programs, organs, and agencies within the UN system address a broad spectrum of issues, from peace and security between and within states to human rights, health, education, poverty alleviation, disaster relief, refugee protection, trafficking of people and drugs, heritage protection, climate change and the environment, and much else.
What is least appreciated of all is how cost-effectively these agencies – for all their limitations – perform overall, in both absolute and comparative terms.
The UN’s core functions – leaving aside peacekeeping missions but including its operations at its New York headquarters; at offices in Geneva, Vienna, and Nairobi; and at the five regional commissions around the world – now employ 44,000 people at a cost of around $2.5 billion a year.
That might sound like a lot, but the Tokyo Fire Department spends about the same amount each year, and the Australian Department of Human Services spends $3 billion more (with less staff).
And that’s just two departments in two of the UN’s 193 member states.
Even including related programs and organs (like the UN Development Program&#160;and the office of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees), as well as peacekeeping activities (which involve more than 110,000 international military, police, and civilian personnel), the UN system’s total cost is still only around $30 billion a year.
That is less than half the annual budget for New York City, and well under a third of the roughly $105 billion that the US military has been spending each year, on average, in Afghanistan.
Wall Street employees received more in annual bonuses ($33.2 billion) in 2007, the year before the global financial meltdown.
The whole family of the UN Secretariat and related entities, together with current peacekeepers, adds up to around 215,000 people worldwide – not a small number, but less than one-eighth of the roughly 1.8 million staff employed by McDonald’s and its franchisees worldwide!
The bottom line, as the youngsters gathered in Melbourne fully understood, is that the UN provides fabulous value for what the world spends on it, and that if it ever ceased to exist, we would have to reinvent it.
The downsides are real, but we need to remember the immortal words of Dag Hammarskjold, the UN’s second secretary-general: “The UN was created not to bring us to heaven, but to save us from hell.”
In Defense of Varoufakis
LONDON – From blaming him for the renewed collapse of the Greek economy to accusing him of illegally plotting Greece’s exit from the eurozone, it has become fashionable to disparage Yanis Varoufakis, the country’s former finance minister.
While I have never met or spoken to him, I believe that he is getting a bad rap (and increasingly so).
In the process, attention is being diverted away from the issues that are central to Greece’s ability to recover and prosper – whether it stays in the eurozone or decides to leave.
That is why it is important to take note of the ideas that Varoufakis continues to espouse.
Greeks and others may fault him for pursuing his agenda with too little politesse while in office.
But the essence of that agenda was – and remains – largely correct.
Following an impressive election victory by his Syriza party in January, Greece’s prime minister, Alexis Tsipras, appointed Varoufakis to lead the delicate negotiations with the country’s creditors.
His mandate was to recast the relationship in two important ways: render its terms more amenable to economic growth and job creation; and restore balance and dignity to the treatment of Greece by its European partners and the International Monetary Fund.
These objectives reflected Greece’s frustrating and disappointing experience under two previous bailout packages administered by “the institutions” (the European Commission, the European Central Bank, and the IMF).
In pursuing them, Varoufakis felt empowered by the scale of Syriza’s electoral win and compelled by economic logic to press three issues that many economists believe must be addressed if sustained growth is to be restored: less and more intelligent austerity; structural reforms that better meet social objectives; and debt reduction.
These issues remain as relevant today, with Varoufakis out of government, as they were when he was tirelessly advocating for them during visits to European capitals and in tense late-night negotiations in Brussels.
Indeed, many observers view the agreement on a third bailout program that Greece reached with its creditors – barely a week after Varoufakis resigned – as simply more of the same.
At best, the deal will bring a respite – one that is likely to prove both short and shallow.
In part, the criticism of Varoufakis reflects less the substance of his proposals than the manner in which he approached his interlocutors.
Eschewing the traditional duality of frank private discussions and restrained public commentary, he aggressively advocated his case openly and bluntly, and did so in an increasingly personal manner.
Whether deemed naive or belligerent, this approach undeniably upset and angered European politicians.
Rather than modifying a policy framework that had failed for five years to deliver on its stated objectives, they dug in their heels, eventually resorting to the economic equivalent of gunboat diplomacy.
And they evidently also made it clear to Varoufakis’s boss, Tsipras, that the future of negotiations depended on him casting aside his unconventional minister – which he did, first by assigning someone else to lead the negotiations and then by appointing a new finance minister altogether.
Now that he is out of office, Varoufakis is being blamed for much more than failing to adapt his approach to political reality.
Some hold him responsible for the renewed collapse of the Greek economy, the unprecedented shuttering of the banking system, and the imposition of stifling capital controls.
Others are calling for criminal investigations, characterizing the work he led on a Plan B (whereby Greece would introduce a new payments system either in parallel or instead of the euro) as tantamount to treason.
But, love him or hate him (and, it seems, very few people who have encountered him feel indifferent), Varoufakis was never the arbiter of Greece’s fate.
Yes, he should have adopted a more conciliatory style and shown greater appreciation for the norms of European negotiations; and, yes, he overestimated Greece’s bargaining power, wrongly assuming that pressing the threat of Grexit would compel his European partners to reconsider their long-entrenched positions.
But, relative to the macro situation, these are minor issues.
Varoufakis had no control over the economic mess that Syriza inherited when it came to power, including an unemployment rate hovering around 25% and youth joblessness that had been running at more than 50% for a considerable period.
He could not influence in any meaningful manner the national narratives that had sunk deep roots in other European countries and thus undermined those countries’ ability to adapt.
He could not counter the view among some of the region’s politicians that success for Syriza would embolden and strengthen other non-traditional parties around Europe.
It also would have been irresponsible for Varoufakis not to work behind closed doors on a Plan B. After all, Greece’s eurozone destiny largely was – and remains – in the hands of others (particularly Germany, the ECB, and the IMF).
And it is yet to be established whether Varoufakis broke any laws in the way he and his colleagues worked on their contingency plan.
When push came to shove, Varoufakis faced the difficult choice of going along with more of the same, despite knowing that it would fail, or trying to pivot to a new approach.
He bravely opted for the latter.
While his brash style undermined outcomes, it would be a real tragedy to lose sight of his arguments (which have been made by many others as well).
If Greece is to have any realistic chance of long-term economic recovery and meeting its citizens’ legitimate aspirations, policymakers must recast the country’s austerity program, couple pro-growth reforms with greater social justice, and secure additional debt relief.
And if Greece is to remain in the eurozone (still a big if, even after the latest agreement), it must not only earn its peers’ respect; it must be treated with greater respect by them as well.
Varoufakis’s Great Game
MUNICH – Game theorists know that a Plan A is never enough.
One must also develop and put forward a credible Plan B – the implied threat that drives forward negotiations on Plan A. Greece’s finance minister, Yanis Varoufakis, knows this very well.
As the Greek government’s anointed “heavy,” he is working Plan B (a potential exit from the eurozone), while Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras makes himself available for Plan A (an extension on Greece’s loan agreement, and a renegotiation of the terms of its bailout).
In a sense, they are playing the classic game of “good cop/bad cop” – and, so far, to great effect.
Plan B comprises two key elements.
First, there is simple provocation, aimed at riling up Greek citizens and thus escalating tensions between the country and its creditors.
Greece’s citizens must believe that they are escaping grave injustice if they are to continue to trust their government during the difficult period that would follow an exit from the eurozone.
Second, the Greek government is driving up the costs of Plan B for the other side, by allowing capital flight by its citizens.
If it so chose, the government could contain this trend with a more conciliatory approach, or stop it outright with the introduction of capital controls.
But doing so would weaken its negotiating position, and that is not an option.
Capital flight does not mean that capital is moving abroad in net terms, but rather that private capital is being turned into public capital.
Basically, Greek citizens take out loans from local banks, funded largely by the Greek central bank, which acquires funds through the European Central Bank’s emergency liquidity assistance (ELA) scheme.
They then transfer the money to other countries to purchase foreign assets (or redeem their debts), draining liquidity from their country’s banks.
Other eurozone central banks are thus forced to create new money to fulfill the payment orders for the Greek citizens, effectively giving the Greek central bank an overdraft credit, as measured by the so-called TARGET liabilities.
In January and February, Greece’s TARGET debts increased by almost €1 billion ($1.1 billion) per day, owing to capital flight by Greek citizens and foreign investors.
At the end of April, those debts amounted to €99 billion.
A Greek exit would not damage the accounts that its citizens have set up in other eurozone countries – let alone cause Greeks to lose the assets they have purchased with those accounts.
But it would leave those countries’ central banks stuck with euro-denominated TARGET claims vis-à-vis Greece’s central bank, which would have assets denominated only in a restored drachma.
Given the new currency’s inevitable devaluation, together with the fact that the Greek government does not have to backstop its central bank’s debt, a default depriving the other central banks of their claims would be all but certain.
A similar situation arises when Greek citizens withdraw cash from their accounts and hoard it in suitcases or take it abroad.
If Greece abandoned the euro, a substantial share of these funds – which totaled €43 billion at the end of April – would flow into the rest of the eurozone, both to purchase goods and assets and to pay off debts, resulting in a net loss for the monetary union’s remaining members.
All of this strengthens the Greek government’s negotiating position considerably.
Small wonder, then, that Varoufakis and Tsipras are playing for time, refusing to submit a list of meaningful reform proposals.
The ECB bears considerable responsibility for this situation.
By failing to produce the two-thirds majority in the ECB Council needed to limit the Greek central bank’s self-serving strategy, it has allowed the creation of more than €80 billion in emergency liquidity, which exceeds the Greek central bank’s €41 billion in recoverable assets.
With Greece’s banks guaranteed the needed funds, the government has been spared from having to introduce capital controls.
Rumor has it that the ECB is poised to adjust its approach – and soon.
It knows that its argument that the ELA loans are collateralized is wearing thin, given that, in many cases, the collateral has a rating below BBB-, thus falling short of investment grade.
If the ECB finally acknowledges that this will not do, and removes Greece’s liquidity safety net, the Greek government would be forced to start negotiating seriously, because waiting would no longer do it any good.
But, with the stock of money sent abroad and held in cash having already ballooned to 79% of GDP, its position would remain very strong.
In other words, thanks largely to the ECB, the Greek government would be able to secure a far more favorable outcome – including increased financial assistance and reduced reform requirements – than it could have gained at any point in the past.
And if Greece exits, a large share of the acquired resources measured by the TARGET balances and the cash that has been printed would turn into an endowment gift for an independent future.
Many people in Europe seem to believe that Varoufakis, an experienced game theorist but a political neophyte, does not know how to play the cards that Greece has been dealt.
They should think again – before Greece walks away with the pot.
European Universities’ Identity Crisis
MADRID – Higher education in Europe today finds itself in a state of profound uncertainty.
What should universities’ primary focus be – research, professional training, or social inclusion?
Should governments invest more in higher education to underpin long-term economic growth?
Should universities be left alone to compete and survive (or not) in a global education marketplace?
Amid the debates about their future role, Europe’s universities must not lose sight of their individual identity, their traditions, and their sense of social purpose.
This will not be easy.
University administrators face pressures from above – European institutions and national governments – and from their own researchers, teachers, and students.
Moreover, the parameters of the debate are becoming hazy.
On one hand, universities are abiding by long-standing agreements with government; on the other, they face zealous reformers who seek market-based solutions that stress competition among institutions, encourage staff and student mobility, and emphasize student-centered learning.
Obviously, these outlooks generate very different implications for universities’ future.
Traditionally, universities undertook research, provided a professional education, and offered a country’s young people a cultural foundation as they entered society.
Today, none of these aims appears secure.
Indeed, the gravest danger to Europe’s universities is a prolonged period of confusion about their ultimate aims.
Seeking truth through observation, experimentation, rational argument, and mutual criticism has always been a raison d’être of universities.
Reflecting this, some European institutions are encouraged by government to try to match the research excellence attained by top universities in the United States.
But not all of Europe’s universities regard themselves primarily as research institutions.
Many prefer to focus on preparing their students for the world of work.
However, the skills that are now required outside academia are changing so rapidly that universities may struggle to marry the generic cognitive skills taught in the classroom – such as critical thinking, analytical reasoning, problem solving, and writing – with the professional expertise that is increasingly acquired in the workplace.
And if years of schooling do not translate into greater cognitive skills, then much of the economic justification for investing in higher education falls apart.
Universities have also had a public-service mission: to provide students with a cultural foundation for life.
This purpose may seem increasingly controversial in pluralistic Western societies, but universities should at least provide their students with an understanding of the models, history, and philosophical fundamentals with which to debate these issues.
Without a reasonable awareness of their socio-cultural environment, students may view universities merely as a place to pursue private goals, make useful connections, enjoy student life, and perhaps pick up a superficial sense of diversity.
Whichever path Europe’s universities take, maintaining a distinct identity in the face of global change and education reform will become increasingly difficult.
Researchers are no longer confined within their ivory towers, but work as part of complex global networks alongside private-sector participants.
Tenured professors, once central to the life and image of a college, are being replaced by part-time teachers who lack a strong connection to their institution.
Likewise, in the emerging conception of universities – one that draws heavily from the corporate world – educational “managers,” applying “best practices” (and always ready to move on to the next posting) – retain the most cursory regard for the institution’s life and traditions.
And students, seen as mere consumers of a service, are invited to exercise choice regarding teachers, curricula, and location.
Some may find these changes exciting.
But their purpose will be lost if pursuing them weakens the very identity of Europe’s universities, many of which are used to functioning in a world of state patronage and strict regulation.
Policymakers must be aware of the educational and cultural damage that continuous reforms – all justified in the future-oriented jargon of the day – can wreak.
Universities must protect their institutional memories, local traditions, and commitment to each new generation of students.
A loyal and grateful alumni network can help to ensure this.
The alternative is a formulaic educational experience that not only lacks individual character, but that is also devoid of moral purpose.
Veiled Sexuality
NEW YORK –A woman swathed in black to her ankles, wearing a headscarf or a full chador , walks down a European or North American street, surrounded by other women in halter tops, miniskirts and short shorts.
She passes under immense billboards on which other women swoon in sexual ecstasy, cavort in lingerie or simply stretch out languorously, almost fully naked.
Could this image be any more iconic of the discomfort the West has with the social mores of Islam, and vice versa?
Ideological battles are often waged with women’s bodies as their emblems, and Western Islamophobia is no exception.
When France banned headscarves in schools, it used the hijab as a proxy for Western values in general, including the appropriate status of women.
When Americans were being prepared for the invasion of Afghanistan, the Taliban were demonized for denying cosmetics and hair color to women; when the Taliban were overthrown, Western writers often noted that women had taken off their scarves.
But are we in the West radically misinterpreting Muslim sexual mores, particularly the meaning to many Muslim women of being veiled or wearing the chador ?
And are we blind to our own markers of the oppression and control of women?
The West interprets veiling as repression of women and suppression of their sexuality.
But when I traveled in Muslim countries and was invited to join a discussion in women-only settings within Muslim homes, I learned that Muslim attitudes toward women’s appearance and sexuality are not rooted in repression, but in a strong sense of public versus private, of what is due to God and what is due to one’s husband.
It is not that Islam suppresses sexuality, but that it embodies a strongly developed sense of its appropriate channeling – toward marriage, the bonds that sustain family life, and the attachment that secures a home.
Outside the walls of the typical Muslim households that I visited in Morocco, Jordan, and Egypt, all was demureness and propriety.
But inside, women were as interested in allure, seduction, and pleasure as women anywhere in the world.
At home, in the context of marital intimacy, Victoria’s Secret, elegant fashion, and skin care lotions abounded.
The bridal videos that I was shown, with the sensuous dancing that the bride learns as part of what makes her a wonderful wife, and which she proudly displays for her bridegroom, suggested that sensuality was not alien to Muslim women. Rather, pleasure and sexuality, both male and female, should not be displayed promiscuously – and possibly destructively – for all to see.
Indeed, many Muslim women I spoke with did not feel at all subjugated by the chador or the headscarf.
On the contrary, they felt liberated from what they experienced as the intrusive, commodifying, basely sexualizing Western gaze.
Many women said something like this: “When I wear Western clothes, men stare at me, objectify me, or I am always measuring myself against the standards of models in magazines, which are hard to live up to – and even harder as you get older, not to mention how tiring it can be to be on display all the time.