Some sheltered Jews &#45;&#45; despite their own prejudices &#45;&#45; simply because they saw it as their religious duty to do so.
Nor does faith have to be in a supernatural being.
Men and women who found strength in their belief in Communism resisted the Nazis with equal tenacity.
Despite the horrific violence of Islamist fanatics, it should not be forgotten that the mosque can also be a legitimate basis for resistance against the mostly secular dictatorships in the Middle East today.
In a world of political oppression and moral corruption, religious values offer an alternative moral universe.
This alternative is not necessarily more democratic, but it can be.
Nevertheless, the danger of all dogmas, religious or secular, is that they lead to different forms of oppression.
The revolt against Soviet domination in Afghanistan was led by holy warriors who then imposed their own form of misrule.
Moreover, charismatic leadership can be problematic even when it takes a benign form.
The Madonna-like status of Cory Aquino in the Philippines was inspiring in the heady days of People Power, but did little to bolster the institutions of a secular democracy.
In Poland, once the battle against Communism was won, the Solidarity movement was soon sundered by conflicts between secular democrats and believers who looked to the Church for guidance.
Faith has an especially important role to play in politics in circumstances where secular liberals are rendered impotent, as in the case of Nazi occupation, Communist rule, or military dictatorship.
Liberals are most needed when compromises have to be made, but not nearly as useful when faced with brute force.
That is when visionaries, romantics, and true believers are driven by their beliefs to take risks that most of us would regard as foolhardy.
It is, on the whole, not beneficial to be ruled by such heroes, but it is good to have heroes around when they are needed.
The Struggle for Middle East Mastery
BERLIN – The last illusions about what was called, until recently, the “Arab Spring” may have vanished.
Egypt’s military coup has made the simple, depressing alternatives for the country’s future crystal clear: The question is no longer one of democracy versus dictatorship, but rather one of (Islamist) revolution versus (military) counter-revolution – dictatorship or dictatorship.
This applies not only to Egypt, but to almost all of the wider Middle East.
And, because both sides have opted for armed struggle, the outcome will be civil war, regardless of what well-intentioned European Union foreign ministers decide in Brussels.
The Islamists cannot win militarily, just as the generals cannot win politically, which all but ensures the return of dictatorship, significant violence, and a series of humanitarian disasters.
For both sides, full mastery and control is the only option, though neither has even a rudimentary understanding of how to modernize the economy and society.
So, whichever side gains the upper hand, authoritarianism and economic stagnation will prevail once again.
In Egypt, the army will be the victor, at least in the medium term.
With the support of old elites, the urban middle class, and religious minorities, Egypt’s military leaders have clearly adopted an all-or-nothing strategy.
Moreover, financial support from Saudi Arabia and other Gulf states has made the army impervious to outside pressure.
Thus, Egypt is reenacting the Algerian scenario.
In 1992, with the Islamic Salvation Front poised to win Algeria’s general election, the country’s military staged a coup and immediately canceled the election’s second round.
In the subsequent eight-year civil war, waged with appalling brutality by both sides, up to 200,000 people lost their lives.
Military rule in Algeria continues de facto to this day.
But, with the role of political Islam still unanswered, none of the country’s fundamental problems has been addressed seriously, and its leaders have been unable to take advantage of promising opportunities (for example, in contrast to Egypt, Algeria has large oil and gas reserves).
In Egypt, the Muslim Brotherhood’s older generation is accustomed to prison and life underground, but there are many reasons to believe that its younger adherents will respond with terror and violence.
Egypt, Syria, Yemen, Tunisia, and soon perhaps other countries in the region will serve as fertile grounds for a new, more militarily oriented Al Qaeda, which will become a more powerful factor in the Middle East’s cacophony of interests and ideologies.
The West in general, and the United States in particular, has little influence or real leverage.
So it will complain, threaten, and deplore the horrors to come, but ultimately will follow its interests, not its principles.
For example, Egypt, with its control of the Suez Canal and its cold peace with Israel, is too important strategically to be simply abandoned.
Taken in isolation, the Egyptian situation is bad enough; but it is by no means a unique case.
Rather, it is part of a regional drama characterized primarily by a massive loss of order.
The US-backed order in the Middle East is breaking down, yet no new order is emerging.
Instead, there is only a spreading chaos that threatens to reach far beyond the region’s borders.
Following the spectacular failure of President George W. Bush and Vice President Dick Cheney, with their neoconservative go-it-alone illusions, the US is no longer willing or able to shoulder the burden of being the last force for order in the Middle East.
Having overstretched its forces in Afghanistan and Iraq, and facing economic retrenchment at home, the US is withdrawing, and there is no other power to take its place.
Withdrawal is one of the riskiest military maneuvers, because it can easily degenerate into panicky retreat and chaos.
With the upcoming withdrawal of the US and NATO from Afghanistan, the potential for turmoil in the region between North Africa and the Hindu Kush will increase significantly on its eastern edge.
What we can learn today from the prolonged crisis in the Middle East is that regional powers are increasingly trying to replace the US as a force for order.
This, too, will fuel chaos, because none of these powers is strong enough to shoulder the American burden.
Moreover, the Sunni-Shia divide frequently leads to contradictory policies.
In Egypt, for example, Saudi Arabia is supporting the military against the Muslim Brotherhood, whereas in Syria the Saudis are backing Salafists against the military, which receives support from Saudi Arabia’s main enemies, Shia Iran and its Lebanese proxy, Hezbollah.
But the region’s struggle for power and its sectarian-ideological antagonisms also create an opportunity for cooperation once scarcely thought possible.
Seen from this perspective, any US-Iranian talks over the nuclear issue in the wake of Hassan Rouhani’s victory in Iran’s presidential election could have much broader significance.
In Egypt, the military counter-revolution will prevail, but the Islamist revolution eventually will return as long as its causes have not been eliminated.
At the moment, there is virtually no indication of progress on this front.
So, when the Islamist revolution does return, it is likely to be even more powerful and violent.
A similar dynamic is evident in European history, particularly in the revolutions and counter-revolutions of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries.
Indeed, the legacy of that dynamic was fully overcome in Europe only two decades ago.
Now it seems to be recurring, largely unchanged, in the Middle East.
Revolution in a Vacuum
MADRID – The Cold War is long over, but superpower rivalry is back.
As a result, the international community’s capacity to unite in the face of major global challenges remains as deficient as ever.
Nowhere is this more clearly reflected than in the case of Syria.
What was supposed to be a coordinated effort to protect civilians from ruthless repression and advance a peaceful transition – the plan developed by former United Nations Secretary-General Kofi Annan – has now degenerated into a proxy war between the United States and Russia.
Russia’s leaders (and China’s) seek to uphold an international system that relies on the unconditional sovereignty of states and rejects the Western-inspired, humanitarian droit d’ingérence.
Concerned that the Arab rebellions would radicalize their own repressed minorities, they refuse to allow the UN Security Council to be used to promote revolutionary changes in the Arab world.
And Syria, the last Russian outpost of the Cold War, is an asset the Kremlin will do its utmost to maintain.
But Russia and China are not the only problem.
Major emerging democracies like Brazil, India, and South Africa have been especially disappointing in their response to the Arab Spring.
All are outspoken paladins of human rights when it comes to condemning any Israeli defensive attack in Gaza as “genocide,” but are equally united in opposing Security Council action on Syria, even as the repression there grows ever more appalling.
The Arab uprisings either clashed with their commitment to the inviolability of national sovereignty, or stoked their fear that “humanitarian intervention” would merely be another tool of Northern dominance.
The West’s response has been far more supportive of Arabs’ aspirations, but it has also been contradictory and erratic.
For years, both the US and Europe engaged in a monumental exercise in political hypocrisy, preaching the gospel of democratic change while supporting Arab tyrants.
Not surprisingly, they found themselves with no tools to deal with the Arab revolutions.
Indeed, at no time since the Arab Spring began has one been able to discern a coherent Western strategy to address its many challenges and uncertainties.
Each case has elicited a different response, owing either to the constraints of international power politics, as is now the case with respect to Syria, or to economic and strategic considerations, as in Saudi Arabia and Bahrain.
The US, for its part, did not abandon authoritarian allies such as Egypt’s Hosni Mubarak and Tunisia’s Zine el Abidine Ben Ali immediately.
Had they been swifter and more effective in repressing the mass protests, they might still be in power today – with America’s blessing.
The US turned against them not because they were autocrats, but because they were inefficient autocrats.
Meanwhile, Europe finds itself paralyzed by a financial crisis that threatens the European Union’s very existence.
The EU’s traditional foreign-policy tools – “promoting civil society” and “encouraging trade” – are no substitute for a strategy to confront the new power game in the Mediterranean.
And yet Europe has proven utterly incapable of developing an appropriate response to conditions in which Islamist regimes are independently shaping their priorities and external actors – Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Turkey, Russia, China, and perhaps even Iran – are vying for influence with an extraordinary combination of financial firepower and political muscle.
Europe cannot afford to remain on the sidelines.
NATO’s “Operation Unified Protector” in Libya was a major success for the alliance, but America’s decision to let Europe assume the leading role also signaled its intention to “rebalance” its global priorities.
With the US intent on shifting its attention from Europe’s sphere of vital interests, the Mediterranean and the Middle East, to Asia and the Pacific, it can no longer be expected to take the lead in resolving crises in Europe’s backyard.
Indeed, grand designs for the Middle East are no longer on America’s agenda.
Since its victory in the Cold War, America’s hegemony in the Middle East has been a story of frustration and unrewarded investment of blood, sweat, and treasure.
A shift to foreign-policy realism is now expected, and Secretary of State Hillary Clinton’s recent meeting with Egypt’s Islamist president, Mohamed Morsi, is a clear indication of America’s new orientation.
The implications of such a shift are far-reaching.
Following the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, the US viewed the Islamic world almost exclusively through the prism of the “global war on terror.”
Now, however, policymakers admit that it was precisely the persistence of secular Arab autocracies that encouraged Islamist terrorism.
As a result, the major premise of current US policy is that a loss of trust by the Islamists in the democratic process would have adverse consequences, and that the restoration of the old regimes could threaten Western interests more than a Muslim Brotherhood government would.
America is now wisely building working relations with the new Islamist leaders, in the hope that they will not endanger the region’s US-brokered peace agreements (Israel-Jordan and Israel-Egypt) or interfere with America’s drive to halt Iran’s nuclear ambitions.
Realizing that hope is no easy task.
Turmoil in Arab societies is bound to persist for years to come, and emerging regional and world powers can be expected to exploit the international order’s fragmentation to advance their interests in the region.
With Europe in disarray, and Iran’s nuclear crisis still resistant to diplomatic resolution, America’s new foreign-policy realism could well imply that the US, however reluctantly, will ultimately be forced to revisit its “rebalancing strategy.”
Revolutionizing Arab Economies
ISTANBUL – The ongoing showdown in Egypt between the country’s Islamists and its military rulers is a clear reminder of how difficult democratic transitions in the Arab world are likely to be.
Obviously, failure to reach a power-sharing agreement will prolong political instability.
But the resulting economic inaction would be just as damaging to the consolidation of democratic rule.
Emerging Arab leaders, from Islamists to re-invented former regime officials, are keenly aware of the need to improve their countries’ economic prospects.
They know full well that their popularity can be sustained only if they are able to deliver growth, employment, and higher living standards.
This would be a difficult challenge under any circumstances – and is all the more daunting against the backdrop of the Arab Spring’s destabilization of the economic systems across the Middle East and North Africa.
Even in countries like Tunisia and Egypt, where the transition to democracy is more advanced, political uncertainty has tended to plague economic achievements.
For the first time since 1986, Tunisia’s economy shrank in 2011, by 1.8%.
Unemployment reached 18% last year, up from 13% in 2010.
Meanwhile, the Egyptian economy contracted by 0.8%, and one million Egyptians lost their jobs.
Egypt’s foreign-investment inflows have also dried up, falling from $6.4 billion in 2010 to a mere $500 million in 2011.
The combination of these negative trends is affecting these countries’ fiscal as well as external balances.
Egypt’s budget deficit reached 10% of GDP, while its foreign-exchange reserves have fallen to $15 billion – barely enough to cover the country’s import bill for the next three months.
In Tunisia, too, the budget deficit has widened sharply in the wake of the revolution, rising from 2.6% of GDP in 2010 to 6% in 2011.
This rapid economic deterioration, combined with the high expectations raised by the onset of political transition, is creating a sense of urgency.
Emerging political actors feel compelled to develop more detailed economic programs and to address their populations’ growing material grievances.
For example, whereas the Islamists had essentially focused on political themes, highlighting participation, inclusiveness, and democratic reforms, the recent election campaigns witnessed a rhetorical shift to economic aspirations.
Overall, the emerging political players – particularly the Islamist parties – have adopted a rather conciliatory tone regarding engagement with international actors.
These parties’ economic programs are by and large pro-market, emphasizing the private sector’s role in driving growth and the need to attract foreign capital.
The state is seen as a vehicle for ensuring social justice, and there are scant references to sharia principles.
Both in Tunisia and Egypt, for example, Islamist politicians have given assurances that the economically critical tourism sector will not be hindered by restrictions related to Islamic law.
The Islamists’ economic programs also foresee a role for international institutions in helping their countries to overcome the challenges that they face.
Indeed, whereas resistance to foreign intervention and assistance has been strong with respect to democratic reforms, new Arab leaders seem more receptive to a partnership with the West on economic objectives.
Economic weakness thus provides an unprecedented opportunity for international engagement with the new Arab leadership, which should incorporate short-, medium-, and long-term goals.
Short-term goals must have priority, because many Islamist parties are being pressed to produce positive results within a single electoral cycle.
The new governments will face the immediate challenge of creating jobs, for which the only available recipe is investment in large-scale public-works projects.
This type of government spending can create labor-intensive jobs that will help to stem rising unemployment.
The international community can help the Arab governments to launch and sustain such initiatives in several ways.
First, it can increase the amount of promised financial assistance.
It can also provide technical expertise to Arab policymakers on debt management.
Without first-rate expertise in debt management, an economy implementing large-scale public outlays risks crowding out private investment through overreliance on domestic savings.
Finally, the international community can help Arab governments to establish a secure and predictable legal and regulatory framework for public-private partnerships for large-scale infrastructure projects.
International actors, jointly with Arab governments, can then help to market these opportunities, allowing Arab economies to benefit from infrastructure-focused long-term international financing.
Only a combination of these options would allow Arab economies to create jobs in the short term, while avoiding the risks of destabilizing fiscal imbalances or a lack of financing for private-sector investment.
The West, for its part, stands to gain in myriad ways from a solid partnership with the Arab world to improve its societies’ economic future.
Even in the midst of a protracted currency crisis, European governments can surely sign on to an agenda that prioritizes transfers of know-how over cash infusions.
The Real Raw Material of Wealth
TIRANA – Poor countries export raw materials such as cocoa, iron ore, and raw diamonds.
Rich countries export – often to those same poor countries – more complex products such as chocolate, cars, and jewels.
If poor countries want to get rich, they should stop exporting their resources in raw form and concentrate on adding value to them.
Otherwise, rich countries will get the lion’s share of the value and all of the good jobs.
Poor countries could follow the example of South Africa and Botswana and use their natural wealth to force industrialization by restricting the export of minerals in raw form (a policy known locally as “beneficiation”).
But should they?
Some ideas are worse than wrong: they are castrating, because they interpret the world in a way that emphasizes secondary issues – say, the availability of raw materials – and blinds societies to the more promising opportunities that may lie elsewhere.
Consider Finland, a Nordic country endowed with many trees for its small population.
A classical economist would argue that, given this, the country should export wood, which Finland has done.
By contrast, a traditional development economist would argue that it should not export wood; instead, it should add value by transforming the wood into paper or furniture – something that Finland also does.
But all wood-related products represent barely 20% of Finland’s exports.
The reason is that wood opened up a different and much richer path to development.
As the Finns were chopping wood, their axes and saws would become dull and break down, and they would have to be repaired or replaced.
This eventually led them to become good at producing machines that chop and cut wood.
Finnish businessmen soon realized that they could make machines that cut other materials, because not everything that can be cut is made out of wood.
Next, they automated the machines that cut, because cutting everything by hand can become boring.
From here, they went into other automated machines, because there is more to life than cutting, after all.
From automated machines, they eventually ended up in Nokia.
Today, machines of different types account for more than 40% of Finland’s goods exports.
The moral of the story is that adding value to raw materials is one path to diversification, but not necessarily a long or fruitful one.
Countries are not limited by the raw materials they have.
After all, Switzerland has no cocoa, and China does not make advanced memory chips.
That has not prevented these countries from taking a dominant position in the market for chocolate and computers, respectively.
Having the raw material nearby is only an advantage if it is very costly to move that input around, which is more true of wood than it is of diamonds or even iron ore.
Australia, despite its remoteness, is a major exporter of iron ore, but not of steel, while South Korea is an exporter of steel, though it must import iron ore.
What the Finnish story indicates is that the more promising paths to development do not involve adding value to your raw materials – but adding capabilities to your capabilities.
That means mixing new capabilities (for example, automation) with ones that you already have (say, cutting machines) to enter completely different markets.
To get raw materials, by contrast, you only need to travel as far as the nearest port.
Thinking about the future on the basis of the differential transport-cost advantage of one input limits countries to products that intensively use only locally available raw materials.
This turns out to be enormously restrictive.
Proximity to which particular raw material makes a country competitive in producing cars, printers, antibiotics, or movies?
Most products require many inputs, and, in most cases, one raw material will just not make a large enough difference.
Beneficiation forces extractive industries to sell locally below their export price, thus operating as an implicit tax that serves to subsidize downstream activities.
In principle, efficient taxation of extractive industries should enable societies to maximize the benefits of nature’s bounty.
But there is no reason to use the capacity to tax to favor downstream industries.
As my colleagues and I have shown, these activities are neither the nearest in terms of capabilities, nor the most valuable as stepping-stones to further development.
Arguably, the biggest economic impact of Britain’s coal industry in the late seventeenth century was that it encouraged the development of the steam engine as a way to pump water out of mines.
But the steam engine went on to revolutionize manufacturing and transportation, changing world history and Britain’s place in it – and increasing the usefulness to Britain of having coal in the first place.
By contrast, developing petrochemical or steel plants, or moving low-wage diamond-cutting jobs from India or Vietnam to Botswana – a country that is more than four times richer – is as unimaginative as it is constricting.
Much greater creativity can be found in the UAE, which has used its oil revenues to invest in infrastructure and amenities, thus transforming Dubai into a successful tourism and business hub.
There is a lesson here for the United States, which has had a major beneficiation policy since the 1973 oil embargo, when it restricted the export of crude oil and natural gas.
As the US increasingly became an energy importer, its leaders never found any reason to abandon this policy.
But the recent shale-energy revolution has dramatically increased the output of oil and gas in the last five years.
As a result, the domestic natural-gas price is well below the export price.
This is an implicit subsidy to the industries that use oil and gas intensively and may attract some inward foreign investment.
But is this the best use of the government’s capacity to tax or regulate trade?
Would the US not be better off by using its capacity to tax natural gas to stimulate the development of the contemporary technological equivalent of the revolutionary engine?
Should Venezuela Default?
CAMBRIDGE – Will Venezuela default on its foreign bonds?
Markets fear that it might.
That is why Venezuelan bonds pay over 11 percentage points more than US Treasuries, which is 12 times more than Mexico, four times more than Nigeria, and double what Bolivia pays.
Last May, when Venezuela made a $5 billion private placement of ten-year bonds with a 6% coupon, it effectively had to give a 40% discount, leaving it with barely $3 billion.
The extra $2 billion that it will have to pay in ten years is the compensation that investors demand for the likelihood of default, in excess of the already hefty coupon.
Venezuela’s government needs to pay $5.2 billion in the first days of October.
Will it?
Does it have the cash on hand?
Will it raise the money by hurriedly selling CITGO, now wholly owned by Venezuela’s state oil company, PDVSA?
A different question is whether Venezuela should pay.
Granted, what governments should do and what they will do are not always independent questions, because people often do what they should.
But “should” questions involve some kind of moral judgment that is not central to “will” questions, which makes them more complex.&nbsp;
One point of view holds that if you can make good on your commitments, then that is what you should do.
That is what most parents teach their children.
But the moral calculus becomes a bit more intricate when you cannot make good on all of your commitments and have to decide which to honor and which to avoid.
To date, under former President Hugo Chávez and his successor, Nicolás Maduro, Venezuela has opted to service its foreign bonds, many of which are held by well-connected wealthy Venezuelans.
Yordano, a popular Venezuelan singer, probably would have a different set of priorities.
He was diagnosed with cancer earlier this year and had to launch a social-media campaign to locate the drugs that his treatment required.
Severe shortages of life-saving drugs in Venezuela are the result of the government’s default on a $3.5 billion bill for pharmaceutical imports.
A similar situation prevails throughout the rest of the economy.
Payment arrears on food imports amount to $2.4 billion, leading to a substantial shortage of staple goods.
In the automobile sector, the default exceeds $3 billion, leading to a collapse in transport services as a result of a lack of spare parts.
Airline companies are owed $3.7 billion, causing many to suspend activities and overall service to fall by half.
In Venezuela, importers must wait six months after goods have cleared customs to buy previously authorized dollars.
But the government has opted to default on these obligations, too, leaving importers with a lot of useless local currency.
For a while, credit from foreign suppliers and headquarters made up for the lack of access to foreign currency; but, given mounting arrears and massive devaluations, credit has dried up.
The list of defaults goes on and on.
Venezuela has defaulted on PDVSA’s suppliers, contractors, and joint-venture partners, causing oil exports to fall by 45% relative to 1997 and production to amount to about half what the 2005 plan had projected for 2012.
In addition, Venezuela’s central bank has defaulted on its obligation to maintain price stability by nearly quadrupling the money supply in 24 months, which has resulted in a 90% decline in the bolivar’s value on the black market and the world’s highest inflation rate.
To add insult to injury, since May the central bank has defaulted on its obligation to publish inflation and other statistics.
Venezuela functions with four exchange rates, with the difference between the strongest and the weakest being a factor of 13.
Unsurprisingly, currency arbitrage has propelled Venezuela to the top ranks of global corruption indicators.
All of this chaos is the consequence of a massive fiscal deficit that is being financed by out-of-control money creation, financial repression, and mounting defaults – despite a budget windfall from $100-a-barrel oil.
Instead of fixing the problem, Maduro’s government has decided to complement ineffective exchange and price controls with measures like closing borders to stop smuggling and fingerprinting shoppers to prevent “hoarding.”
This constitutes a default on Venezuelans’ most basic freedoms, which Bolivia, Ecuador, and Nicaragua – three ideologically kindred countries that have a single exchange rate and single-digit inflation – have managed to preserve.
So, should Venezuela default on its foreign bonds?
If the authorities adopted common-sense policies and sought support from the International Monetary Fund and other multilateral lenders, as most troubled countries tend to do, they would rightly be told to default on the country’s debts.
That way, the burden of adjustment would be shared with other creditors, as has occurred in Greece, and the economy would gain time to recover, particularly as investments in the world’s largest oil reserves began to bear fruit.
Bondholders would be wise to exchange their current bonds for longer-dated instruments that would benefit from the upturn.
None of this will happen under Maduro’s government, which lacks the capacity, political capital, and will to move in this direction.
But the fact that his administration has chosen to default on 30 million Venezuelans, rather than on Wall Street, is not a sign of its moral rectitude. It is a signal of its moral bankruptcy.
Turning Good Economic Luck into Bad
CAMBRIDGE, MA – It is often difficult to understand how countries that are dealt a pretty good economic hand can end up making a major mess of things.
It is as if they were trying to commit suicide by jumping from the basement.
Two of the most extreme cases (but not the only ones) are Argentina and Venezuela, countries that have benefited from high prices for their exports but have managed to miss the highway to prosperity by turning onto a dead-end street.
They will eventually have to make a U-turn and backtrack over the terrain of fictitious progress.
The puzzling thing is that this is not the first time either country has veered into an economic cul-de-sac.
It has been said that only barbers learn on other people’s heads, but some countries seem unable to learn even from their own experience.
The ultimate reason for such self-destructiveness may be impossible to identify.
But it is certainly possible to describe how the road to hell is paved, whatever the intentions.
It all starts when some imbalance causes overall inflation or some key price – typically the exchange rate, but also power, water, and gasoline – to come under upward pressure.
The government then uses its coercive power to keep a lid on price growth.
For example, Brazil has wreaked havoc on the financial health of its national oil company, Petrobras, in order to keep gasoline prices low.
Argentina destroyed its natural-gas sector with price controls.
Many countries have kept power and water prices too low and have ended up with shortages.
But things become really nasty when the government opts for foreign-exchange controls.
The usual story, nicely summarized by the late Rüdiger Dornbusch and Sebastian Edwards, is that lax fiscal and monetary policies cause a flood of freshly printed currency to chase more dollars than the central bank can provide at the going exchange rate.
Rather than let the currency depreciate, or tighten its policies, the government opts for foreign-exchange controls, limiting access to dollars to those who “really” need it and thus preventing “speculators” from hurting “the people.”
Foreign-exchange controls, typically accompanied by price controls, give the government the sense that it can have its cake (lax policies) and eat low inflation.
But controls lead to a parallel exchange rate, which can be either legal, as in Argentina, or illegal and even unpublishable, as in Venezuela.
But having two prices for an identical dollar creates enormous arbitrage opportunities.
A dollar purchased at the official rate can be sold for almost twice as much in the “blue” market in Argentina and a whopping ten times more in Venezuela.
Repeat that game a few times and you will be able to afford a corporate jet.
Nothing becomes more profitable than over-invoicing imports and under-invoicing exports.
In Venezuela, importing spoiled food and letting it rot is more profitable than any investment anywhere else in the world (disregarding, of course, the bribes needed to make it happen).
The dual-exchange-rate system ends up distorting production incentives and causing the effective supply of imported goods to decline, leading to a combination of inflation and shortages.
But here things turn interesting.
Public spending tends to rise with inflation more than government revenues do, because revenues depend on the tax on exports, which is calculated at the pegged official exchange rate.
So, over time, fiscal accounts worsen automatically, creating a vicious circle: monetized fiscal deficits lead to inflation and a widening gap in the parallel exchange-rate market which worsens the fiscal deficit.
Eventually, a major adjustment of the official rate becomes inevitable.
For example, when Hugo Chávez was first elected President in 1998, the Venezuelan bolívar could be exchanged for 2,610 Colombian pesos.
Today, despite a raft of foreign-exchange controls, a bolívar is worth barely 300 pesos at the official exchange rate (which is soon to be readjusted); one would be lucky to get 30 pesos at the black-market rate.
Not surprisingly, prices in Venezuela rise in one month more than they do in two years in neighboring Colombia.
Why do countries opt for such a strategy?
Any system creates winners and losers.
In Argentina and Venezuela, the winners are those who have preferential access to foreign exchange, those who benefit from the government’s profligacy, those who can borrow at the negative real interest rates that lax policies create, and those who do not mind waiting in long lines to buy rationed items.
Such a system can generate a self-reinforcing set of popular beliefs, which may explain why countries like Argentina and Venezuela repeatedly drive down dead-end streets.
Because so many businesses make money from the rents created by the rationing of foreign exchange, rather than by creating value, it is easy to believe that markets do not work, that entrepreneurs are speculators, and that governments need to control them and impose “fair” prices.
All too often, this allows governments to blame the car, and even the passengers, for getting lost.
In Search of Convergence
CAMBRIDGE – One puzzle of the world economy is that for 200 years, the world’s rich countries grew faster than poorer countries, a process aptly described by Lant Pritchett as&nbsp;“Divergence, Big Time.”
When Adam Smith wrote The Wealth of Nations in 1776, per capita income in the world’s richest country – probably the Netherlands – was about four times that of the poorest countries.
Two centuries later, the Netherlands was 40 times richer than China, 24 times richer than India, and ten times richer than Thailand.
But, over the past three decades, the trend reversed.
Now, the Netherlands is only 11 times richer than India and barely four times richer than China and Thailand.
What could explain generalized divergence in one period and selective convergence in another?
After all, shouldn’t laggards grow faster than leaders if all they have to do is imitate others, even leapfrogging now-obsolete technologies? Why didn’t they grow faster for so long, and why are they doing so now?
Why are some countries now converging, while others continue to diverge?
There are potentially many answers to these questions.
But I would like to outline a possible explanation that, if true, has important implications for development strategies today.
The economic expansion of the last two centuries has been based on an explosion of knowledge about what can be made, and how.
An apt metaphor is a game of Scrabble: Goods and services are made by stringing together productive capabilities – inputs, technologies, and tasks – just as words are made by putting letters together.
Countries that have a greater variety of capabilities can make more diverse and complex goods, just as a Scrabble player who has more letters can generate more and longer words.
If a country lacks a letter, it cannot make the words that use it.
Moreover, the more letters a country has, the greater the number of uses it could find for any additional letter it acquired.
This leads to a “quiescence trap,” which lies at the heart of the Great Divergence.
Countries with few “letters” lack incentives to accumulate more letters, because they cannot do much with any additional one: you would not want a TV remote control if you didn’t have a TV, and you would not want a TV broadcasting company if your potential customers lacked electricity.
This trap becomes deeper the longer the alphabet and the longer the words.
The last two centuries have seen an explosion in technologies – letters – and in the complexity of goods and services that can be made with them.
So the techies get techier, and the laggards fall further behind.
Why, then, are some poorer countries now converging?
Is the technological alphabet getting shorter?
Are products getting simpler?
Obviously not.
What is happening is that globalization has split up value chains, allowing trade to move from words to syllables.
Now, countries can get into business with fewer letters and add letters more parsimoniously.
It used to be that if you wanted to export a shirt, you had to be able to design it to the taste of people you didn’t really know, procure the appropriate materials, manufacture it, distribute it through an effective logistical network, brand it, market it, and sell it.
Unless you performed all of these functions well, you would go out of business.
Globalization allows these different functions to be carried out in different places, thereby allowing countries to participate earlier, when they still have few locally available capabilities, which can then be expanded over time.
A recent example is Albania.
Known as the North Korea of Europe until the early 1990s, when Albania abandoned its quixotic quest for autarky, it started cutting and sowing garments and shoes for Italian manufacturers, gradually evolving its own fully integrated companies.
Other countries that started in garments – for example, South Korea, Mexico, and China – ended up reusing the accumulated letters (industrial and logistical capabilities) while adding others to move into the production of electronics, cars, and medical equipment.
Consider this a stylized version of the sale of IBM’s Thinkpad to China’s Lenovo.
Once upon a time, IBM asked a Chinese manufacturer to assemble its Thinkpad – using the components that it would supply and following a set of instructions – and send the final product back to IBM.
A couple of years later, the Chinese company suggested that it take responsibility for procuring the parts.
Later, it offered to handle international distribution of the final product.
Then it offered to take on redesigning the computer itself.
Soon enough, it was no longer clear what IBM was contributing to the arrangement.
Learning to master new technologies and tasks lies at the heart of the growth process.
If, while learning, you face competition from those with experience, you will never live long enough to acquire the experience yourself.
This has been the basic argument behind import-substitution strategies, which use trade barriers as their main policy instrument.
The problem with trade protection is that restricting foreign competition also means preventing access to inputs and knowhow.
Participating in global value chains is an alternative way to learn by doing that is potentially more powerful than closing markets to foreign competition.
It enables a parsimonious accumulation of productive capabilities by reducing the number of capabilities that need to be in place in order to get into business.
This strategy requires a highly open trade policy, because it requires sending goods across borders many times.
But this does not imply laissez-faire; on the contrary, it requires activist policies in many areas, such as education and training, infrastructure, R&amp;D, business promotion, and the development of links to the global economy.
Some dismiss this strategy, arguing that countries end up merely assembling other people’s stuff.
But, as the famous astronomer Carl Sagan once said: “If you want to make an apple pie from scratch, you must first invent the universe.”
The Tacit-Knowledge Economy
CAMBRIDGE – Almost all rich countries are rich because they exploit technological progress.
They have moved the bulk of their labor force out of agriculture and into cities, where knowhow can be shared more easily.
Their families have fewer children and educate them more intensively, thereby facilitating further technological progress.
Poor countries need to go through a similar change in order to become rich: reduce farm employment, become more urban, have fewer children, and keep those children that they have in school longer.
If they do, the doors to prosperity will open.
These are better social indicators than the United Kingdom had in 1960.
At that time, the UK was 78.4% urban; its fertility rate was 2.7; its labor force had six years of schooling on average, and its university graduates accounted for less than 2% of potential workers.
Brazil is not a unique case: Colombia, Tunisia, Turkey, and Indonesia in 2010 compare favorably to Japan, France, the Netherlands, and Italy, respectively, in 1960.
Not only did these countries achieve better social indicators in these dimensions; they also could benefit from the technological innovations of the past half-century: computers, cellphones, the Internet, Teflon, and so on.
This should allow higher productivity than was feasible in 1960.
So today’s emerging-market economies should be richer than today’s advanced economies were back then, right?
Wrong – and by a substantial margin.
Per capita GDP at constant prices was 140% higher in Britain in 1960 than in Brazil in 2010.
It was 80% higher in Japan back then than in Colombia today, 42% higher in old France than in current Tunisia, 250% higher in the old Netherlands than in current Turkey, and 470% higher in old Italy than in current Indonesia.
Why is it that today’s smaller and more educated urbanized families in emerging-market economies are so much less productive than their counterparts were a half-century ago in today’s rich countries?
Why can’t today’s emerging markets replicate levels of productivity that were achieved in countries with worse social indicators and much older technologies?
The key to this puzzle is tacit knowledge.
To make stuff, you need to know how to make it, and this knowledge is, to a large extent, latent – not available in books, but stored in the brains of those who need to use it.
Getting it there is really tough.
Tacit knowledge is acquired mostly through learning by doing.
That is how we train musicians, barbers, doctors, and scientists.
Consider how long it takes an adult to learn to speak a language or a musician to master the violin.
Moreover, tacit knowledge is vast and growing, so that only a miniscule fraction of it fits in anybody’s head.
But most products require much more knowledge than fits in anybody’s head, so that making them requires teams of people with different pieces of knowledge, not unlike a symphonic orchestra.
Getting more tacit knowledge is easier said than done, because economies can offer experience only on the basis of current jobs.
How do people learn to do jobs that do not yet exist?
How do they create and mobilize coherent teams of people in new economic activities if the requisite tacit knowledge is missing?
Recent research at Harvard University’s Center for International Development (CID) suggests that tacit knowledge flows through amazingly slow and narrow channels.
The productivity of Nuevo León, Mexico, is higher than in South Korea, but that of Guerrero, another Mexican state, resembles levels in Honduras.
Moving knowledge across Mexican states has been difficult and slow.
It is easier to move brains than it is to move tacit knowledge into brains, and not only in Mexico.
For example, as the CID’s Frank Neffke has shown, when new industries are launched in German and Swedish cities, it is mostly because entrepreneurs and firms from other cities move in, bringing with them skilled workers with relevant industry experience.
They seldom hire locals.
The recently deceased economist Steven Klepper argued that industries tend to cluster in particular cities simply because new firms are formed mainly by workers who leave other successful firms, taking the relevant tacit knowledge with them.
Indeed, a large literature on knowledge spillovers points to their remarkably narrow geographic range.
The exceptions often confirm the rule.
The US would not have been able to build the first atomic bomb in just four years had Hitler not encouraged so many key scientists to leave Europe.
The bottom line is that urbanization, schooling, and Internet access are woefully insufficient to transmit effectively the tacit knowledge required to be productive.
That is why today’s emerging markets are so much less productive than rich countries were in 1960, even though the latter were less urban, had higher birth rates and less formal schooling, and used much older technologies.
The policy implications are clear.
Knowhow resides in brains, and emerging and developing countries should focus on attracting them, instead of erecting barriers to skilled immigration.
They should tap into their diasporas, attract foreign direct investment in new areas, and acquire foreign firms if possible.
Knowledge moves when people do.
A Brain’s View of Economics
CAMBRIDGE – In his pathbreaking 2005 book On Intelligence, Jeff Hawkins proposed an alternative paradigm of how the human brain works.
In his view, the brain is not a Turing machine that manipulates symbols according to a table of rules, which is the model on which computers and artificial intelligence have been based.
Instead, the brain is a giant hierarchical memory that is constantly recording what it perceives and predicting what will come next.
The brain makes predictions by finding similarities between patterns in recent sensory inputs and previous experiences stored in its vast memory.
It matches current fragmentary sounds in a sea of noise with a known song, or the face of a person in disguise with that of your child.
The idea is similar to the auto-complete function in, say, the Google search box – constantly guessing what you will enter next based on what you have already typed in.
To see the hierarchy in this mechanism, consider that by perceiving just a few letters, you can predict the word; by looking at a few words, you can predict what the sentence means, or even the paragraph.
In fact, right now you must be guessing where it is that I am going with this entire commentary.
The hierarchy allows you to understand meaning, whether the input got to your brain by reading or listening.
The brain is thus an inductive machine that predicts the future based on finding similarities, at many different levels, between the present and the past.
Hawkins’ alternative model of how the brain works has important implications for many fields, including the one that I spend most of my time thinking about: economic-development strategy.
By definition, development is not just more of the same, just as an adult is not just a big baby.
The process involves adding and combining new and existing capabilities to support more diverse and complex activities.
But finding new things that can be done successfully is tricky, because it requires knowing what you will need and whether you will be able to procure it.
This is why Jeffrey Sachs’s Millennium Villages project has faltered, as the journalist Nina Munk’s recent book shows.
In trying to move farmers from subsistence to commercial agriculture, Munk argues, there are just too many missing pieces.
Traditional thinking in economic development has followed a Turing-like approach, trying to specify a general model of the world – based on first principles – and then use that model to think about a country’s predicament or a policy’s potential impact.
But the world is often too complex and nuanced for such an approach.
Would it not be a great improvement if, when looking at a particular place, we could have in mind all of the world’s previous experiences and automatically identify the most relevant ones, in order to infer what to do next?
Would it not be useful to see the development possibilities just as our brain, according to Hawkins, sees the world?
An alternative, Hawkins-like approach to economic development would take massive amounts of data about the world and ask what is likely to succeed next in a country or a city at a given point in time, given what is already present and in light of the experience there and everywhere else.
It would be like Amazon’s recommendation system, proposing books you may like based on your and everybody else’s experience.
In a recent paper, my colleagues and I showed that such an approach to economic development actually works.
In a particular city or country, you can predict, even a decade in advance, which industries will appear or disappear or grow or wane just by knowing the history of what has been there and everywhere else.
Countries tend to move into industries that are related to the ones they already have or that are present in locations that are similar to them.
We have made the approach user-friendly for countries in our recent Atlas of Economic Complexity.
The idea of looking at previous experiences to inform future action is as old as civilization.
Following this intuition, Justin Yifu Lin, the former chief economist of the World Bank, has suggested that when countries choose what to do next, they should look at a successful country that was similar to them two decades ago.
But we should be able to do much better than that by looking at many more experiences in much more detail, using a much bigger memory that can find many more patterns across much more of the relevant human experience.
Imagine that Sachs’s Millennium Villages project had known the sequence of all previous successful moves out of subsistence agriculture, rather than relying only on guesswork or deduction.
Would it not be useful to understand the paths to industrial development – and the dead ends – that are most relevant to a particular country today?
This alternative approach can empower many more people to seek successful routes to prosperity by lowering the perils and risks involved in the search – in the same way that maps empower people to get to where they want to go with much more information than they would otherwise have.
Just as augmented-reality technologies make our experience of the world richer (imagine a sports match today without instant replay), putting the development experience of the world at the fingertips of those engaged in promoting development is now perfectly feasible.
We should seize this opportunity.
The Still-Emerging Markets
SAN FRANCISCO – Today’s turbulence in emerging-market equity markets has triggered a wave of obituaries for their growth miracles of recent decades.
But confusing short-term wobbles with terminal decline is a gross misreading of what is happening.
The wave of industrialization and urbanization that is boosting the incomes of millions of people in emerging economies has not run its course.
Indeed, emerging-market bears are missing an important new driver of continued growth in these countries: their increasingly powerful and dynamic companies.
Emerging economies today are much more than a collection of new consumer markets and plentiful (and increasingly skilled) labor.
They are also home to thousands of new companies, many of which are quickly becoming large, global leaders in their fields.
Twenty years ago, who would have guessed that Mumbai’s Tata Group would be the largest private-sector industrial employer in the United Kingdom; or that Mexican companies Cemex and Bimbo would become the United States’ market leaders in cement production and bread-making, respectively; or that Beijing-based Lenovo would be on a par with Hewlett-Packard as the world’s largest seller of personal computers?
Moreover, the transformation in the world’s business landscape is in its early stages and should bolster growth in emerging markets for years to come.
The MGI CompanyScope, a new database of all companies with revenues of $1 billion or more, reveals that there are about 8,000 large companies worldwide.
Three-quarters of them are still based in developed regions.
By 2025, however, there are likely to be an additional 7,000 large companies, with seven out of ten based in emerging regions.
The share of global consolidated revenue generated by these emerging-market corporate giants is set to increase from 24% today to 46% in 2025.
The composition of the Fortune Global 500 is a case in point.
From 1980 to 2000, the share of companies on the list that were based in the emerging world remained relatively flat, at 5%.
By 2013, this share had soared to 26%, and, even on the most pessimistic assumptions for emerging-market growth, we expect it to rise to 39% by 2025 and to as high as 50% on more bullish assumptions.
In fact, the shift in the business landscape thus far has lagged behind the shift in the weight of global GDP toward emerging markets.
Between now and 2025, the GDP of emerging markets could increase by a factor of 2.5 – but the number of large companies based in these regions could more than triple.
By 2025, some of the leading global names in many industries could be companies we have not yet heard of – and some will likely be based in cities that few today could point to on a map.
We have mapped the MGI CompanyScope to Cityscope, our database of the world’s cities, giving us a detailed picture of where large companies locate their head offices and foreign subsidiaries.
Headquarters are extraordinarily concentrated.
The top 20 host cities are home to around one-third of all large companies’ headquarters and account for almost half of these companies’ combined revenue.
Just five of these top 20 cities are in emerging regions today.
But this, too, is changing fast.
The number of large-company headquarters in São Paolo, for example, is expected to rise more than three-fold by 2025, while Beijing and Istanbul could have 2.5 times as many head offices as they do today.
We estimate that about 280 cities – among the candidates are Campinas (Brazil), Daqing (China), and Izmir (Turkey) – could host large companies for the first time.
More than 150 of these up-and-coming business cities are likely to be in China.
If we look at telecoms companies, for example, Bandung (Indonesia) and Hanoi (Vietnam) already host large firms’ headquarters – despite the fact that their GDP is relatively small, at $6 billion and $12 billion, respectively.
Fast-growing home markets have been the launchpad for globally competitive emerging-market companies partly because these firms have learned to compete at very different income levels.
Moreover, they know how to work around inadequate infrastructure.
McKinsey research suggests that these companies are growing more than twice as quickly as their counterparts in developed economies.
Emerging-market large companies’ growing global clout is reflected in flows of foreign direct investment.
As recently as 2001, only 5% of outward FDI came from non-OECD countries; by 2011, that share had soared to 21%.
China’s outward FDI rose by almost 50% per year from 2004 to 2010; Brazil, Singapore, and Hong Kong have been major investors in Europe.
Those who have been writing obituaries for the emerging-market boom should give serious consideration to these trends.
The new breed of emerging-market multinational is diversifying its revenue around the world.
If growth in these companies’ home markets slows, they will diversify even more aggressively.
The global economy is now their platform.
When Easy Money Ends
LONDON – The departure of US Federal Reserve Board Chairman Ben Bernanke has fueled speculation about when and how the Fed and other central banks will wind down their mammoth purchases of long-term assets, also known as quantitative easing (QE).
Observers seize upon every new piece of economic data to forecast QE’s continuation or an acceleration of its decline.
But more attention needs to be paid to the impact of either outcome on different economic players.
There is no doubting the scale of the QE programs.
Since the start of the financial crisis, the Fed, the European Central Bank, the Bank of England, and the Bank of Japan have used QE to inject more than $4 trillion of additional liquidity into their economies.
When these programs end, governments, some emerging markets, and some corporations could be vulnerable.
They need to prepare.
Research by the McKinsey Global Institute suggests that lower interest rates saved the US and European governments nearly $1.6 trillion from 2007 to 2012.
This windfall allowed higher government spending and less austerity.
If interest rates were to return to 2007 levels, interest payments on government debt could rise by 20%, other things being equal.
Governments in the US and the eurozone are particularly vulnerable in the short term, because the average maturity of sovereign debt is only 5.4 years and roughly six years, respectively.
The United Kingdom is in better shape, with an average maturity of 14.6 years.
As interest rates rise, governments will need to determine whether higher tax revenue or stricter austerity measures will be required to offset the increase in debt-service costs.
Likewise, US and European non-financial corporations saved $710 billion from lower debt-service payments, with ultra-low interest rates thus boosting profits by about 5% in the US and the UK, and by 3% in the eurozone.
This source of profit growth will disappear as interest rates rise, and some firms will need to reconsider business models – for example, private equity – that rely on cheap capital.
Emerging economies have also benefited from access to cheap capital.
Foreign investors’ purchases of emerging-market sovereign and corporate bonds almost tripled from 2009 to 2012, reaching $264 billion.
Some of this investment has been initially funded by borrowing in developed countries.
As QE programs end, emerging-market countries could see an outflow of capital.
By contrast, households in the US and Europe lost $630 billion in net interest income as a result of QE.
This hurt older households that have significant interest-bearing assets, while benefiting younger households that are net borrowers.
Although households in many advanced economies have reduced their debt burdens since the financial crisis began, total household debt in the US, the UK, and most eurozone countries is still higher as a percentage of GDP (and in absolute terms) than it was in 2000.
Many households still need to reduce their debt further and will be hit with higher interest rates as they attempt to do so.
Some companies, too, have been affected by QE and will need to take appropriate steps if such policies are maintained.
Many life-insurance companies and banks are taking a considerable hit, because of low interest rates.
The longer QE continues, the more vulnerable they will be.
The situation is particularly difficult in some European countries.
Insurers that offer customers guaranteed-rate products are finding that government-bond yields are below the rates being paid to customers.
Several more years of ultra-low interest rates would make many of these companies vulnerable.
Similarly, eurozone banks lost a total of $230 billion in net interest income from 2007 to 2012.
If QE continues, many of them will have to find new ways to generate returns or face significant restructuring.
We could also witness the return of asset-price bubbles in some sectors, especially real estate, if QE continues.
The International Monetary Fund noted in 2013 that there were already “signs of overheating in real-estate markets” in Europe, Canada, and some emerging-market economies.
In the UK, the Bank of England has announced that in February it will end its mortgage Funding for Lending Scheme, which allowed lenders to borrow at ultra-low rates in exchange for providing loans.
Of course, QE and ultra-low interest rates served a purpose.
If central banks had not acted decisively to inject liquidity into their economies, the world could have faced a much worse outcome.
Economic activity and business profits would have been lower, and government deficits would have been higher.
When monetary support is finally withdrawn, this will be an indicator of the economic recovery’s ability to withstand higher interest rates.
Nevertheless, all players need to understand how the end of QE will affect them.
After more than five years, QE has arguably entrenched expectations for continued low or even negative real interest rates – acting more like addictive painkillers than powerful antibiotics, as one commentator has put it.
Governments, companies, investors, and individuals all need to shake off complacency and take a more disciplined approach to borrowing and lending to prepare for the end – or continuation – of QE.
Richard Dawkins’ Law Delusion
AIX-EN-PROVENCE – Richard Dawkins is one of the great minds of our time; yet in his just-published memoir, Brief Candle in the Dark: My Life in Science, he notes that great minds often err when they leave their field of expertise.
He cites the great astronomer Fred Hoyle, whose book The Nature of the Universe was essential reading a half-century ago.
When Hoyle turned to biology, he went astray.
The same thing happens to Dawkins when he turns from science to law.
Dawkins sees law as a tug of war.
One party, he says, makes the strongest arguments for a proposition “whether they believe it or not,” and the opposing party pays somebody to make the strongest counter-arguments.
The outcome is just a question of who wins the tug of war.
He thinks lawyers would be more “honest and humane” if they were just to “sit down together, look at the evidence, and try to work out what really happened here.”
Dawkins’ argument is marred by three common fallacies.
The first might be called the Crime Fallacy.
As is true of many people, what first springs to Dawkins’ mind when he thinks of law is criminal law.
Criminal trials fill a large space in the public imagination, but – to borrow a metaphor from biology – they are but one cell of law’s complex corpus.
Most lawyers and judges never enter a criminal court.
The second is the Guilt Fallacy.
Dawkins is “deeply shocked” to discover that a person who committed an illegal act may be found not guilty.
The Guilt Fallacy confuses “guilt,” which is a legal concept, with the commission of a forbidden act.
Whether one has committed an act is a question of fact.
Whether one is “guilty” is a question of law.
A person may have carried out an act, but quite rightly be found “not guilty” – just as he may be found “guilty,” even though he did nothing.
This puzzles Dawkins, as it does many others.
“Guilt” means that the state has proved beyond a reasonable doubt that the accused committed the act.
If the state cannot prove it beyond a reasonable doubt, the accused is “not guilty” – regardless of whether he or she really did commit the act.
If that burden of proof – “beyond a reasonable doubt” – were lowered to, say, “a preponderance of the evidence,” as it is in civil cases, the state would have an easier task.
But while this would result in more guilty verdicts for those who have committed crimes, it would also cause more innocent people to be found guilty.
The underlying premise that Dawkins seems to be failing to grasp is straightforward: It is better to let ten criminals go free than one innocent person be convicted.
Centuries of legal history show that this system, though far from perfect, is the fairest that humans have been able to devise.
Dawkins’ third and most fundamental fallacy is the delusion that law is about truth – “what really happened,” as he puts it.
Let us call this the Truth Fallacy.
It is here that Dawkins goes furthest astray.
The goal of law, unlike that of science, is not to determine truth; its primary aim is to minimize conflict.
US Supreme Court Justice Louis Brandeis summed up this understanding as follows: “In most matters it is more important that the applicable rule of law be settled than that it be settled right.”
Even a wrong or “unjust” decision can end a conflict.
Only when parties to a conflict cannot reach an agreement will a judge try to discover “what really happened.”