But democracy and distrust can be a dangerous compound, because people confronting complex political and economic issues do not always direct their anger at the proper target.
Profound economic and technological changes in recent decades – together with privatization, deregulation, digitization, and financialization – have further empowered elites and enabled them to hone their use of political influencing via think tanks and philanthropies; shadow lobbying, workarounds that subvert standard processes; the media; campaign finance; and stints in “public service” to advance their interests.
This “new corruption,” though usually technically legal, is virtually nontransparent – and thus highly corrosive of public trust.
This, along with widening income inequality, helps explain how voters can be swayed by a candidate like Trump, especially when they live, as many increasingly do, in their own information universes.
Facebook and Twitter algorithms confirm a group’s biases and screen out contrary viewpoints – and even facts.
The digital age has created an insularity that, ironically, is not unlike that fostered under communism.
The result is frighteningly familiar to anyone who has studied Eastern European history.
Like Russian President Vladimir Putin, Trump harnesses futility and anger, exploits nostalgic yearning and nationalism, and finds convenient scapegoats in vulnerable people such as immigrants.
As in Russia, where gays and other minorities have been officially targeted, America’s disenchanted are being encouraged to harass and demonize already marginalized groups.
Trust is the lifeblood of a thriving society, and much of the West needs an emergency transfusion.
But its political systems will remain on life support until their entrenched elites feel sufficiently vulnerable to stop ignoring the needs of those who have been left behind.
Publish or Perish
OXFORD – A few years ago, two Norwegian researchers presented their version of a scientific-research slippery slope, with honest errors (mistaken observations and analyses) at the top and intentional fraud (plagiarism, falsification, and fabrication) at the bottom.
They placed “publication bias” about halfway down the scale – but it should have been much lower.
Indeed, failure to publish research results is by far the most common and worrying form of scientific and ethical misconduct in health research – and it has had lethal consequences.
Anecdotal evidence of publication bias has existed for a long time.
But, as requirements for registering clinical trials have become more stringent, its magnitude has become quantifiable: the results of at least half of the clinical trials involving patients and healthy volunteers remain unpublished years after completion.
Studies with “negative” results are particularly unlikely to see the light of day.
But neglecting to report research can lead to distorted clinical-practice recommendations, suffering, and death.
For example, anti-arrhythmic drugs were prescribed widely – with the United States Food and Drug Administration’s approval – to heart-attack victims for more than a decade, under the assumption that reducing heart-rhythm abnormalities would decrease mortality rates.
But, as the investigative journalist Thomas J. Moore reported in his book Deadly Medicine, at the peak of their use, these drugs were killing more Americans each year than were killed during the entire Vietnam War.
Following this revelation, a British research team reported a clinical trial that they had carried out more than a decade earlier.
Their study had found a higher death rate among patients receiving a new anti-arrhythmic drug than among those receiving a placebo.
They had not published the results, they explained, because the drug’s development had been abandoned for commercial reasons.
In retrospect, however, they observed that their results “might have provided early warning of trouble ahead.”
Beyond avoidable suffering and death, failure to report research also slows the pace of scientific discovery.
It is widely acknowledged that the high current level of investment in pharmaceutical research is yielding too few substantive discoveries.
At a meeting on “translational research,” a senior member of a contract-research organization – a company that provides outsourced research services to the pharmaceutical and biotechnology industries – articulated the problem.
Drug-trial volunteers should not accept this abuse of their participation in research.
Failing to publish the results of clinical trials is a betrayal of the implicit trust that they have placed in researchers to use their contribution to increase and improve the stock of scientific knowledge.
Nor should the public accept this squandering of resources.
There is simply no justification for withholding the results of health-research studies.
Publication is a moral imperative.
Puerto Rico’s Debt Trap
WASHINGTON, DC – The Caribbean island of Puerto Rico – the largest United States “territory” – is broke, and a human calamity is unfolding there.
Unless a constructive course of political action is found in 2016, Puerto Rican migration to the 50 states will rival the scale of the 1930s Dust Bowl exodus from Oklahoma, Arkansas, and other climate-devastated states.
With public debt service (principal plus interest) projected to reach nearly 40% of government revenue in 2016, Puerto Rico needs a new set of economic policies.
But austerity will not work; this must be an investment-led recovery, with official measures oriented toward boosting growth by reducing the cost of doing business.
The question is whether Puerto Rico will have that option.
Much of its $73 billion debt has been issued by government corporations.
But, though federal law allows such municipal debt to be restructured under Chapter 9 of the bankruptcy code in all 50 states, this does not apply to US territories like Puerto Rico.
As a result, a protracted series of confusing legal battles and selective defaults looms.
The cost of essential infrastructure services – electricity, water, sewers, and transportation – will go up while quality declines.
One response has been to demand further belt-tightening, for example, in the form of wage reductions and healthcare cuts.
But residents of Puerto Rico are also US citizens and they vote with their feet – the population has fallen from 3.9 million to 3.5 million in recent years as talented and energetic people have moved to Florida, Texas, and other parts of the mainland.
The more creditors insist on lower living standards and higher taxes, the more the tax base will simply leave the island – causing bondholders’ losses to rise.
Disorganized defaults by public corporations will make it hard for any part of the private credit system to function.
Leading conservatives in the US – including at the Hoover Institution – have long argued in favor of using established bankruptcy procedures when large financial firms fail.
The same logic applies here: A judge can remove any doubt that actual insolvency exists, while also ensuring that credit remains available during a restructuring.
During that process, a judge can rely on precedent and ensure fairness across creditor classes based on the precise terms under which loans were obtained.
Although congressional Republicans have so far refused to allow for a judge-supervised bankruptcy process, bipartisan agreement remains possible.
Democratic Senators Richard Blumenthal, Elizabeth Warren, and Charles E. Schumer have proposed legislation that would introduce a stay on creditor lawsuits until March 31, 2016.
No one, including Republican Senator Chuck Grassley, Chair of the powerful Senate Judiciary Committee, believes that debt restructuring by itself will bring back growth; but extending Chapter 9 of the bankruptcy code to Puerto Rico would help.
Puerto Rico needs private-sector investment, which requires taking three steps.
For starters, bureaucratic hurdles to job creation should be eliminated, including by using state-of-the-art technology to make government more transparent.
Pedro Pierluisi, Puerto Rico’s representative in Congress, has long emphasized this point.
Second, the cost of essential inputs for industry needs to fall.
Electricity on the island is significantly more expensive than in Florida, in part because of underinvestment.
More broadly, there are pressing needs for public investment to improve infrastructure, which implies great opportunities for private-sector participation.
But none of this will happen until the debt overhang is removed.
Finally, Puerto Rico needs better fiscal management.
The island’s idiosyncratic tax and expenditure system – and the lack of effective local control over fiscal policy – has become part of the longer-term problem.
Puerto Rico should, over time, become more like one of the 50 states in its fiscal relationship with the federal government.
If Congress is willing to commit to that path, a reasonable quid pro quo would be strong fiscal rules – and a powerful monitoring body.
With congressional support and pro-growth policies, Puerto Rico can attract talented Americans (and legal immigrants) to move to the island, start companies, and work hard.
Higher education in Puerto Rico remains strong, but more than 80,000 people leave every year (and only 20,000 move in).
In part, high levels of net migration reflect Puerto Rico’s badly frayed health-care system.
The federal government provides significantly more support to every state health-care system through Medicare (for pensioners) and Medicaid (for low-income households), despite the fact that Puerto Ricans pay the same federal payroll taxes that fund much of the Medicare program.
Likewise, to become eligible for more robust support, including through the earned-income tax credit – a program supported by leading conservatives, such as Speaker of the House of Representatives Paul Ryan – hard-working low-income Puerto Ricans must move to one of the 50 states.
Puerto Rico doesn’t need a bailout.
It needs to reduce the cost of doing business – cut the red tape, encourage investment, and attract people to work (and pay tax in) a beautiful place.
It also needs what has been a constructive part of the American economic model over 200 years – the ability to restructure municipal debt through bankruptcy.
Purpose beyond Power
BUDAPEST – The re-run of the Greek parliamentary election on June 17 is only the latest symptom of the most serious crisis to plague Western democracies and open societies since the 1960’s.
Liberal democracies in the West today are struggling to avoid – and in doing so are exacerbating – a crisis of identity, which puts the existing social contract at risk and threatens their implosion.
The end of the Cold War bequeathed our leaders with a new set of governance challenges, which promptly grew in magnitude, in large part owing to faster globalization, the consequences of the 1980’s economic liberalization, and the 1990’s revolution in information technology.
These challenges, insufficiently addressed, soon led many to question the sustainability of liberal democracy’s appeal at home and its universality abroad, and to probe the alleged merits of the “Chinese model,” best characterized as a form of authoritarian or state capitalism.
The financial meltdown of 2008, which soon metamorphosed into the deepest Western economic recession since the 1930’s, added fuel to the fire, as policymakers hunkered down in a non-transparent crisis-management mode, condoning massive state intervention in the economy and socialization of private-sector losses on a previously unprecedented scale.
The resulting fiscal austerity plunged many below the poverty line and accelerated economic inequality, while many private institutions, having caused the 2008 bust, recovered on the public dime.
Adding insult to injury, in Greece and Italy, two of the hardest-hit countries, financial markets effectively deposed elected, if imperfect, governments.
The hapless former Greek prime minister, George Papandreou, had to resign last year after daring to suggest a referendum to decide the economic future of his fellow citizens.
(Ironically, the upcoming election will de facto serve as the referendum that Papandreou suggested in October 2011.)
At the root of the European crisis (and its equivalent crisis in the United States) is a shift in the configuration of economic, social, and political power.
Liberal democracies and open societies have traditionally relied on a fine balance of these three forms of power.
Over the last two decades, our elites have been unable to maintain it, as economic power has long since gone global and dislodged itself from political power, often corrupting democratic politics in the process.
At the same time, social power, which provides the oxygen for democratic legitimacy, has been marginalized and disillusioned, and is increasingly turning away from the traditional transmission belts of politics.
The result is an erosion of the stature of mainstream political parties and trade unions, and all-time low levels of trust in governments writ large.
Powered by new media, identities are beginning to form around new networks of social interaction that often defy state boundaries and have little connection to liberal democracy’s traditional institutions of governance.
The refusal of today’s elites to promote an effective balance of the three powers – to recognize a larger purpose beyond maximizing each individual power – has visibly translated into a waning regard for the public good.
This has dramatic consequences for liberal democracy and open societies.
With political power diminished (and sometimes usurped) by the transformation of its economic counterpart, and its detachment from its social base rendering it increasingly illegitimate, this is the hour of populists and extremists.
We now see them feast on enfeebled democracies in many European countries, as fringe movements become serious contenders for power and threaten to wipe out the achievements of more than 60 years of European integration.
In the US, the political system has descended into seemingly intractable partisan paralysis, gravely undermining the system of checks and balances and generating a deepening sense of malaise and frustration.
We stand at a critical juncture.
Recreating democracy and open societies in a global age requires investment in new ideas to rebalance political, economic, and social power at both the national and the global level.
Nationally, we need to experiment with new mechanisms for policymaking and implementation, reconnecting democratic institutions to citizens and emerging networks of civil society.
Globally, we must allow political and social power to establish their rightful place next to economic power.
Mere tinkering will not do; we need a transformation of the global institutional architecture.
Unless we can establish a global socio-political space, we cannot legitimately deliberate over the provision of global public goods, let alone deliver them successfully.
The push toward such a space needs to be spearheaded by risk takers – social and political entrepreneurs who are unafraid to work across lines traditionally dividing sectors and states, and who help to re-create a global community of purpose beyond power.
The French philosopher Jean-Paul Sartre once described the Berlin Wall as a mirror.
In view of the Soviet system, it was indeed easy to overlook our own weakness and fallibilities.
As the Wall came down, our elites struggled to maintain the fiction of an inherently imminent victory march for liberal democracy worldwide, now laid bare by the economic crisis on both sides of the Atlantic.
We have lost two valuable decades to respond adequately to globalization and the crisis of liberal democracy and open societies.
It is time to begin an honest reflection about power and its purpose in today’s rapidly changing world.
Putin and Medvedev: Teammates or Rivals?
Vladimir Putin’s decision to serve as prime minister should Dmitri Medvedev become Russia’s next president has made their electoral success in March a virtual certainty.
Although the Communist Party’s leader, Gennadi Zyuganov, and the Liberal Democrats’ Vladimir Zhirinovsky are running – in contrast to 2004, when they fielded stand-ins – neither will get more than 15% of the vote.
Even assuming that Mikhail Kasyanov, Boris Nemtsov, and Democratic Party leader Andrei Bogdanov somehow collect two million signatures each to get on the ballot, the outcome will be the same.
Indeed, so far, none of them has more than 2% popular support.
But, while Medvedev’s victory in the first round of voting appears assured, the important questions will arise after the ballots are counted.
How will power be distributed between Medvedev and Putin?
Who will be in charge?
Will Russia have to rewrite its laws and Constitution to give the prime minister more official power?
Is Putin risking his political future by accepting a formally secondary role and making himself accountable for all socio-economic policy?
Russia’s Constitution does not allow for a “technical presidency.”
The head of state has extensive powers, which alone indicates that Medvedev will be a strong president.
Moreover, Medvedev is a strong-willed politician and very experienced administrator.
But Putin will be a strong prime minister, if only because he’s Putin.
He is set to remain the most popular person in Russia for a long time to come.
That implies a system of governance with at least two decision-making centers – perhaps in addition to United Russia, the party of Putin and Medvedev, which won 64% of the vote in the recent parliamentary election up from 37% in 2003.
All this represents obvious progress from the standpoint of the separation of powers.
In consenting to become prime minister, Putin is well aware of what to expect.
After all, he served as prime minister for several months in 1999.
Many commentators underestimate the prime minister’s powers.
According to the Constitution, the prime minister is head of the executive branch, and the government is empowered to determine the main direction of domestic and foreign policy.
Much depends on who is prime minister; heavyweight politicians holding the office can potentially eclipse the president.
Recall Yevgeny Primakov – or Putin at the end of Boris Yeltsin’s last presidential term, when it was obvious to everyone that the prime minister was running the country.
The 2008 version of Prime Minister Putin will undoubtedly be stronger than the 1999 version.
So no changes are required to the laws or the Constitution for him to remain a key political player.
But Medvedev – youthful and energetic, with a fresh mandate – will be far stronger than Yeltsin was in 1999.
A powerful prime minister seems preferable.
One of the chief weaknesses in Russia's constitutional design is that power is separated from accountability: the president has the most power, but the government is held accountable for policy results.
From this standpoint, the American model, for example, is more successful: the head of state also leads the government.
While not entirely addressing the flaws in the design, the new situation – with the strongest political figure heading the executive branch – will permit more effective performance by the government, which is still battling to recover from Putin’s administrative reforms of 2004.
Many commentators have reproached Putin for agreeing to take a job that they say is beneath him – assuming responsibility for road-building, social services, inflation, and many other problems that could undermine his popularity.
However, he should be thanked rather than reproached.
But how stable will this new polycentric system of governance be?
How long will Medvedev remain president and Putin prime minister?
What if they quarrel?
Of course, stability requires agreement between the two key actors; and there are sure to be plenty of opponents and allies trying to stir up trouble between them.
But Putin and Medvedev have worked together for more than 17 years with no serious conflicts.
Moreover, Putin has never made a mistake about the loyalty of the people he promotes.
In the Yeltsin era, sacked officials often took revenge by publishing their memoirs and “telling all” about their ex-boss.
In the Putin era, no one has done so.
Mikhail Kasyanov, a former prime minister and now an opposition critic, was inherited from Yeltsin.
When Putin made the most important appointment of his life – the choice of his successor – one can be sure that his calculations were thorough.
So Medvedev will become the next president, and will hold that office for at least one full term.
And Putin will remain prime minister throughout that time, with a good chance of becoming president again in 2012 or 2016 – or after any other presidential election over the next two decades.
Europe Versus Gazprom
NEW YORK – For years, Russian President Vladimir Putin has wielded Europe’s dependence on his country’s natural gas as a foreign-policy weapon, without fear of the European Union calling his bluff – until now.
With the EU launching an antitrust case against the state-controlled gas conglomerate Gazprom, Europe has sent a clear signal that Putin’s brutishness is no longer as intimidating as it once was.
The message from the European Commissioner on Competition – that market rules apply to everyone – is one that Putin has dismissed for years.
Reliance on economic and legal means to achieve his political goals has long been a hallmark of his rule.
More than a decade ago, the Kremlin expropriated Yukos Oil, which at the time produced 20% of Russia’s output, and jailed its founder, Mikhail Khodorkovsky, for ten years on trumped-up tax evasion charges after he dared to oppose Putin.
All major players in Russia’s energy-centric economy quickly fell into line politically, enabling Putin to use the country’s oil and gas exports as a geopolitical cudgel.
EU countries that he could not intimidate militarily, owing to NATO, were wooed with discounts – or punished with price hikes.
Hungarian Prime Minister Victor Orbán is Putin’s staunchest friend in Europe (though Greek Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras seems to want to change that), while Poland’s leaders have consistently warned that Russia could become a menace to the continent again.
As a result, whereas Hungary pays Gazprom $260 per thousand cubic meters of gas, Poland pays $526 – the highest price in the EU.
The Poles have paid a steep price, but they were right.
The downing of Malaysian Airlines Flight 17 over eastern Ukraine last July seemed to mark the beginning of the end of Russia’s reputation, such as it is, as a civilized country.
And now there is the hearing, currently underway in London, into the murder of Alexander Litvenenko, a dissident ex-KGB officer.
Early in that hearing, the barrister acting for Litvenenko’s family claimed that the evidence in the case led to Putin’s door.
Russia’s economy has already been reeling under Western sanctions imposed in response to the Kremlin’s annexation of Crimea and continued aggression in eastern Ukraine.
Output is expected to shrink by almost 4% this year, and the country’s credit ratings have been reduced to “junk” or “near junk” status.
And now the European Commission is taking a page from Putin’s playbook.
By seeking to punish Gazprom for its manipulation of energy prices, it is aiming a dagger at the heart of Putin’s regime.
Moreover, the EU’s antitrust action seems to be part of a coordinated legal assault.
Last summer, the Permanent Court of Arbitration in The Hague ruled that Russia must pay $50 billion to Yukos’s shareholders – a judgment expected to be upheld on appeal.
In essence, the decision sent the same message as the EU’s anti-trust action against Gazprom: rules apply to everyone, and stolen property must be returned.
Of course, Europe could not easily withstand a 30% cut in natural-gas deliveries if Putin ordered Gazprom to stop doing business there.
But that is unlikely: Natural resources comprise 70% of Russia’s exports, and transfers from Gazprom’s revenues alone account for at least 5% of the national budget.
Over the past decade, rising oil and gas prices fueled rapid GDP growth, securing Putin’s popularity and giving him the resources to reconstruct Russia’s military might, now on display in Ukraine.
In other words, Gazprom (and the Russian government) are less capable of withstanding the loss of the European market than vice versa.
Indeed, given the hard bargains that China has been driving during Putin’s desperate search for alternative buyers, threatening to cut exports to Europe has proven to be an exceedingly unwise tactic.
A moment of truth is slowly approaching.
Much of the world is working to reduce its dependence on volatile or unsavory energy suppliers by adopting new technologies such as hydraulic fracturing and increasing purchases from places like Australia, Norway, Qatar, and the United States, which has eased restrictions on the export of natural resources.
Whether Putin likes it or not, this trend will force him to become accountable for his actions.
The EU may be unable to return Crimea to Ukraine, but its legal actions should put Putin on notice that his strong-arm tactics will not work for much longer.
Putinism in Crisis
MOSCOW – “Owing to the harsh economic situation, it was decided to cut off the light at the end of the tunnel as a temporary measure.”
That is but one of the jokes making the rounds in Russia these days, as the country faces its most severe crisis in a decade.
Having been born in the early 1960’s, my generation remembers two crises.
The first, following the collapse of the USSR, was almost cataclysmic – nothing in the shops, the country in bankruptcy, all savings lost.
The other affected everyone but was less severe – Russia’s 1998 default, which saw a fourfold devaluation of the ruble.
Today’s crisis is acute, but there is no sense of an approaching apocalypse.
Yet the crisis will be severe, not only because prices for the major Russian export commodities – oil, gas, and metal – have plummeted, but also because the government, which believed in its boundless force and wisdom, now seems inadequate to the challenges that Russia faces.
Yes, Russia has enormous gold and currency reserves, but they are being depleted fast.
They will not last for long while being spent – mostly in defense of the ruble – at the current pace.
Most importantly, there is no one in power who can change the country’s economic policies.
Instead, Russia is ruled by “yes men” who are only able to agree and echo: “As you say, Mr. Prime Minister…”; “As you wish, Mr. President…” One reason is that the country’s leadership now appears to be digesting the same garbage information it feeds to the public.
Whole regions – the Urals and Mordovia, for example – are stagnant.
Moscow, which used to rain gold on the economy, is also suffering, because it, too, depends on natural resources, and its biggest taxpayers – Gazprom, Lukoil, Transneft – are now in bad shape.
Indeed, Moscow’s budget has lost about a quarter of its revenues.
But, given the tastes and appetites of Moscow’s mayor, you can assume that he will continue to pour what money remains into the city’s building boom.
What does not bring in money – roads, schools, hospitals, and kindergartens – will suffer.
As in the early 1990’s, everyone is again afraid of unemployment.
But back then, there was almost no unemployment, peaking at 12%, because Russia’s Labor Code makes firing employees hard and very costly.
Moreover, most Russians do not object strenuously to wage cuts, reductions in working hours, and unpaid leaves.
There is a good reason for this docility.
Moving and buying a new apartment in a different place is almost impossible, which makes Russian workers highly immobile.
In Soviet times, people were proud of the fact that they had only one or two jobs during their lifetime. Those who acted differently were referred to pejoratively as “job-hoppers.”
So, today, people stay near idle factories – kind of employed, but having nothing to do and earning virtually no money.
Occasionally the factory pays them something, but people mainly live off their own vegetable gardens.
The outcome is widespread alcoholism, poverty, and lack of prospects.
Yet real signs of crisis are emerging.
Electricity consumption fell 6% in November from a year ago, and freight traffic has decreased by 20%.
Even the Ministry of Economics recognizes that Russia has entered a recession that will last at least six months.
The strange thing about today’s crisis is that Russia’s billionaires have been hit harder than others.
Don’t worry, Russia’s oligarchs are not starving, but the fortunes of many of them have collapsed.
In another joke making the rounds in Moscow, a billionaire borrows 300 rubles (just over $10) from another to buy Forbes to check his place in the latest rankings of Russia’s richest people.
Indifferent to the poor, Russia’s government is actively supporting its fallen oligarchs, especially those who are close to the Kremlin.
For example, the state has granted a $4.2 billion loan to the aluminum magnate Oleg Deripaska (who held first place on the Forbes list before the crisis) to pay off Western creditors.
While experts are not sure whether Deripaska will repay the loan, the Kremlin and the oligarchs have their own ways of settling debts.
Deripaska, who accompanied President Dmitry Medvedev on his recent trip across Latin America, appealed to Russia’s rulers to study Franklin Roosevelt’s “New Deal” in the 1930’s as a model for economic recovery.
Roosevelt’s idea of a treaty between industrialists and the authorities appeals to the Russian oligarch.
Notably, Deripaska has suggested that the government create an “aluminum stabilization fund,” because the industry – his industry – is losing money and global market share.
Of course, Vladimir Putin had already put in place a treaty between Russia’s government and the country’s richest men, who agreed not to comment on the actions of the state in exchange for the freedom to earn as much money as possible in any way they wanted.
And if a well-placed official wanted to enter into a successful business, refusals were not accepted.
Fortunately, Russians know how to survive hard times.
I remember the late 1980’s not only for its hopes for freedom, but also for a total absence of baby food for my newborn daughter.
Twenty years have passed. My daughter has grown up.
There is enough baby food in the shops. But now there are no hopes for freedom.
Moscow intellectuals debate whether the current economic crisis will bring a new wave of liberalization to Russia.
This is the key question for me.
With a feeling of approaching freedom, any economic crisis can be endured more easily.
So far, that feeling remains a ghost.
Vladimir Putin’s Soviet Dream
MADRID – The recent nuclear deal concluded by six major world powers and Iran represented a triumph of multilateralism.
If those same powers – the five permanent UN Security Council members and Germany – showed the same will to work together to resolve other disputes, the world might enter a new era of cooperation and stability.
Unfortunately, such a scenario seems farfetched.
From China’s activities in the South China Sea to the Islamic State’s continued advance in the Middle East, competition and conflict are threatening long-standing regional orders.
But perhaps the most critical conflict – the one whose resolution has implications for all the rest – is in Ukraine, a country that has become central to Russian President Vladimir Putin’s expansionist ambitions.
Russia’s unilateral annexation of Crimea and support for separatists in eastern Ukraine have ruptured its relations with the West, and Putin has intentionally recreated a Cold War atmosphere by touting Russia’s “conservative values” as an ideological counterweight to the American-led liberal world order.
Nonetheless, key issues – the carnage in Syria, the fight against the Islamic State, nuclear non-proliferation, and conflicting interests and competing claims in the Arctic – cannot be resolved without Russia’s involvement.
That is why, as hard as it may be for Western powers, some efforts to appease Russia are unavoidable.
The United States should be less dismissive of Russia’s sensibilities as an important power and a major civilization, and Russia’s legitimate security interests concerning its borders with NATO countries must be addressed, not least to keep Ukraine out of a rival military alliance.
The Ukrainian parliament’s endorsement, despite strong international opposition, of autonomy for the pro-Russia separatist regions – a solution initially proposed by Putin – is exactly the kind of concession that is needed to restore peace.
Ultimately, however, it is up to Russia to change its ways.
Propaganda-driven nostalgia for the Soviet Union’s Cold War-era “great power” status is obscuring the lessons of that time.
The Soviet Union was an unsustainable empire; if it could not survive at a time when isolation and bipolarity were the order of the day, it certainly could not be recreated within today’s interconnected multipolar global system.
Russia already is in no position to confront the West: Its economy is withering, and it lacks solid alliances capable of countering US power.
Putin is hoping that Russia and its BRICS partners (Brazil, India, China, and South Africa) will become “the future leaders of the world and the global economy,” as he put it in July, at the conclusion of the BRICS and Shanghai Cooperation Organization summits
But the plain truth is that neither the BRICS nor the SCO is remotely close to being a cohesive bloc capable of insulating Russia from the consequences of its behavior in Ukraine.
The differences in values and strategic interests within the groupings are no less acute than the disagreements that their various members have with the West.
Russia’s bilateral relationship with China is no different.
It is a relationship founded largely on Chinese dependence on Russian energy supplies, mutual support for “spheres of influence” as the conceptual foundation of an alternative world order, and joint naval exercises in the Black Sea.
But the two countries have conflicting interests in Central Asia, where China is pursuing major investments to expand its influence in countries that Russia views as its “near abroad.”
When Putin questioned Kazakhstan’s independence last year, China was quick to support the country’s sovereignty.
China’s potential encroachment on Russia’s unpopulated Far East borders – which, in China’s view, were stolen, much like Hong Kong and Taiwan, during its “century of humiliation” – is another source of anxiety in the Kremlin.
More important, China’s economy depends on continued access to Western – and especially US – markets.
At a time when a slowing economy is creating greater uncertainty for China, it cannot afford to provoke tensions with the US over anything that is not in its direct interests, such as its territorial claims in the South China Sea.
Despite Russia’s weak alliances, Putin seems undeterred.
Beyond his boastful talk about Russia’s nuclear arsenal, his government has recently announced a new naval doctrine – one that amounts to an alarming echo of Germany’s naval challenge to Britain prior to World War I. If no diplomatic détente is brokered, Putin may well continue on this path, bringing his country ever closer to a full-blown conflict with NATO.
Even if no such conflict erupts, Putin’s attempts to restore Russian influence across Eurasia (by whatever means necessary, if his actions in Ukraine are any indication) will be highly damaging.
It should be no surprise that Kazakhstan and Belarus are as wary of Russian expansionism as Ukraine.
Putin has discarded former President Dmitri Medvedev’s concept of a “partnership for modernization” with the West.
But a Eurasian customs union among post-Soviet and other countries is not the road to modernization for Russia; nor is an effort to make the defense industry the engine of industrialization.
That, in a nutshell, was the Soviet model, which failed once and would fail again.
If Putin is serious about diversifying and strengthening Russia’s commodities-based economy, thereby improving the lives of his country’s people, he must attract advanced technologies and foreign investment, especially from the West.
For that, he must pursue democratic reforms, institutional regeneration, and renewed diplomatic ties with the West.
Russia is in no position to create an alternative international system; but, if Putin continues to pursue an outdated and antagonistic foreign policy, it can undermine the existing one.
At a time when the world is facing so many destabilizing challenges, this would not be good for anyone.
The West should seek to mollify Russia on core strategic questions like NATO expansion.
But that will not help Putin to overcome the source of Russia’s weakness, which lies in his inability or unwillingness to see the Soviet Union for the failure that it was.
Putin is No Ally Against ISIS
MUNICH – The leaders of the United States and the European Union are making a grievous error in thinking that President Vladimir Putin’s Russia is a potential ally in the fight against the Islamic State.
The evidence contradicts them.
Putin’s current aim is to foster the EU’s disintegration, and the best way to do so is to flood the EU with Syrian refugees.
Russian planes have been bombing the civilian population in southern Syria forcing them to flee to Jordan and Lebanon.
There are now 20,000 Syrian refugees camped out in the desert awaiting admission to Jordan.
A smaller number are waiting to enter Lebanon.
Both groups are growing.
Russia has also launched a large-scale air attack against civilians in northern Syria.
This was followed by a ground assault by Syrian President Bashar al-Assad’s army against Aleppo, a city that used to have 2 million inhabitants.
The barrel bombs caused 70,000 civilians to flee to Turkey; the ground offensive could uproot many more.
The families on the move may not stop in Turkey.
German Chancellor Angela Merkel flew to Ankara on February 9 to make last-minute arrangements with the Turkish government to induce the refugees already in Turkey to prolong their stay there.
She offered to airlift 200,000-300,000 Syrian refugees annually directly to Europe on the condition that Turkey prevent them from going to Greece and will accept them back if they do so.
Putin is a gifted tactician, but not a strategic thinker.
There is no reason to believe that he intervened in Syria in order to aggravate the European refugee crisis.
Indeed, his intervention was a strategic blunder, because it embroiled him in a conflict with Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan that has hurt the interests of both.
But once Putin saw the opportunity to hasten the EU’s disintegration, he seized it.
He has obfuscated his actions by talking of cooperating against a common enemy, ISIS.
He has followed a similar approach in Ukraine, signing the Minsk Agreement but failing to carry out its provisions.
It is hard to understand why the leaders of both the US and the EU take Putin at his word rather than judging him by his behavior.
The only explanation I can find is that democratic politicians seek to reassure their publics by painting a more favorable picture than reality justifies.
The fact is that Putin’s Russia and the EU are engaged in a race against time: The question is which one will collapse first.
The Putin regime faces bankruptcy in 2017, when a large part of its foreign debt matures, and political turmoil may erupt sooner than that.
Putin’s popularity, which remains high, rests on a social compact requiring the government to deliver financial stability and a slowly but steadily rising standard of living.
Western sanctions, coupled with the sharp decline in the price of oil, will force the regime to fail on both counts.
Russia’s budget deficit is running at 7% of GDP, and the government will have to cut it to 3% in order to prevent inflation from spiraling out of control.
Russia’s social security fund is running out of money and has to be merged with the government’s infrastructure fund in order to be replenished.
These and other developments will have a negative effect on living standards and opinions of the electorate before the parliamentary election in the fall.
The most effective way that Putin’s regime can avoid collapse is by causing the EU to collapse sooner.
An EU that is coming apart at the seams will not be able to maintain the sanctions it imposed on Russia following its incursion into Ukraine.
On the contrary, Putin will be able to gain considerable economic benefits from dividing Europe and exploiting the connections with commercial interests and anti-European parties that he has carefully cultivated.
As matters stand, the EU is set to disintegrate.
Ever since the financial crisis of 2008 and the subsequent rescue packages for Greece, the EU has learned how to muddle through one crisis after another.
But today it is confronted by five or six crises at the same time, which may prove to be too much.
As Merkel correctly foresaw, the migration crisis has the potential to destroy the EU.
When a state or association of states is in mortal danger, it is better for its leaders to confront harsh reality than to ignore it.
The race for survival pits the EU against Putin’s Russia.
ISIS poses a threat to both, but it should not be over-estimated.
Attacks mounted by jihadi terrorists, however terrifying, do not compare with the threat emanating from Russia.
ISIS (and Al Qaeda before it) has recognized the Achilles’ heel of Western civilization – the fear of death – and learned how to exploit it.
By arousing latent Islamophobia in the West and inducing both publics and governments to treat Muslims with suspicion, they hope to convince young Muslims that there is no alternative to terrorism.
Once this strategy is understood, there is a simple antidote: Refuse to behave the way your enemies want you to.
The threat emanating from Putin’s Russia will be difficult to counter.
Failure to recognize it will make the task even more difficult.
Putin of all the Russias
VIENNA &#45;&#45; For those who still wondered who Vladimir Putin is, the mystery is over.
His actions this week show that he is Russia’s new autocrat.
He is a Czar pure and simple.
The seven years since Putin assumed power in the Kremlin have been a time of conflicting signals.
On one hand, he appears to be an educated and dynamic leader committed to modernizing Russia.
On the other hand, with the help of the military-industrial KGB complex – the “ siloviki ” – he has systematically weakened or destroyed every check on his personal power, while strengthening the state’s ability to violate citizens’ constitutional rights.
This week, Putin told the United Russia party that he will place his name at the top of its ballot for the parliamentary election scheduled for December 2, which could enable him to become Russia’s new prime minister after the presidential election due in March 2008.
Of course, as he put it, Russia will have to elect as president a “decent, competent, effective, modern person with whom it would be possible to work in tandem.”
But what that really means is that Russia will have to choose a man Putin has hand-picked to do his bidding.
If this scenario comes true, it will be a sad day for Russia, but not because Putin will be retaining power – something everyone in Russia knew that he would.
True, Putin has concentrated in his own hands more decision-making authority than at any time in Russia’s post-Soviet history.
But most Russians think he is a great leader, crediting him with taking the country from the bankruptcy and despair of the Yeltsin era to wealth and prosperity in just seven years.
Poll after poll puts his approval ratings at more than 70%.
Putin, quite genuinely, holds contradictory views.
He simultaneously advocates multiparty democracy and centralized power.
He favors a free economy, but wants the state to control how wealth is allocated and who benefits from it.
Like their president, most Russians see no contradiction between improving their personal lives and the country’s international status since the 1990’s and the erosion of democratic institutions.
Of course, Russia’s formal institutions of democracy remain in place; but, in the absence of a free press, an independent judiciary and free elections in the regions – where Kremlin cronies, like Ramzan Kadyrov in Chechnya, now hold sway – they have been hollowed out.
Russians would rather have a “father of the nation,” no matter the title – czar, general secretary, president, or prime minister – than follow laws and rules.
Putin’s political genius is to have recognized this.
Even if Putin has found a way to retain power without amending the constitution – a possibility that was endlessly speculated about by Russia’s dwindling band of democrats – the undemocratic nature of his strategy is glaringly obvious.
Moving from one high office in the Kremlin to another in the White House (the seat of the Russian Parliament) is merely a technicality.
Putin will be czar no matter what office is formally his own.
What will make this work is that, like any good KGB man, Putin is a master of facades.
It has been said that presidential democracy only strengthens Russian political culture’s tendency to favor rulers with a “strong hand,” whereas a parliamentary system would allow for a more “horizontal” distribution of power.
So any future Prime Minister Putin will be able to say— hey , I rule under the ultra-democratic Italian parliamentary model.
What could be more democratic?
But if Putin, who has spent seven years “verticalizing” power in order to restore the stability and pride lost during Yeltsin’s “democratization” of Russia, really wanted to secure the good of his country, he would follow in Yeltsin’s footsteps and exit the scene.
For the lesson of the years of communist misrule is this: no one man or party can know enough to manage a modern economy.
Only democratic systems and free markets provide the essential signals that a government needs in order to act efficiently.
After all, the good of democratic structures is their predictability.
Only the Russians, with their devotion to the rule of a strongman, still insist on the importance of the role of personality in history.
By contrast, successful democracies believe that nobody is irreplaceable.
After September 11, 2001, many New Yorkers wanted the city’s then Mayor Rudy Giuliani to remain in office.
But democracy required an election, and many now argue that the current mayor, Michael Bloomberg, has performed even better than Giuliani might have done in reviving the city.
So, if Putin is concerned about Russia, he should abandon his czarist notions of power and leave high office, if not politics altogether.
Like other democratic leaders, he might consider working in the private-sector, like Gerhard Schröder, or, better yet, write books and help Tsunami victims, like Bill Clinton or become an environmentalist, like Mikhail Gorbachev.
But this seems to be too much to ask of ex-KGB man Putin, for whom there can be no distinction between losing power and leaving it gracefully.
Putinomics
WASHINGTON, D.C. &#45;&#45; President Vladimir Putin turned Russia’ parliamentary election into a referendum on himself – and won by a landslide.
But, while he refuses to spell out his plans for remaining in power once his second term expires next spring, his economic policy is clear.
The strangest thing about the Duma election was that Putin lost his nerve.
He over-exposed himself in public appearances that were as aggressive as they were vague in substance.
He ran against the West and the “chaos” of the 1990’s, just as he raged against Chechen terrorists in 1999 and against oligarchs in 2003.
The Kremlin abandoned democratic procedures, controlling which parties were allowed to run and their candidates, while Putin’s United Russia monopolized media coverage.
Opposition activists were blocked from most campaigning, and often arrested, while Kremlin-controlled courts denied their complaints.
People were intimidated into voting for United Russia on a mass scale.
Independent election monitors were barred.
As a consequence, the new State Duma has not been elected so much as appointed.
It lacks legitimacy and its members are unknown.
But Putin’s legitimacy has also been tainted by the pervasive fraud.
His only “mass” meeting in Moscow drew no more than 5,000 people.
The main questions are how authoritarian he will become, or whether this pathetic campaign will weaken him.
Putin’s policy is easy to understand if one realizes that he usually does the opposite of what he says.
In his first term, Putin appeared to be an authoritarian reformer, undertaking substantial market reforms, such as introducing a 13% flat income tax.
But in his second term, Putin was simply authoritarian, undertaking no economic or social reforms worth mentioning.
The expropriation of the oil company Yukos, valued at $100 billion, was the signal event, and was followed by rising corruption.
Putin has established a purely personal dictatorship.
He rules through the presidential administration and competing secret police forces without ideology or party.
United Russia is little more than a bunch of state officials.
He has sapped most power from other state institutions.
Personal authoritarianism rarely survives its founder.
Since Putin has created an over-centralized regime that cannot survive without him, he has to stay as president.
Law is of minimal relevance, as he can always order the Constitutional Court to approve his third term.
Putin’s regime may be described as a group of clans, consisting of state-dominated corporations, such as Gazprom, Rosneft, Vneshtorgbank, Rosoboronexport, and the Russian Railways, together with the security agencies.
Putin’s KGB cronies, usually from St. Petersburg, control these institutions, and tap them for huge kickbacks.
At the same time, Putin has made sure that they all hate one another, so that they need him as arbitrator or godfather.
In a sensational interview before the election in the Russian newspaper Kommersant , one of these previously unknown KGB managers explained how they use state extortion against private enterprises to accomplish their “velvet re-privatization” through state corporate raiding.
According to the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the share of GDP originating in the private sector has declined from 70% to 65% under Putin.
Re-nationalization through extortion is likely to accelerate.
This re-nationalization has not been justified ideologically, but rather cynically: the purpose is simply to generate corrupt revenues for top Kremlin officials.
Although corruption has been declining in most of the former Soviet Union, it has surged in Russia since 2004, becoming more rationalized and concentrated.
None of Putin’s KGB kingpins has been arrested or even demoted.
As re-nationalization gained momentum, the public economic rhetoric changed and become statist.
Putin now favors protectionism, state intervention, and subsidies.
In this climate, no progressive structural reforms are likely.
Until recently, Russia has pursued an admirably conservative macroeconomic policy, running up huge budget and current account surpluses.
It has paid off its foreign debt and built up foreign currency reserves of $450 billion.
Before the Duma election, however, Putin jeopardized this last vestige of responsible economic policy.
Currently, Russia’s greatest economic concern is growing inflationary pressure, driven especially by food prices.
Rising food prices are an international phenomenon, and Russia’s inflation is driven by the large current account surpluses and capital inflows.
But Russia’s government is no longer trying to mitigate these factors, instead pursuing an inflationary policy.
Monetary policy has been loose for the last year, and before the Duma election the government started pouring huge sums into pensions and other social welfare transfers.
Not surprisingly, inflation has shot up from 7% last spring to 11% currently, and may reach 15% in the spring.
Naturally, monetary and fiscal policy should be tightened, but that is difficult when Putin is trying to placate the population.
He could liberalize the exchange rate and let it float upwards, but he is not even doing that.
Instead, using an old Soviet tactic, Putin has imposed informal price controls, which cannot hold for long in a privatized economy.
Russia’s economic growth is still driven by the sound market reforms undertaken in the 1990’s and Putin’s first term, together with high oil and gas prices.
But, while growth is not likely to stop any time soon, Russia’s economic success increasingly hinges not only on high but rising oil and gas prices.
The main question about economic policy in Putin’s third term, then, is how fast it will deteriorate.
Russia’s Preemptive Counter-Revolution
FLORENCE – In 2014, Russian President Vladimir Putin returned his country to dictatorship.
From the Kremlin to Crimea, Russian citizens must now deal with the greed, fear, and mendacity of a dictator who, in the course of a year, eviscerated any final check on his authority.
In many respects, Putin’s dictatorship is primitive.
It is founded on base emotions rather than Soviet-era, ideological motivations.
Though Putin has tried to stoke a popular desire for empire with his Crimea annexation and intervention in eastern Ukraine, these actions amount to little more than open theft by masked men in the dead of night; they have little chance of begetting lasting glory.
Many of my fellow cultural historians disagree.
They insist that Putin’s regime represents a form of continuity with Russia’s cultural traditions.
They believe that Russia has inherited a cultural DNA that transcends revolutions, as if some kind of vicious gene was driving the Kremlin’s current imperialist aggression in Ukraine (and, if Putin’s threats are to be believed, Kazakhstan may soon be next).
Others believe that this continuity works through national character.
They argue that Russians’ specific nature leads them to support Putin, just as they allegedly supported Stalin and the Romanovs.
Such arguments do not withstand scrutiny.
Empires come and go, as do their traditions.
For every expansionist Czar, or commissar, from Catherine II to Putin, there have been leaders prepared to retreat.
Alexander II sold Alaska; Lenin withdrew from Ukraine in exchange for peace with Germany; and Gorbachev pulled back from central Europe in an effort to end the Cold War.
The belief that Russians desire an authoritarian leader is also misplaced.
To be sure, as 2015 begins, Putin’s approval ratings remain high (though they are no more reliable an indicator than Russian budget projections, political pronouncements, or gas deliveries).
But, even if the polls are accurate, his popularity is largely irrelevant: dictators do not rule through a social contract, and neither his position nor his legitimacy derives from popular appeal.
That distinction between state and people has long defined Western policy toward Russia.
In his 1946 Long Telegram, which marked the start of the Cold War, the United States diplomat George F. Kennan understood that the Communist Party line did “not represent the natural outlook of Russian people.”
In any case, though portrayed as a powerful leader, Putin cannot be said to be following Russia’s ultimate strongman, Stalin, in any meaningful respect.
Under Stalin, enthusiastic self-sacrifice and scientific rationality were promoted as ideals.
Industrial development and military victories, though coming at an intolerable human cost, were real.
The regime depended on show trials and gulag labor, and used unprecedented violence to consolidate the power of dogmatic, ascetic bureaucrats.
Corruption was a crime that was punished.
Today, corruption is the norm, and show trials, though still occurring, do not happen on Stalin’s industrial scale.
Putin and his circle are mainly concerned with survival and enrichment.
He fears Ukraine’s 2014 uprising as a “revolutionary plague” only because it might erupt in Moscow’s own squares.
Putin’s desire to preempt such an outcome explains the Kremlin’s brutal response.
Putin’s regime is simply a Russian version of clientelism, with wealth and economic opportunity distributed on the basis of political fealty.
The system’s crimes have been evident for years, and it is tragic that no international power has been able to punish it.
Westerners who think otherwise and have acquiesced in Russia’s actions in Ukraine do so for no other reason than their own greed, fear, or self-deception.
Indeed, after sucking resources and money from Russia and its citizens, Putin and his obedient oligarchs have been allowed to invest their ill-gotten gains in European and US banks and real estate, paying fat fees that have fueled profit growth for Western firms.
The West’s gain, however, continues to cause enormous discomfort for ordinary Russians.
After almost a quarter-century of so-called “liberal” economic policy, everything from imported goods to bank mortgages are still far more expensive than in the West.
And recent sanctions have only worsened conditions.
The Ukraine crisis has revealed how the longstanding collaboration between Russia and the West has undermined important principles of the modern global order.
Everyone knew about the underinvestment, over-exploitation, and lawlessness that characterize Putin’s Russia, but no international power was interested in discussing, let alone combatting, it.
Only when the Russian state decided in 2014 to elevate kleptocracy to a principle of foreign policy did Putin’s system of government become an international concern.
Russia has had more than two decades to reshape itself into a country that would benefit its people, Europe, and the wider world.
Instead, it remains stuck in a post-Soviet netherworld, owing to the concerted efforts of an elite that has a strong interest in preventing the emergence of a productive, law-abiding country.
That was not inevitable, though it is likely to continue in 2015.
Putin’s Ark
Recently I visited Moscow after five years away.
The city, which looked different and strange, impressed me by its ability to change.
My days back in Russia were divided between official meetings, hours wasted in traffic jams, and nights spent with old friends who tried to show me the best of Moscow nightlife.
On my first free evening, I was invited to a place called “Shinok.”
The restaurant had many of the traits found in ethnic restaurants everywhere.
Different bits of kitsch, this time Ukrainian, were richly represented.
But the interior decoration had one unique element – an artificial wall with windows separating a part of the restaurant hall. Behind the wall was a stage set of a village yard.
A real cow, as well as chickens and geese populated that ersatz farmyard.
At times an old woman in traditional dress appeared to feed the animals.
Visitors enjoying borscht and pirogi observed her efforts with satisfaction.
“She works for the restaurant,” my acquaintance explained.
“She feeds animals and sits in the yard to create the rustic ambiance.”
Shinok was just an introduction to today’s new wave of Moscow restaurant culture.
A few days later, I visited “The White Sun of the Desert,” another ethnic hangout.
The White Sun existed in Soviet times. Back then, it was called “Uzbekistan” and was nothing more than an obligatory culinary demonstration of the supposedly unbreakable union of the USSR’s fifteen fraternal republics.
Although the restaurant interior had completely changed since then, its decorative themes remained the same.
Nowadays, however, the establishment is named after a popular Soviet borscht-western (or “eastern”) filmed in 1969 and set in Central Asia during the 1919 Civil War.
The restaurant is decorated not only with oriental carpets, but with life-size figures of the movie’s heroes firing machine guns or sitting on crates of dynamite.
This Soviet “orientalism” is reinforced by pretty waitresses dressed in sexy outfits more inspired by the Arabian Nights than by any Central Asian reality – then or now.
But the Soviet past, not ethnic motifs, are the biggest element in contemporary Muscovite restaurant design.
The club-restaurant “Major Pronin:” is conveniently located in the vicinity of the KGB-FSB headquarters. It is named after the hero of bad Soviet-era spy novels, a figure who was also the butt of many underground jokes.
Russian literature is not forgotten.
If the restaurant “Pushkin” on Tverskoy Boulevard not far from the monument to the great Russian poet is designed to recreate the “aristocratic atmosphere” of the early nineteenth century, the combined bar and diner called “Gogol” on Stoleshnikov Lane is an attempt to recreate a vanished Soviet institution called “rumochnaia.”
A “rumka” is a vodka glass from which exhausted proletarians could revive themselves.
Of course “rumochnaia” had nothing in common with Nikolai Gogol, but the establishment named after the famous writer does have a skating rink that is used once a day by a man dressed up as Gogol.
After my return to Washington, I had a dinner with an American politician who had just visited Saint Petersburg.
As a special honor, his Russian hosts organized an excursion to Strelna, the “Russian Versailles,” which was recently restored from ruin to become the Petersburg residence of President Vladimir Putin.
The palace didn’t impress the American.
The amount of marble used for renovation seemed excessive, and the understanding of what constitutes luxury appeared to correspond to the standards of a Holiday Inn.
The American’s excited Russian hosts asked him constantly for his opinion of the palace.
Throughout the tour, the American answered with polite exclamations like “exquisite” or “striking.”
Finally, they reached the attic.
At last, the American was excited.
The attic of the presidential residence was designed as a belly of the seventeenth-century ship.
“The last time I saw something like this was in a Hamburg beer hall in the 1960’s,” the politician told me.
How perfect, I thought, as I imagined Russia’s president climbing the stairs to the attic of his palace to play the role of Peter the Great.
Like the customers in that Ukrainian-style village restaurant, perhaps Putin found his attic ark reassuring in some unconscious way.
A historical wave beyond his control had lifted the former KGB lieutenant colonel from out of the shadows to the pinnacle of power. But fate might also just as suddenly wash him away.
Putin’s Brezhnev Syndrome
PARIS – The winner of Sunday’s legislative election in Russia was a foregone conclusion: United Russia, organized by Vladimir Putin.
Likewise, there is no doubt that Putin himself will win the presidential election due in March 2012. But the public enthusiasm that ratified Putin’s rule for a decade has vanished, something demonstrated by the poor performance of his party, United Russia, in the just concluded elections to the Duma.
Unlike Europe, beset by a sovereign-debt crisis, and the United States, whose leaders are wrangling over how to stem the deficit, Russia may look like an oasis of stability and continuity.
But that continuity is more reminiscent of the zastoi, or stagnation, of the Brezhnev era.
Eight years of 7% average annual GDP growth during Putin’s previous presidency (2000-2008) allowed Russia to repay its debts, accumulate almost $600 billion in foreign-currency reserves, and join the leading emerging economies.
A decade after the 1998 crisis brought Russia to its knees, its leaders boasted that the country could weather the 2008 financial crisis.
Given Russia’s economic fundamentals, Putin’s diminished popularity might appear surprising. The International Monetary Fund’s forecast of 4% growth in 2011 and subsequent years puts Russia well behind China and India, but far ahead of average growth rates in the rich G-7 countries.
Moreover, Russia’s budget will be balanced as long as oil prices remain above $110 per barrel.
Longer-term trends have also improved.
Instead, the state is the target of political entrepreneurs who strive to capture it in order to capture the rents that it controls.
Russia has most of the usual features of rentier states: autocracy, weak political and judicial institutions, arbitrary governance, lack of the rule of law, little transparency, restraints on freedom of expression, widespread corruption, cronyism, and nepotism.
Also common to rentier states are short investment horizons, vulnerability to commodity-price volatility – euphoria when they surge, crisis when they collapse – and an underdeveloped and uncompetitive manufacturing sector.
Today’s Russia is a gigantic reservoir of raw materials, and its economy relies heavily on commodities – mining and drilling.
Russia is the world’s largest oil and gas exporter, sitting on more than 25% of total proven gas reserves.
Those commodities account for over two thirds of the country’s export earnings, and are the primary source of state revenue.
The impact on governance is all too predictable.
In 2011, Transparency International’s “corruption perception” index ranked Russia 143rd out 182 countries, on a par with Nigeria, and 182nd out of 210 for “control of corruption,” one of the World Bank’s worldwide governance indicators. &nbsp;Regarding the rule of law, there has been only minimal improvement, with Russia ranked 156th.