Moreover, they often result in different policy prescriptions.
The late Robert Heilbronner – one of Schumpeter’s most renowned students – viewed economics as “worldly philosophy.”
Just as philosophers are divided on the nature of truth and understanding, economics is divided on the workings of the real world.
Paradigms should co-exist in economics, just as in other social sciences.
Yet, in practice, the dominance of the belief in “one economics,” particularly in North America and Europe, has led increasingly to a narrow and exclusionary view of the discipline.
This reality is difficult to convey.
One reason is that liberal neo-classical economists like Stiglitz and Krugman share values with heterodox economists, and shared values are easily conflated with shared analysis.
Another reason is that heterodox and MIT School economists also often agree on policy, even if their reasoning is different.
Finally, most people are incredulous that economists could be so audacious as to enforce one view of economics.
The “many recipes” thesis enriches neo-classical economics’ contribution to the development debate, and many of its policy proposals will find support from heterodox economists.
However, it fails to engage the deep intellectual divisions regarding economic development, trade, and globalization, because it refuses to admit the legitimacy of such disagreements.
By repeating the claim of “one economics,” Rodrik inadvertently reveals the censorship embedded in contemporary economics.
The great challenge is not to admit that there are many recipes, but rather to create space for other perspectives on economic analysis and policy.
Breaking the Windows Barrier
Kyoto – As 2009 commences, Microsoft is previewing its next-generation operating system, Windows 7, which is remarkable only in that it is almost the same as every previous version.
Stagnation in computer design is not surprising, considering that familiarity is so comfortable. 
But it can also stifle development.
Military intelligence depends on ever-improving communication, so it is one area in which system design is constantly changing.
Some of those innovations will eventually trickle into the mainstream, so a glimpse at current experiments can reveal what the future of ordinary computer interaction could look like, and what would be gained.
For the lay user, technology is encountered mostly as an interactive interface.
People rarely consider that the tangible features assumed to be intrinsic to the “computer” were imitations of other objects, with keyboards inherited from typewriters and screens from television.
Inside the computer screen is a virtual 1950’s office, with paper documents, filing cabinets, and a garbage can.
This page-window format is known as Window-Icon-Mouse-Pointer, or WIMP, which, due to monopoly forces, has been the universal paradigm since the 1980’s – ancient history in computer years.
These formats are taken for granted, just as we accept telephone keypads and car dashboards, which are also user interfaces.
It is easy to forget that, years ago, telephones had no buttons or dial – you had to pick up the handset and ask an operator to make the connection.
The telephone dial didn’t appear until 1919, when the first group of self-designated “user interface scientists” at Western Electric considered what the most intuitive form should be.
When improving a computer interface, form is the key.
We’ve seen hints of a new paradigm in Apple’s iPhone, which allows gestural finger motions, but in the intelligence community, concept visualization can be so radical that most ordinary users might barely recognize what it was.
Designs are inspired by cognitive science, the arts, even science fiction.
Ironically, a recent trend reaches far into the past, to a traditional Japanese concept known as 
 katachi
 , which is emerging as an international movement.
“Katachi” literally means “form” in Japanese, but the concept has complex connotations that do not exist in other languages.
The word is a composite of two terms, “kata” (pattern) and “chi” (magical power), so it includes nuances such as “complete assembly” and “shape that tells an attractive story.”
This richer notion stems from ancient Japanese culture, which perceived the overlap between geometry and meaning.
The Chinese symbol for “form” carries some of the same reasoning, due to its use of ideograms.
Four thousand years ago, China developed a writing system that conveyed concepts both as idea and picture.
Notions such as “wooden structure” and “beauty” were indicated by symbols which, when combined, could create a new concept, such as “form.” 
Governments in countries colonized by China were forced to adopt this pictographic writing system in order to receive political regulations, but the pronunciation of the characters was not controlled.
The colonized were able to maintain aspects of their local culture through different aural versions of the same written “word” because the common meaning existed only in the shape.&#160; 
Modern user interface scientists are interested in katachi because it can reveal how form facilitates human interaction.
In the tea ceremony, this ability has been refined into a skill that combines materials, meaning, and mood.
Those with high ability know how the guests’ experience can be improved with careful preparations of tools, reflective conversations, and natural yet well-controlled body motions.
Physical movements embody the intended meaning of the event, so the whole environment becomes a signifier.
Small innovations are often introduced into the style of hospitality to suggest the personality of the host. 
An operating system based on katachi’s insights would harness this overlap between shape, sense and environment.
It might allow you to feel the “form” of a concept with your hands.
Or it could indicate the reliability of data based on whether it was laid out neatly or had a scrambled appearance, so it could be assessed at a glance.
Perhaps future interfaces will allow us to communicate across language barriers by immersing us in assemblies of pictures – a hybrid between movies, architecture and email. 
Expressive icons represent thought, but can only communicate complex subtleties and situations if they allow multiple levels of understanding.
Computer scientists might be in a unique position to enable richer communication, and perhaps a more stable future as a consequence.
For this reason, let us hope that more developers explore this so-called “disruptive” side of technology during the coming year.
The Screening Myth
TORONTO – Breast-cancer screening has long been viewed as one of the most important tools for reducing mortality from the disease.
That is why recent doubts about its effectiveness – intensified by the publication in February of the 25-year follow-up to the Canadian National Breast Screening Study – have come as such a shock.
How can breast-cancer screening, which facilitates early detection of the disease, not prevent deaths from it?
Understanding screening’s limitations requires, first and foremost, an understanding of the process.
A mammogram (x-ray of the breast) is administered to ostensibly healthy people to detect unsuspected disease.
If any abnormalities are found, a diagnostic test is conducted to confirm the presence of the disease.
If the results are positive, treatment begins.
The first limitation of breast-cancer screening is obvious: where effective diagnosis and treatment are not available, screening cannot have any impact.
But there is more to the issue – namely, whether screening ultimately fulfills its intended purpose of reducing breast-cancer mortality rates.
There have been several attempts to evaluate, through observational studies, the impact of screening in the general population.
But such studies, which are based on comparisons between uncontrolled groups, tend to produce biased results. None has been able to account for differences in treatment.
More important, none has found a reduction in advanced breast cancer in the screened groups – a requirement to deem screening effective.
With observational studies producing inadequate results, scientists turned to a procedure developed years ago to evaluate new tuberculosis drugs: randomized screening trials.
Such trials begin with the selection of women at risk of developing breast cancer, and randomly allocate them to be screened or not.
Any woman in either group who develops breast cancer is treated to the fullest extent possible, following the closest possible treatment plan to other participants in the trial (taking into consideration the stage of the disease at diagnosis).
Researchers follow the women’s progress over many years, with the goal of comparing the two groups’ mortality rates.
In North America, where, for ethical reasons, randomization requires informed consent, only two such trials have been conducted.
The first was in New York in the 1960s, using annual mammograms and breast examinations for the screened group.
The second, the Canadian National Breast Screening Study, which began in the 1980s, also used annual mammograms and breast examinations for the screened group.
But, in the control group, women aged 50-59 also received annual clinical breast examinations, and women aged 40-49 were given a single breast examination.
In Europe, one trial began in the United Kingdom in the 1970s, again using breast examinations and mammography for the screened group.
A more recent British trial, performed on women aged 39-41, used only mammography, as did the largest of all, the Swedish two-county trial.
Though the trial results have been inconsistent, the conclusion is clear: breast-cancer screening does not reduce mortality rates.
The trials that have shown a significant decrease in mortality are usually older, and other factors have compromised the results.
For example, the Swedish two-county trial was randomized by clusters of population groups, and the comparability between the women in the screened and control groups was not confirmed.
Moreover, the trial was conducted before modern breast-cancer treatments were freely available.
More recent trials, such as that conducted in the UK, show at most a non-significant benefit from screening.
The results of the 25-year follow-up of the Canadian trial – which can be considered the most accurate, given that the women were carefully characterized according to risk factors and had access to the most advanced treatments – are even more damning.
Beyond showing no benefit from mammography screening, the Canadian trial highlighted one of the practice’s major disadvantages: over-diagnosis.
Indeed, 22% of those in the screened group were over-diagnosed, meaning that the cancers found would not have become clinically detectable during the woman’s lifetime.
Add to that the in situ cancers – early-stage cancers that have not spread to neighboring tissue – and the number rises to 50%.
To be sure, over-diagnosis is inevitable with good screening tests.
The real problem is the over-treatment that follows, owing to the lack of reliable tests to differentiate observable lesions from those that actually require medical intervention.
Many of the women who believe that their lives were saved by mammography screenings actually had so-called “IDLE” cancers (indolent lesions of epithelial origin), which would not have progressed before they died of other causes.
Meanwhile, the very aggressive cancers, which are most likely to prove fatal, tend to present as “interval” cancers that appear between screenings.
In the deadliest cases, regular screenings would not make much difference.
Efforts to develop new, more sensitive screening tests are thus likely to do more harm than good, as they increase the rate of over-diagnosis, without improving outcomes among women with aggressive cancers.
What breast-cancer patients really need are tests that identify the risk that the disease actually poses, as well as new, lifesaving treatments.
It is time to recognize that breast-cancer screening does not save lives – and to focus on the strategies that will.
Brecht on Brexit
LONDON – In the wake of the 1953 workers’ uprising in East Germany, the playwright Bertolt Brecht mordantly suggested that “if the people had forfeited the confidence of the government,” the government might find it easier to “dissolve the people and elect another.”
It is a sentiment that resonates with many in the United Kingdom today, in the aftermath of June’s Brexit referendum.
In the heat of the referendum campaign, Michael Gove, then the justice secretary and a leading member of the “Leave” camp, said, “I think the people of this country have had enough of experts from all kinds of organizations with acronyms, who have consistently got it wrong.”
His targets were the IMF, the OECD, the LSE, and all the other covens of economists who argued that leaving the European Union would damage the British economy.
Unfortunately, Gove was right – not about what would happen to the economy, but about UK voters’ low regard for economic expertise.
Despite the near-unanimous view of the economics profession that Brexit would tip the UK into recession and lower its long-term growth rate, voters went with their hearts, not their wallets.
The “Remain” campaign was accused of using the economists’ warnings to try to frighten voters into submission.
Some have argued that the blame for the referendum’s outcome lies with economists themselves, because they were unable to speak a language that ordinary people could understand.
A similar charge is made against bankers and other financiers, who, widely perceived to be arguing from narrow sectoral self-interest, were equally unpersuasive.
There is undoubtedly some truth in this criticism, but the problem was not simply over-complex language and impenetrable jargon.
The economists all began from the assumption that the UK was doing fine, with GDP growth well above the European average, and unemployment well below. It seemed self-evident that EU membership was good for Britain, especially as we had avoided joining the euro and were thus not tied up in monetary and fiscal knots designed in Brussels and Frankfurt.
The problem was that this rosy picture did not resonate with voters outside London and the Southeast of England, for reasons set out with great clarity in a recent speech by Andy Haldane, the Bank of England’s chief economist.
Haldane cites national statistics showing that Britain’s GDP is 7% above its pre-crisis peak, employment is 6% higher, and wealth is 30% greater. But, he adds, national income per head is flat.
Median real (inflation-adjusted) wages have barely risen since 2005. The UK population has grown, partly owing to immigration.
The recorded increase in wealth has come about mainly from increases in property prices in favored areas, especially London, and in the value of occupational pensions.
If you are not lucky enough to own property in the Southeast of England, and are not in a final-salary pension scheme, your wealth has stagnated or fallen.
The regional breakdown of GDP figures shows that London and the Southeast are the only areas of the UK where people are better off, on average, than they were in 2009, at the trough of the recession.
It may well be true that Brexit will exacerbate these inequalities.
If intra-European trade barriers are imposed, and companies choose to invest elsewhere to access Europe’s single market, lower-paid jobs in disadvantaged regions may disappear altogether, or wages will fall further.
But that sounds like “expert” talk, and the former Leave campaigners have a response to it: economists are talking down the UK to prove that their gloomy forecasts were correct.
If the experts couldn’t be trusted before the referendum, they certainly can’t be trusted now.
That is the inauspicious background against which talks on the UK’s future relationship with the EU will soon begin.
It is especially unfavorable for the City of London.
There is clearly a trade-off between access to the single market, which most financial firms greatly desire, and one of its main conditions: freedom of movement for EU citizens, which is seen as having contributed to wage stagnation in the rest of the UK.
So an outcome that benefits London (which, unsurprisingly, voted overwhelmingly to remain in the EU) must be advocated with subtlety and care, lest it be seen as sacrificing the wellbeing of the many to the interests of a few.
The strongest argument in favor of remaining in the single market is that putting the City of London at risk jeopardizes the entire UK economy.
Financial services may account for only 3% of employment, but they generate 11% of tax revenues.
Killing the goose that lays the golden tax egg would be foolhardy: if the economy slows, which seems the best we can expect, those revenues will be sorely needed.
And at a time when the UK’s balance-of-payments deficit is over 5% of GDP (the second largest in the OECD), the financial sector’s 3%-of-GDP trade surplus has been essential to prevent an external blowout.
It is no surprise, therefore, that sterling has dropped sharply since the Brexit vote.
Some argue that exchange-rate depreciation will narrow the trade deficit by making British exports more competitive, but the experience of 2008, when the pound also fell sharply, is that the impact on the external deficit may not be great.
The UK has few price-sensitive exports for which there is significant spare capacity available to expand production.
So these are nervous times in London’s financial markets.
We need new experts, unadorned with despised acronyms like IMF, to explain the unpleasant facts of economic life to a highly suspicious public.
No one should take Brecht’s ironic suggestion seriously.
The British people have spoken, and a way must be found to achieve their desires at the lowest possible economic cost.
Breivik’s Call to Arms
NEW YORK – Let us assume, for the sake of argument, that Geert Wilders, the Dutch politician who is convinced that Europe is “in the final stages of Islamization,” is right: Anders Breivik, the Norwegian mass murderer, is mad.
Wilders tweeted: “That a psychopath has abused the battle against Islamization is disgusting and a slap in the face of the worldwide anti-Islam movement.”
This assumption is not so far-fetched.
Murdering more than 60 innocent young people at a summer camp with an assault rifle, after bombing a chunk of central Oslo, is, to put it mildly, morally eccentric – something most sane people would never dream of doing.
The same is true, naturally, of a group of young men who decide to commit suicide and mass murder by flying commercial airliners into large public buildings in New York and Washington.
But neither Breivik, nor the terrorists of September 11, 2001, killed without reason, in the way some nihilistic American shooters do.
Islamists view their acts of random mass murder not as a personal publicity stunt, but as a tactic in a holy war against the decadent, sinful West.
Breivik is, in his own mind, a warrior for the other side.
His aim was to protect the West from Islamization.
His enemies are not just Muslims, but the liberal Western elites, and their children, who were destroying Europe from within through “multiculturalism” and “cultural Marxism.”
In fact, what Breivik wrote in his rambling manifesto, entitled A European Declaration of Independence, is more or less what populists, such as Geert Wilders, have been saying.
Of course, there was much else in the manifesto – fantasies about reviving the medieval Knights Templar, for example – that suggests a more bizarre disposition, and Wilders was quick to distance himself from Breivik’s violent methods.
Indeed, only one right-wing European politician, Francesco Speroni of the Italian Northern League, which is part of Silvio Berlusconi’s government, was prepared to defend Breivik.
Speroni claimed that Breivik’s “ideas are in defense of western civilization.”
So, how seriously must we take the ideological reasons that killers like Breivik and the September 11 terrorists invoke to justify their murders?
A few years ago, the German writer Hans Magnus Enzensberger wrote a fascinating essay about the “radical loser.”
Radical losers are mostly young men who are so enraged by their own lack of social, economic, and sexual self-esteem and the indifference of the world around them, that they long for a suicidal act of mass destruction.
Anything can trigger such an act: rejection by a girl, being fired from a job, failing an examination.
And sometimes the killers reach for ideological justifications: building pure Islam, struggling for communism or fascism, or saving the West.
The particular ideals might be unimportant – simply those that happen to be available, owing to fashion or other historical circumstances.
Once a radical loser is in the mood to kill, any reason will do.
Perhaps.
But does this mean that there is no link at all between the stated views of radical clerics or politicians and the acts committed in the name of those opinions?
For all the finger pointing at Wilders, just because Breivik professed to admire him, the acts of a deranged killer, others caution, should not be used to discredit what he stands for.
After all, there is nothing irrational, or murderous, about claiming that multiculturalism is a flawed ideal, or that Islam conflicts with modern Western European views of gender equality or gay rights, or that mass immigration will cause serious social conflicts.
These claims began to be made by respectable conservatives, and even some social democrats, in the 1990’s.
They reacted against a rather smug liberal establishment that tended to dismiss all critical thought about immigration or non-Western faiths and traditions as racism and bigotry.
But, while there was nothing intrinsically wrong with discussing the social consequences of large-scale immigration from Muslim countries, some populists in Holland, Denmark, France, Germany, Belgium, Britain, and other countries, went much further.
Wilders, in particular, likes to speak in apocalyptic terms of “the lights going out over Europe,” and “the sheer survival of the West.”
And the problem is not just a particular strain of violent revolutionary Islam, but Islam itself: “If you want to compare Islam to anything, compare it to communism or national socialism – a totalitarian ideology.”
This is the language of existential war, the most dangerous kind.
Indeed, the terminology of World War II is being deliberately revived.
Those who oppose radical hostility to all forms of Islam are “appeasers” of, or “collaborators” with, “Islamofascism.”
For some, September 11, 2001, was analogous to 1938, or even 1940.
The very survival of Western civilization is at stake.
Is it really so surprising that certain people might mistake this rhetoric for a call to arms?
To be sure, neither Geert Wilders, nor even rabidly anti-Islamic bloggers in the United States, such as Scott Spencer and Pamela Geller (both of whom were quoted extensively in Breivik’s manifesto), have called for physical violence.
But their writings and statements have been sufficiently hysterical and hateful to incite a person with an unbalanced mind.
Indeed, Breivik’s interpretation of their words is, in an odd way, more rational than the idea that a war for our very survival can be fought with words alone.
Why Britain Should Remain European
WASHINGTON, DC – On June 23, the United Kingdom will hold a referendum on whether to leave the European Union.
On the economic side of the “Brexit” debate are three main questions: Do European rules impose growth-stifling regulation on the UK?
Would leaving the EU increase opportunities for British exports?
And what would be the likely impact of withdrawal on financial stability?
These are complex issues, but the June 2014 report by the Centre for European Reform (CER) provides a sensible guide on the first two questions.
And now the Bank of England (BoE) has weighed in clearly on the third.
In economic terms, the facts favor staying in the EU.
Heated and relatively technical debates of this nature require one to decide which experts to trust.
The commission that prepared the CER report comprised sensible British and European economic thinkers and former policymakers with no illusions about how the EU really works.
Likewise, the BoE’s Financial Policy Committee was designed after the 2008 crisis to speak truth to authority on where systemic risks really lurk – and what to do about them.
The CER report is strongest on the real (nonfinancial) economic issues.
The most contentious point here is whether the British economy is held back in some way by red tape imposed by Brussels or by European treaty obligations.
It is very hard to find any such stifling effect in the data.
The CER points out that product- and labor-market regulation in the UK are closer to that of the United States than to Western Europe, and the same broad pattern emerges from the OECD’s assessment of barriers to entrepreneurship.
The CER’s assessment is confirmed by the latest available information from the World Bank’s 2016 Doing Business indicators, which have the advantage of covering almost all countries in the world.
These indicators are not perfect, but they do get at red-tape-related issues.
Britain is ranked sixth in the world – one place above the United States and behind only some very pro-business countries, such as Singapore, Hong Kong, and New Zealand.
Other leading EU countries have more impediments to doing business.
For example, Germany is ranked 15th and France is 27th.
Italy, ranked 45th, surely has something to worry about – but its problems do not stem from Brussels.
There is no sign here of the UK being dragged down by the EU.
If anything, the UK might aim to be a bit more like Denmark (an EU member, ranked third in the world) on some dimensions of the business environment, including property registration, construction permits, and paperwork reduction in international trade.
On the issue of trade, the assessment is even more straightforward.
At the heart of European integration is the idea that barriers to trade – including tariffs and other impediments – can be and have been reduced.
In the CER’s view, EU membership has increased UK trade in goods with other member states by more than 50%.
Would leaving the EU create new robust trade possibilities that otherwise would not exist, either within the British Commonwealth or with emerging markets such as China?
This seems highly unlikely.
And the biggest trade agreement on the horizon that will affect the UK is between the United States and the European Union – the Trans-Atlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP).
Such mega-regional trade agreements are complex, with many devils in the detail.
The TTIP will most likely move forward after the US presidential election, and Britain most definitely needs to be at the negotiating table.
International trade is about getting access to a bigger market, and trade agreements involve mutual reduction of barriers, including all kinds of non-tariff rules that minimize competition in the provision of services.
Britain will do well from this kind of service-sector trade liberalization.
But any country involved directly in such talks generally does better.
In terms of Brexit’s impact on the financial sector – in addition to broader stability concerns – the BoE’s Financial Policy Committee is quite clear.
“[H]eightened and prolonged uncertainty,” owing to the impending referendum, “has the potential to increase the risk premia investors require on a wider range of UK assets, which could lead to a further depreciation of sterling and affect the cost and availability of financing for a broad range of UK borrowers.”
This is not likely to be good for consumers or for business investment.
Over the longer term, the UK financial sector needs to be well regulated; no one wants another major financial disruption.
But such rules are entirely possible within the existing international and European framework.
Some other economic issues that have come up in the Brexit debate are either minor or red herrings.
As the CER report shows, immigration from EU member states, for example, benefits the UK economy, because it brings in more young people who pay taxes.
And the post-Brexit reduction in UK government spending would most likely be minor.
Of course, EU membership is not just about economics.
There is also an important debate about Britain’s role in the world.
But it is difficult to see how the UK’s global stature and influence would increase if it left the EU – particularly given the significant adverse impact such an outcome would have on the British economy.
The Brexit Alarm
BERKELEY – I have no special expertise on the question of whether Britain should leave (or “Brexit”) the European Union.
True, I did live in the United Kingdom until a bit less than a year ago.
And here in California, we have our own Brexit-like debate, with a movement to place a proposal to secede from the United States on the November ballot.
But while the idea of California independence might seem comical, the Brexit referendum on June 23 is no laughing matter.
Most obviously, Brexit would damage Britain’s export competitiveness.
To be sure, ties with the EU would not be severed immediately, and the UK government would have a couple of years to negotiate a trade agreement with the European Single Market, which accounts for nearly half of British exports.
The authorities could cut a bilateral deal like Switzerland’s, which guarantees access to the Single Market for specific industries and sectors.
Or they could follow Norway’s example and access the Single Market through membership in the European Free Trade Association.
But Britain needs the EU market more than the EU needs Britain’s, so the bargaining would be asymmetric.
And EU officials would most likely drive a hard bargain indeed, in order to deter other countries from contemplating exits of their own.
The UK would have to accept EU product standards and regulations lock, stock and barrel, with no say in their design – and would be in a far weaker position when negotiating market-access agreements with non-EU partners like China.
In addition, Brexit would undermine London’s position as Europe’s financial center.
It is quite extraordinary that the principal center for euro-denominated financial transactions is outside the eurozone.
This attests to the strength of EU regulations prohibiting discrimination within the Single Market.
But in a post-Brexit world, Frankfurt and Paris would no longer be prevented from imposing measures that favored their banks and exchanges over London’s.
The City is also an example of a sector that relies heavily on foreign labor.
Upwards of 15% of workers in banking, finance, and insurance were born abroad.
Attracting and retaining this foreign talent will become harder after Brexit, when EU workers moving to Britain will no longer be able to take their pension rights with them, and the other conveniences of a single labor market are lost.
Brexit could have more mundane, but highly noticeable, effects on Britain.
Anyone who has spent time in the UK knows that the single greatest gain in the quality of life over the last generation has been in the caliber of the food.
One shudders to imagine the culinary landscape of a UK abandoned by its French and Italian chefs.
Somewhat more weightily, a Britain that is just another middle power would be less able to project military and diplomatic influence globally than it currently is, working in concert with the EU.
Although the UK would remain a member of NATO, we have yet to see how functional the Alliance will be in the era after US hegemony.
While the EU has yet to develop a coherent foreign and security policy, the ongoing refugee crisis makes clear that it will have to move in that direction.
Indeed, this is the single most ironic aspect of the Brexit debate.
After all, British public opinion first began to turn in favor of EU membership after the failed Suez invasion of 1956, which taught the country that, bereft of empire, it could no longer execute an effective foreign policy on its own.
All of which leads one to ask: What can Brexit’s proponents possibly be thinking?
The answer is that they are not – thinking, that is.
The Brexit campaign is tapping into the same primordial sentiments as Donald Trump is in the US.
Most Brexit supporters are angry, disaffected voters who feel left behind.
Exposure to international trade and finance, which is what EU membership entails, may have benefited the UK as a whole, but it has not worked to every individual’s advantage.
So the disadvantaged are lashing out – against trade, against immigration, and against the failure of conventional politicians to address their woes.
Fundamentally, a vote for Brexit is a vote against Prime Minister David Cameron, Chancellor of the Exchequer George Osborne, and the political mainstream generally.
The real problem, obviously, is not the EU; it is the failure of the British political class to provide meaningful help to the casualties of globalization.
Within the last month, Work and Pensions Secretary Iain Duncan Smith resigned in protest over the government’s proposed cuts to welfare benefits.
And on April 1, the minimum wage was raised.
Maybe the voices of the angry and disaffected are finally being heard.
If so, the Brexit debate will not have been pointless after all.
The Brexit of UK Banking
LONDON – When I became the head of banking supervision in the United Kingdom in the mid-1990s, my friends did not see it as a glamorous or exciting career move.
Banking regulation was an obscure task, like cleaning sewers: essential, perhaps, but hardly front-page news.
Expressions of curiosity about how I spent my working hours were typically a sign of friendly politeness rather than genuine interest.
Twenty years later, the structure of banking regulation in Europe has risen to the top of the political agenda in London.
It is one of the key points in Prime Minister David Cameron’s renegotiation of the UK’s terms of membership of the European Union.
One of Cameron’s four major demands of the EU is a national derogation from elements of the uniform rulebook which the European Central Bank is seeking to introduce in the eurozone’s banking union to ensure a consistent approach across countries.
The French and others fear that this derogation could permit the UK, in search of competitive advantage, to loosen financial regulation in London, even though recent evidence suggests that bank capital requirements, and other controls on banks’ activities, are in fact now tighter in London than elsewhere in Europe.
For example, there is no European equivalent of the British requirement to “ring-fence” retail and commercial banking, and the French and German governments’ opposition suggests that there is unlikely to be one.
Of course, the reason why banking supervision – and financial regulation more generally – has higher political salience now is obvious: The financial crisis of 2008 showed that bank failures could have catastrophic consequences for the economy as a whole.
That crisis followed a period during which the financial sector grew dramatically, especially in Europe.
The bank-market ratio – the size of the banking sector relative to the size of equity and bond markets – roughly doubled in the UK and Germany in little more than a decade, while the ratio remained stable in the US, and at a much lower level.
The difference is particularly marked in the eurozone, where two-thirds of non-financial firms’ external financing comes from bank loans.
The comparable figure is nearer 20% in the US, where, as in the UK, equity and debt capital markets play a much more important role in financing business investment.
The short-term consequence was that the credit crunch that began in 2008 had a more serious and longer-term impact on Europe’s heavily bank-based economies, as banks curtailed lending to preserve and rebuild their capital ratios.
That process is still under way in parts of continental Europe, though business lending by banks has recovered in the UK.
But a new study by Sam Langfield of the ECB and Marco Pagano of the University of Naples suggests that the longer-term implications are even more damaging than was previously suspected.
Langfield and Pagano point out that in the eight years since the crisis, the European Union’s GDP has grown by only 2%, compared to more than 9% in the US, and attribute this differential to transatlantic differences in financial structure.
Many EU countries, notably Ireland and Spain, did experience a collapse in house prices after 2008.
So the relative size of EU banks might account for roughly half of the growth gap vis-à-vis the US.
That explains why the ECB, and some EU governments, are keen on the Capital Markets Union project, which aims to find ways to stimulate the growth of non-bank financing channels across the continent.
Progress would reduce dangerous over-reliance on banks.
The UK, as ever, is to be found somewhere in the middle of the Atlantic.
Cumulative economic growth from 2008 to 2015 was 6%.
A little closer to the US than to the rest of Europe, though still a relatively weak rebound from a deep recession.
The UK’s stock market is larger relative to its economy than most others in Europe.
Its banking system is large and concentrated, though new entrants and new financing channels are changing that.
Peer-to-peer lending has expanded faster than elsewhere in Europe.
UK banks are also, on average, more oriented toward non-European markets, which makes the banking sector seem larger.
And a third of the UK banking sector’s assets are in fact held by non-EU banks.
Only Luxembourg comes close, at just below 20%, while in France, Germany, and Italy, the overseas share of their domestic markets is negligible.
These differences may partly explain the UK’s reluctance to participate in the European banking union, while some other non-eurozone countries are keen to join it, fearing that, otherwise, they might be effectively excluded from ECB policymaking.
In London, even pro-Europeans prefer to address Britain’s remaining financial-sector challenges on a national basis; the differences in structure make that an understandable choice.
A Post-Referendum Agenda for Britain
LONDON – The end of the wretched campaign to take the United Kingdom out of the European Union against the advice of our friends around the world is less than a month away.
The Brexiteers, as they have come to be called, deny all evidence of the economic damage that the UK would do to itself by leaving.
Their disregard for reason and facts resembles that of Donald Trump, the reality-TV star and Republican presidential candidate, whose political style seems to have crossed the Atlantic on a cheap ticket.
If voters choose to leave the EU, all bets are off; the UK will be taking a leap in the dark.
Fortunately, the bookies are increasingly predicting that voters will decide to remain.
But even if sanity prevails, the effects of Brexitosis – a toxic combination of manic ambition (on the part of former London Mayor Boris Johnson, in particular), self-delusion, and mendacity – will linger long after the result is announced.
Prime Minister David Cameron will face the unenviable task of trying to pull his Conservative Party together again.
He will need to balance magnanimity with forceful assertion of leadership.
One thing that never works is to pay Danegeld to disloyal members of parliament; give them one bun, and they will come back almost immediately for another.
What will matter most for Cameron’s future is whether he can convince the losers to accept the voters’ verdict, instead of slinking away to plot another insurrection.
It would be understandable if Cameron were to conclude that Europe was the last thing he wants to spend time on this summer.
But, for the sake of his country, and of Europe, Cameron should take the lead in trying to put in place a credible policy for dealing with mass migration.
This is not just a short-term issue, driven by the conflicts in Syria and Afghanistan; it is a challenge that Europe will confront for decades.
During the nineteenth century, as Europe’s population grew from one-fifth to one-quarter of the world’s total population, millions left their native countries for other continents.
Between 1815 and 1932, some 60 million Europeans emigrated.
At the beginning of World War I, almost two out of every five people worldwide had European ancestry.
Today, the balance has been completely reversed.
Europe’s population has fallen to well below 10% of the global total, and it will fall much further as populations skyrocket elsewhere.
Over the last 40 years, for example, Egypt’s population has increased from 39 million to 93 million.
During a comparable period, Ethiopia’s population more than tripled, to 101 million.
Nigeria, now home to more than 186 million people, has followed a similar trajectory; its population is predicted to rise to a half-billion by 2050.
During the first half of the twenty-first century, the population of Africa as a whole is expected to grow from about one billion to 2.5 billion.
Failing states, as we have learned, export their problems – and their people.
The world’s poorest countries are experiencing the fastest population growth.
They have the youngest populations, and, all too often, are among the most likely to see a breakdown in governance.
The resulting flows of people will put developed countries under extreme pressure – nowhere more so than in Europe.
Erecting more razor wire will not come close to being an adequate response.
The Mediterranean has become, tragically, a cemetery for some – but a barrier only for a few.
Not even island countries like the UK can meet the migration challenge acting on their own.
What we require is a long-term program discussed and agreed upon by our neighbors and the United States.
We need to coordinate our foreign, security, and development policies in order to prevent uncontrollable, unmanageable mass migration – a phenomenon that will lead to many migrant deaths and stoke xenophobia in the countries they try to reach.
We need to agree on how we deal with failed states and help to put them back on their feet.
We have to use our development assistance strategically, to help poor countries grow and provide their citizens a reason for staying at home.
We also need more aggressive policies to tackle people smuggling, supported by United Nations Security Council resolutions where necessary.
And we have to deploy more naval resources in the Mediterranean and spend more on Europe’s border security.
Such an effort would be in the interest of everyone, not least the poor in Africa and West Asia.
As Cameron surveys the broken political crockery at the end of June, taking responsibility for such an effort – at the helm of a country that is an integral part of the EU – would be very much in his interest as well.
Is Europe Worth the Effort?
PARIS – When the United Kingdom joined the then-European Economic Community in 1973, it was at the rearguard of European integration.
The question raised by the UK’s upcoming referendum on continued European Union membership is whether Britain is now at the forefront of Europe’s disintegration.
The issue has little to do with the insignificant accord that Prime Minister David Cameron recently reached with his EU colleagues.
Indeed, it is hard to believe that this agreement will determine Britain’s fateful choice in June.
The fundamental issue is whether EU membership still yields large enough benefits to outweigh the loss of sovereignty that it entails.
This is not a matter for discussion in Britain only.
For many in the EU, however, it is a very difficult question to ask, because Europe remains emotionally loaded.
Only in Britain could a cabinet minister from the same party that brought the country into the EU call for exiting it.
No mainstream German, French, or Spanish politician would dare discuss the matter openly, let alone advocate divorce.
But the question cannot be ignored.
In most EU countries, large segments of public opinion are dissatisfied with the Union and increasingly sympathetic to nationalistic appeals.
In response, many politicians pay lip service to Europe while emphasizing purely national solutions.
This inconsistent – and often simply cynical – stance has mired Europe in an unhappy equilibrium: It cannot move backward, it cannot move forward, and it satisfies no one.
One hopes that the fierce EU membership debate, now that it has begun, will be honest enough for everyone to learn from it.
In particular, the economic benefits of EU membership are a matter for serious discussion.
Economists describe regional integration as a tradeoff between economies of scale and the diversity of preferences.
By joining, countries gain efficiency and influence, at the cost of having to settle on policies that do not exactly match their choices.
For example, businesses get access to a larger market, and consumers benefit from lower prices, but regulations are less attuned to their liking.
It is like sharing an apartment: you reduce your costs, but you have to adapt to your roommates’ habits.
In Europe, preferences today are arguably much less dissimilar than they were a few decades ago.
Former British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher and former French President François Mitterrand were much further apart ideologically than their current successors.
True, the British are still more inclined toward free markets than the French, but the gap between them has become much narrower.
There is no factual basis for claiming that we have become unhappier roommates since the 1980s.
Nor has the EU ventured into domains where it produces no value added.
The first Cameron government launched a review of EU competences in 2012 to determine which lie with the EU and which with the UK.
A comprehensive public consultation and 32 thorough reports later, the audit has not resulted in any request for significant competence repatriation.
Perhaps for this reason, Brexit advocates often focus on the diminishing benefits of regional integration and claim that Britain would be much better off playing its cards alone.
Why bother negotiating with continental partners, when the UK can trade with the whole world?
Aren’t small, open economies like Singapore thriving?
There are serious objections to this argument.
For starters, free trade suffices for selling shirts, but trade in services requires detailed legislation and institutions (such as sector-specific authorities) to enforce it.
Absent a comprehensive regulatory apparatus, financial or health-care services, among others, cannot be traded.
So the notion that all that is needed is to eliminate tariffs and bureaucratic red tape is pure fiction.
The UK, which is strong in services, needs the institutional framework of the EU single market much more than, say, Poland, which is stronger in goods.
Second, the global trading framework is itself in serious trouble.
The Uruguay Round, the latest global trade agreement, was completed in 1994.
Its putative successor, the Doha Development Round, has not been completed and probably never will be.
Global trade increasingly relies on bilateral or regional arrangements.
According to the World Trade Organization, 267 such agreements are in force, including 49 involving the EU.
Contrary to popular perception, globalization has not made regional arrangements irrelevant; on the contrary, it largely relies on them.
Furthermore, globalization is in fact fragile – and increasingly so.
American leadership buttressed it in the decades after World War II; but the United States no longer regards itself as the guardian of multilateral rules.
The US effort to create two mega-regional free-trade zones – the Trans-Pacific Partnership and the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership, neither of which includes China – is indicative of America’s priorities.
And the other big players, from China to the commodity producers, are not shy about wielding their economic power.
For all its weaknesses, the EU is a big economic player that participates in shaping the world around it.
As a standard-setter, a negotiator, and a rule enforcer, it has considerably more influence than its opponents recognize.
Because it is itself based on rules, it is the strongest champion of rules-based economic interdependence.
For these reasons alone, to dispense with it would be an adventurous gamble.
If rational arguments do not support leaving the EU, why has the question arisen?
In part, it is because the EU has disappointed.
But this is an argument for reforming it, rather than leaving it.
In part, it is because transnational democracy has not delivered.
But the answer is not to give up on it, but to make it work.
In part, it is because the emotional glue binding Europe together has dried up.
But this a reason to make change, not to pander to parochialism.
The World’s Ins and Outs
LONDON – As the United Kingdom’s debate about whether to withdraw from the European Union has heated up, “in” and “out” have come to define the stark choice facing voters in next week’s “Brexit” referendum.
The British are not alone: the world is increasingly divided between the mentalities underpinning support for the “Leave” and “Remain” campaigns.
Do citizens and their leaders want to work with others toward greater security and prosperity, or do they think that they are better served by isolating themselves behind real or virtual walls?
Those with an “out” mindset view the world through a Hobbesian lens, seeing everywhere the danger of people with unregulated passions, driven to do them harm.
Only an omnipotent Leviathan can ensure order and security.
This is essentially the worldview – gradations of extremism notwithstanding – of Austria’s Freedom Party, Greece’s Golden Dawn, the UK Independence Party, Hungary’s ruling Fidesz party, and similar forces throughout Europe and the West, not to mention the world’s autocracies and outright dictatorships.
Theirs is a politics of fear and dog-whistle incitement of the extremist forces that exist in every society.
And, as we’ve seen in both the UK’s Brexit debate and the United States’ presidential election campaign, neither facts nor reason will dissuade voters with an “out” mindset.
As the Nobel laureate economist Daniel Kahneman recently observed of Britain’s Leave camp, “The arguments look odd: they look short-term and based on irritation and anger.”
And yet they work.
In the US presidential election, the choice between Hillary Clinton, the presumptive Democratic nominee, and her Republican counterpart, Donald Trump, reflects an unambiguous battle between “in” and “out.”
In response to the recent mass shooting at an LGBT nightclub in Orlando, Trump boasted that he had been right all along about the threat posed by “radical Islamic terrorism.”
Clinton, by contrast, offered words of support – in English and Spanish – to the victims, and focused on the community and on the need for gun control.
With his xenophobic rhetoric and fondness for despots like Russian President Vladimir Putin (a demagogue who bullies the neighbors he doesn’t invade), Trump epitomizes the “out” mindset: hyperbolic, malicious, pompous, and hostile to all who defy or disagree with him (be it the press, which he berates and tries to block, or judges who preside over his lawsuits).
Some senior Republicans, to their credit, have disavowed this Pied Piper’s effort to lead Americans over a cliff of isolation and bigotry.
But many others, confronted with his steady stream of insults directed at Latinos, Muslims, and women, seem to have walled off their consciences.
Paul Ryan, Speaker of the House of Representatives, has called Trump’s comments racist, but continues to endorse him.
So does Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell and, perhaps most remarkably, John McCain, the party’s 2008 presidential nominee, whose military service Trump denigrated, saying that McCain returned from Vietnam “a war hero” only “because he was captured,” adding, “I like people who weren’t captured.”
Clinton, on the other hand, though widely perceived as a foreign-policy “hawk,” is still of the “in” mindset – someone who knows the value of trade, discussion, and compromise.
She also understands the value of “smart power” – that bombs aren’t always the most valuable tools to use in pursuit of one’s goals.
She would presumably seek to advance the legacy established by President Barack Obama, whose trips to Vietnam, Cuba, and Japan this year focused on moving on from a very difficult past to a new, more hopeful future.
This “in” mindset has proved its worth time and again.
The world benefits from entering into treaties and embracing cooperative arrangements.
By working in concert with other countries and through global institutions, countries become safer and more prosperous.
A victory for the “out” mindset – which seems to regard compassion, truth, and integrity as if they were vestigial limbs – would be Pyrrhic, at best.
Economies would wither, violent conflict would increase, and women, minorities, and journalists would suffer as “out” movements use scare tactics that encourage the extreme among them.
The irony is that all of this is coming at a time when technology companies in Silicon Valley and beyond, long criticized as inward-looking, isolationist, and self-obsessed, are moving as fast as they can to be “in.”
That’s why Tim Cook in May became Apple’s first CEO to journey to India, and a trip by Microsoft’s CEO, Satya Nadella, followed.
Likewise, Facebook’s CEO, Mark Zuckerberg, devoted considerable effort to learning Mandarin ahead of his trip to China in March.
Companies are investing in building more efficient translation software to make working anywhere, with anyone, simple and seamless.
Multinationals worldwide know that, to grow and thrive, they must look to markets and relationships beyond their own home countries’ borders.
And what is true of global companies applies to countries: those that are not “in” will inevitably be left out.
Britain’s Democratic Failure
CAMBRIDGE – The real lunacy of the United Kingdom’s vote to leave the European Union was not that British leaders dared to ask their populace to weigh the benefits of membership against the immigration pressures it presents. Rather, it was the absurdly low bar for exit, requiring only a simple majority.
Given voter turnout of 70%, this meant that the leave campaign won with only 36% of eligible voters backing it.
This isn’t democracy; it is Russian roulette for republics.
A decision of enormous consequence – far greater even than amending a country’s constitution (of course, the United Kingdom lacks a written one) – has been made without any appropriate checks and balances.
Does the vote have to be repeated after a year to be sure?
No.
Does a majority in Parliament have to support Brexit?
Apparently not.
Did the UK’s population really know what they were voting on?
Absolutely not.
Indeed, no one has any idea of the consequences, both for the UK in the global trading system, or the effect on domestic political stability.
I am afraid it is not going to be a pretty picture.
Mind you, citizens of the West are blessed to live in a time of peace: changing circumstances and priorities can be addressed through democratic processes instead of foreign and civil wars.
But what, exactly, is a fair, democratic process for making irreversible, nation-defining decisions?
Is it really enough to get 52% to vote for breakup on a rainy day?
In terms of durability and conviction of preferences, most societies place greater hurdles in the way of a couple seeking a divorce than Prime Minister David Cameron’s government did on the decision to leave the EU.
Brexiteers did not invent this game; there is ample precedent, including Scotland in 2014 and Quebec in 1995.
But, until now, the gun’s cylinder never stopped on the bullet.
Now that it has, it is time to rethink the rules of the game.
The idea that somehow any decision reached anytime by majority rule is necessarily “democratic” is a perversion of the term.
Modern democracies have evolved systems of checks and balances to protect the interests of minorities and to avoid making uninformed decisions with catastrophic consequences.
The greater and more lasting the decision, the higher the hurdles.
That’s why enacting, say, a constitutional amendment generally requires clearing far higher hurdles than passing a spending bill.
Yet the current international standard for breaking up a country is arguably less demanding than a vote for lowering the drinking age.
With Europe now facing the risk of a slew of further breakup votes, an urgent question is whether there is a better way to make these decisions.
I polled several leading political scientists to see whether there is any academic consensus; unfortunately, the short answer is no.
For one thing, the Brexit decision may have looked simple on the ballot, but in truth no one knows what comes next after a leave vote.
What we do know is that, in practice, most countries require a “supermajority” for nation-defining decisions, not a mere 51%.
There is no universal figure like 60%, but the general principle is that, at a bare minimum, the majority ought to be demonstrably stable.
A country should not be making fundamental, irreversible changes based on a razor-thin minority that might prevail only during a brief window of emotion.
Even if the UK economy does not fall into outright recession after this vote (the pound’s decline might cushion the initial blow), there is every chance that the resulting economic and political disorder will give some who voted to leave “buyers’ remorse.”
Since ancient times, philosophers have tried to devise systems to try to balance the strengths of majority rule against the need to ensure that informed parties get a larger say in critical decisions, not to mention that minority voices are heard.
In the Spartan assemblies of ancient Greece, votes were cast by acclamation.
People could modulate their voice to reflect the intensity of their preferences, with a presiding officer carefully listening and then declaring the outcome.
It was imperfect, but maybe better than what just happened in the UK.
By some accounts, Sparta’s sister state, Athens, had implemented the purest historical example of democracy.
All classes were given equal votes (albeit only males).
Ultimately, though, after some catastrophic war decisions, Athenians saw a need to give more power to independent bodies.
What should the UK have done if the question of EU membership had to be asked (which by the way, it didn’t)?
Surely, the hurdle should have been a lot higher; for example, Brexit should have required, say, two popular votes spaced out over at least two years, followed by a 60% vote in the House of Commons.
If Brexit still prevailed, at least we could know it was not just a one-time snapshot of a fragment of the population.
The UK vote has thrown Europe into turmoil.
A lot will depend on how the world reacts and how the UK government manages to reconstitute itself.
It is important to take stock not just of the outcome, though, but of the process.
Any action to redefine a long-standing arrangement on a country’s borders ought to require a lot more than a simple majority in a one-time vote.
The current international norm of simple majority rule is, as we have just seen, a formula for chaos.
The Rise of Demotic Democracy in Europe
LONDON – The shock of the British vote to leave the European Union has yet to sink in.
Yet European leaders must steel themselves for what is to come.
In fact, Brexit might be the initial tremor that triggers a tsunami of referenda in Europe in the coming years.
Across Europe, there are 47 insurgent parties turning politics on its head.
They are gaining control of the political agenda, shaping it according to their interests – and winning power in the process.
In one-third of EU member states, such parties are members of coalition governments, and their success has driven mainstream parties to adopt some of their positions.
Though these parties have very different roots, they all have one thing in common: all are trying to upend the foreign-policy consensus that has defined Europe for several decades.
They are Euroskeptic; they spurn NATO; they want to close their borders and stop free trade.
They are changing the face of politics, replacing traditional left-right battles with clashes pitting their own angry nativism against the cosmopolitanism of the elites they disdain.
These parties’ weapon of choice is the referendum, with which they can whip up popular support for their pet issues.
According to the European Council on Foreign Relations, 32 referenda are being demanded in 18 countries across the EU.
Some, such as the Danish People’s Party, want to follow the United Kingdom’s lead and hold a vote on EU membership.
Others want to escape from the eurozone, block the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP) with the United States, or restrict labor mobility.
The EU’s refugee relocation scheme has proved to be particularly divisive.
Hungarian Prime Minister Viktor Orbán has declared that he will hold a referendum on the proposed quotas.
And the Polish opposition party Kukiz ’15 has been collecting signatures for its own referendum on the issue.
Handing power back to the masses through direct democracy may well be these parties’ most revolutionary proposition.
Indeed, it reflects an understanding of the frustrations that have driven a global wave of popular protests in recent years – protests that, in the Arab world, sparked actual revolutions.
The same spirit of protest that drove, say, Spaniards, Greeks, and New Yorkers to take to the streets – with different demands, to be sure – is fueling support for these new referenda and the insurgent parties that are bringing them about.
This is a nightmare not only for established parties, but also for democratic governance.
As California’s experience with referenda has shown, the public will often vote for contradictory things – for example, lower taxes and more welfare programs, or environmental protection and cheaper gas.
But for the EU, this dynamic is exponentially more challenging; indeed, it overturns the EU’s foundations.
The EU is, after all, the ultimate expression of representative democracy.
It is an enlightened body that places at its core liberal values such as individual rights, the protection of minorities, and a market-based economy.
But the layers of representation on which the EU relies have created the sense that a kind of “Über-elite” is running things, far removed from ordinary citizens.
This has given nationalist parties the perfect target for their anti-EU campaigns.
Add to that fear mongering about issues like immigration and trade, and their ability to attract frustrated or anxious voters is strong.
Two visions of Europe – the diplomatic and the demotic – are now facing off against each other.
The diplomatic Europe, incarnated by EU founding father Jean Monnet, took big, sensitive questions out of the sphere of popular politics and reduced them to manageable technical issues that diplomats could address through bureaucratic compromises behind closed doors.
The demotic Europe, exemplified by the UK Independence Party, which helped spearhead Brexit, is like Monnet in reverse, taking diplomatic compromises like the TTIP or the association agreement with Ukraine, and intentionally politicizing them.
Whereas diplomatic Europe is about finding reconciliation, demotic Europe is about polarization.
Diplomacy is win-win; direct democracy is zero-sum.
Diplomacy tries to lower the temperature; the demotic paradigm raises it.
Diplomats can work with one another; referenda are binary and fixed, leaving none of the political wiggle room and scope for creative compromise needed to resolve political problems.
In demotic Europe, solidarity is impossible.
Europe’s shift away from diplomacy began more than a decade ago, when the Treaty establishing a Constitution for Europe was rejected in popular referenda in France and the Netherlands.
That outcome may have put the EU out of the treaty-making business altogether, meaning that hopes of future integration may well be dashed.
But, in the wake of Brexit, future integration is not Europe’s biggest concern. Instead, it must contend with the increasingly powerful forces undermining the integration that has been achieved, attempting to push Europe backward.
Of course, one need only recall what was there before the EU to realize just how dangerous this path may be.