Europe’s initial response was incoherent, with different EU member states taking radically different approaches to the influx.
Still, checks are being reinstituted at an increasing number of internal borders – most recently, on Denmark’s border with Germany.
To many, Schengen appears to be in tatters.
But the reinstatement of some border controls is merely a temporary measure.
Like the capital controls in Greece (and, until recently, in Cyprus), the purpose is to stem the crisis while better mechanisms are implemented.
Moreover, internal border controls remain the exception, not the rule.
The Schengen countries know that reviving full controls across all internal borders would be extremely costly, forcing them to divert significant resources away from the primary objective of fighting crime and terrorism.
That is why their leaders remain committed to preserving open internal borders, while maintaining a stronger external border – even if that means, as has been made clear to Greece, revoking the Schengen membership of a country deemed incapable of doing its part.
Both the eurozone and the Schengen Area have survived the tough tests they have faced for one reason: They bring practical, tangible benefits to their members.
Economists call this “revealed preference.”
The value added from European integration now extends beyond EU membership to include participation in sub-groups like the eurozone or the Schengen Area that have a more direct and tangible impact on daily life and key policy choices.
In the real world, declarations of lofty principles mean a lot less than concrete actions.
And the concrete actions of the last year – notably, the warning that countries that do not follow the rules will be left out – suggest that 2016 will bring more progress, however piecemeal, toward a stronger eurozone and a real political union.
Money for Nothing
BRUSSELS – The developed world seems to be moving toward a long-term zero-interest-rate environment.
Though the United States, the United Kingdom, Japan, and the eurozone have kept central-bank policy rates at zero for several years already, the perception that this was a temporary aberration meant that medium- to long-term rates remained substantial.
But this may be changing, especially in the eurozone.
Strictly speaking, zero rates are observed only for nominal, medium-term debt that is perceived to be riskless.
But, throughout the eurozone, rates are close to zero – and negative for a substantial share of government debt – and are expected to remain low for quite some time.
In Germany, for example, interest rates on public debt up to five years will be negative, and only slightly positive beyond that, producing a weighted average of zero.
Clearly, Japan’s near-zero interest-rate environment is no longer unique.
To be sure, the European Central Bank’s large-scale bond-buying program could be suppressing interest rates temporarily, and, once the purchases are halted next year, they will rise again.
But investors do not seem to think so.
Indeed, Germany’s 30-year bund yield is less than 0.7%, indicating that they expect ultra-low rates for a very long time.
And many issuers are extending the maturity structure of their obligations to lock in current rates, which cannot go much lower (but could potentially increase a lot).
In any case, the eurozone seems stuck with near-zero rates at increasingly long maturities.
What does this actually mean for its investors and debtors?
Here, one must consider not only the nominal interest rate, but also the real (inflation-adjusted) interest rate.
A very low – or even negative – nominal interest rate could produce a positive real return for a saver, if prices fall sufficiently.
In fact, Japanese savers have been benefiting from this phenomenon for more than a decade, reaping higher real returns than their counterparts in the US, even though Japan’s near-zero nominal interest rates are much lower than America’s.
Nonetheless, nominal rates do matter.
When they are negligible, they flatter profit statements, while balance-sheet problems slowly accumulate.
Given that balance-sheet accounting is conducted according to a curious mix of nominal and market values, it can be opaque and easy to manipulate.
If prices – and thus average debt-service capacity – fall, the real burden of the debt increases.
But this becomes apparent only when the debt has to be refinanced or interest rates increase.
In an environment of zero or near-zero interest rates, creditors have an incentive to “extend and pretend” – that is, roll over their maturing debt, so that they can keep their problems hidden for longer.
Because the debt can be refinanced at such low rates, rollover risk is very low, allowing debtors who would be considered insolvent under normal circumstances to carry on much longer than they otherwise could.
After all, if debt can be rolled over forever at zero rates, it does not really matter – and nobody can be considered insolvent.
The debt becomes de facto perpetual.
Japan’s experience illustrates this phenomenon perfectly.
At more than 200% of GDP, the government’s mountain of debt seems unconquerable.
But that debt costs only 1-2% of GDP to service, allowing Japan to remain solvent.
Likewise, Greece can now manage its public-debt burden, which stands at about 175% of GDP, thanks to the ultra-low interest rates and long maturities (longer than those on Japan’s debt) granted by its European partners.
In short, with low enough interest rates, any debt-to-GDP ratio is manageable.
That is why, in the current interest-rate environment, the Maastricht Treaty’s requirement limiting public debt to 60% of GDP is meaningless – and why the so-called “fiscal compact” requiring countries to make continued progress toward that level should be reconsidered.
In fact, near-zero interest rates undermine the very notion of a “debt overhang” in countries like Greece, Ireland, Portugal, and Spain.
While these countries did accumulate a huge volume of debt during the credit boom that went bust in 2008, the cost of debt service is now too low to have the impact – reducing incomes, preventing a return to growth, and generating uncertainty among investors – that one would normally expect.
Today, these countries can simply refinance their obligations at longer maturities.
Countries’ debts undoubtedly play a vital role in the global financial system.
But, in a zero interest-rate environment, that role must be reevaluated.
A Strategic Rallying Cry for Europe
MADRID – At the end of June, Greece was hurtling toward implosion and the European Union was consumed by an increasingly vicious internal debate over migration.
That might not sound like the most auspicious time for the European Council to give final approval for the preparation of a long-awaited new “global foreign and security strategy” for the EU.
But that is what happened, with the endorsement – complete with deliver-by date – buried in the conclusions of the Council’s June 25-26 meeting.
The initiative has the potential to revolutionize how Europe addresses the many challenges it now faces and, perhaps more important, to give the EU the sense of purpose that it so badly needs.
That the EU needs a new security strategy is clear.
The current one, created in 2003, is deeply outmoded, as epitomized by its opening line: “Europe has never been so prosperous, so secure, nor so free.”
This is clearly no longer the case today.
The constant state of turmoil in which Europe has found itself is a result of the increasing complexity and intertwining of its internal and external realities – shaped, most notably, by four overlapping existential threats.
First, Russia has revived a traditional security challenge that Europe had, it was thought, solved long ago.
Second, transnational terrorism poses a multifaceted and fundamental danger.
Third, a burgeoning migration crisis is raising questions about European values and identity.
And finally, a general lack of vision for the future of the European project has led to disaffection throughout the continent, undermining cohesion and, in turn, the EU’s capacity to address the trials it faces.
These menaces exacerbate and intensify one another.
The activities of terrorist groups contribute to violence and instability in neighboring regions, driving an increasing number of migrants to the EU.
The difficulty of integrating immigrant communities into European societies has sometimes led to radicalization, providing ammunition to nationalist politicians and further fracturing Europe.
Russia’s leaders, too, have worked insidiously to break down solidarity, without which the EU is powerless to respond to the threats it faces.
All of this raises serious questions about the EU’s global role, while diminishing the viability of the European project itself.
Given this interconnectedness, it is unsurprising that the EU’s compartmentalized responses – such as the European Agenda on Migration, the Eastern Partnership, and the Energy Security Strategy – while important, have proved inadequate.
What is needed is an overarching framework that not only underpins a self-reinforcing and coordinated response to core security threats, but also takes advantage of linkages and opportunities to buttress Europe’s capacity to act.
Such a reconceptualization – not just revision – of Europe’s security strategy must account for the fact that the internal and external are becoming increasingly difficult to separate.
Indeed, internally focused initiatives– the digital single market is one clear example – have significant international impacts, while external events shape life in the EU.
Given this, the new security strategy should account for the wider implications of domestic policies, leveraging the full array of tools that Europe has at its disposal.
Of course, lofty rhetoric and ambitious intentions will mean little unless Europe’s leaders commit to the sustained implementation of concrete initiatives.
This is why the drafting process itself is so important; it presents an opportunity for a serious discussion involving EU institutions and the wider European policy community, which has already spent considerable time reflecting on these issues.
Federica Mogherini, the EU’s High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy and Vice-President of the European Commission, is correct when she urges the close involvement of member states in the discussions, in order to give them a sense of ownership over whatever strategy emerges.
The aim should be to produce viable ideas, build consensus, and find linkages – first and foremost within the EU, but without forgetting allies and partners.
In fact, that external dimension is essential.
The ongoing euro crisis has stripped away the rationale that undergirded the integration process for decades.
No longer able to point toward shared prosperity as its raison d'être, the EU is floundering in its search for a new narrative – one that convinces citizens and member states that European integration still has real value.
A strategy that focuses not only on how the world impacts the EU, but also on how European values and interests can and should be projected abroad would provide a rallying cry, a broader mission, and a clear purpose.
The European integration process has, at its core, always been values-driven and rules-based – two qualities that are on retreat in today’s world.
By carrying the banner of liberalism, good governance, and the rule of law internationally, the EU can reverse the centrifugal forces at home that have intensified during the crisis, thereby strengthening its capacity to respond to today’s challenges and securing its position in tomorrow’s world.
This is an opportunity that we cannot afford to miss.
An EU-Turkey Reset
ROME – Later this year, Turkey will host the 2015 G-20 Leaders' Summit, the tenth annual meeting of the G-20 heads of government.
The country's prominence on the world stage comes at an odd time, when it finds itself surrounded by a widening arc of instability.
Indeed, two geopolitical orders are unraveling in Turkey's immediate neighborhood: the post-Cold War entente with Russia, and the national borders in the Middle East defined by the 1916 Sykes-Picot Agreement and 1919 Treaty of Versailles.
Never have the European Union and Turkey needed one another more, and yet rarely have they been so distant.
Turkey is no longer the rising regional star that it was during the first half of President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan's 12 years in office.
Long gone are the days when the country was booming economically and advancing toward true democracy, a source of inspiration to many in the region.
Today, Turkey faces myriad challenges: growing authoritarianism, unimpressive growth, and a faltering Kurdish peace process.
With a 900-kilometer border with Syria, it is hosting nearly two million Syrian refugees and is vulnerable to attacks and infiltration by the Islamic State.
Tensions with both Iran and Israel have become deeply entrenched, and the country has become increasingly dependent on energy from a revanchist Russia.
Turkey cannot confront these challenges alone.
The EU accounts for almost 40% of Turkish trade, 70% of its foreign direct investment, and more than 50% of its tourism industry.
Meanwhile, the country's economic ties with its southern neighbors have spiraled downward since the Arab Spring in 2011.
This reality is reflected in Turkish public opinion, with support for the EU rising from a low of 34% in 2009 to 53% last year.
Simply put, Turkey is waking up to the reality that it has no attractive alternative to the EU and close cooperation with the transatlantic community.
The country's “EU Strategy" announced by European Affairs Minister Volkan Bozkir last fall can be read as an implicit recognition of this fact.
Meanwhile, Europe has never had a greater interest in a stable, democratic, and Western-oriented Turkey.
Without Turkey's cooperation, Europe and the international community will struggle to confront the threat of foreign fighters, defeat the Islamic State, stabilize Iraq, and craft a political solution to the Syrian quagmire.
The EU also needs a sound partnership with Turkey to achieve energy security through diversification.
And yet, rather than being drawn closer together, the EU and Turkey are drifting apart.
Freedom of expression, the separation of powers, and the rule of law have been progressively eroded under Erdoğan.
The country risks being sucked into the region's sectarian conflicts – and being tempted by the authoritarian sirens of Vladimir Putin's Russia.
The EU-Turkey relationship hit a new low at the close of last year, when Turkey increased its pressure on media close to the self-exiled Islamic leader Fethullah Gülen.
The clampdown triggered strong criticism by the EU, which Erdoğan, in turn, angrily rejected.
Some in Europe argue that the deterioration of rights and freedoms in Turkey is so serious that the already-moribund EU accession process should be suspended.
Indeed, it would be difficult to make the case that Turkey fulfills the Copenhagen political criteria.
For example, Turkey slid in Reporters Without Borders' World Press Freedom Index to 154th place (out of 180 countries).
But it is unlikely that a formal suspension of accession negotiations would do anything other than remove the last incentive for Turkey to pursue democratization and EU harmonization.
Instead, the EU should redouble its efforts, strengthening both its criticism of Turkey's democratic backsliding and the credibility of its accession process.
Until now, Cyprus has posed the biggest obstacle to Turkish accession.
EU member states should engage more actively with the Cypriot government to bring about the necessary change.
This would enable the EU to open chapters 23 and 24 of the accession talks – those that deal with rights, fundamental freedoms, and the judiciary – as the European Parliament and the European Commission advocate.
The EU would then be able to cast its criticism within the appropriate legal framework, while Turkish leaders would no longer be in a position to brush aside the EU's concerns.
Lifting its blockade on negotiations would benefit Cyprus as much as Europe.
No country would gain more than Cyprus from stable democracy in Turkey, whereas a de-democratizing Turkey in an unraveling neighborhood seriously threatens Cypriot and European interests alike.
Beyond the EU accession process, other important measures should be taken to rebuild trust and deliver concrete benefits to both sides, thereby revitalizing an ailing and yet increasingly strategic relationship.
Such steps should include deepening EU-Turkey cooperation on counter-terrorism, Syrian refugees, and the multiple crises from Libya to Ukraine, as well as upgrading and modernizing the customs union agreement (as the World Bank recently advocated) and vigorously pursuing visa liberalization.
Though these measures are not alternatives to a revamped accession process, they would help to revive it.
Above all, by embedding Turkey within the European family, such measures would counter the country's dangerous drift away from our common European values.
This commentary was also signed by Wolfgang Ischinger, Chairman of the Munich Security Conference; Hans van den Broek, a former Dutch foreign minister and EU commissioner for external relations; Marcelino Oreja Aguirre, a former Spanish foreign minister; Michel Rocard, former French Prime Minister; and Nathalie Tocci, Deputy Director of the Istituto Affari Internazionali in Rome.
Evading Tax Evasion
ALESSANDRIA, ITALY – Tax evasion is a global scourge.
The “black” economy has, by some estimates, reached 10% of GDP in advanced countries and can top 70% in developing countries. And it is getting worse.
Tax evasion is usually confronted in two ways: audits and harsh sanctions.
But, as the rising tide of tax evasion suggests, these mechanisms amount only to a cat game of and mouse problem – and the mice, it seems, are winning.
As tax evasion becomes more pervasive, whole networks to help hide incomes have appeared, making it far less likely that those who break the law are punished.
Moreover, because more people are evading taxes, tax administrations are under increasing pressure to become more lenient or to accept bribes.
One strategy for weakening ties among potential evaders is to introduce various conflicts of interests.
For example, value-added tax is designed to encourage firms to procure invoices for their inputs in order to reduce their own tax outlays.
But the results often fall short of the potential benefits, because VAT has helped inspire tax evaders to create even stronger networks that can hide an entire chain of transactions.
The Chinese have devised a novel solution.
To encourage customers to request official receipts as proof of payment, some local tax authorities issue a type of receipt that doubles as a lottery ticket.
The receipts can be used as scratch cards to win small amounts of cash, but they also serve as lottery tickets for winning larger amounts.
To prevent forgery, businesses must purchase special, patented machines for printing these receipts.
Records of the printed receipts are automatically transmitted to the tax authorities and are used to calculate taxes.
Similar systems are in use in Taiwan and Latin America.
Another way to reward consumers for combating tax evasion is to offer subsidies.
Some developing countries have introduced a far-reaching VAT refund system for consumers who collect official receipts.
Northern Cyprus, like Turkey, offers a 2.5 percentage point refund on VAT, compared to the standard VAT rate of 13%.
But such systems are burdened by large administration and compliance costs.
The process of collecting and verifying claims is time-consuming, and the net benefit for taxpayers is low.
Moreover, the method is vulnerable to illicit practices, such as collecting receipts issued to foreigners and students, who cannot claim their own refunds.
Monetary subsidies to consumption are also often granted in developed countries for a variety of purposes, not least of which is fighting tax evasion.
One such subsidy is permitting deduction of a fixed percentage of certain expenses from income tax.
In Italy, expenditures for home improvements have been partly deductible for the past ten years, mainly to improve tax compliance by firms in the housing sector.
New regulations have recently been introduced with the specific aim of cracking down on moonlighting.
Under the 2007 financial law, those who claim the home improvement deduction must supply an invoice from the building contractor, which must specify the cost for labor.
In terms of reducing tax evasion, the results have been mixed.
The bulk of claims for the subsidy come from northern Italy, which is usually considered less prone to tax evasion to begin with.
While some cases of illegitimate claims are under investigation, there is no black market for receipts; fraud seems to arise mainly through falsified invoices.
While econometric studies are not available, raw data show an increase in reported income and in the number of firms and official workers.
However, taxable income in the sector is still growing at a slower rate than gross income as measured by national accounts.
When tax evasion is extremely common, taxpayers are likely to experience high transaction and psychological costs in resorting to tax auditors to enforce the issuing of receipts.
But if consumers bear the brunt of costs for reporting violations to the authorities, subsidies may induce them to seek out vendors willing to offer legal transactions.
Yet these efforts are also costly.
Whenever a firm chooses to evade, it becomes increasingly difficult to find a vendor willing to engage in legal transactions.
When alternatives become difficult to find, the compensation requested for accepting an illegal transaction falls.
As typically happens in these cases, once a critical mass of tax evasion is reached, it can jump to much larger values.
This process might also explain why, although many reward systems have proven successful at the beginning, their benefits quickly fade.
Of course, there is a risk that subsidies and lotteries may diminish the moral motivation of citizens to obey tax laws, because compliance becomes conditional on some form of compensation.
But if lotteries, subsidies, and other devices fail to control tax evasion, the Chinese have another method: the death penalty.
Evidence-Based Economics
There is a movement in medicine to require that applications for licenses to sell a new drug be “evidence-based.”
By contrast, trained economists view their discipline as having already achieved this scientific standard.
After all, they express their ideas with mathematics and arrive at quantitative estimates of implied relationships from empirical data.
But economics is not evidence-based in selecting its theoretical paradigms.
Economic policy initiatives are often taken without all the empirical pre-testing that could have been done.
A notorious example is postwar macroeconomic policymaking under the radical Keynesians.
The radicals relied on Keynes’s untested theory that unemployment depended on “effective demand” in relation to the “money wage,” but their policy ignored the part about wages and sought to stabilize demand at a high enough level to ensure “full” employment.
Cecil Pigou and Franco Modigliani objected that if demand were successfully increased, the money wage level would rise, catch up to demand, and thus push employment back down to its previous level.
Employment cannot be sustained above its equilibrium path by inflating effective demand.
Nevertheless, the radicals prevailed through what the economist Harry Johnson called “scorn and derision.”
Postwar macroeconomic policies were dedicated to “full” employment, without any evidence that money wages would not get in the way.
In the late 1950’s, neo-Keynesians finally conceded the point raised by Pigou and Modigliani.
Will Phillips’s work on wages gave them no choice.
But they still insisted that steady increases of demand at a fast enough rate would keep demand one step ahead of the money wage level, so that employment could be kept as high as desired, albeit at the cost of steady inflation.
In different ways, Milton Friedman and I objected, arguing that such a policy would require an ever-rising inflation rate.
Money wages will lag behind demand, I argued, only as long as the representative firm is deterred from raising wages by the misperception that wages at other firms are already lower than its own – a disequilibrium that cannot last.
Like the radicals, the neo-Keynesians did not engage their challengers with empirical testing.
The efficacy of high demand was a matter of faith.
Yet events in the 1970’s put that faith to a cruel test.
When supply shocks hit the US economy, the neo-Keynesians’ response was to pour on more demand, believing it would revive employment.
There was little recovery – only faster inflation.
The current era offers a parallel.
Although policy has since shifted to reflect supply-side economics and real business-cycle theory, the new reigning paradigm’s builders and promoters display the same antipathy to checking data for serious error.
An earlier classroom lesson was well-founded: temporarily below-normal tax rates on labor this year, when merged with the prospect of reversion to normal rates next year, will encourage households to squeeze more work into this year and to work less in future years.
This proposition was recently tested anew on Icelandic data and performed well.
But the supply-siders jumped to the daring conclusion that a permanent cut in tax rates on labor would encourage more work permanently – with no diminution of effectiveness.
Larry Summers and I both doubted that this could be generally true.
If every increase in the after-tax wage rate gave a permanent boost to the amount of labor supplied, we reasoned, steeply rising after-tax wages since the mid-nineteenth century would have brought an extraordinary increase in the length of the workweek and in retirement ages.
But both have fallen, and in continental Europe unemployment is higher.
In my view, this core tenet of supply-side economics rests on a simple blunder.
What matters for the amount of labor supplied is the after-tax wage rate relative to income from wealth.
While after-tax wage rates soared for more than a century, wealth and the income it brought grew just as fast.
To be sure, if tax rates were decreased permanently this year, there would initially be a strongly positive effect on labor supplied.
But there would also be a positive effect on saving and thus on wealth next year and beyond.
In the long run, wealth could tend to increase in the same proportion as after-tax wages. The effect on work would vanish.
We must proceed cautiously, however.
In standard analyses, the tax cut brings a reduction in government purchases of goods and services, like defense.
But a tax cut could instead contract the welfare state – social assistance and social insurance, which constitute social wealth.
In that case, the tax cut, while gradually increasing private wealth, would decrease social wealth.
The issue is an empirical one.
Research I did with Gylfi Zoega a decade ago confirmed that cuts in taxes on labor boost employment in the short run.
But what about the long run?
Do large long-run effects of tax rates show up in international differences in employment?
In 1998 we examined OECD data for a correlation between national unemployment rates in the mid-1990’s and current tax rates on labor.
We found none.
In 2004, we looked at labor-force participation rates and again at unemployment.
Still no correlation.
High-unemployment countries include high-tax Germany, France, and Italy, but also low-tax Japan and Spain.
Low-unemployment nations include low-tax Britain and the US, but also very high-tax Denmark and Sweden.
Neoliberals are now telling continental Europe that tax cuts on labor can dissolve high unemployment.
But the effectiveness of such tax cuts would be largely, if not wholly, transitory – especially if the welfare state was spared.
In two decades’ time, high unemployment would creep back.
The false hopes raised by cutting taxes would have diverted policy makers away from fundamental reforms that are necessary if the Continent is to achieve the dynamism on which high rates of innovation, abundant job creation, and world-class productivity depend.
The Problem With Evidence-Based Policies
CAMBRIDGE – Many organizations, from government agencies to philanthropic institutions and aid organizations, now require that programs and policies be “evidence-based.”
It makes sense to demand that policies be based on evidence and that such evidence be as good as possible, within reasonable time and budgetary limits.
But the way this approach is being implemented may be doing a lot of harm, impairing our ability to learn and improve on what we do.
The current so-called “gold standard” of what constitutes good evidence is the randomized control trial, or RCT, an idea that started in medicine two centuries ago, moved to agriculture, and became the rage in economics during the past two decades.
Its popularity is based on the fact that it addresses key problems in statistical inference.
For example, rich people wear fancy clothes.
Would distributing fancy clothes to poor people make them rich?
This is a case where correlation (between clothes and wealth) does not imply causation.
Harvard graduates get great jobs.
Is Harvard good at teaching – or just at selecting smart people who would have done well in life anyway?
This is the problem of selection bias.
RCTs address these problems by randomly assigning those participating in the trial to receive either a “treatment” or a “placebo” (thereby creating a “control” group).
By observing how the two groups differ after the intervention, the effectiveness of the treatment can be assessed.
RCTs have been conducted on drugs, micro-loans, training programs, educational tools, and myriad other interventions.
Suppose you are considering the introduction of tablets as a way to improve classroom learning.
An RCT would require that you choose some 300 schools to participate, 150 of which would be randomly assigned to the control group that receives no tablets.
Prior to distributing the tablets, you would perform a so-called baseline survey to assess how much children are learning in school.
Then you give the tablets to the 150 “treatment” schools and wait.
After a period of time, you would carry out another survey to find out whether there is now a difference in learning between the schools that received tablets and those that did not.
Suppose there are no significant differences, as has been the case with four RCTs that found that distributing books also had no effect.
It would be wrong to assume that you learned that tablets (or books) do not improve learning.
What you have shown is that that particular tablet, with that particular software, used in that particular pedagogical strategy, and teaching those particular concepts did not make a difference.
But the real question we wanted to answer was how tablets should be used to maximize learning.
Here the design space is truly huge, and RCTs do not permit testing of more than two or three designs at a time – and test them at a snail’s pace.
Can we do better?
Consider the following thought experiment: We include some mechanism in the tablet to inform the teacher in real time about how well his or her pupils are absorbing the material being taught.
We free all teachers to experiment with different software, different strategies, and different ways of using the new tool.
The rapid feedback loop will make teachers adjust their strategies to maximize performance.
Over time, we will observe some teachers who have stumbled onto highly effective strategies.
We then share what they have done with other teachers.
Notice how radically different this method is.
Instead of testing the validity of one design by having 150 out of 300 schools implement the identical program, this method is “crawling” the design space by having each teacher search for results.
Instead of having a baseline survey and then a final survey, it is constantly providing feedback about performance.
Instead of having an econometrician do the learning in a centralized manner and inform everybody about the results of the experiment, it is the teachers who are doing the learning in a decentralized manner and informing the center of what they found.
Clearly, teachers will be confusing correlation with causation when adjusting their strategies; but these errors will be revealed soon enough as their wrong assumptions do not yield better results.
Likewise, selection bias may occur (some places may be doing better than others because they differ in other ways); but if different contexts require different strategies, the system will find them sooner or later.
This strategy resembles more the social implementation of a machine-learning algorithm than a clinical trial.
In economics, RCTs have been all the rage, especially in the field of international development, despite critiques by the Nobel laureate Angus Deaton, Lant Pritchett, and Dani Rodrik, who have attacked the inflated claims of RCT’s proponents.
One serious shortcoming is external validity.
Lessons travel poorly: If an RCT finds out that giving micronutrients to children in Guatemala improves their learning, should you give micronutrients to Norwegian children?
My main problem with RCTs is that they make us think about interventions, policies, and organizations in the wrong way.
As opposed to the two or three designs that get tested slowly by RCTs (like putting tablets or flipcharts in schools), most social interventions have millions of design possibilities and outcomes depend on complex combinations between them.
This leads to what the complexity scientist Stuart Kauffman calls a “rugged fitness landscape.”
Getting the right combination of parameters is critical.
This requires that organizations implement evolutionary strategies that are based on trying things out and learning quickly about performance through rapid feedback loops, as suggested by Matt Andrews, Lant Pritchett and Michael Woolcock at Harvard’s Center for International Development.
RCTs may be appropriate for clinical drug trials.
But for a remarkably broad array of policy areas, the RCT movement has had an impact equivalent to putting auditors in charge of the R&D department.
That is the wrong way to design things that work.
Only by creating organizations that learn how to learn, as so-called lean manufacturing has done for industry, can we accelerate progress.
Evil Personified
COLLEGE STATION, TEXAS – Equating war with individual evil has become ubiquitous – if not universal – in contemporary international politics.
Wars are fights against evil tyrants and the illegitimate governments they control.
Such rhetoric makes wars easier to justify, easier to wage, and easier to support, especially for elected leaders who must respond directly to swings in public opinion.  Such language works equally well for any society in today’s media-obsessed age.
Little wonder, then, that political leaders consistently personalize international conflicts.
Alas, such commonplace language also makes wars harder to avoid, harder to end, and arguably more deadly.
The rhetoric of personified evil is easily seen through American examples, but is hardly a uniquely American phenomenon.
Chinese leaders blame Taiwanese leaders for cross-straits tensions, and blame the Dalai Lama for all that ails Tibet.
So, too, have protestors around the world made George W. Bush resemble Hitler, and mullahs throughout the Islamic world ritualistically harangue US presidents as earthly Satans, simultaneously noting their basic affection for the American people.
Recent American leaders, for their part, find it nearly impossible to deploy military force without first employing such rhetoric as both mantra and crutch.
The most famous example came in 1917.
Woodrow Wilson, asking for a declaration of war against Germany, said, “We have no quarrel with the German people.
We have no feeling toward them but one of sympathy and friendship.
It was not upon their impulse that their Government acted in entering this war.”
Only the Kaiser and his evil henchmen were to blame.
In 1990, George H.W. Bush made the same plea: “We have no quarrel with the Iraqi people.”
His son said the same thing in 2003, adding, “they are the daily victims of Saddam Hussein’s oppression.”
George W. Bush had earlier noted that Americans “had no quarrel with the people of Afghanistan,” only with Al Queda and their Taliban supporters.
He even employed this phrase in his final State of the Union address in 2008, saying that “Our message to the people of Iran is clear: We have no quarrel with you….Our message to the leaders of Iran is also clear: Verifiably suspend your nuclear enrichment, so negotiations can begin.”
Every American president since Wilson has, at least once while in office, uttered the phrase “have no quarrel with” a foreign enemy.
Such statements are typically made only days, sometimes hours, before the first American bombs fall.
Bill Clinton promised on the eve of the bombing of Serbia that “I cannot emphasize too strongly that the United States has no quarrel with the Serbian people.”
Barack Obama promised from the campaign trail that “We have no quarrel with the Iranian people.
They know that President Ahmadinejad is reckless, irresponsible, and inattentive to their day-to-day needs.”
Presidents employ such language for good reason.
They know their public, a self-styled melting pot of peoples, would rather fight dictators than brothers and cousins abroad.
Indeed, Wilson’s initial formulation grew from a demographic and political quandary.
More than one-third of Americans in 1917 could trace their heritage back to Germany and its allies.
Wilson could not implore his people to “kill the Krauts,” as British or French leaders frequently did, because so many of Wilson’s soldiers were, by ethnicity at least, Krauts themselves.
He instead rhetorically transformed American soldiers from fratricidal killers into liberators of their ancient fatherland.
Only when foreign enemies looked different from what Americans conceived themselves to be could presidents wage war against a people as a whole.
Thus, Franklin Roosevelt could simultaneously urge Americans to keep the world from being “dominated by Hitler and Mussolini ,” even as he told them that “we are now in the midst of a war against Japan .”
The war in Europe was a war to liberate oppressed peoples from tyrants. The war in the Pacific was a race war.
Such politically expedient language has a strategic downside.
First, once you pin blame for a conflict on a single individual, a Saddam Hussein or Kim Jong Il, it is difficult to see a solution to international conflict that does not result from the tyrant’s downfall.
Imagine Bush parlaying with Saddam Hussein in 2005 or 2006, if war had never come again to Iraq, after having called him this generation’s Hitler.
More troubling is the identification of conflict with a single human source, which obscures the more systemic and insidious nature of international conflict.
Again, imagine if recent history had gone differently, and Saddam had in fact taken the Bush administration’s eleventh-hour offer of exile rather than war.
Or if the initial attempt made on Saddam’s life in the war’s first hours had been successful.
If Iraq indeed had weapons of mass destruction, as Bush believed, Hussein’s departure would have left such weapons in the hands of…whom exactly?
Equating war with a solitary tyrant thus imposes strategic limitations for policymakers.
It also leads, paradoxically, to a greater number of civilian deaths.
Bombs aimed at foreign dictators or their security apparatus almost invariably kill individuals far from the corridors of power.
Their deaths are easier to stomach, and to justify, so long as airmen and soldiers, and the public watching at home, believe the violence was at least directed against evil incarnate.
Such rhetoric clearly works.
It is global in nature.
But it also helps make the world a more dangerous place by obscuring the real reasons for war, and by allowing peoples around the world to justify violence and conflict not as a means to an end, but rather as a holy mission of liberation, freedom, and the eradication of tyranny.
Until political leaders reject the rhetoric of evil as a justification for war, war itself is unlikely to disappear.
Evolution’s New Frontiers
MISHIMA – Recent breakthroughs in our understanding of molecular mechanisms have revolutionized many fields of biology, including cell biology and developmental biology.
So it is no surprise that these advances are providing valuable insights into the field of evolutionary biology as well, including evidence supporting the nearly neutral theory of molecular evolution that I developed in 1973.
As is typical in science, each new discovery in evolutionary biology raises as many questions as it answers.
Indeed, my field is now going through one of the most dynamic periods in its 150-year history.
For roughly a century after the publication of Charles Darwin’s On the Origin of Species, scientists believed that genetic mutations were governed by a process similar to that described by the father of natural selection.
The idea was that individuals with superior genetic variants would be more likely to survive, reproduce, and pass on their genes than those without them.
As a result, harmful mutations would quickly die out.
Beneficial ones would spread until the entire species carried them.
Evolutionary changes, including morphological ones, were thought to be the result of the accumulation and distribution of beneficial mutations, and the genetic makeup of populations was believed to be close to homogeneous, with only a few rare, random mutations creating differences between one individual and another.
That view was challenged by the discovery of DNA.
As it became possible to analyze an individual’s genetic makeup, it become apparent that there was much more variation within populations than prevailing evolutionary theory predicted.
Indeed, individuals could have similar traits but very different gene sequences.
This appeared to contradict the principles of natural selection.
One of the first attempts to square the theory with the evidence was proposed by my late colleague Motoo Kimura, who posited the existence of neutral mutations – gene variants that are neither advantageous nor harmful to an individual, and therefore not influenced by natural selection.
Kimura examined the rate of evolutionary change of proteins and proposed the neutral theory of molecular evolution in 1968.
His theory – which held that evolutionary changes at the molecular level are caused not by natural selection, but by random genetic drift – provided a good explanation for the genetic variation that researchers had discovered.
Kimura’s theory was simple and elegant, but the classification of mutations into the distinct classes – beneficial, neutral, or harmful – seemed too simple to me.
My own work showed that borderline mutations, those with very small positive or negative effects, could be very important in driving evolutionary changes.
This insight was the basis of the nearly neutral theory of molecular evolution.
The explosion of data on genomes and population genetics in the twenty-first century has not only lent new support to my 42-year-old theory; it has also uncovered broad new areas of research.
Our knowledge of the structure and function of proteins, for example, has been greatly expanded through the discovery of dynamic folding processes.
These are thought to provide flexibility in how proteins function, in a way that may be connected to nearly-neutral mutations.
Among the most interesting challenges in evolutionary biology is the attempt to identify the molecular mechanisms of gene expression that drive morphological evolution.
The field is in the process of gaining a better understanding of a host of complex systems within individual cells.
These molecular-level systems are at the heart of epigenetics – the study of changes in genetic function that cannot be explained by differences in DNA sequences.
Epigenetics is crucial for comprehending the link between the genetic composition, or genotype, and the traits we can actually observe.
In higher organisms – such as humans – epigenetic processes are controlled by chromatin, a complex of macromolecules inside cells consisting of DNA, protein, and RNA.
The way chromatin works is, in turn, shaped by genetic and environmental factors, making their functioning difficult to grasp.
These rapidly evolving, highly variable macromolecules are well worth studying, however, as they may be the cause of some human diseases.
Another factor in the relationship between genetic composition and observable traits is the way that proteins can sometimes be modified.
For example, protein enzymes can be turned on and off, thereby altering their function and activity.
This process, like other forms of genetic expression, seems to be driven by a combination of innate and environmental factors.
No single mechanism, it seems, can be studied in isolation; at a very basic level, factors like selection, drift, and epigenetics work together and become inseparable.
The deeper we dive into what we once thought were straight-forward evolutionary processes, the more wondrous and complex they are revealed to be.
Evolutionary Theory’s Welcome Crisis
EXETER – Those who believe that a supernatural being created the universe have never posed an intellectual challenge to evolutionary theory.
But creationists, whether biblical fundamentalists or believers in “intelligent design,” do pose a threat to scientific thinking.
Indeed, creationism’s insidious genius lies in its ability to reinvent evolution in its own image as a dogmatic belief system – and thus the antithesis of science.
The creationists are right about one thing: contrary to the impression given by much popular writing on the subject, the theory of evolution is in crisis.
But this is a positive development, because it reflects the non-linear progress of scientific knowledge, characterized by what Thomas Kuhn described in his influential book The Structure of Scientific Revolutions as “paradigm shifts.”
For the last 70 years, the dominant paradigm in evolutionary science has been the so-called “new synthesis.”
Widely publicized in recent years by Oxford evolutionary biologist Richard Dawkins, the new synthesis unites Darwin’s theory of natural selection with Mendelian genetics, which explains heredity.
But examination of genomes – particularly microbes – has shown that genes moving between distantly related organisms are an important catalyst of evolutionary change.
Moreover, the new synthesis assumes that the main drivers of evolution are small mutations generated by chance within a species.
But recent evidence suggests that large changes, caused by the absorption of a chunk of alien genetic material, may be just as significant.
Indeed, the absorption of entire organisms – such as the two bacteria that formed the first eukaryotic cell (the more complex cell type found in multicellular animals) – can generate large and crucial evolutionary change.
Further destabilizing evolutionary theory is the growing realization that many factors, not just the genome, determine an individual organism’s development.
Ironically, as the discovery of DNA’s structure – initially lauded as the final act in the triumph of the new synthesis – led to a better understanding of genomes�� functioning, it ended up weakening belief in their unique role in directing biological development.
Those who long deplored the omission of development from evolutionary models – a decades-old critique made under the scientific banner of evolutionary developmental biology (“evo-devo”) – together with the insistence that organisms’ development draws on a wide variety of resources, have been vindicated.
Recent developments in molecular biology have put the final nail in the coffin of traditional genetic determinism.
For example, epigenetics – the study of heritable modifications of the genome that do not involve alterations to the genetic code – is on the rise.
And the many kinds of small RNA molecules are increasingly recognized as forming a regulatory layer above the genome.
Beyond undermining the gene-centered theories of evolution that have dominated public consciousness for several decades, these developments call for new philosophical frameworks.
Traditional reductionist views of science, with their focus on “bottom-up” mechanisms, do not suffice in the quest to understand top-down and circular causality and a world of nested processes.
This brings us back to where we started.
Radically rethinking evolutionary theory invariably attracts the attention of creationists, who gleefully announce that if professional advocates of Darwinism cannot agree, the concept must be in retreat.
And, evolutionists, confronted with this response, tend to circle the wagons and insist that everyone is in agreement.
But nothing more clearly demonstrates that science and creationism are polar opposites than the latter’s assumption that disagreement signals failure.
In fact, disagreement – and the deeper insights that result from it – enables new approaches to scientific understanding.
For science, unlike for dogmatic belief systems, disagreement is to be encouraged.
Evolutionary theory’s current contretemps – and our inability to predict where the field will be in 50 years – are a cause for celebration.
We should leave the creationists to their hollow convictions and happily embrace the uncertainties inherent in a truly empirical approach to understanding the world.
Evo Morales and the Populist Paradox
LA PAZ – Evo Morales succeeded in amending the Bolivia’s constitution and being re-elected President.
And, backed by his parliamentary majority, he was recently able to fill vacant judicial posts, making him the most powerful president in Bolivia’s contemporary history.
According to his opponents, Morales is reproducing the tradition of caudillismo, concentrating power in his hands and turning government institutions into mere formalities.
But his immense popularity over the past five years suggests that most Bolivians do not seem very worried in putting their country’s democracy at risk.
Morales’s success rests largely on the paradox of populism.
Although he claims to oppose economic liberalism, he is a product of the political liberties that it promotes and feeds on the benefits generated by the market economy.
Morales was born into a peasant household on the Andean altiplano and later established himself in Chapare at the beginning of the coca boom.
His career as a union leader took him away from agriculture and into politics, where he stood out for his criticism of the United States, whose anti-drug crusade meant the eradication of a cash crop for poor peasants.
By defending the coca leaf, consumed for centuries in the Andean world and the raw material for cocaine, Morales was able to link his opposition to America’s anti-drug policy with the defense of native cultural tradition and the economic rights of the poor.
Thus, Morales’s leadership brought together three strongly symbolic dimensions: nationalist sentiment, concern for the poor, and emerging ethnic pride among Bolivia’s native peoples.
But the making of Morales as a leader able to combine these three dimensions reflects two institutional reforms in the 1990’s that expanded social participation and opened up opportunities for new leaders and political movements.
The division of the country into municipalities transferred tax resources and decision-making capabilities to communities, thereby enabling agricultural unions to control several towns and assume management responsibilities.
This led to the formation of new political parties, and the creation of regional councils in 1997 made it possible for leaders with strong local roots – like Morales – to reach Bolivia’s congress without any major party’s backing.
Once situated at the center of the political scene, Congressman Morales took advantage of his constitutional immunity to intensify his union activities and his fight against anti-drug policies.
In the 2002 elections, Morales received an unexpected boost from the US ambassador, who, by declaring himself against Morales, stirred up nationalist sentiment.
Morales went on to win the 2005 presidential election with an absolute majority.
The other parties made it easier for him by discrediting each other, failing even to defend their own achievements over the previous 20 years.
Two other factors that made Morales’s rise possible were the revival of Bolivia’s oil industry and the creation of mechanisms for distributing the income that oil produces.
Both now sustain his rule.
Private investment in the mid-1990’s, moreover, increased output of natural gas.
Soon gas was being exported – very profitably – to Brazil.
Thus, when Morales came to power, Bolivia’s economy was in a position to take advantage of the global price boom for raw materials.
As a result, revenues increased, despite his government’s nationalist and statist policies, which drove away investment and hindered access to new markets.
Since 2005, Bolivian exports have increased six-fold, along with fiscal revenue.
This money is distributed automatically to local governments, according to the model established by Morales’s predecessors, carrying resources to the farthest reaches of the country.
But it is not only local governments that have benefited; through cash transfers created during the so called neo-liberal years, families have gained as well, most importantly through a universal and non-contributive old-age pension benefit given to persons over 60, which reaches slightly more than 30% of households.
In recent years, aid for students at public schools and maternity assistance for pregnant women at health centers have been created, but these have a greater political than economic impact.
Indeed, Morales’s economic initiatives usually turn out to be empty, such as his deals with Venezuela for hydrocarbon supplies and with India for iron.
His plan to exploit and industrialize the country’s gas fields remains just a promise.
The Bolivian economy has grown moderately under Morales’s management, owing to international demand and cash transfers from the state to local governments and individuals.
These not only increase household spending, but also offer opportunities for trade, in both the formal and informal sectors, making it the most successful policy in the fight against poverty.
Thus, despite official speeches intended to support state intervention, Morales’s government benefits mainly from the workings of the market.
The failure of state plans and projects is overlooked because of the small but expanding internal market, which is invigorated by de facto economic liberalism involving the growth of smuggling and drug traffic.
These illicit activities are not intended, but they increase the income of peasants, transporters, builders, and businessmen.
This is the paradox of twenty-first-century socialism: economic liberalism is the foundation for a policy that aspires to replace it.
This might also be its greatest limitation as a political project.
A Hard Look at a Soft Global Economy
MILAN – The global economy is settling into a slow-growth rut, steered there by policymakers’ inability or unwillingness to address major impediments at a global level.
Indeed, even the current anemic pace of growth is probably unsustainable.
The question is whether an honest assessment of the impediments to economic performance worldwide will spur policymakers into action.
Since 2008, real (inflation-adjusted) cumulative growth in the developed economies has amounted to a mere 5-6%.
While China’s GDP has risen by about 70%, making it the largest contributor to global growth, this was aided substantially by debt-fueled investment.
And, indeed, as that stimulus wanes, the impact of inadequate advanced-country demand on Chinese growth is becoming increasingly apparent.
Growth is being undermined from all sides.
Leverage is increasing, with some $57 trillion having piled up worldwide since the global financial crisis began.
And that leverage – much of it the result of monetary expansion in most of the world’s advanced economies – is not even serving the goal of boosting long-term aggregate demand.
After all, accommodative monetary policies can, at best, merely buy time for more durable sources of demand to emerge.
Moreover, a protracted period of low interest rates has pushed up asset prices, causing them to diverge from underlying economic performance.
But while interest rates are likely to remain low, their impact on asset prices probably will not persist.
As a result, returns on assets are likely to decline compared to the recent past; with prices already widely believed to be in bubble territory, a downward correction seems likely.
Whatever positive impact wealth effects have had on consumption and deleveraging cannot be expected to continue.
The world also faces a serious investment problem, which the low cost of capital has done virtually nothing to overcome.
Public-sector investment is now below the level needed to sustain robust growth, owing to its insufficient contribution to aggregate demand and productivity gains.
The most likely explanation for this public investment shortfall is fiscal constraints.
And, indeed, debt and unfunded non-debt liabilities increasingly weigh down public-sector balance sheets and pension funds, eroding the foundations of resilient, sustainable growth.
But if the best way to reduce sovereign over-indebtedness is to achieve higher nominal GDP growth (the combination of real growth and inflation), cutting investment – a key ingredient in a pro-growth-strategy – is not a sound approach.
Instead, budget rules should segregate public investment, thereby facilitating a differential response in fiscal consolidation.
Increased public-sector investment could help to spur private-sector investment, which is also severely depressed.
In the United States, investment barely exceeds pre-crisis levels, even though GDP has risen by 10%.
And the US is not alone.
Clearly, deficient aggregate demand has played a role by reducing the incentive to expand capacity.
In some economies, structural rigidities adversely affect investment incentives and returns.
Similarly, regulatory opacity – and, more broadly, uncertainty about the direction of economic policy – has discouraged investment.
And certain types of shareholder activism have bred short-termism on the part of firms.
There is also an intermediation problem.
Large pools of savings in sovereign wealth funds, pension funds, and insurance companies could be used, for example, to meet emerging economies’ huge financing needs for infrastructure and urbanization.
But the channels for such investment – which could go a long way toward boosting global growth – are clogged.
Meanwhile, technological and market forces have contributed to job polarization, with the middle-income bracket gradually deteriorating.
Automation, for example, seems to have spurred an unexpectedly rapid decline in routine white- and blue-collar jobs.
This has resulted in stagnating median incomes and rising income inequality, both of which constrain the private-consumption component of aggregate demand.
Even the one factor that has effectively increased disposable incomes and augmented demand – sharply declining commodity prices, particularly for fossil fuels – is ultimately problematic.
Indeed, for commodity-exporting countries, the fall in prices is generating fiscal and economic headwinds of varying intensity.
Inflation – or the lack of it – presents further challenges.
Price growth is well below targets and declining in many countries.
If this turns to full-blown deflation, accompanied by uncontrolled rising real interest rates, the risk to growth would be serious.
Even very low inflation hampers countries’ ability to address over-indebtedness.
And there is little sign of inflationary pressure, even in the US, which is near “full” employment.
Given such large demand shortfalls and output gaps, it should surprise no one that even exceptionally generous monetary conditions have proved insufficient to bolster inflation.
With few options for fighting deflation, countries have resorted to competitive devaluations.
But this is not an effective strategy for capturing a larger share of tradable global demand if everyone is doing it.
And targeting exchange-rate competitiveness doesn’t address the aggregate demand problem.
If the global economy remains on its current trajectory, a period of intense volatility could destabilize a number of emerging economies, while undermining development efforts worldwide.
That’s why policymakers must act now.
For starters, governments must recognize that central banks, however well they have served their economies, cannot go it alone.
Complementary reforms are needed to maintain and improve the transmission channels of monetary policy and avoid adverse side effects.
In several countries – such as France, Italy, and Spain – reforms designed to increase structural flexibility are also crucial.
Furthermore, impediments to higher and more efficient public- and private-sector investment must be removed.
And governments must implement measures to redistribute income, improve the provision of basic services, and equip the labor force to take advantage of ongoing shifts in the economic structure.
Generating the political will to get even some of this done will be no easy feat.
But an honest look at the sorry state – and unpromising trajectory – of the global economy will, one hopes, help policymakers do what’s needed.
Exhausted Italy
Italy is facing perhaps its most important elections since 1948, when voters confirmed the emergence of Italy’s new republic from the wreckage of Mussolini’s fascist regime.
On April 9-10, Italians must choose between Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi’s center-right government and the center-left bloc headed by Romano Prodi.
But neither man seems the sort of decisive figure that overcoming Italy’s bleak economic predicament demands.
Italy’s economic malaise is obvious.
Cumulative economic growth over the past five years was the slowest in the euro zone – 3.2%, compared to an average of 7.8% – with two years of stagnation.
Per capita GDP, too, has fallen below the euro-zone average.
Employment has increased, but labor productivity has remained flat and total factor productivity has declined.
Combined with strong real exchange-rate appreciation, this has led to a dramatic loss of competitiveness and weakening exports.
Indeed, the only growth sector seems to be books about Italy’s decline.
Berlusconi claims that statistics are unreliable, for they conceal a much rosier reality for today’s well-off Italians.
Other members of the government admit more soberly that Italy faces serious problems, but they lay the blame on factors beyond their control: a series of global economic shocks, a slow-down in continental Europe, the admission of China to the World Trade Organization, and the role of the euro.
But such explanations are unconvincing.
The global shocks affected all European countries alike, as did the entry of China (and other Asian countries) into the WTO, but French exports, for example, suffered much less, while German exports actually increased.
True, European growth was dragged down by meager growth in Germany, but Italy grew marginally less than Germany.
Finally, while the euro has put a stop to competitive devaluations, it also provided Italy with a sizeable benefit: a reduction by 6% of GDP in interest payments on the huge public debt accumulated in the 1990’s.
It would be unfair, however, to blame the Berlusconi government alone for this dismal performance.
Italy’s growth has been slower than Europe’s, with weakening exports, for the past decade, because the country was ill prepared to adjust to the global revolution in information technology and the changing pattern of world trade.
Its infrastructure, both material and intellectual, was poorer, and its economic structure was unfit for the new challenges, owing both to firm size and their specialization in traditional sectors, as well as low levels of education and R&amp;D.
Yet the Berlusconi government did next to nothing to address these deficiencies, despite being the first government in Italy’s history to survive a full five-year electoral term.
With an unassailable parliamentary majority, it could have undertaken coherent supply-side reforms, even at the risk of some initial unpopularity.
A couple of reforms were belatedly enacted: timid intervention on pensions and a further increase in labor-market flexibility.
But nothing was done to deregulate product markets or to give proper incentives to restructuring, while privatization came to a halt.
Instead, the government chose old-style Keynesian policy: moderate tax cuts to increase disposable income and an increase in current expenditure.
Between 2001 and 2005, current non-interest expenditure rose by 2% of GDP, revenues fell by 0.5% of GDP, and the general government deficit rose by 1% of GDP.
Worse, the surplus fell from 3.2% to 0.5% of GDP, and fell even allowing for the business cycle.
As a result, the debt-to-GDP ratio declined only modestly until 2004 and rose again – to more than 106% – in 2005.
The weak fiscal position will severely constrain whatever government comes to power.
The center-left’s ponderous electoral program proposes a cut of five percentage points in payroll taxes, but it is not clear where the required €10 billion will come from to pay for this.