A World of Trouble
So you thought this year was bad!
2009 began with the flattening of Gaza.
Unemployment is surging in many countries, even though we can detect the first signs of recovery from the recession.
Many bankers, meanwhile, are back to the trough as though nothing had happened.
Greed was just taking a temporary break.
Pakistan is hit hard by a wave of monstrous Taleban attacks, and in Afghanistan NATO troops die and are terribly injured in large numbers.
The “Peace Process” in the Middle East becomes ever more clearly the great oxymoron in international relations.
Preparations for the climate change conference in Copenhagen are dominated by charges and recriminations. Even President Barack Obama, of whom miracles were expected, turns out to be no more than a very talented mortal.
He receives the Nobel Peace Prize in the hope that maybe he can make next year better.
He’ll certainly have his work cut out.
Will 2010 see a recovery shaped like a “V” or a “W,” or will there simply be an anemic tilt towards a very distant prospect of better times?
I suspect the latter, with unemployment and cuts in public spending – certainly in much of Europe and the United States – constraining economic confidence.
That will make the politics of dealing with global imbalances all the more difficult.
Let’s be clear about what is happening.
The deliberate undervaluation of China’s currency, and the fall in the dollar, are both putting a squeeze on the export prospects of the European Union members and other countries like Canada and Mexico, and China’s covert and not so covert export subsidies and import barriers exacerbate the problem.
American exasperation has probably been curbed by its need to borrow so much money – much of it from China.
But Obama’s recent tariffs on tire imports may be a sign of things to come.
Chinese behavior will put increasing political pressure on those of us in Europe and the US who are delighted about China’s economic success and who argue for free trade.
Weaker economies will also feel the pinch.
I hope that China’s sophisticated economic managers understand that either their country’s behavior will have to change, or we are likely to face a massive trade conflict and disruption of global commerce.
The patience even of free traders will wear thin in 2010.
Rows about the short-term costs of dealing with climate change won’t make it any easier to keep markets open.
But failure to act now will only raise the price of delayed action at some moment in the future.
While the most hopeful outcome of the Copenhagen summit – a global pact limiting carbon emissions – has now been all but ruled out, the second-best outcome – negotiations on specific measures continue within a framework of general goodwill – would not be a disaster.
Anything short of that would be very bad news.
In either of these two more optimistic scenarios, one consequence will be the transfer – actual or putative – of considerable sums of money from developed to emerging or developing countries to cover some of their costs for emissions abatement and environmental protection.
Now just imagine the problems that legislators in developed democracies will face when they must explain why billions of dollars and euros should be handed over to China, whose deliberately undervalued currency is costing their constituents their jobs.
Obama’s commitment to substantial nuclear disarmament bodes well for the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty Renewal Conference in 2010.
But, even with progress there, the problems created by the threat of nuclear weapons development in North Korea and Iran will remain.
American and European diplomatic engagement with Iran is welcome.
But what happens if this brings either no Iranian commitment to refrain from weaponizing nuclear power, or no acceptance of tough monitoring of such a pledge?
China and Russia seem unlikely to support any further sanctions against Iran if diplomacy fails.
China’s energy relationship with Iran grows ever stronger, and Russia continues to see its mission internationally as making trouble wherever it can.
This is just a little of what 2010 perhaps has in store – and no mention yet of Israeli settlement building on the West Bank, Pakistan’s struggle against murderous extremists, and NATO’s bloody difficulties in propping up a discredited and corrupt Afghan regime in order to prevent the country from falling back into the hands of the Taliban and Al-Qaeda.
Still, however gloomy the outlook, we do stagger on – the flowers still bloom, the breeze stirs the trees, the birds sing, and children laugh.
The rest of us can enjoy life while Obama does the heavy lifting.
A Year of Anniversaries and Uncertainties
ALBERTA – As China enters the “Year of the Ox,” there is much to reflect on from the past 12 months and even more to speculate about regarding the coming year.
2008 began with devastating snowstorms that paralyzed most of central and southern China’s transport system, interrupting lives and causing severe material damage.
Then came the riots in Tibet, which caught the government off guard, followed by embarrassing protests over China’s Olympic torch relay in several Western and Asian countries.
Then, as Chinese were wondering why 2008, a year of supposed good fortune marked by the lucky number eight, had started with so much misfortune, a deadly earthquake struck Sichuan province, killing 80,000 people and leaving millions homeless.
Emerging more united from this tragedy, the country welcomed the world to the long-anticipated Olympics, which were remarkably successful, but were soon superseded by the tainted-dairy-product scandal in which many babies became ill, and some died.
In contrast to last year, when the rush home for the lunar New Year celebration was hampered by freak storms, this year millions of migrant workers have already returned to their rural homes.
Many will be staying there, because the global economic downturn has hit China hard, costing them their jobs.
Littered with a host of extremely sensitive anniversaries, 2009 could prove even more dramatic and unpredictable than 2008.
Fast approaching is not only the March anniversary of last year’s disturbances in Tibet, but also the 50th anniversary of the Tibetan unrest in 1959 that led to the exile of the Dalai Lama and his supporters.
Since the riots last spring, China’s government has taken many pro-active measures, even adopting a “Serf Liberation Day,” to defend its record in Tibet of the past 50 years, while continuing to talk with the Dalai Lama’s representatives.
But it has also implemented heavy-handed police and military controls.
Then comes the 20th anniversary of the June 4 crackdown on the Tiananmen Square student demonstrations.
Calls to re-evaluate the official response began when President Hu Jintao and Premier Wen Jiabao came to power seven years ago.
But recently the pressure has intensified, especially with the publication of “Charter 08,” a manifesto signed by hundreds of Chinese intellectuals, journalists, lawyers, and ordinary citizens, condemning the government’s human rights record and demanding more democratic reform, press freedom, governmental transparency, and societal openness.
Although neither Hu nor Wen were directly involved in the crackdown, they nonetheless must tread carefully.
Doing everything possible to avoid a repeat of the 1989 scenario may well be the Communist Party leadership’s top priority in 2009.
And, given the economic slowdown, widening income disparity, rising unemployment, and growing popular discontent over corruption, China’s leaders will have their hands full.
Of course, the inspiration for almost every political reform movement in China is the May 4th Movement of 1919, when Chinese students protested against a weak and corrupt government and called for China to strengthen itself by adopting two key Western ideals: democracy and science.
As the 90th anniversary approaches, China has made great strides in science, but still has a long way to go in terms of democracy.
This year also marks the 50th anniversary of the Great Leap Forward, when 20-40 million Chinese died of starvation, as well as the tenth anniversary of the government’s ban on Falun gong, an organization of self-claimed religious and meditation practitioners that has challenged the Communist Party’s legitimacy.
Though largely discredited inside the country, this militant movement still has a following around the world, and further protests may come at any time and in unpredictable forms.
While some of the plethora of anniversaries that China’s leaders must confront are potentially very destabilizing, several have, and will, work in their favor.
For example, the 30th anniversary of China’s reform movement and the establishment of diplomatic relations between China and the United States has been a much-celebrated event this January.
More importantly, October will mark the 60th anniversary of the founding of the Peoples’ Republic of China, an occasion that the Party will commemorate in grand style.
After all, the Middle Kingdom has re-emerged as the world’s third-largest economy (having recently replaced Germany), sent astronauts into space, dispatched advanced naval destroyers to the Horn of Africa, and become the largest holder of US foreign debt.
China will want to flex its muscles and proclaim to the world that the Party has delivered the goods to its people, while making the country strong and prosperous.
As the worst recession since the1930’s continues, both the American and Chinese economies are bound to suffer further setbacks.
There is no guarantee that protectionist and xenophobic sentiment in America will not hit China-US relations, or that the economic downturn will not fuel new unrest in China.
The world should not misjudge the effect of such troubles on China.
Nor should it forget China’s fierce display of nationalism in response to Western protests of the Olympic touch relay, the extraordinary patriotism that swept the country in response to the Sichuan earthquake, and the national pride evinced by the Olympic Games.
But, in 2009, it would not hurt if China’s leadership also took note of the need to continue assuring the world of its commitment to a “peaceful rise,” and to do so by boldly addressing some of the unresolved issues that this year’s anniversaries will highlight.
A Year of US-China Discord?
NEW YORK – In 2009, Forbes magazine named US President Barack Obama and Chinese President Hu Jintao the “world’s most powerful people.”
In 2010, we will discover that neither has the power to keep US-Chinese relations on track.
That is bad news for those who believe that US-China cooperation is essential for reviving the global economy, meeting the challenge of climate change, containing threats of nuclear proliferation, and managing a host of other problems without borders.
It is also bad news for America and China.
Ten is the number to watch: America's 10% unemployment and China’s potential 10% GDP growth are set to collide like weather fronts generating a storm.
American populism will meet Chinese pride. And the fevered political climate created by US mid-term elections means that the world’s most important bilateral relationship is headed for real turbulence this year.
America and China now live with a kind of mutually assured economic destruction, and both presidents know it.
The US needs China to finance its mounting debt, and China needs Americans to buy its products.
Indeed, the short, sharp shock that China absorbed from the financial crisis has proven that its economic growth still depends on consumer demand in America, Europe, and Japan – and will for some time to come.
Chinese leaders would like to shift China’s growth model toward greater reliance on domestic consumption, but that is a long-term project.
For the foreseeable future, they will depend on local manufacturers to create the jobs that protect both China’s development goals and the Communist Party’s monopoly on domestic political power.
As long as voters are worried about their wallets, Democrats and Republicans will compete to defend American workers. As November’s elections approach, many US lawmakers will demand that the country with 10% unemployment persuade the country with 10% growth to stop bending trade rules and manipulating the value of its currency.
China
This includes helping the US to apply pressure on countries like Iran, Sudan, and Myanmar that continue to defy the will of the international community – and with which those Chinese state-owned companies have established lucrative commercial relationships that serve the Chinese government’s economic and political interests.
China’s leaders, unwilling to compromise on any issue that might undermine their domestic goals, continue to resist.
A full-scale trade war is unlikely. Both governments know the stakes are too high for both economies, and Obama and Hu will continue to work hard to try to keep things moving in a constructive direction.
But neither president can guarantee that recrimination and reproach will not take on a life of its own.
For example, if another product-safety issue involving Chinese imports makes headlines in the US, things could move quickly from disappointment to real anger.
Most Americans care little about China's currency policy or its stance on intellectual property rights. But if Chinese-made products threaten their health and safety, there are sure to be opportunistic lawmakers ready to fan the flames.
The 2008 US presidential election was the last in which the overwhelming majority of American voters neither knew nor cared about where the candidates stood on China.
Officials in Beijing, increasingly sensitive to US criticism, will prove as ready to trade accusations as goods and services or good ideas.
That is why the “world’s most powerful people” will now have a much harder time working together to meet today’s toughest challenges.
Disciplining the Sharing Economy
SINGAPORE – The increasing ability of people to exchange goods, services, and labor directly, via online platforms, is transforming how modern economies operate.
But to ensure that the rise of the “sharing economy” works efficiently and improves conditions for all parties, some regulation is needed.
People can now circumvent many traditional service businesses.
They can share transport, using Uber, Lyft, or RelayRides; provide accommodation through Airbnb; tender household chores via TaskRabbit, Fiverr, or Mechanical Turk; and arrange their grocery deliveries using Favor and Instacart.
Similarly, crowdfunding platforms, such as Kickstarter and Lending Club, allow start-ups to raise grants, loans, or investment from the general population, rather than relying on a financial intermediary.
By cutting out the middleman, these online platforms empower individuals, reduce transaction costs, and create a more inclusive economy.
But their evolution is far from straightforward, and many such services will require careful regulation if they are to flourish – as protests and court rulings in Europe against Uber demonstrate.
One reason why Uber and other sharing-economy pioneers are so disruptive is that they represent a highly efficient form of peer-to-peer capitalism.
Buyers and sellers can agree directly on the price of every transaction, and business reputations depend on transparent customer feedback, generating continuous pressure to improve performance.
The sharing economy also boosts entrepreneurship, as people see new ways to fill gaps in the market.
What began as a simple way for households to boost incomes – by renting out one’s apartment or car – has become a formidable disruptive force.
Forbes magazine estimates that the sharing economy’s 2013 revenues topped $3.5 billion.
During the 2014 soccer World Cup in Brazil, a country with a chronic shortage of hotel rooms, more than 100,000 people used home-sharing Web sites to find accommodation.
The opportunity to buy or sell has also become much more inclusive: half of Airbnb hosts in the United States have low to moderate incomes, and 90% of hosts globally rent their primary residence.
Several cities have recognized the benefits to be gained from promoting a sharing economy.
Seattle, for example, has deregulated its transportation and hospitality sectors, challenging the city’s taxi and hotel monopolies.
But economic change of this magnitude inevitably has its opponents, some with legitimate concerns.
Do peer-to-peer businesses undercut incumbents by not paying similar taxes?
Are such businesses – flush with venture capital – running their operations at a loss in order to capture market share?
And should these firms be allowed to access telecoms data to learn about customers’ habits and movements, thus giving them an unfair advantage?
Some firms have set their own operating standards.
TaskRabbit, which subcontracts household jobs like assembling Ikea furniture, requires participants to pay a minimum wage, and has launched an insurance scheme to protect its US workers.
On the other hand, technology platforms that use “algorithmic scheduling” to align workers’ shifts and hours with business cycles automatically, continue to disrupt family life and cause unnecessary stress.
Policymakers need to stay ahead of these sharing-economy trends.
As services and software converge, public officials must enhance their technical skills and work with the private sector to ensure market fairness and efficiency.
For example, they must prevent the manipulation of reviews and other practices that mislead consumers trying to assess the quality of a company’s service.
Airbnb and the online travel agent Expedia allow reviews only by customers who have actually used their services; that could become a regulatory norm throughout the sharing economy.
Governments also have a broader role to play.
As more people adopt “portfolio careers” – relying on several sources of income, rather than a single job – it becomes harder to collect and analyze labor-market data.
Governments will need new accounting and reporting standards to calculate wages, forecast incomes, and categorize workers within the growing ranks of the self-employed.
Such standards, coupled with data-sharing guidelines, will help determine when, and how much, to tax sharing-economy transactions.
None of this will be easy.
Though self-employment and part-time labor are hardly new, the sharing economy is different, because it allows freelancers to become “nano-workers,” shifting among employers not just monthly or even weekly, but several times a day.
As US and European unemployment rates remain high and wages stagnate, people increasingly rely on such diverse income streams.
Today, almost 27 million Americans survive on part-time and project-based incomes.
With nearly half of all services jobs in the OECD at risk of automation, the sharing economy can smooth the disruption caused to displaced workers as they upgrade their skills.
Indeed, sharing-economy data can help governments identify those workers at greatest risk and support their retraining.
The sharing economy reflects the convergence of entrepreneurialism and technological connectivity.
Taxi drivers and hotel owners may feel threatened, but the sharing economy has the potential to increase and redistribute earnings in cities that are already struggling with poverty and inequality.
Those who are displaced will have far better prospects in the more prosperous and inclusive environment that the sharing economy promises to create.
A \
The drubbing that many governments suffered in the recent elections to the European Union Parliament places them in a difficult position as they maneuver ahead of this week's EU Summit.
Only an incurable optimist can hope that the summit will bring glory to any of them.
The summit has two purposes: to finalize the text of a new EU Constitution, and to appoint the next President of the Commission.
These negotiations will be much harder in view of the spectacular repudiation of a number of key governments at the ballot box, together with the potent rise of protest and Euroskeptic parties in several member states.
The problem for Europe's leaders is that their own repudiation by voters does not necessarily carry the same message as the rise of the Euroskeptic parties.
Nevertheless, the rise of Euroskeptic parties, in a number of countries including Britain, France, Belgium, Poland, and the Czech Republic, has worrying implications for a summit meeting whose purpose is to take European integration a small but unmistakable step forward.
In Britain, in particular, the spectacular surge of the UK Independence Party (UKIP) can only strengthen the government's long-standing latent Euroskepticism.
The proposed constitution will contain a Charter of Fundamental Rights, which is intended to enhance the political and moral legitimacy of the EU.
But will it really enhance the rights of EU citizens?
Or, as the British government insists, will it merely be a declaratory document that only describes rights already existing under national legislation in the member states.
The draft constitution would enhance the policymaking powers of the Union, with a bit more majority voting in the Council of Ministers, and a stronger role for the European Parliament.
But, despite Tony Blair's one-time declaration that he would take Britain "into the heart of Europe," he remains viscerally opposed to the prospect of further integration, and he will resist any new encroachment on British sovereignty in his "red line" areas of tax, foreign policy, and EU budget finance.
Blair's Euroskepticism is understandable insofar as it chimes with the British mood.
Opinion polls consistently show that British voters are unenthusiastic about the EU, and the picture is confirmed by the latest Eurobarometer poll, conducted throughout the Union for the Commission - but before the recent enlargement from 15 to 25 member states.
One question always asked in this poll is whether voters tend to trust or mistrust different institutions, such as national parliaments, national governments, and the European Union.
Overall, the general level of trust in the European Union is not high: only 41% of voters tend to trust the EU, whereas 42% tend not to trust it.
But in Britain, the figures are dramatically different: only 19% trust the EU, while 55% distrust it.
By contrast, the European Parliament has a better reputation than the EU as a whole: the average EU-wide level of trust in the European Parliament is 54%, whereas in Britain it is 30%.
Across the EU, 48% think EU membership is a good thing; in Britain, this figure falls to 29%.
On virtually every question, British voters are less enthusiastic about the EU than voters in any other country. 
One might think that Britons' aversion to the EU would be reflected in support for, and pride in, their national institutions.
Not so.
British trust in the European Parliament may stand at only 30%; but trust in the Westminster Parliament is much lower, at only 19% - the lowest figure in the EU.
Trust in the national government is a bit higher, but still only 25%, while trust in national political parties is only 10%.
Both figures are, again, the lowest in the EU.
Voters in other states have more confidence in EU institutions, but their opinion of their own institutions is also low.
In France, 57% trust the European Parliament, but only 29% trust the French parliament; while the corresponding figures for Germany are 51% and 23%. 
But the puzzle in the poll is that, even if Europe's voters are unenthusiastic about the EU and its existing institutions as they stand now, 65% of them would support a common foreign policy for Europe, and 72% would support a common defense and security policy; even in Britain, there is 52% support for the idea of a common defense policy.
This may be a reaction to the American-led war in Iraq; but Tony Blair will exclude it precisely for that reason, and a common European defense policy without Britain makes little sense.
The predicament for Europe's leaders at this week's summit is that they stand at the cusp of an unstable process of European integration.
With the accession of 10 new members, the EU must become more integrated if it is to function.
But it is not at all clear that those governments that would normally support more integration can sell it to their disillusioned electorates.
Tony Blair has promised a referendum on the new EU constitution, which he cannot possibly win.
The central question will be whether Europe's "leaders" deliberately play for failure, in the hope that the problem will go away.
Latin America’s Foxy Leaders
SANTIAGO – “Every country gets the leaders it deserves,” the French counter-revolutionary Joseph de Maistre quipped.
He was wrong.
The countries of Latin America did not deserve the blustering demagogues and iron-fisted generals who, until recently, often occupied the seats of government.
A look at Venezuela or Nicaragua reminds us that the demagogues and the populists are not yet gone.
But a new kind of leader – moderate, intellectually humble, and prone to gradualism – has been in ascendance since the 1990s.
This is the kind of leadership Latin America does indeed deserve.
The elder statesman of this generation of pragmatists died last week.
In a continent of loud-mouthed leaders, Patricio Aylwin, who led Chile from dictatorship to democracy in 1990, was an oddity: a soft-spoken professor whose great love was the study of the more abstruse aspects of administrative law.
His legacy sheds light on what moderate leaders in Latin America must do if they are to succeed.
Aylwin faced one of the toughest moral choices any leader of a newly re-established democracy can confront: how far to push prosecution of those who had abducted, tortured, and killed thousands of Chileans during General Augusto Pinochet’s dictatorship.
His answer remains controversial to this day.
He would, he said, pursue justice “to the extent [that it is] possible.”
At first, the idea seems shocking: Isn’t justice supposed to be an absolute moral imperative?
It is.
But history shows that it is an imperative that cannot always be perfectly achieved.
Obtaining justice, however imperfect, is itself a moral goal.
Aylwin understood this, and acted accordingly.
The coalition he led boldly took up Pinochet’s challenge to participate in a 1988 referendum on extending his rule, won the vote against all odds, and in 1990 removed the dictator from office.
If there was ever a case of a dictator going not by the sword, but by the mighty pen, this was it.
Once in office, the new democratic government decided that before punishment could be meted out, the whole truth about the violation of human rights should be established.
Chile’s “Truth and Reconciliation Commission” became a model for similar bodies established in the 1990s in South Africa and other countries worldwide.
Aylwin went on television to share the grim truth with citizens.
His voice breaking, he apologized on behalf of the state for the crimes committed.
The voices of Chileans of my generation still break when we recall that moment.
The courts did their job.
Pinochet never saw the inside of a cell, but many of his henchmen – including the head of his secret police – served long sentences.
How many countries emerging from dark authoritarian rule (one thinks of Russia, East Germany, Spain, Portugal, or Brazil) can claim the same?
Justice in Aylwin’s Chile was carried out to the extent possible, but it was nothing to scoff at.
Aylwin belonged to the Christian Democratic Party, which in Chile emerged from the ashes of the old Conservative Party.
He was a practicing Catholic.
He would not have liked to be called a liberal.
Yet he governed in the style of the philosopher Isaiah Berlin’s liberal fox, who knows many things, as opposed to Berlin’s hedgehog, who knows one big thing.
Populists, in Latin America and elsewhere, are always hedgehogs.
They are dogmatic.
The world has to adapt to their monolithic ideology, not vice versa.
Pragmatism, policy experimentation, gradual learning – this is not their thing.
“When the facts change, I change my mind.
What do you do, sir?”
The spirit behind this famous quip, attributed to John Maynard Keynes, would be alien to the populist camp, but not to the generation of Latin American pragmatists epitomized by Aylwin.
He was the anti-populist.
Coming to office after 17 years of right-wing authoritarian rule, the temptation to promise handsomely and spend lavishly was enormous.
Instead, he practiced fiscal austerity and offered Chileans dignity, plus sweat and toil (though no blood or tears).
Aylwin was instinctively wary of markets and once proudly claimed never to have set foot in a shopping mall.
Yet, upon becoming president, he did not simply maintain Chile’s free-market system; he deepened it, signing free-trade agreements with a slew of countries.
At the same time, his government raised taxes, increased social expenditures, and strengthened collective bargaining in a deal with the unions.
His was foxy leadership at its best.
The results were encouraging.
In the years since 1990, per capita income in Chile has tripled.
Back then, 40% of Chileans lived below the poverty line; today, the figure is around 10%.
Inequality has not fallen; but, contrary to what some critics claim, it has not increased either.
The economist Albert O. Hirschman, arguably the most insightful outside observer of Latin American politics in the last half-century, was critical of what he called – borrowing from Flaubert – la rage de vouloir conclure, or the obsession of some Latin American leaders to try to bring everything to an immediate conclusion.
In its place, Hirschman called for leaders who had a “passion for the possible,” and who would patiently engage in “reform-mongering.”
Aylwin answered this call.
So did Fernando Henrique Cardoso of Brazil, Alan García of Peru, Ernesto Zedillo of Mexico, Juan Manuel Santos of Colombia, Ricardo Lagos of Chile, and Julio María Sanguinetti of Uruguay.
For a while, Brazil’s Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva seemed to be part of the group.
Argentina’s Mauricio Macri is a strong applicant, but after only a few months in office it is too early to tell.
“Possibilism” is not the same as complacency.
On the contrary, it aims, in Hirschman’s words, “to widen the limits of what is or is perceived to be possible.”
Once upon a time, it did not seem possible for Latin America to be well governed.
Today we know otherwise.
For that, we should thank leaders like Patricio Aylwin.
A Yukos Autopsy
Yukos, once Russia’s leading oil company and a favorite of international investors, is in its death throes.
At what many perceived to be a rigged auction, the company’s best assets were sold off to a previously unknown bidder and are now back in the hands of the Russian state.
The shell of what remains continues to challenge the company’s fate, notably in a Houston, Texas courtroom.
But these spasms will not revive the corpse.
What matters now is whether Russia’s economy will share Yukos’s fate.
The damage to Russia’s economic growth prospects from the Yukos affair may yet prove temporary, barring a repeat performance with other companies.
But whether the Yukos affair proves to be an isolated case, as the Kremlin insists, depends on a reading of Russian President Vladimir Putin’s motives.
One possibility is that Putin is not sincere about his aim of doubling Russia’s GDP in a decade.
Recent opinion polls suggest that this is the view of much of Russia’s cynical public.
On this view, the privatizations of the 1990’s were a scam serving only the powers that be.
But any reversal of those privatizations – such as the effective expropriation of Mikhail Khodorkovsky and his Menatep partners in Yukos – signifies not the dawn of social justice but rather a new group of bosses “expropriating the expropriators,” as Lenin used to say.
A less nihilistic view is that the Yukos affair suggests above all a series of improvisations by Putin rather than a coherent agenda.
This is somewhat reassuring.
Much evidence points to the affair originating not in a systematic nationalization project, but rather in the Kremlin’s perception that Khodorkovsky aimed to use his wealth to privatize the Russian state itself.
Such “state capture” occurred in Russia in the late 1990’s and to an even greater extent under the Kuchma regime in neighboring Ukraine which, ironically, Putin tried to preserve.
Neutralizing the perceived threat from Khodorkovsky meant depriving him of the means to achieve his ambitions by separating his Menatep Group from Yukos’s future cash flows.
The massive tax claims against Yukos used for this purpose were precisely that – the means rather than the end.
Had the goal been mere recovery of tax arrears, there would have been no need to break up the company: Yukos could have settled even these colossal liabilities on a civilized installment schedule.
To be sure, expropriating Menatep made shares in Yukos – a company that by 2003 attracted more domestic and foreign savings than any other in Russia – virtually worthless.
But this seems like collateral damage from the pursuit of an overriding political objective.
Much now depends on whether the same is true of the other major outcome, which is that Yukos’s principal asset – Yuganskneftegaz – is now in state hands, while its remaining units appear doomed to nationalization.
Is this another incidental by-product of the campaign against Khodorkovsky, or is it part of the core Kremlin agenda?
There is no green light for opportunistic predators in and around the Kremlin who now control Yuganskneftegaz to grab other companies’ assets at will.
If so, the damage caused by the Yukos affair should be minimal.
Yet, even on the assumption that Putin has no plans to nationalize key natural resource companies, he clearly desires strong state control over these “commanding heights” of the economy.
That in itself will result in overall GDP growth falling below potential, owing to the inferior productivity and greater corruption in the major companies that the state controls or heavily influences.
In a speech marking the state gas monopoly Gazprom’s tenth anniversary in 2003, Putin stated his position explicitly, speaking of the company as one of the few strong geopolitical levers left to Russia after the Soviet collapse.
Putin’s geopolitical preoccupations could be accommodated by sensibly preserving state ownership of pipeline infrastructure in the hydrocarbons sector, while allowing private companies to extract, process, and sell Russia’s oil and gas.
Instead, Putin has allowed Gazprom’s management to block proposals from his own government on the long overdue unbundling of the company.
Putin has sought an economic transformation of Russia similar in kind, if not in degree, to China’s boom.
The prize is higher living standards for Russia’s long-suffering people and a recovery in the country’s international standing.
Despite uncertainty about Putin’s intentions, that prize is not out of reach.
Indeed, at this point the only action more harmful than the Yukos affair would be another Yukos affair.
It’s All Over Now, Baby Boom
MUNICH – Carlos Barientos III was born at 6:45 on the evening of December 31, 1964, a few miles northwest of Honolulu.
This year, he will turn 50, quite possibly making him the last member of the US “baby boom” to do so.
The generation that once seemed to define for the world the energy, excitement, and even irritating nature of youth will officially be “old” – even if, some might say, not entirely grown up.
But what does this really mean?
The “baby boomers” are the generation that grew up in the United States, in particular, but also in Europe, Canada, Australia, and elsewhere, after World War II, when rapid economic growth was accompanied by rising birth rates.
Those born during that 19-year period – from 1945 to 1964 – were part of the largest, most prosperous, best-educated and, some might say, most indulged and indulgent generation that the world has ever seen.
From sex, drugs, and rock ‘n’ roll to the civil rights movements to the dot-com and housing bubbles, for better or worse, the boomer generation has shaped modern society.
And with one of its younger members currently in the White House, and others at Downing Street, the Élysée Palace, and the German Chancellery, it will continue to do so for years to come.
But there are stark differences within the boomer generation.
Early boomers – beginning with Kathleen Casey-Kirschling, whose birth one second past midnight on New Year’s Day, 1946, has made her a minor celebrity – grew up surrounded by the hippie counterculture, the music of the Beatles and Bob Dylan, and the Vietnam war.
By contrast, Barientos and the other boomers of 1964 grew up playing video games and listening to disco music – or, if their tastes were closer to those of Barientos, the heavier sounds of Gary Moore, Thin Lizzy, and Van Halen.
In fact, Barientos, who owns and runs his own guitar shop with his father, does not readily identify himself as a baby boomer; he feels closer to the “Generation X” that followed.
But Barientos’s interests are not all that set him apart from the likes of Casey-Kirschling.
While many of the early US baby boomers are now comfortably retired, enjoying the benefits of Medicare, Social Security, and tax-free Roth IRA disbursements, Barientos is still in his prime – and concerned about his retirement.
By 2031, when Barientos and the rest of the baby boomers are retired, more than 20% of the US population will be at least 65 years old, compared with only 13% in 2010.
As a result, the old-age dependency ratio (the number of people aged 65 or over relative to the working-age population) is set to rise from 1:5 to 1:3.
Not that Barientos would swap places with his father.
“I think I’ve been blessed in comparison to previous generations,” he says.
“Even compared to older members of my generation, I haven’t had to fight for my freedom.
I didn’t have to go to Vietnam.
I’ve been able to benefit from the hard work of people before me.”
Definitions of the post-war baby boom vary by country.
Barientos’s claim to be the last US boomer rests on Hawaii’s position as America’s most westerly state in a time zone two hours behind the Pacific coast.
It also means, though, that he lives a life that is somewhat different from that of many of his peers on the mainland.
“The food, the language, the weather – Hawaii isn’t like the rest of the US,” he notes.
“The first time I left Hawaii, I was 25 years old.
I went to Maryland to visit a friend for two weeks and ended up staying five years because I loved it so much.”
If he had the money, Barientos says he would probably be a “snow bird” – spending summers on the US mainland and winter in Hawaii.
“There are things I’d like to do with my family that we just can’t do here, such as [going to] museums, amusement parks, or large sporting events.”
He could not leave permanently, though – there are too many things to enjoy at home.
“I love the people, the culture – pretty much everything.”
When Barientos and his family spill out onto the beach to celebrate New Year’s Eve with the whole neighborhood, one of the last things he will think about is his age.
“I don’t have time to be worrying about that!” he says.
What about his status as the last of a generation?
“I don’t know whether I’m the last baby boomer or not,” Barientos muses.
“If there was anyone born in Hawaii later than 6:45 on December 31, 1964, then they’ve got me beat.
But, you know what, if it means I get to meet some new people and talk about it, then it’s definitely cool.”
Confronting the Global Threat to Democracy
OXFORD – Across the world, populists are attracting votes with their promises to protect ordinary people from the harsh realities of globalization.
The democratic establishment, they assert, cannot be trusted to fulfill this purpose, as it is too busy protecting the wealthy – a habit that globalization has only intensified.
For decades, globalization promised to bring benefits to all.
On an international scale, it facilitated the rise of the Asian tigers and the BRICS countries (Brazil, Russia, India, China, and South Africa), produced rapid growth across Africa, and facilitated the boom in developed countries through 2007.
It also created new opportunities and augmented growth within countries.
But since the 2008 crash, many rich countries have been locked into austerity; the Asian economies have been slowing; the BRICS’ progress has been stalling; and many African countries have fallen back into debt.
All of this has contributed to rising inequality, which is now fueling discontent.
Emmanuel Saez and Gabriel Zucman calculate that in the United States, the wealth gap is already wider than at any time since the Great Depression, with the richest 1% of households now holding almost half the country’s wealth.
In the United Kingdom, the Office for National Statistics reports that in the period from 2012 to 2014, the wealthiest 10% of households owned 45% of total aggregate household wealth.
Since July 2010, the top decile’s wealth has increased three times faster than that of the bottom 50% of the population.
In Nigeria, astonishing economic growth, averaging 7% per year since 2000, may well have reduced poverty in the southwest of the country; but in the northeast (where the extremist group Boko Haram is most active), shocking levels of wealth inequality and poverty have emerged.
Similar trends are apparent from China to Egypt to Greece.
Alongside inequality, declining public trust fuels the revolt against globalization and democracy.
Across the developed and developing worlds, many suspect that the rich are getting richer because they are not held to the same rules as everyone else.
It’s not hard to see why.
As the global economy slows, breaches of trust by those at the top become more apparent.
In the United Kingdom, Amazon, Starbucks, and Google attracted public outrage in 2013 for using loopholes to pay almost no tax, prompting the UK government to lead a G8 tax announcement aimed at reducing tax evasion and avoidance.
In 2015, an audit of the state-owned Nigerian National Petroleum Corporation revealed that about $20 billion in revenue was never remitted to the authorities under the previous administration.
And the problem appears to be systemic.
This year, the Panama Papers exposed how the global rich create secretive offshore companies, permitting them to avoid financial scrutiny and taxation.
And the world’s largest banks have faced unprecedented fines in recent years for brazen violations of the law.
But, despite the negative publicity generated by such cases, the public has seen virtually no one held to account.
Almost a decade after the global financial crisis of 2008, only one bank executive has gone to prison.
Many bankers instead followed a path similar to Fred Goodwin, the head of Britain’s Royal Bank of Scotland, who racked up £24.1 billion ($34.2 billion) in losses, then resigned with a huge pension.
Ordinary people – like the father of three who was imprisoned in the UK in September 2015 for accumulating £500,000 in gambling debts – do not enjoy such impunity.
All of this helps explain why anti-establishment movements are gaining momentum around the world.
These movements share a sense of disenfranchisement – a sense that the “establishment” is failing to give ordinary citizens a “fair shake.”
They point to election results “bought” by special interests, and to arcane legal and regulatory frameworks that seem rigged to benefit the rich, such as banking regulations that only large institutions can navigate and investment treaties negotiated in secret.
Governments have permitted globalization – and peripatetic wealth-holders – to outpace them.
Globalization requires regulation and management.
It requires responsible business leaders.
And it requires deep and effective global cooperation.
When governments failed to cooperate in the 1930s, globalization came to a crashing halt.
It took a series of careful, highly managed efforts after World War II to open up the world economy and permit globalization to take off again.
Still, while many countries liberalized trade, capital controls ensured that “hot money” could not race in and out of their economies.
Meanwhile, governments invested the returns on growth in high-quality education, health care, and welfare systems that benefited the many.
As the business of government grew, so did the resources put into it.
By the 1970s, wealthy countries’ leaders in both government and business had become complacent.
They took on faith the promise of self-equilibrating, self-restraining markets that would deliver continued growth.
By the time this new orthodoxy spread to the leveraged financial sector, the world was on a crash course.
Unfortunately, many governments had already lost the capacity to manage the forces they had unleashed, and business leaders had lost their sense of responsibility for the welfare of the societies within which they were flourishing.
In 2016, we are re-learning that, politically, globalization needs to be managed not just to permit the winners to win, but also to ensure that they do not cheat or neglect their responsibilities to their societies.
There is no place for corrupt politicians pandering to corrupt business leaders.
Restoring confidence will be difficult.
Business leaders will need to secure a “license to operate” from society at large, and contribute visibly to sustaining the conditions that support their prosperity.
They can start by paying their taxes.
Governments will need to distance themselves from the companies that fail to do their part.
Moreover, they must overhaul their own operations, to prove their impartiality.
Robust regulation will require significant investment in government capacity and the legal services that support it.
Finally, global cooperation will be crucial.
Globalization cannot be undone.
But with a strong, shared commitment, it can be managed.
Turkey’s Imprisoned Press
PARIS – According to two pro-government newspapers in Turkey, Star and Yeni Akit, as well as Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdoğan himself, those who denounce the state of press freedom in Turkey are “terrorists.”
That is the term that they were using last week to denounce the New York-based Committee to Protect Journalists and the Paris-based Reporters Sans Frontières, both of which have issued reports saying that Turkey has imprisoned even more journalists than Iran and China.
Last October, the CPJ reported that there were 76 journalists imprisoned in Turkey, including 61 who were in jail for their journalistic work.
While the latter number declined to 49 by December, after some of those held were freed by the courts, that is still a lot of journalists to hold in prison.
The situation is especially dismaying, given that, for several years, Turkey’s human-rights performance had been improving dramatically under Erdoğan’s leadership.
The use of torture had declined sharply.
The cultural rights of the large Kurdish minority, including the right to use their own language, had advanced greatly.
Military control over the civilian government had been ended.
And more.
Yet, as Erdoğan and his moderate Islamist Justice and Development Party have consolidated their power and their control of the country, their tolerance for dissent has declined.
Today, Internet freedom has largely disappeared.
Legislation provides for mandatory filtering of content, and many Web sites have been blocked for reasons that range from facilitating the use of drugs or stimulants to offenses under the Law on Crimes against Atatürk (the founder of the modern Turkish state and Turkey’s national hero).
Though it is the Turkish government that is to blame for the precipitous decline in press freedom, the policies of the European Union and the United States have been contributing factors.
The EU had indicated that performance on human rights would be a key factor in determining whether Turkey would be admitted as a member.
Yet it was during the period of rapid progress on human rights that Europe seemed to turn its back on the country.
This outcome undermined those in Turkey who had promoted human-rights reforms.
Their claims that progress would lead to accession were shown to be false, and an important incentive for officials was eliminated.
If the process leading to EU accession is put back on track, it will greatly aid the effort to ensure that Turkey becomes an open society.
The US government, for its part, tends to speak softly when it comes to human-rights abuses in Turkey.
During the Cold War, Turkey’s strategic value, given its geographic proximity to the Soviet Union, outweighed other concerns.
Today, geography still plays a role, though it is Turkey’s contiguity with Syria, Iraq, and Iran that has left the US reluctant to make a fuss about press freedom.
The US has supported Turkey’s accession to the EU, but its efforts would have more credibility in Europe if it also pressed Turkey to address its shortcomings.
The situation is far from hopeless.
Turkey has a lively civil society, with proudly independent institutions that include some renowned universities.
The period of rapid progress is not in the distant past.
Europe would strengthen itself economically and militarily if Turkey became a member, and it should revive accession negotiations on the same basis as other member states if Turkey meets the political criteria, including press freedom.
With John Kerry’s arrival as Secretary of State, the US ought to recognize that such a large Islamic country in a troubled neighborhood should show leadership on human-rights issues.
As a role model for the region, it is especially important that Turkey should practice press freedom.
If Europe and the US do their part, Erdoğan may be persuaded to resume the role of human-rights reformer that he played during his first several years in office.
Back to Afghanistan
While the unremitting violence in Iraq grabs the world’s headlines, Afghanistan still struggles for peace.
The country’s parliament is packed with warlords, the drug trade is thriving, and violence is on the rise.
This week, world leaders have an opportunity to steer developments onto a new and more hopeful path when they meet in London to forge a new compact with Afghanistan.
The compact builds on the 2001 Bonn Agreement, which laid the framework for a democratic Afghanistan but left much to be done to overcome that war-torn country’s tragic legacy.
The need for renewed attention to Afghanistan could hardly be greater.
Decades of neglect coupled with foreign intervention left the country in ruins, with reverberations across the world.
It is now in everyone’s interest to help Afghanistan rebuild.
The drug trade exemplifies the far-reaching impact of domestic instability.
Last year, the value of drugs produced in Afghanistan – the world’s largest supplier of opiates – is estimated to have reached up to 25% of GDP.
Security, too, remains a serious concern.
In 2005, more than 125 Coalition troops were killed, while suicide bombing emerged as a new and increasingly common tactic of the insurgency.
Corruption is rampant, with government officials accused of cronyism and drug trafficking.
Several members of the newly elected parliament are known warlords with bloody records.
With international aid poorly coordinated and the United States reducing its troop strength, many Afghans believe that the outside world is abandoning them.
But the massive scale of the challenges facing Afghanistan should not overshadow the opportunities for positive change.
The Bonn process established the principle of democratic accountability, gave Afghanistan its first directly elected president, and provided a new constitution that – approved after genuine debate and compromise – created a legitimate central government.
It also paved the way for a parliament in which over a quarter of the members are women – this in a country where, just five years ago, women were not even allowed to leave the house without a male relative.
Moreover, most of the 20,000 village councils were elected through secret ballot.
In a nod to the importance of the councils to realizing change at the most local level, the World Bank and its partners have adopted a highly innovative program that channels rural development aid through the councils, which have been empowered to decide how the funds will be spent.
At the national level, the government recently approved a new development strategy that goes far to advance a vision for Afghanistan’s future stability and growth.
Public opinion reflects widespread support for the latest changes.
A recent poll shows that Afghans overwhelmingly favor their country’s new direction – backing the participation of women in public life and international intervention against al Qaeda, the Taliban, and the drug economy.
But Afghanistan’s potential for progress must be bolstered by concerted international action.
At the London Conference, world leaders should support the counter-narcotics strategy recently approved by the Afghan government, which would reduce economic dependence on opium production, punish traffickers and dealers, and provide sustainable economic alternatives for poppy farmers.
Afghanistan is grappling with the world’s biggest narcotics problem and donors must commit to a long-term drug control strategy.
The conference should follow up on a resolution by the European Parliament to consider whether Afghanistan should become one of the countries licensed to produce opium for medical purposes.
Furthermore, instead of pouring hundreds of millions of dollars into technical assistance and short-term capacity-building programs, the London conference should strive to help meet the Afghan government’s benchmark for equipping young people with the skills and education necessary to lead their nation to a future of peace and prosperity.
International support could help educate 40,000 Afghans each year in urgently needed fields, such as engineering, management, agriculture, law, and economics.
Judicial reform is another pressing issue.
Currently, the judiciary is incapable of trying a case of petty theft much less of ensuring human rights.
A Supreme Court dominated by conservative factions has selected judges and prosecutors, and Afghans have little legal redress in a system that allows local commanders, who hold sway over the judiciary, to act with impunity.
Without a viable legal system, foreign investment will remain elusive.
Even Afghan expatriates in the Gulf states, who have invested roughly $5 billion in regional and global trading networks, are reluctant to invest in their homeland.
Reform is nonetheless clearly possible.
Last month, the Afghan leadership finally adopted – albeit half-heartedly – a transitional justice plan that could remove from power the biggest war criminals who have consolidated their grip on the country over the past five years.
Implementation of this plan would not only give a boost to the rule of law, but also would enhance security and lead to better governance.
Failure to act would mean a betrayal of the Afghan people, who in 2001 welcomed the US army and NATO forces as liberators.
For their sake, and ours, we must not let them down.
Back-to-School Letter to the US Congress
NEWPORT BEACH – What if members of the United States Congress, now returning from their summer recess, were to receive a “back to school” letter from concerned citizens?
Here is what a first draft might look like.
Dear Member of Congress:
Welcome back to the Capitol.
We hope that you had a good summer break, and that you return to Washington not just rested, but also energized to take on our country’s mounting economic challenges.
The news has been mixed during your absence.
We have seen some improvement in economic data, but not enough to suggest that we are any closer to overcoming decisively this painful period of low growth and high unemployment.
And, with a self-inflicted fiscal cliff looming – one that could send our country back into recession, pulling the rest of the world with us – businesses are reluctant to hire and invest in new capital goods.
Fortunately, the Federal Reserve has signaled its intention to remain active, but its policy tools are poorly suited to the challenges that we face.
Meanwhile, global difficulties remain substantial.
We continue to face strong headwinds originating from the deepening European debt crisis, as well as geopolitical tensions in the Middle East.
China, once the world’s unstoppable growth engine, is slowing.
And, despite all the happy talk, multilateral policy coordination is essentially non-existent.
All of this calls for courageous and visionary economic leadership; otherwise, our problems will fester and grow, and the solutions will become even more complex.
Already, too many of our economy’s difficulties, including worrisome trends in youth joblessness and long-term unemployment, risk becoming structurally embedded.
No doubt you have also noticed that, with less than ten weeks to go until the November presidential election, our country is in the grip of an increasingly ugly political campaign.
So, with this combination of bad economics and bad politics, we look to you for direction and leadership.
It is that simple, and that important.
We need you to overcome a prolonged period of congressional paralysis and polarization in order to address the country’s malaise.
We need you to pivot in your responses from the tactical to the strategic, from the cyclical to the secular, from the partial to the comprehensive, and from sequential to simultaneous reforms.
If this call to national duty is not enough, we would remind you of your own self-interest.
According to the latest NBC News/Wall Street Journal poll, your support among us, the electorate, stands at just 12%.
We concede that there is no magic wand to overcome our country’s problems.
After all, for too many years leading up to the global financial crisis, America “bought” and “borrowed” its growth by leveraging balance sheets, rather than “earning” it through increased competitiveness.
The result was massive misallocation of human resources, insufficient infrastructure investment, over-reliance on credit entitlements, and, of course, unsustainable debt.
To make matters worse, this occurred at a time when systemically important emerging economies hit their “developmental breakout phase,” powered by trade and other aspects of globalization.
We do not expect you to solve America’s problems overnight.
Instead, we look to you to embark on an appropriate and sustainable policy path.
So, as you unpack your bags and renew old friendships and rivalries, please keep the following in mind.
Changing course requires that you, together with the president, have a much more open and consistent economic dialogue with us, the general public, about the challenges that we face.
It also requires that you and the president converge on a multi-prong, multi-year policy initiative that, at a minimum, makes simultaneous advances in six critical areas:
·         Fiscal reform: We desperately need you to eliminate the looming fiscal cliff in the context of medium-term reforms of both the tax system and entitlements.
This would also allow for greater fiscal stimulus at a time when other components of aggregate demand are slowing.
·         Labor-market reform: Persistently high unemployment and large-scale withdrawal from the labor force are a constant reminder of a malfunctioning labor market that needs support through better training and retooling.
Reform must also address the related challenges of a lagging education system and an insufficient social safety net.
·         Housing and housing finance: At the root of the global financial crisis, the troubled US housing market continues to act as a millstone around the economy’s neck.
The longer the problems persist, the greater the pressure on consumer and business sentiment, and the harder it is for the unemployed to find and relocate to new job opportunities.
·         Clogged credit pipes: With banks’ balance sheets contracting, too many small and medium-size companies are unable to mobilize credit for investment and growth.
Recognizing that it will take years until banks are properly stabilized, America needs to build new conduits for credit.
·         Infrastructure: Those of you who have traveled abroad know that our infrastructure is desperately lagging that of a growing number of countries.
This makes it even harder for our companies to compete and prosper.
·         Global policy coordination: America’s traditional leadership role has evaporated in recent years as our problems have made us more insular and inward-looking.
This would not be a major problem if the resulting vacuum had been filled.
But that has not happened.
On the contrary, the G-7 has lost relevance, the International Monetary Fund is hampered by its representation and legitimacy deficits, and the G-20 is still finding its feet.
Engineering such an agenda is not an overwhelming challenge.
But that will provide little comfort if you, our elected representatives, do not collaborate effectively.
The choice Congress faces this term is simple: either address head on America’s challenges, or risk being remembered as the body whose dithering condemned future generations to being worse off than their parents.
Yours sincerely,
Concerned citizens
Back to the Brink in Ukraine
The campaign for Ukraine’s parliamentary election of September 30th is scarcely underway and yet Prime Minister Viktor Yanukovych is already trying to steal it.
Yanukovych was the man who sought to falsify the result of the presidential election of 2004, inciting the Orange Revolution. Back then, a peaceful and honest result was reached in the end because Ukraine’s President Leonid Kuchma refused to heed Yanukovych’s call to use violence to defend his rigged election.
This time it appears that Yanukovych is prepared to do anything to remain in power.
The dirty tricks began in the midnight hours of August 11th, when Ukraine’s Central Election Commission (which is packed with Yanukovych placemen) refused to certify the largest opposition party, the bloc of former Prime Minister Yuliya Tymoshenko, to participate in the election.
The technicality the commission cited would be absurdly funny if its potential results were not so incendiary: the CEC objected to the fact that the Tymoshenko bloc candidates listed only their home towns on the party list, not their precise street address.
But Tymoshenko’s party successfully submitted its list in the very same format at the March 2006 election, which demonstrates the glaringly partisan nature of the election commission’s ruling.
By seeking to cling to power by hook or by crook, Yanukovych is likely to bring on the deluge.
In Ukraine that means not only violent unrest, but economic decline and renewed repression. At the end of the day it could lead to the sort of huge street protests that marked the Orange Revolution, and their attempted violent suppression.
Recent history is replete with alarming examples of dictators and would be dictators who refuse to recognize when their time has run out.
But for the past twenty years their blatant political chicanery has been met with a potent new force: the massed voices of ordinary people who refuse to be cowed.
From the “People Power” revolution that toppled Ferdinand Marcos in the Philippines in 1986 to Boris Yeltsin’s defiance of the attempted coup against Mikhail Gorbachev of August 1991, to the Rose, Orange, and Cedar Revolutions of recent years, dictators have been forced to admit defeat when enough people stand up to them.
Will it really be necessary for Ukrainians to repeat the Orange Revolution by again gathering in their millions to shame Yanukovych (a twice convicted violent felon before he entered politics) to change course?
There is a person who might compel Yanukovych to retreat to democratic norms and thus hold off such protests -- Russia’s President Vladimir Putin.
It is certainly in Russia’s national interest to prevent chaos in the country’s big next door neighbor.
But Putin’s idea of what constitutes Russia’s national interest makes that type of intervention unlikely.
Weak neighbors are states that the Kremlin can control, so why not expand Russian power by letting Ukraine slide into protest and anarchy if by doing so it brings that country back under Putin’s thumb?
Moreover, Putin himself is in the business of sterilizing Russia’s democratic processes by handpicking his successor and having his courts and electoral commissions block his opponents from political participation, often tarring them as traitors.
Someone with such contempt for the democratic rights of his own people is unlikely to champion them abroad.
As is usual with this ex-KGB man, Putin is being cunning about Ukraine, but he is deluding himself if he thinks that siding with Yanukovych will bring back effective Russian overlordship of Ukraine.
The days of empire are over, no matter how much wealth oil and gas is bringing to Russia.
Only if Ukraine maintains its independence will the imperial nostalgia of Russia’s elites be shattered.
So other pressure will need to be applied, primarily by the European Union and the United States.
In 2004, both the EU and US were tardy in speaking in defense of Ukraine’s democrats. Only when the courage of millions of ordinary Ukrainians gathered in central Kyiv galvanized world opinion did the US and EU marshal the courage to stand up for an honest election result.
And the one state that did stand with Ukraine from the start back then, Poland, has now antagonized much of EU opinion, particularly in Germany, because of the paranoid behavior of its current leaders.