The military dimension of intervention abroad loses its privileged role, making way for the prevention of conflict and for peace-keeping and stabilization missions.
In the fight against terrorism, the Strategy abandons the predominantly military viewpoint underlying the war against terror, and embraces a more significant role for the intelligence services.
For the first time, precise reference is made to people liable to be a threat to US security. The US is not waging a war against terrorism; it is at “war against a specific network, al Qaida, and its affiliates.”
In this war, information resources are particularly necessary.
In order to guarantee national security, the Strategy is categorical – without giving in to the temptation of isolationism – in admitting the strategic value of the example and the importance of doing one’s homework first.
Obama steers clear both of interventions for humanitarian purposes and of attempting to export democracy by force.
There is no better way of exporting the values of democracy than by strengthening the US internally.
Thus, an economic policy that tackles America’s debt and deficit makes up the main portion of the Strategy.
Backing competitive education, innovation, technology, energy, and a more efficient and accessible health-care system complements and reinforces Obama’s leadership approach of setting an example with one’s own policies.
An important example is removing the US prison at Guantánamo Bay from international limbo – one of his first initiatives as president.
This approach does not have unanimous support among international experts.
The two main criticisms – lack of strategic clarity and less emphasis on the classical concepts of power – point to America’s loss of influence, power, and leadership.
But these criticisms reflect an inability to contemplate the current nature of armed conflict, which no longer follows the classical logic of military victory or defeat.
The war in Afghanistan and the complex situation in Iraq have highlighted the importance of a comprehensive approach.
Military action cannot be considered the only variable of success. A successful strategy should use civilian means – incidentally a model advocated by the European Union.
We are faced with forging a new long-term policy that affects both states and societies. That task requires patience and strategic perseverance.
Change will not occur from one day to the next, but the results obtained in the end will be better and more enduring.
Obama maintains the idea of service to a historical mission for the US: the important job of guaranteeing global security.
But, unlike his White House predecessors, Obama’s National Security Strategy recognizes the value of partnerships; attaches greater importance to the civilian dimension as opposed to the military; and stresses the value of dialogue and the need to reinforce international institutions.
This is a good sign for a world with different power centers and interests, with resources and legitimacy remaining tied to the nation-state, but in which challenges (climate change, armed conflicts, pandemics, and transnational crime) are global and, therefore, require cooperation among states.
We are in a transition period: international interconnection is increasing, as the global economic crisis has shown, but the management tools and mechanisms to guarantee the smooth operation of governments are still not being shared.
Obama’s new National Security Strategy shows a political willingness to back an international order able to tackle these challenges.
The road ahead is not free of difficulties, but the Strategy represents a decisive step towards solving the challenges of the twenty-first century and preparing us for the world of tomorrow.
A Seismic Crime
NEW YORK – Few people outside Italy are aware that six seismologists and a government official are on trial in the small city of L’Aquila.
But the story has implications for scientists, engineers, administrators, and legal systems far beyond Italy’s borders.
L’Aquila was largely destroyed by earthquakes in 1461 and 1703.
The city was rebuilt, eventually grew to more than 73,000 inhabitants, and remained stable for more than 300 years – until October 2008, when tremors began again.
From January 1 through April 5, 2009, 304 additional tremors were reported.
Italy’s National Commission for Prediction and Prevention of Major Risks, which comprised the seven men now on trial, met in L’Aquila for one hour on March 31, 2009, to assess the earthquake swarms.
According to the minutes, Enzo Boschi, President of the National Institute of Geophysics and Volcanology, was asked if they were precursors to an earthquake resembling the one in 1703.
He replied: “It is unlikely that an earthquake like the one in 1703 could occur in the short term, but the possibility cannot be totally excluded.”
On April 6, 2009, a 6.3 magnitude earthquake struck L’Aquila and nearby towns, killing more than 300 people and injuring more than 1,500.
The quake also destroyed roughly 20,000 buildings, temporarily displacing another 65,000 people.
More than a year later, in July 2010, prosecutor Fabio Picuti charged the Commission members with manslaughter and negligence for failing to warn the public of the impending risk.
The trial began last September, and is expected to last for months, if not years.
After Picuti made the charges public in June 2010, Alan Leshner, Executive Publisher of Science, sent an open letter of protest to Italian President Giorgio Napolitano on behalf of the American Association for the Advancement of Science.
He wrote that the “charges against these scientists are both unfair and naïve….[T]here is no accepted scientific method for earthquake prediction that can be reliably used to warn citizens of an impending disaster.”
The American Geophysical Union and thousands of other scientists also objected.
Picuti reportedly responded: “I’m not crazy.
I know they can’t predict earthquakes.
The basis of the charges is not that they didn’t predict the earthquake.
As functionaries of the state, they had certain duties imposed by law: to evaluate and characterize the risks that were present in L’Aquila.”
In 1989, a United States National Research Council report, Improving Risk Communication, recommended that one-way communication from experts to non-experts be replaced with an “interactive process of exchange of information and opinion.”
The report suggested that risk communication is successful only if those involved are satisfied that they are adequately informed about the relevant issues, given the limits of available knowledge.
Yet such information exchange remains a problem – and not only in Italy – more than 20 years later.
The interactions between science, technology, and law are growing increasingly complex.
As science and technologies evolve, risk assessments and the dialogue between scientists and governments must adapt.
Both sides must continually determine, before disaster strikes, whether existing laws provide scientists and administrators with clear, realistic standards for their analyses and public communications.
If they do not, the best qualified scientists and administrators might be frightened away.
In 2011, the National Research Council and the US Federal Judicial Center issued the 1,016-page third edition of the Reference Manual on Scientific Evidence.
Although its purpose is to help judges and attorneys to understand the science from which legal evidence is derived, its index contains no entry for earthquakes.
Furthermore, the manual mentions risk communication only briefly, in the context of medical testimony.
Given such shortcomings, courses on science and engineering and their social applications should become part of the core training and continuing education of those in law, public administration, and official policymaking positions.
Legislators, prosecutors, and judges, in particular, need to understand what natural sciences, social sciences, and engineering can and cannot offer.
At the same time, natural scientists must become better educated to work effectively with engineers, public administrators, and social scientists (for example, economists, demographers, and psychologists) to communicate the consequences of scientific findings, especially when high risks are involved.
Those risks will not go away.
In February 2011, almost 200 people died when a 6.3-magnitude earthquake struck Christchurch, New Zealand.
The following month, Japan’s Tōhoku earthquake killed almost 16,000 people.
As the anniversary of that earthquake approaches on March 11, Japanese researchers predicted in January 2012 that another major earthquake will strike the southern Kanto region, including Tokyo, by 2016 with 70% probability.
The Big One will one day strike California. Will we be ready?
The Eurozone’s Narrowing Window
PRINCETON – Portuguese authorities recently made a preemptive offer to their country’s creditors: Instead of redeeming bonds maturing in September 2013, the government would stretch its repayment commitment out to October 2015.
The deal was concluded on October 3, and has been interpreted as a successful market test for Portugal.
Ireland’s authorities have conducted similar recent operations, exchanging short-maturity paper for longer-term debt.
These transactions highlight the broader strategy of buying time.
Both countries are seeking to create a longer, more manageable repayment profile for their privately-held debt as they begin weaning themselves from dependence on official “bailout” funds provided by the “troika” (the European Commission, the European Central Bank, and the International Monetary Fund).
Private investors are acknowledging the reality that repayments will likely be drawn out, because insisting on existing terms could cause an untenable bunching of debt-service payments, with possibly unpleasant consequences.
This strategy’s success presupposes that, in the interim, economic growth will strengthen the capacity to repay debt down the line.
The debt ratios for both Ireland and Portugal are expected to peak at about 120% of GDP in 2013, after which they are projected to fall.
The peak ratio and the subsequent downward trajectory depend crucially on the assumed pace of economic growth.
But growth prospects remain grim.
Ireland is doing better, although its growth forecast has also been revised downward, to just under 0.5% in 2012 and 1.4% next year.
Moreover, Irish GNP (the income accruing to its nationals, as distinct from foreign firms operating in Ireland) continues to shrink.
Each downward revision implies postponement of the date on which the debt/GDP ratio will peak.
Beyond 2013, growth must depend on either the elixir of structural reforms, or a strong revival of the global economy.
But a revival of economic growth in the short term is unlikely.
Crucially for Europe, world trade has been virtually stagnant in recent months.
Global trade and economic performance in the eurozone appear to be dragging each other down.
The potential consequences are serious.
While the IMF’s primary scenario is that Irish and Portuguese debt levels will soon stop rising, it comes with a chilling litany of downside risks.
The likelihood that budget deficit and debt targets will be missed is rising.
Thus, the eurozone faces three choices: even more austerity for the heavily-indebted countries, socialization of the debt across Europe, or a creative re-profiling of debt, with investors forced to accept losses sooner or later.
Austerity alone cannot do it.
Some countries face the growing risk of near-perpetual belt-tightening, which would further dampen growth and thus keep debt ratios high.
After all, if a country’s debt/GDP ratio is to decline without austerity, the interest rate that it pays on its debt must be lower than its GDP growth rate.
If the interest rate is higher than the growth rate, austerity is required;&nbsp;the wider the gap, the more austerity is needed.
Acknowledging the limits of austerity, several initiatives attempt a European resolution.
Special European facilities, along with the IMF, lend money at below-market interest rates, which reduces the extent of austerity required.
But the facilities’ resources are dwindling, and they certainly would not be sufficient if Spain and Italy were to seek support.
The ECB’s announcement of a new program to purchase sovereign bonds has lowered market interest rates.
But, even with that decline, many countries’ long-term interest rates will most likely remain higher than their growth rates for the next several years.
More ambitious pan-European efforts are embodied in various Eurobond proposals.
These schemes imply socialization of debt – taxpayers elsewhere in Europe would share a country’s debt burden.
These proposals, once in great vogue, have receded.
Not surprisingly, the political opposition to such debt mutualization was intense.
Given that perpetual austerity is untenable and others in Europe can only do so much, without robust growth the options will narrow quickly.
As a result, much now hangs on the ECB’s actions – and how long they will be sufficient to maintain a truce with financial markets.
Perhaps the Portuguese time-buying strategy points the way ahead.
But time eventually does run out.
If buying time is not enough, will there finally be a greater call on bondholders to share the pain?
The Looming Lost Decade
PRINCETON – As 2013 comes to an end, it looks like the world economy will remain stuck in low gear.
For those reading the tea leaves of global recovery, the third-quarter GDP numbers offered no solace.
While the United States is ahead of the pack, some of its gains could soon be lost, as accumulating inventories begin eroding profits.
Despite glimmers of hope, the eurozone and Japan are struggling to cross the 1% threshold for annual economic growth.
And the major emerging economies are all slowing, with Russia practically at a standstill.
Not surprisingly, a catchphrase in economic-policy debates nowadays is “secular stagnation,” the idea that excess savings chronically dampen demand.
The economist Robert Gordon has also argued that the world is low on economically productive ideas.
But before we despair, there is work to be done.
The coordinated fiscal stimulus that saved the world from economic collapse in 2009 disappeared too quickly, with governments shifting their focus to domestic politics and priorities.
As domestic policy options have been exhausted, economic prospects have dimmed. A renewed emphasis on stimulus must be augmented by global coordination on the timing and content of stimulus measures.
The crisis was and remains global.
Trade data tell the story: after increasing by about 7% annually in the decade before 2008, world trade fell faster than global GDP in 2009 (and more sharply than during the Great Depression).
Once the brief stimulus-fueled recovery faded, growth in world trade again slowed quickly, falling to 2% year on year over the past 18 months.
Disappointing export performance is largely responsible for the recent weakening of economic-growth prospects.
At the end of 2008, when the scale of the impending economic destruction was not yet apparent, Olivier Blanchard, the International Monetary Fund’s chief economist, boldly called for a global fiscal stimulus, stating that, in these “not normal times,” the IMF’s usual advice – fiscal retrenchment and public-debt reduction – did not apply.
He warned that if the international community did not come together, “vicious cycles” of deflation, liquidity traps, and increasingly pessimistic expectations could take hold.
Fortunately, world leaders listened, agreeing in April 2009 at the G-20 Summit in London to provide a total of $5 trillion in fiscal stimulus.
The US and Germany added stimulus amounting to about 2% of GDP.
And China’s banks pumped massive amounts of credit into the country’s economy, enabling it to sustain import demand, which was critical to the global recovery.
But hubris rapidly set in, and parochial interests took over.
Before the wounds had fully healed, the treatment was terminated.
The worst offenders were the US and Germany, which shirked the responsibility to protect the global common good that accompanies their status as economic hegemons.
The United Kingdom, with its contrived rationale for fiscal austerity, was not much better.
Fiscal stimulus by these three countries – together with smaller contributions from France and China – could have continued the necessary healing.
Countries now seem to think that monetary-policy measures are their only option.
But, whereas fiscal stimulus boosts growth at home and abroad, enabling mutual reinforcement through world trade, monetary policy is guided primarily by domestic goals, and, in the short term, one country’s gain can be another’s loss.
America leads the world in monetary-policy ambition.
The researchers Cynthia Wu and Fan Dora Xia estimate that the US Federal Reserve’s open-ended asset purchases (so-called quantitative easing, or QE) have led to an effective US policy rate of -1.6%.
QE helped American exports by weakening the dollar relative to other currencies.
Once the Japanese engineered their own QE, the yen promptly depreciated. That has kept the euro strong.
The weakest of the “big three” developed economies – the eurozone – has thus been left with the strongest currency.
In the third quarter of 2013, Germany’s export growth slowed and French exports fell.
After a spike earlier in the year, Japan’s exports have also contracted.
Only US exports have maintained some traction, thanks to the weaker dollar.
In the 1930’s, after the gold standard broke down, world leaders could not agree on coordinated reflation of the global economy.
In his book Golden Fetters, the economist Barry Eichengreen argued that the lack of coordinated action dragged out the global recovery process.
Such delays are costly, and risk allowing pathologies to fester, prolonging the healing process further.
Now, despite unfavorable political circumstances, Blanchard should make an even bolder call.
These are still not “normal” times, and the “vicious cycles” persist.
Another global fiscal stimulus – focused on public investment in infrastructure and education – would deliver the adrenaline shot needed for a robust recovery.
More public investment is twice blessed.
It can shake the world out of its stupor; and it can safeguard against “secular stagnation.”
The US, Germany, the United Kingdom, France, and China should act together to provide that boost.
Otherwise, a sustainable global recovery may remain elusive, in which case 2014 could end in low gear as well.
The IMF’s False Confession
PRINCETON – “Do I have to go on my knees?” the International Monetary Fund’s managing director, Christine Lagarde, asked the BBC’s Andrew Marr.
Lagarde was apologizing for the IMF’s poor forecasting of the United Kingdom’s recent economic performance, and, more seriously, for the Fund’s longer-standing criticism of the fiscal austerity pursued by Prime Minister David Cameron’s government.
Now endorsing British austerity, Lagarde said that it had increased confidence in the UK’s economic prospects, thereby spurring the recent recovery.
Lagarde’s apology was unprecedented, courageous, and wrong.
By issuing it, the IMF compromised on an economic principle that enjoys overwhelming academic support: The confidence “fairy” does not exist.
And, by bowing to the UK’s pressure, the Fund undermined its only real asset – its independence.
The IMF has dodged responsibility for far more serious forecasting errors, including its failure to anticipate every major crisis of the last generation, from Mexico in 1994-1995 to the near-collapse of the global financial system in 2008.
Indeed, in the 6-12 months prior to every crisis, the IMF’s forecasts implied business as usual.
Some claim that the Fund counsels countries in private, lest public warnings trigger the very crisis that is to be avoided.
But, with the possible exception of Thailand in 1997, the IMF’s long-time resident historian, James Boughton, finds little evidence for that view in internal documents.
The IMF’s Internal Evaluation Office is more directly scathing in its assessment of the Fund’s obliviousness to the US subprime crisis as it emerged.
Given that the IMF is the world’s anointed guardian of financial stability, its failure to warn and preempt constitutes a far more grievous lapse than its position on British austerity, with huge costs borne by many, especially the most vulnerable.
For these failures, the Fund has never offered any apology, certainly not in the abject manner of Lagarde’s recent statement.
The Fund does well to reflect on its errors.
In a September 2003 speech in Kuala Lumpur, then-Managing Director Horst Köhler conceded that temporary capital controls can provide relief against volatile inflows from the rest of the world.
He was presumably acknowledging that the Fund had it wrong when it criticized Malaysia for imposing such controls at the height of the Asian crisis.
Among the countries hurt by that crisis, Malaysia chose not to ask for the Fund’s help and emerged at least as well as others that did seek IMF assistance.
Malaysia’s imposition of capital controls was a controversial policy decision.
And even as the Fund opposed them, prominent economists – among them Paul Krugman – endorsed their use.
In his speech, Köhler reported that the Fund had taken the evidence on board and would incorporate it in its future advice.
But in the current crisis, the academic evidence has overwhelmingly shown that fiscal austerity does what textbook economics says it will do: the more severe the austerity, the greater the drag on growth.
A variety of studies confirming this proposition, including one by the IMF’s chief economist, Olivier Blanchard, have withstood considerable scrutiny and leave little room for ambiguity.
The two public voices arguing for the magical properties of austerity are official agencies based in Europe: the OECD and the European Commission.
The Commission’s stance, in particular, is animated by an institutional commitment to a fiscal viewpoint that leaves no room for evidence.
Among the G-7 economies, only Italy has done worse than the UK since the Great Recession began.
Indeed, the UK’s GDP has only just regained its 2008 level, lagging behind even France.
This is all the more remarkable given that the crisis in the UK was comparatively mild.
The fall in property prices was modest relative to Ireland and Spain, and, because there was no construction boom, there was no construction bust.
Having missed the warning signs about the bank Northern Rock, which needed to be bailed out by the UK government after a run on its deposits in September 2007, the British authorities, unlike their eurozone counterparts, quickly dealt with the economy’s distressed banks.
For these reasons, the UK should have had a quick recovery; instead, the Cameron government’s gratuitous austerity stifled it.
The IMF’s apology was a mistake for two reasons.
Thumbing one’s nose at scholarly evidence is always a bad idea, but it is especially damaging to an institution that relies so heavily on the credibility of its technical competence and neutrality.
If the Fund embraces muddled economics, on what basis will it defend its policy advice?
Moreover, in choosing to flatter the UK’s misguided policy, the Fund has confirmed its deference to its major shareholders.
For years, the view has been that the IMF is a foreign-policy instrument of the United States.
The softness in its annual surveillance of UK economic policy has also been well known.
But in taking this latest step, the Fund has undermined – perhaps fatally – its ability to speak “truth to power.”
If so, a fundamental question may well become unavoidable: Why does the IMF exist, and for whom?
The Global Economy’s Groundhog Day
NEW DELHI – In the movie “Groundhog Day,” a television weatherman, played by Bill Murray, awakes every morning at 6:00 to relive the same day.
A similar sense of déjà vu has pervaded economic forecasting since the global economic crisis began a half-decade ago.
Yet policymakers remain convinced that the economic-growth model that prevailed during the pre-crisis years is still their best guide, at least in the near future.
Consider the mid-year update of the International Monetary Fund’s World Economic Outlook, which has told the same story every year since 2011: “Oops!
The world economy did not perform as well as we expected.”
The reports go on to blame unanticipated factors – such as the Tōhoku earthquake and tsunami in Japan, uncertainty about America’s exit from expansionary monetary policy, a “one-time” re-pricing of risk, and severe weather in the United States – for the inaccuracies.
Emphasizing the temporary nature of these factors, the reports insist that, though world GDP growth amounted to roughly 3% during the first half of the year, it will pick up in the second half.
Driven by this new momentum, growth will finally reach the long-elusive 4% rate next year.
When it does not, the IMF publishes another rendition of the same claims.
This serial misjudgment highlights the need to think differently.
Perhaps the focus on the disruptions caused by the global financial crisis is obscuring a natural shift in developed economies to a lower gear following years of pumped-up growth.
Moreover, though emerging economies are also experiencing acute growth slowdowns, their share of the global economic pie will continue to grow.
In short, tougher economic competition, slower growth, and low inflation may be here to stay.
In the first two quarters of this year, America’s GDP barely exceeded the level it attained at the end of last year, and much of the increase was driven by goods that have been produced but not yet sold.
The prevailing explanation – a brutally cold winter – is wearing so thin that everyone should be able to see through it.
American consumers remain scarred by the crisis.
But there is another problem: in their homes and workplaces, the sense of excitement about the future is missing, despite all the gee-whiz gadgetry that now surrounds them.
And while the US Federal Reserve’s policy of quantitative easing has propped up businesses, it is no substitute for the enthusiasm and anticipation needed to propel investment.
Even the reduced global forecast of 3.4% GDP growth for this year is likely to prove excessively optimistic.
Before the crisis, world trade grew at 6-8% annually – well faster than GDP.
But, so far this year, trade growth remains stuck at about 3%.
Failure to recognize the fundamental slowdown that is occurring is reinforcing the expectation that old models can revive growth – an approach that will only create new fragilities.
Atif Mian and Amir Sufi warn that US consumers’ purchases of cars and other durables have been bolstered by the same unsustainable “subprime” lending practices that were used to finance home purchases before the crisis.
Similarly, Mark Carney, Governor of the Bank of England, envisages a Britain with a Cyprus-sized financial sector amounting to 900% of GDP.
And economist Michael Pettis cautions that China’s reliance on policy stimulus to kick-start the economy whenever it stalls will merely cause macroeconomic vulnerabilities to accumulate.
The two tectonic shifts in the global economy – slower GDP growth and increased emerging-market competition – have created a fault line that runs through Europe.
The technical lead held by Europe’s traditional trading economies is being eroded, while wage competition is encouraging fears of deflation.
And, with the eurozone’s most debt-burdened economies bearing the brunt of these shifts, Italy is sitting directly atop the fault.
The European Central Bank, however, is unable to revive eurozone growth on its own.
Given the resulting drag on the global economy – and especially on world trade – it is in the world’s interest to engineer a coordinated depreciation of the euro.
At the same time, a globally coordinated investment stimulus is needed to create new opportunities for growth.
Just as Bill Murray’s character could not escape Groundhog Day without radically changing his life, we cannot expect different economic outcomes without fundamentally different growth models.
Asia After the Afghan War
TOKYO – July will mark two milestones in America’s sometimes-tortured relations with Asia.
One is the beginning of the end of the nearly decade-long struggle in Afghanistan – the longest war in United States history – with President Barack Obama announcing the withdrawal of 30,000 US troops from the country by next summer.
The other is the 40th anniversary of Henry Kissinger’s secret mission to Beijing, a turning point in the Cold War and the first step on China’s road to modernization – but at the time a huge shock to Asia, particularly Japan.
The looming Afghan withdrawal recalls, at least for some Asians, a third, even more traumatic event: America’s chaotic exit from Saigon in April 1975.
Back then, that debacle seemed to presage a broader US withdrawal from Asia, with a war-weary American public seeking the supposed comforts of isolationism.
Today’s Asian nervousness exists not only because isolationism appears to be gaining ground once more in America, but also because Afghanistan’s stability remains in doubt, while China’s power is rising in the absence of any pan-Asian consensus or institutional structure.
America did, indeed, turn inward following the fall of Saigon, and its neglect of Afghanistan following the Soviet withdrawal in 1989 led to chaos and Al Qaeda’s near-takeover of the country.
So it is not surprising that many Asian leaders are asking themselves what commitments the US will maintain once its troops leave Afghanistan.
Perhaps equally important, many people in Asia are also debating whether the region would be able to rebalance itself should the US scale back its military presence.
Fortunately, US Secretary of Defense Robert Gates has reassured America’s Asian friends and allies that regional disengagement is not being contemplated.
These principles matter, because Australia, Japan, South Korea, Thailand, the Philippines, India, Indonesia, Singapore, Malaysia, New Zealand, Vietnam, and even Mongolia all regard America’s military presence in the region as essential to counterbalancing China’s increasing might.
Gates, however, is due to step down from his post shortly, which is unfortunate, because the Obama administration’s apparent lack of any explicit Asia strategy means that Gates’s reassurances might not reassure for very long.
Nowadays, US policy on Asia needs the type of strategic vision and insight that guided Kissinger’s discussions with Mao Zedong and Zhou En-lai four decades ago.
Without a clear and convincing doctrine, at least some Asian leaders are likely to remain dubious of America’s ability to remain Asia’s dominant military force, particularly given its economic woes, projected fiscal retrenchment, and other overseas commitments.
This lack of clarity may become particularly troublesome should China’s leaders underestimate the enduring quality of America’s Asian commitments.
Securing a structure of peace in Asia, however, is not solely America’s responsibility.
America’s friends and allies need to think hard about what sort of regional order they want, and they must begin to collaborate in order to breathe life into a structure of peace within which all of Asia can prosper and feel secure.
Japan’s government in particular needs to identify a coherent Asia strategy and stick to it, instead of leaning towards China one minute, and America the next.
In constructing a viable strategy, deepening Japan’s partnerships with Asia’s great democracies – India, Indonesia, and South Korea – must be a priority.
But the biggest question concerns China’s place in a consensual Asian order, and its willingness to collaborate with its neighbors, as well as with the US, in creating it.
The doubts that many Asians now hold about China’s intentions are well grounded, given the secretive nature of China’s military build-up, and its leaders’ increasingly aggressive tone in territorial disputes with India, Japan, the Philippines, and Vietnam.
China’s unconditional support for North Korea’s wayward regime, despite its repeated crimes against peace, is also a cause for concern about whether China will treat its neighbors’ security concerns with respect.
Today’s Asia-Pacific region has now become the focus of the global economy.
According to the World Bank, three of the top five economic powers (China, Japan, and India) will be Asian powers within this decade.
The boom that has brought this shift occurred because America’s military presence in the region provided stability and predictability.
America’s withdrawal from Afghanistan must not be allowed to call this stability into question.
What happens in Afghanistan as America begins to draw down its troops will test the willingness of all of Asia’s powers to work together to build a secure regional order.
In Afghanistan, their long-term interests are essentially in harmony, as none – including China – wants to see Afghanistan become a haven for terrorism once again.
But only a strong regional consensus on Afghanistan’s future can avert the prospect of a renewed struggle for mastery there.
If such a consensus can be forged, however, it will provide a foundation for further collaboration in building a pan-Asian order based on consent, not military might.
East Asia’s New Year Resolutions
SEOUL – If World War III ever breaks out, its origins will not lie in the Middle East, South Asia, or Eastern Europe. It is in East Asia – where the strategic interests of China, the United States, and their respective partners intersect – that the geopolitical stakes, diplomatic tensions, and potential for a global explosion are highest.
Because it is so obviously in every player’s interest to avoid outright conflict, we have stony handshakes like that between Chinese President Xi Jinping and Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe in Beijing last month.
But if there is to be a genuinely durable peace, the region’s leaders need to work harder and more courageously to achieve it.
Each of them could pursue game-changing initiatives if only they could summon the necessary statesmanship.
So, here – in a spirit of supreme, but perhaps not totally naive, optimism – are the 2015 New Year’s resolutions that I would most like each of East Asia’s leaders to make.
Xi Jinping: “I will make it clear that any territorial claims we have in the South China Sea are based only on reasonable assertions of sovereignty over particular land features and the rights that accompany them under the Convention on the Law of the Sea.
I will stop talking about our ‘historical waters,’ and order the removal of the ‘nine-dashed’ line from the map in Chinese passports.
“Having made our authority in Hong Kong clear, I will find a way to let the people there have the local leader they want.
A little flexibility here should also be a helpful message to those getting restless in Taiwan that China really can accommodate difference.
“Also in that spirit, I will welcome the Dalai Lama to Beijing and negotiate with his leadership team a package of cultural autonomy and limited self-government, satisfying once and for all the reasonable aspirations of the Tibetan people.”
Shinzo Abe: “I will invite to Hiroshima or Nagasaki on the August A-bomb anniversary all six-party talks leaders to kick-start serious negotiations on a Northeast Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone, which will embrace Japan and both Koreas and be guaranteed by the US, China, and Russia.
“And I will make 2015 the year that the historical grievances between us and our neighbors are buried for good.
Remembering the impact of Willy Brandt’s Kniefall at the Jewish ghetto site in Warsaw in 1970, I will commemorate the 70th anniversary of the end of World War II by visiting Nanjing and accepting Japanese responsibility for the terrible massacre of 1937-1938.
“I will also do everything I can to remove from the Yushukan Museum, on the grounds of the Yasukuni Shrine, all exhibits which deny, question, or are insensitive to Japan’s responsibility for waging aggressive war and committing atrocity crimes in the 1930s and 1940s.
I will start by removing from its pedestal the steam locomotive that ran on the Thailand-Burma “Death Railway,” the display of which dishonors the more than 100,000 prisoners of war and forced laborers who perished from disease, malnutrition, or maltreatment in its construction.”
South Korean President Park Geun-hye: “I will&nbsp;remove the ‘May 24’ sanctions we placed on North Korea after their military provocations in 2010, because they are making impossible nearly all of the measures to build trust and confidence that I keep saying are necessary.
“Of course the North should continue to be named and shamed in the United Nations for its human-rights abuses and nuclear misbehavior.
But pariah states never behave responsibly, and no state has a bigger role than we do in coaxing Kim Jong-un’s regime into normality.
Serious re-engagement will be politically hard for me to deliver.
But if I do not, I will be on the wrong side of history.”
North Korea’s Kim Jong-un: “I will surprise everyone by freezing our efforts to develop nuclear weapons and missiles, and I will prove my seriousness by opening our uranium enrichment plants to inspection.
That will leave no one with any credible reason to delay resumption of the six-party talks.
“We have known since the 1990s that a denuclearization settlement is the best guarantee of our regime’s security.
I may have image problems, but I am not crazy.
China has fallen out of love with us; my people know too much about the wider world; and everyone knows that to use our handful of nuclear weapons would be suicidal.
It is time to reach an agreement.”
US President Barack Obama: “I will say publicly what Bill Clinton was saying privately a decade ago.
It may be painful for many Americans to hear, and it will not impress my opponents.
But if I can make it believable, it will do more to win the US friendship, respect, and ultimate security in East Asia and around the world than our trillion-dollar nuclear-weapons modernization program or all the unworkable and counter-productive missile-defense systems at which we keep hurling money.
“It is simply this: The US should not use its immense military and economic power to try to stay top dog on the global block in perpetuity.
Rather, we should be using that power to create a world in which we will be comfortable living when we are no longer top dog on the global block.”
Perhaps the idea that any of these resolutions will actually be made is fanciful.
And we all know that it is in the nature of New Year’s resolutions that, even when they are made, they are rarely kept.
But should any one of the resolutions on my list come to pass, the result would be momentous.
Cumulatively, they would be transformative.
The rest of us should hope that they are made, and kept, and we should continue nagging until they are.
Defusing Asia’s Arms Race
BANGKOK – The ruling against China’s territorial claims in the South China Sea by the Permanent Court of Arbitration (PCA) in The Hague will be met with relief in the region’s capitals.
But it is unlikely to reverse one of Asia’s most worrying trends: an alarming regional arms build-up.
According to the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute, Asia now accounts for almost half of the world’s arms expenditure, which is more than twice the total expenditure of countries in the Middle East and four times greater than that of Europe.
Vietnam, which restored diplomatic relations with the United States only in 1995, is now considering allowing the US Navy to use its Cam Ranh Naval Base – which was built and used by the US Air Force during the Vietnam War (and then by the Soviet and Russian navies).
It has also purchased a clutch of Russian-made submarines, and it spent eight times more in arms procurement between 2011 and 2015 than it did in the previous five years.
Thailand, too, wants submarines for its navy, despite having only shallow waters in the Gulf of Thailand and no territorial claims in the South China Sea.
The Philippines, which brought the case against China in The Hague, is beefing up its military as well, with the procurement of fighter jets from South Korea and new investments in its navy, supported not only by the US, but also by Japan.
The Philippines has also rehabilitated its defense alliance with the US, marking a U-turn from its decision to expel the US Navy from its base at Subic Bay in 1991.
In the same spirit, the American Seventh Fleet has stepped up its Freedom of Navigation Operational Patrols (FONOPs) in the South China Sea.
Lastly, Japan is gaining influence in the region by inching away from its post-war “peace constitution.”
So far, Prime Minister Shinzo Abe’s government has reinterpreted Article 9, which renounces war, to allow for Japan to come to the defense of its allies.
The government has also revised security laws to allow exports of weapons technology to its partners in the region, thereby buttressing their defense capabilities.
All of these countries are responding to China’s rapid emergence as the foremost threat to regional stability.
On the headwaters of the Mekong River, China has constructed upriver dams that deprive downstream countries like Cambodia and Vietnam of vital water resources.
In the South China Sea, China has built artificial islands and militarized them with airstrips and defense facilities; and it is flexing its naval muscles with a newly minted aircraft carrier group, with more on the way.
In the run-up to the PCA’s decision, China drummed up support in far-flung African countries, where it has investments, and among more easily influenced members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, such as Brunei, Cambodia, and Laos.
China’s goal is to prevent ASEAN members from uniting against it and to diminish the role of international law in a region where it seeks strategic dominance.
More ominously, China ramped up its South China Sea activities in spite of the tribunal’s proceedings, vowing long ago to ignore any ruling that invalidated its claims.
Asia’s arms race is the biggest since the Cold War, and it is accelerating against an increasingly unfavorable international backdrop.
The US is preoccupied with the Islamic State and other terrorist threats abroad, and now with the presidential campaign at home.
And Europe is in disarray after the United Kingdom’s vote to leave the European Union, which followed eight years of weak growth, austerity, and prolonged crises.
If anything, this should be Asia’s moment to assume a global leadership role.
Sadly, the region’s bitter geopolitical rivalries stand in the way, owing to the absence of an institutional framework to prevent, mitigate, and settle territorial disputes.
Unless, and until, such arrangements are established, the risk of conflict will grow, jeopardizing the region’s economic transformation – which in recent decades has lifted a billion Asians out of poverty.
Creating a viable regional security framework will not be easy, given the seeming intractability of many of Asia’s geopolitical fault lines.
These include the standoff between India and Pakistan over Kashmir; the confrontation between North and South Korea; the tumultuous relationship between China and Taiwan; and China’s claims on the sovereign territory of Japan and India, in addition to that of the Philippines and Vietnam.
Resolving such conflicts requires, at a minimum, some baseline rules of the game, which can be developed and implemented only on a multilateral basis, not in the unilateral way that China demands.
For example, ASEAN is drafting a Code of Conduct to govern the South China Sea; but the effort has made little headway, owing to Chinese intransigence.
If the Philippines does not overplay its victory at The Hague, and if other interested parties step back a little and give China space to recognize the dangers of its own aggression, Chinese leaders may yet become more willing to negotiate a regional agreement.
The alternative – further escalation of the Asian arms race – is in no one’s interest.
Northeast Asia’s Home Fires Burning
TOKYO – Successful diplomatic summits are almost always pre-cooked affairs, with every aspect of the meeting, from the initial handshakes to the final communiqué, minutely choreographed.
But next month’s Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) summit in Beijing looks like a high-risk enterprise.
It is not even clear whether Chinese President Xi Jinping will agree to meet with one of his most important guests, Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe.
It is also unclear whether Abe will be able to meet with South Korean President Park Geun-hye.
And yet there is considerable reason to hope not only for formal handshakes and bilateral meetings among Northeast Asia’s “Big Three” leaders, but also for substantive discussions aimed at lowering tensions in the region.
That hope is built on all three leaders’ need for a period of diplomatic quiet, owing to the difficult domestic challenges that each now faces.
Xi may be confronting the most difficult domestic agenda: an effort to engineer a relatively smooth transition from an economic structure based on manufacturing and exports to one in which domestic consumption and services fuel growth.
Not only has structural transformation caused the economy to slow; it has also exposed deep flaws in China’s financial system.
The shift in the country’s economic model would be difficult in the best of circumstances.
But it is being undertaken simultaneously with the deepest political purge China has experienced since the days of Mao Zedong, with Xi targeting corrupt officials high and low.
At the moment, the focus seems to be on People’s Liberation Army officers and those tied to now-imprisoned former Chongqing Communist Party boss Bo Xilai and the former Politburo security chief Zhou Yongkang, who is awaiting sentencing.
Indeed, the most perilous phase of Xi’s purge may now be underway, given the recent arrest of the deputy commander of the Sichuan Military District – a key post, given the district’s large and restive Tibetan population.
Abe’s domestic troubles, stemming from two decades of economic stagnation, are well known.
Although his economic strategy, known as “Abenomics,” appears to have ended deflation, vibrant growth is nowhere in sight.
Moreover, after a series of scandals cost Abe some newly appointed ministers, some fear that he may no longer be willing to follow through on the liberalizing structural reforms – the so-called “third arrow” of Abenomics – that sustained economic recovery requires.
Park may appear to face the least vexing domestic conditions, with South Korea’s economy growing at a 3.2% annual pace in the second quarter of 2014, only marginally lower than market forecasts.
But Park undoubtedly views her domestic circumstances as anything but rosy; in many ways, this has been an annus horribilis for her and her country.
Indeed, disaster has stalked South Korea this year, beginning in April with the sinking of the ferry Sewol, which claimed some 300 lives, most of them high school students.
The trial of the Sewol’s captain, the apparent suicide of its owner, and a series of scandals involving beatings and bullying leading to death and suicide among army conscripts have cost Park key ministerial resignations, and have created a pervasive sense of unease about how the country is governed.
Complicating matters further is the need for Park to devise a viable response to a new diplomatic charm offensive by North Korea’s usually charmless leader, Kim Jong-un.
Park remains, rightly, a skeptic concerning Kim’s motives; but the spectacle of the North’s second-highest-ranking official appearing suddenly at the Asian Games earlier this month created a frisson of excitement that perhaps Kim the Younger may actually want to improve relations.
Faced with these domestic concerns, all three leaders need a respite from the tensions that have bedeviled relations among their countries over the past three years.
But, because each has played on these tensions, particularly with Japan, in order to control their domestic opponents, achieving this necessary respite may prove difficult.
And yet there are signs that the three leaders understand that the APEC summit may be a make-or-break moment for their countries’ relations.
Much of the worst anti-Japanese bombast has disappeared from Chinese television in recent weeks, and former Japanese Prime Minister Yasuo Fukuda is due to meet with Xi in Beijing this week.
This does not yet add up to a thaw in the bilateral relationship, but it does suggest that Xi may be seeking a respite, at least until China’s economy is on a more stable footing and his anti-corruption campaign begins to wind down.
Park, too, has sent signals that she may want to ease tensions.
She recently met with former Japanese finance minister Fukushiro Nukaga, and Kim Kwan-jin, the chief of South Korea’s National Security Office, recently met with Abe’s national security adviser, Shotaro Yachi.
With Abe, Park, and Xi each facing daunting domestic challenges, a rare convergence in each country of self-interest and national interest may be creating a chance for improved relations.
The question now is whether Northeast Asia’s Big Three leaders can overcome old positions, shake hands, and get serious about regional diplomacy.
Asian Growth in Turbulent Times
NEW DELHI – A new reality is emerging in Asia.
In recent decades, many of Asia’s economies have boomed.
The region today accounts for about 40% of the world’s GDP – up from 25% in 1990 – and contributes about two-thirds of global economic growth.
There’s more. Asia has made unprecedented strides in reducing poverty and improving broad development indicators.
The poverty rate fell from 55% in 1990 to 21% in 2010, while education and health outcomes have improved significantly.
Hundreds of millions of lives have been improved in the process.
And, looking ahead, Asia is expected to continue to grow at an average annual rate of 5%, leading global economic expansion.
But today, the region is facing challenging new economic conditions.
With growth in advanced economies tepid, risk aversion increasing in global financial markets, and the commodity super-cycle coming to an end, the world economy is providing little impetus to Asian growth.
At the same time, China is moving toward a more sustainable growth model that implies slower expansion.
Given the growing links between China and the rest of the world, particularly Asia, the spillover effects are significant.
Indeed, China is now the top trading partner of most major regional economies, particularly in East Asia and ASEAN.
New research by the International Monetary Fund, to be published in next month’s Regional Economic Outlook for Asia and the Pacific, suggests that the median Asian country’s economic sensitivity to China’s GDP has doubled in the last couple of decades.
So China’s slowdown means a slower pace of growth across Asia.
Asia’s achievements in recent decades attest to the hard work of the region’s people, as well as to the soundness of the policies that many Asian governments have adopted since the late 1990s, including improved monetary-policy and exchange-rate frameworks, increased international reserve buffers, and stronger financial sector regulation and supervision.
Against this backdrop, the region attracted vast amounts of foreign direct investment.
As trade links expanded, a sophisticated network of integrated supply chains emerged, creating the conditions for Asia to become a manufacturing powerhouse and, increasingly, an exporter of services as well.
More recently, thanks to strong policies and ample reserves, the region quickly recovered from the global financial crisis.
Asia also benefited during these years from strong global tailwinds, including favorable external financing conditions and the rapid expansion of the Chinese economy.
Amid this new testing reality now dawning in Asia, we must not lose sight of the deep, and long term, structural challenges facing the region.
Populations are rapidly aging and even declining in countries like Japan, Korea, Singapore, and Thailand, dragging down potential growth and putting pressure on fiscal balances.
Income inequality is a further challenge.
While inequality has remained stable or declined in Malaysia, Thailand, and the Philippines, it is rising in many parts of the region, most notably in India and China (as well as other parts of East Asia).
In many emerging markets and developing countries, widespread infrastructure gaps persist, notably in power and transport.
And, elsewhere in the region – the small Pacific islands in particular – vulnerability to the effects of climate change is increasing.
This shifting landscape calls for bold action on several fronts.
While the response will certainly need to be tailored to each country’s specific circumstances, some recommendations could be helpful for most countries:
· Because inflation remains low across most of the region, monetary policy should remain supportive of growth in case downside risks materialize.
· Exchange-rate flexibility and targeted macroprudential policies should be part of the risk-management toolkit.
· Countries need to deepen their financial systems to channel the large pool of domestic and regional savings toward financing their development needs; closing the region’s infrastructure gaps, for example, remains critical.
· Structural reforms, aided by fiscal policy, should support the economic transitions and rebalancing, while boosting potential growth and alleviating poverty.
The good news is that Asia, as demonstrated by its strong performance in recent years, can meet these challenges and continue to build upon the significant achievements of the past two decades.
It has the resources and the people; it has the buffers and resilience; and it has ample opportunities for further trade and financial integration.
To discuss these challenges, the government of India and the IMF are organizing the Advancing Asia conference in New Delhi on March 11-13, bringing together regional policymakers and thinkers.
India, a bright spot among emerging markets in these difficult times – indeed, the world’s fastest growing major economy – is an auspicious place to hold this gathering.
Our mutual aim in convening with Asian policymakers is clear and critical, for Asia and for the global economy: to ensure that growth in Asia continues to be robust, sustainable, and inclusive, so that the region remains a powerful locomotive for global growth.
Asia Enters the Storm
BERKELEY – As 2011 draws to a close, there are growing signs that Asia is becoming caught up in the global slowdown, dashing hopes that the region’s economies would “decouple” from the prolonged recession in Europe and America’s lackluster recovery.
China’s export growth is slipping, owing to faltering demand in Europe, which has surpassed the United States as China’s largest foreign market.
Indeed, China’s manufacturing activity is contracting for the first time in almost three years.
Reverberations are already evident in other emerging Asian economies that depend on exports both to China-based manufacturers and to the US and Europe.
Decoupling did not occur in 2008, when exports accounted for about 45% of pan-Asian GDP (excluding Japan) and every emerging country in the region experienced a sharp contraction in growth as world trade plummeted.
Nor is decoupling likely today, because exports still account for about the same share of the region’s GDP, and about 50% of these exports are still headed to developed countries.
So the idea of decoupling appears to be a chimera.
Even if the euro crisis is resolved, austerity in Europe, along with anemic growth or worse in the US, will mean a slowdown in export-dependent Asia.
But Asia’s economies can still grow much faster than the developed West if they respond to prolonged stagnation by rebalancing their growth toward internal demand, especially household consumption.
The good news is that these economies have substantial room for such rebalancing, as well as the policy flexibility to accomplish it.
The share of consumption in GDP in these economies fell from more than 60% in the early 1980’s to less than 50% today.
In China, it is less than 40% – far below the norm for the world’s major economies and for other Asian economies at a comparable stage of development – despite nearly 7% annual average growth in China’s per capita consumption in recent years.
The Asian economies are home to 3.5 billion consumers, but their share in global consumption remains small – much smaller than their share in global GDP.
China alone accounts for 20% of the world’s population, nearly 11% of global GDP, but only 3% of global consumption.
China and most of the other emerging Asian economies have strong government balance sheets – the GDP shares of their budget deficits and public debt are relatively small.
As a result, they have the fiscal firepower to boost consumption in order to mitigate the effects of declining exports.
True, many local governments in China are saddled with debt, some of which may need to be restructured.
But the central government enjoyed a 28% increase in revenues over the last year, and has more than $3 trillion in foreign-exchange reserves.
In addition, the moderation of inflationary pressure as a result of slower growth and cooling global commodity markets will allow Chinese and other Asian policymakers to shift their focus from containing economic overheating to rebalancing growth.
In China, where inflation is falling sharply, monetary policy has already begun to ease.
Even with significant policy support, however, most of the smaller Asian economies – Taiwan, Thailand, Singapore, and even South Korea – will not be able to replace external demand with internal demand to the same extent that China can.
So, even with rebalancing, exports will remain a significant determinant of their growth, and China is already their major export market.
That is why China’s rebalancing is so important not only for its own economy, but for all of China-centric Asia.
Intra-regional trade flows have surged during the last decade, but they have been concentrated in parts and components that go into finished products assembled in China for export to developed countries.
With depressed markets in the developed world, intra-regional trade in the future will depend more on exports to satisfy Chinese domestic demand.
Again, there is cause for optimism: China’s imports from Asia have been growing faster than China’s exports to the US for the last several years.
China responded to the 2009 global slowdown with dramatic fiscal and monetary stimulus, which fueled a rapid investment-led recovery at home and throughout Asia.
Investment, mainly by local governments and state-owned companies with easy access to bank financing, soared to more than 45% of GDP, and, consistent with China’s long-run urbanization strategy, was concentrated in infrastructure and property-development projects.
Over time, much of the expansion in capacity will be absorbed, as an estimated 15 million people move from rural to urban areas each year over the next decade.
But, for now, many investment projects are not yet generating enough income to service their debts (some of them never will), and there is significant spare capacity.
Confronted with another global slowdown that could depress its export markets for years, China needs to boost consumption even as it cools investment. And it needs to so in ways that do not rely on excessive credit expansion.
China’s 12th Five-Year Plan, which will take effect in 2012, recognizes these policy imperatives and calls for several measures to fulfill them, including wage increases for urban workers; income support for rural households; enhanced access to capital for small businesses, especially in the underbuilt services sector; and more generous social-welfare programs, which would reduce Chinese households’ high levels of precautionary saving.
All of these measures are already underway, and Chinese leaders appear committed to embracing a new growth strategy that will benefit both China’s population and Asia as a whole.
The Asian economies should not count on being able to decouple from the economic woes of Europe and the US in the short run.
But there are promising signs that, over time, the advanced countries’ difficulties will trigger a healthy, if belated, shift in Asia’s development strategy, with China leading the way.
Asia Exposed
NEW HAVEN – Asian authorities were understandably smug in the aftermath of the financial crisis of 2008-2009.
Growth in the region slowed sharply, as might be expected of export-led economies confronted with the sharpest collapse in global trade since the 1930’s.
But, with the notable exception of Japan, which suffered its deepest recession of the modern era, Asia came through an extraordinarily tough period in excellent shape.
That was then.
For the second time in less than four years, Asia is being hit with a major external demand shock.
This time it is from Europe, where a raging sovereign-debt crisis threatens to turn a mild recession into something far worse: a possible Greek exit from the euro, which could trigger contagion across the eurozone.
This is a big deal for Asia.
Financial and trade linkages make Asia highly vulnerable to Europe’s malaise.
Owing to the former, the risks to Asia from a European banking crisis cannot be taken lightly.
Lacking well-developed capital markets as an alternative source of credit, bank-funding channels are especially vital in Asia.
Indeed, the Asian Development Bank estimates that European banks fund about 9% of total domestic credit in developing Asia – three times the share of financing provided by banks based in the United States.
The role of European banks is especially significant in Singapore and Hong Kong – the region’s two major financial centers.
That means that Asia is far more exposed to an offshore banking crisis today than it was in the aftermath of Lehman Brothers’ collapse in 2008, which led to a near-meltdown of the US banking system.
The transmission effects through trade linkages are just as worrying.
Historically, the US was modern Asia’s largest source of external demand.
But that appears to have changed over the past decade.
Seduced by China’s spectacular growth, the region shifted from US- to China-centric export growth.
That seemed like a good move.
Combined shipments to the US and Europe fell to 24% of developing Asia’s total exports in 2010 – down sharply from 34% in 1998-1999.&#160; Meanwhile, over the same period, Asia’s dependence on intraregional exports – trade flows within the region – expanded sharply, from 36% of total exports in 1998 to 44% in 2010.
These numbers seem to paint a comforting picture of an increasingly autonomous Asia that can better withstand the blows from the West’s recurring crises.
But research by the International Monetary Fund shows that, beneath the veneer, 60-65% of all trade flows in the region can be classified as “intermediate goods” – components that are made in countries like Korea and Taiwan, assembled in China, and ultimately shipped out as finished goods to the West.
With Europe and the US still accounting for the largest shares of China’s end-market exports, there can be no escaping the tight linkages of Asia’s China-centric supply chain to the ups and downs of demand in the major developed economies.
Moreover, there is an important and worrisome twist to those linkages: China itself has tilted increasingly toward Europe as its major source of external demand.
In 2007, the European Union surpassed the US as China’s largest export market.
By 2010, the EU accounted for 20% of total Chinese exports, while the US share was just 18%.
In other words, a China-centric Asian supply chain has made a big bet on the grand European experiment –&#160;a bet that now appears to be backfiring.
Indeed, in China, a now-familiar pattern is playing out yet again – another slowdown in domestic growth stemming from a crisis in the advanced economies of the West.
And, as goes China, so will go the rest of an increasingly integrated Asia.
The good news is that, so far, the downside has been much better contained than was the case in late 2008 and early 2009.
Back then, Chinese exports went from boom to bust in just seven months – from 26% annual growth in July 2008 to a 27% decline in February 2009.
This time, the annual export gain has slowed from 20% in 2011 to 5% in April 2012 – a significant deceleration, to be sure, but one that stops well short of the previous outright collapse.
That could change in the event of a disorderly euro breakup, but, barring that outcome, there is reason to be more sanguine this time around.
The bad news is that Asia seems to be learning little from repeated external demand shocks.
In the end, internal demand is the only effective defense against external vulnerability.
Yet the region has failed to construct that firewall.
On the contrary, private consumption fell to a record-low 45% of developing Asia’s GDP in 2010 – down ten percentage points from 2002.
In these circumstances, immunity from external shocks – or “decoupling,” as it is often called – seems fanciful.
As with most things in Asia nowadays, China holds the key to supplying Asia’s missing consumer demand.
The recently enacted 12th Five-Year Plan (2011-15) has all the right ingredients to produce the ultimate buffer between the dynamism of the East and the perils of a crisis-battered West.
But, as the euro crisis causes China’s economy to slow for the second time in three and a half years, there can be little doubt that implementation of the Plan’s pro-consumption rebalancing is lagging.
There are no oases of prosperity in a crisis-prone globalized world.
That is equally true for Asia, the world’s fastest-growing region.
As Europe’s crisis deepens, the twin channels of financial and trade linkages have placed Asia’s economies in a vice.
Rebalancing is the only way out for China and its partners in the Asian supply chain.
Until that occurs, the vice now gripping Asia will only continue to tighten.
China’s Asia?
CLAREMONT – Distinguishing diplomatic rhetoric from official policy is never easy.
But it is especially difficult in China, where the government’s actions so often fail to match its statements.
Given this, it is worth asking whether the latest slogan adopted by Chinese officials – “Asia for Asians” – is merely nationalist posturing for domestic consumption or a signal of a genuine policy shift.
The most authoritative reference to an “Asia for Asians” occurred in May, during Chinese President Xi Jinping’s keynote speech at the Conference on Interaction and Confidence-Building Measures in Asia.
In a carefully crafted statement, Xi laid out China’s vision for a new regional security order – one in which, as the slogan suggests, Asians are in charge.
According to Xi, at the fundamental level, “it is for the people of Asia to run the affairs of Asia, solve the problems of Asia, and uphold the security of Asia.”
Fortunately, he declared, they have the “capability and wisdom” to build peace and security in the region through cooperation.
This vision, of course, entails an overhaul of the Asian security structure, with a drastically reduced role for the United States.
Indeed, Xi implicitly criticized the existing US-dominated security architecture in Asia as stuck in the Cold War, and characterized “military alliance targeted at a third party” as “not conducive to maintaining common security.”
Since the speech, lower-level officials and the Chinese media have reiterated similar lines.
At first glance, this vision seems entirely reasonable; after all, most countries prefer to manage domestic and regional affairs without the meddling of outside powers.
But Xi’s statement marked a significant departure from China’s long-standing position on America’s presence in the Asia-Pacific region.
Since the US-China rapprochement four decades ago, China has maintained a studied ambiguity regarding America’s role as the guarantor of Asia’s security.
China’s pragmatic leaders knew that the US presence helped to contain the Soviet Union (and subsequently Russia), prevented Japan from re-arming, and kept sea-lanes open.
They also recognized that they lacked the power to challenge the US-led security order or offer a feasible alternative.
This may be changing.
Though some analysts remain convinced that Xi’s “Asia for Asians” line is an empty attempt to bolster his nationalist credentials, an equally strong case can be made that it signifies a genuine policy shift.
While the argument is not overwhelming, it should not be dismissed out of hand.
The most conclusive evidence of Xi’s readiness to challenge the established order lies in the economic sphere.
Most notably, China has established new development institutions, the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank and the new Silk Road Fund, to which it will channel tens of billions of dollars – clear challenges to the established Western-dominated multilateral institutions.
On the security front, however, China has made much less headway in turning its “Asia for Asians” vision into reality.
To be sure, it has acquired some military capabilities to deter the US from intervening in the Taiwan Strait or the South China Sea, and it has improved its security cooperation with Russia and Central Asian countries through the Shanghai Cooperation Organization.
But such modest gains are more than offset by the security setbacks that China has suffered as a result of its assertiveness in regional territorial disputes.
Indeed, after many months of increasingly forceful military moves – most notably, the unilateral declaration of an air-defense identification zone covering a large swath of the South China Sea, including disputed territories – China’s ties with Japan reached an all-time low.
And concerned Southeast Asian countries have been entreating the US to remain in the region as a counterweight to China.
Underlying the “Asia for Asians” trope may be China’s belief that the US, not its own behavior, is to blame for its neighbors’ defiance.
Some Chinese strategists believe that the US is using Asian states, particularly Japan, Vietnam, and the Philippines, as pawns to contain China.
If this perspective has prevailed in the internal policy debate, Chinese leaders, including Xi, could have reached the fateful conclusion that, on balance, America’s security presence in Asia directly threatens Chinese interests and must be eliminated.
That would be a grave strategic error, based on a fundamental misreading of Asian security dynamics.
Most of China’s neighbors, even North Korea, fear an unconstrained Chinese hegemon – and, if the US security presence were eliminated, that is precisely what they would face.
“Asia for Asians” would be “Asia for the Chinese.”
It is difficult to imagine that Chinese policymakers, known for their sophistication and realism, could be pursuing a strategy that is not only unlikely to gain support from fellow Asians, but also is guaranteed to spark conflict with the US.