Africa needs to do its share.
It needs investments to shift away from a dependence on a donor-driven agenda and peasant-driven agriculture, and learn to compete on a global level.
It can generate sustainable growth through industrialization, and by creating a single market.
It needs to promote production and trade, expand agribusiness and agro-industries, and create wealth and new jobs.
Agribusiness development can stimulate broader economic growth, boost regional trade, and at the same time enhance food security, and reduce poverty.
Globalization has been good to many in the developing world.
At this critical moment, we can’t allow this to fade away.
We need to make this a more inclusive process, and make sure that:
·        financial resources keep flowing to Africa and the developing world so they continue integrating into the global economy;
·        protectionism is avoided and markets stay open;
·        the poorest nations can grow out of poverty through trade;
·        there is good governance of natural resources to fuel broader and inclusive development
The abundance of relevant experiences from the newly industrialized countries in Asia and elsewhere can show African countries how to galvanize their economies, accelerating the process of wealth creation and poverty reduction on the continent. 
And last but not least.
Development without access to energy won’t happen.
This crisis could help formulate a new approach: increase access to reliable, affordable and renewable energy services for sustainable development, promote energy efficiency to make sure economic growth does not raise energy demand and environmental degradation, including climate change.
Africa has great hydropower potential but only 7% has been exploited so far.
Africa’s natural gas reserves amount to about 8% of global reserves.
It has 10% of global oil reserves.
But it requires major investments to develop both traditional energy means and renewable ones.  
It is still unclear exactly how much of the $1 trillion pledged at the London G20 summit will find its way to Africa.
That’s why we need to keep an eye on the figures and keep reminding world leaders of the needs of those in the developing world that live in their shadow.
This will set policy priorities straight, put strategies in place to avert a human catastrophe, and help Africa secure its rightful place at the global economic table.
The Year of Betting Conservatively
NEW YORK – The upswing in global equity markets that started in July is now running out of steam, which comes as no surprise: with no significant improvement in growth prospects in either the advanced or major emerging economies, the rally always seemed to lack legs.
If anything, the correction might have come sooner, given disappointing macroeconomic data in recent months.
Starting with the advanced countries, the eurozone recession has spread from the periphery to the core, with France entering recession and Germany facing a double whammy of slowing growth in one major export market (China/Asia) and outright contraction in others (southern Europe).
Economic growth in the United States has remained anemic, at 1.5-2% for most of the year, and Japan is lapsing into a new recession.
The United Kingdom, like the eurozone, has already endured a double-dip recession, and now even strong commodity exporters – Canada, the Nordic countries, and Australia – are slowing in the face of headwinds from the US, Europe, and China.
Meanwhile, emerging-market economies – including all of the BRICs (Brazil, Russia, India, and China) and other major players like Argentina, Turkey, and South Africa – also slowed in 2012.
China’s slowdown may be stabilized for a few quarters, given the government’s latest fiscal, monetary, and credit injection; but this stimulus will only perpetuate the country’s unsustainable growth model, one based on too much fixed investment and savings and too little private consumption.
In 2013, downside risks to global growth will be exacerbated by the spread of fiscal austerity to most advanced economies.
Until now, the recessionary fiscal drag has been concentrated in the eurozone periphery and the UK.
But now it is permeating the eurozone’s core.
And in the US, even if President Barack Obama and the Republicans in Congress agree on a budget plan that avoids the looming “fiscal cliff,” spending cuts and tax increases will invariably lead to some drag on growth in 2013 – at least 1% of GDP.
In Japan, the fiscal stimulus from post-earthquake reconstruction will be phased out, while a new consumption tax will be phased in by 2014.
The International Monetary Fund is thus absolutely right in arguing that excessively front-loaded and synchronized fiscal austerity in most advanced economies will dim global growth prospects in 2013.
So, what explains the recent rally in US and global asset markets?
The answer is simple: Central banks have turned on their liquidity hoses again, providing a boost to risky assets.
The US Federal Reserve has embraced aggressive, open-ended quantitative easing (QE).
The European Central Bank’s announcement of its “outright market transactions” program has reduced the risk of a sovereign-debt crisis in the eurozone periphery and a breakup of the monetary union.
The Bank of England has moved from QE to CE (credit easing), and the Bank of Japan has repeatedly increased the size of its QE operations.
Monetary authorities in many other advanced and emerging-market economies have cut their policy rates as well.
And, with slow growth, subdued inflation, near-zero short-term interest rates, and more QE, longer-term interest rates in most advanced economies remain low (with the exception of the eurozone periphery, where sovereign risk remains relatively high).
It is small wonder, then, that investors desperately searching for yield have rushed into equities, commodities, credit instruments, and emerging-market currencies.
But now a global market correction seems underway, owing, first and foremost, to the poor growth outlook.
At the same time, the eurozone crisis remains unresolved, despite the ECB’s bold actions and talk of a banking, fiscal, economic, and political union.
Specifically, Greece, Portugal, Spain, and Italy are still at risk, while bailout fatigue pervades the eurozone core.
Moreover, political and policy uncertainties – on the fiscal, debt, taxation, and regulatory fronts – abound.
In the US, the fiscal worries are threefold: the risk of a “cliff” in 2013, as tax increases and massive spending cuts kick in automatically if no political agreement is reached; renewed partisan combat over the debt ceiling; and a new fight over medium-term fiscal austerity.
In many other countries or regions – for example, China, Korea, Japan, Israel, Germany, Italy, and Catalonia – upcoming elections or political transitions have similarly increased policy uncertainty.
Yet another reason for the correction is that valuations in stock markets are stretched: price/earnings ratios are now high, while growth in earnings per share is slackening, and will be subject to further negative surprises as growth and inflation remain low.
And, given the seriousness of the downside risks to growth in advanced and emerging economies alike, the correction could be a bellwether of worse to come for the global economy and financial markets in 2013.
Down with Debt Weight
LONDON – Nearly four years after the start of the global financial crisis, many are wondering why economic recovery is taking so long.
Indeed, its sluggishness has confounded even the experts.
According to the International Monetary Fund, the world economy should have grown by 4.4% in 2011, and should grow by 4.5% in 2012.
In fact, the latest figures from the World Bank indicate that growth reached just 2.7% in 2011, and will slow this year to 2.5% – a figure that may well need to be revised downwards.
There are two possible reasons for the discrepancy between forecast and outcome.
Either the damage caused by the financial crisis was more serious than people realized, or the economic medicine prescribed was less efficacious than policymakers believed.
In fact, the gravity of the banking crisis was quickly grasped.
Huge stimulus packages were implemented in 2008-9, led by the United States and China, coordinated by Britain, and with the reluctant support of Germany.
Interest rates were slashed, insolvent banks were bailed out, the printing presses were turned on, taxes were cut, and public spending was boosted.
Some countries devalued their currencies.
As a result, the slide was halted, and the rebound was faster than forecasters expected.
But the stimulus measures transformed a banking crisis into a fiscal and sovereign-debt crisis.
From 2010 onwards, governments started to raise taxes and cut spending in response to growing fears of sovereign default.
At that point, the recovery went into reverse.
As Carmen Reinhart and Kenneth Rogoff tell it in their masterly book This Time is Different, there is no secure way of short-circuiting a deep banking crisis.
The crisis originates with “excessive debt accumulation,” which makes economies “vulnerable to crises of confidence.”
Commercial banks have to be bailed out by governments; then governments have to be bailed out by commercial banks.
In the end, both have to be bailed out by central banks.
All of this, according to Reinhart and Rogoff, involves a “protracted and pronounced contraction in economic activity.”
They reckon that the average length of post-war crises has been 4.4 years – the time it takes for the necessary “de-leveraging” to occur – after which the crisis of confidence is over and economic growth revives.
However, there is something missing in the story.
Recovery from the Great Depression took about 10 years, more than twice the post-war average.
Reinhart and Rogoff offer a couple of reasons for the difference in recovery rates: the slow policy response to the Great Depression and the gold standard, which meant that individual countries could not export their way out of depression.
In other words, fiscal policy and the monetary-policy regime have a decisive influence both on the depth of the collapse and how long before the economy recovers.
It is also significant that big financial collapses occurred again in the 1970’s, after being virtually absent in the 1950’s and 1960’s, when the Keynesian system of managed economies and the Bretton Woods system of managed exchange rates was in place.
The major post-war crises that Reinhart and Rogoff consider run from 1977 to 2001.
They occurred because regulation of banks and controls on capital movements were lifted; they were shorter than in the 1930’s because the policy responses were not idiotic.
Indonesian president Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono emphasized that point earlier this month, boasting to British Prime Minister David Cameron that Indonesia’s successful recovery plan after the 1998 collapse was inspired by John Maynard Keynes.
“We must ensure that the people can buy; we must ensure that industries can produce…”
Today, many governments, especially in the eurozone, seem to have run out of policy options.
With fiscal austerity all the rage, they have given up ensuring that “people can buy” and “industries can produce.”
Central banks have been handed the job of keeping economies afloat, but most of the money that they print remains stuck in the banking system, unable to arrest stagnating consumption and falling investment.
Moreover, the eurozone itself is a mini-gold standard, with heavily indebted members unable to devalue their currencies, because they have no currencies to devalue.
So, given that Chinese growth, too, is slowing, the world economy seems destined to crawl along the bottom for some time yet, with unemployment rising in some countries to 20% or more.
With fiscal, monetary, and exchange-rate policies blocked, is there a way out of prolonged recession?
John Geanakoplos of Yale University has been arguing for big debt write-offs.
Rather than waiting to get rid of debt through bankruptcies, governments should “mandate debt forgiveness.”
They could buy bad loans from lenders and forgive part of the principal payable by borrowers, simultaneously reducing lenders’ collateral requirements and borrowers’ debt overhang.
In the US, the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF) program and the Public-Private Investment Program (PPIP) were in effect debt-forgiveness schemes aimed at sub-prime mortgage holders, but on too small a scale.
But the principle of debt forgiveness clearly has applications for public debt as well, especially in the eurozone.
Those who fear excessive public debt are the banks that hold it.
Junk public bonds are no safer for them than junk private bonds.
Both lenders and borrowers would be better off from a comprehensive debt cancelation.
So would citizens whose livelihoods are being destroyed by governments’ desperate attempts to de-leverage.
Philosophically, the debt-forgiveness approach rests on the belief that creditors share culpability for defaults with debtors, since they made the bad loans in the first place.
As long as the borrower has not misled the lender at the time of taking the loan, the lender bears at least some responsibility for the transaction.
In 1918, Keynes urged the cancelation of inter-Allied debts arising from World War I.
“We shall never be able to move again, unless we can free our limbs from these paper shackles,” he wrote.
And, in 1923, his call became a warning that today’s policymakers would do well to heed: “The absolutists of contract…are the real parents of revolution.”
Down With Human Rights
The relationship between the United Nations and the human-rights movement has always been ambiguous.
On the one hand, human-rights ideology – and it is an ideology, every bit as much as Communism was or neo-liberalism is today – is profoundly legalist, claiming legitimacy from treaties and other international and national instruments.
These include, as “first among equals,” the UN’s 1948 Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
The modern human-rights movement was born out of the UN, and in many ways it has never entirely left home.
On the other hand, the UN is more a bully pulpit for the promulgation of the high ideals of human rights, equality, and personal and economic freedom than it is a way station on the road to world government (no matter what some conservative extremists in the United States imagine).
Indeed, at its institutional core, the UN is an inter-governmental body whose officials, from the most junior staffer to the Secretary General, serve at the pleasure of its member states – above all, its powerful member states.
As a result of this profound contradiction between ambition and mandate, the UN often seems to impede the advance of human-rights goals as much as it realizes them.
Doubters need only recall the unwillingness of Secretary General after Secretary General, from U Thant to Kofi Annan, to meet with – or, in some cases, even to permit on the UN’s premises – victims of human rights violations who had the misfortune of being born in powerful countries.
For all the UN’s intellectual commitment to the furtherance of human rights, it knows better than to incite the displeasure of the Chinese or the Russians by receiving activists from Tibet or Chechnya.
In fairness, no UN Secretary General has paid greater homage to the ideals of the human-rights movement, or attempted, at least rhetorically, to associate the UN with those ideals, than Kofi Annan.
Rhetoric is not reality, of course, and the UN’s declarations have often seemed far removed from its daily practice.
But words are not without consequences, and there is little question that human rights has occupied a higher place in international deliberations during Annan’s tenure than ever before.
Moreover, Annan’s appointee as UN High Commissioner for Human Rights, former Irish President Mary Robinson, was instrumental in many developing countries’ adoption of a human-rights agenda, which previously was often viewed as a flag of convenience for Western meddling.
People close to Annan say that he hoped to build on these successes during the UN’s recently concluded summit.
In March, he wrote that “the Organization [must] take the cause of human rights as seriously as those of security and development.”
Among his key proposals was the replacement of the largely discredited UN Commission on Human Rights – a body that has no mechanism for excluding even notorious human-rights violators like Libya, Cuba, or Zimbabwe – with a new Human Rights Council, where such embarrassments would in theory not be tolerated.
It is generally agreed that the summit was largely a failure.
Annan himself conceded as much in the speech he gave at the opening of the 60th UN General Assembly.
There are many reasons for this.
There was the US government’s eleventh-hour decision to table hundreds of objections to the final Summit Declaration, effectively reducing it to a series of lowest-common-denominator platitudes.
There was also skepticism among developing countries about whether a stronger UN commitment to human rights was what Annan claimed it to be or, instead, merely a moral flag of convenience – or worse, a legal warrant for Western military intervention.
A great deal of attention has been paid to the stratagems of John Bolton, the fiercely anti-UN diplomat whom President Bush recently appointed US ambassador to the UN, and rightly so.
But what has tended to get lost in these discussions are the malign synergies between a Third World suspicious that so-called humanitarian interventions are only colonialism redux and a unilateralist US administration wedded to the concept of pre-emptive war against enemies that it equates with states that violate human rights.
Because the Bush administration, as its officials repeatedly insist, placed the installation of democratic, human-rights-oriented regimes, by force if necessary, at the core of US foreign policy, those who see only aggressive imperialism in America’s interventions in Afghanistan and Iraq view human rights in a more skeptical light.
In a sense, the UN, Annan, and the human-rights activists who have been perhaps his biggest backers, are caught in the crossfire.
All of this brings to mind one of the great Spanish director Luis Buñuel’s late films.
The pre-credit sequence shows a group of Spanish guerrillas during the insurgency against Napoleon being led to a wall where they are to be executed by firing squad.
At the head of the firing party, a French soldier carries the Tricolor forward. On it are the great words, “Liberty, Equality, Fraternity.”
The guerrillas are led to the wall, and, just as the soldiers are raising their guns to their shoulders, one insurgent shouts, “Down with liberty!”
We have not progressed very far, it seems.
Down with the Eurozone
NEW YORK – The eurozone crisis seems to be reaching its climax, with Greece on the verge of default and an inglorious exit from the monetary union, and now Italy on the verge of losing market access.
But the eurozone's problems are much deeper.
They are structural, and they severely affect at least four other economies: Ireland, Portugal, Cyprus, and Spain.
For the last decade, the PIIGS (Portugal, Ireland, Italy, Greece, and Spain) were the eurozone's consumers of first and last resort, spending more than their income and running ever-larger current-account deficits.
Meanwhile, the eurozone core (Germany, the Netherlands, Austria, and France) comprised the producers of first and last resort, spending below their incomes and running ever-larger current-account surpluses.
These external imbalances were also driven by the euro’s strength since 2002, and by the divergence in real exchange rates and competitiveness within the eurozone.
Unit labor costs fell in Germany and other parts of the core (as wage growth lagged that of productivity), leading to a real depreciation and rising current-account surpluses, while the reverse occurred in the PIIGS (and Cyprus), leading to real appreciation and widening current-account deficits.
In Ireland and Spain, private savings collapsed, and a housing bubble fueled excessive consumption, while in Greece, Portugal, Cyprus, and Italy, it was excessive fiscal deficits that exacerbated external imbalances.
The resulting build-up of private and public debt in over-spending countries became unmanageable when housing bubbles burst (Ireland and Spain) and current-account deficits, fiscal gaps, or both became unsustainable throughout the eurozone's periphery.
Moreover, the peripheral countries’ large current-account deficits, fueled as they were by excessive consumption, were accompanied by economic stagnation and loss of competitiveness.
So, now what?
The problems with this option are many.
Fiscal austerity, while necessary, means a deeper recession in the short term.
Even structural reform reduces output in the short run, because it requires firing workers, shutting down money-losing firms, and gradually reallocating labor and capital to emerging new industries.
So, to prevent a spiral of ever-deepening recession, the periphery needs real depreciation to improve its external deficit.
But even if prices and wages were to fall by 30% over the next few years (which would most likely be socially and politically unsustainable), the real value of debt would increase sharply, worsening the insolvency of governments and private debtors.
In short, the eurozone's periphery is now subject to the paradox of thrift: increasing savings too much, too fast leads to renewed recession and makes debts even more unsustainable.
And that paradox is now affecting even the core.
If the peripheral countries remain mired in a deflationary trap of high debt, falling output, weak competitiveness, and structural external deficits, eventually they will be tempted by a third option: default and exit from the eurozone.
This would enable them to revive economic growth and competitiveness through a depreciation of new national currencies.
Of course, such a disorderly eurozone break-up would be as severe a shock as the collapse of Lehman Brothers in 2008, if not worse.
Avoiding it would compel the eurozone's core economies to embrace the fourth and final option: bribing the periphery to remain in a low-growth uncompetitive state.
This would require accepting massive losses on public and private debt, as well as enormous transfer payments that boost the periphery’s income while its output stagnates.
Italy has done something similar for decades, with its northern regions subsidizing the poorer Mezzogiorno.
But such permanent fiscal transfers are politically impossible in the eurozone, where Germans are Germans and Greeks are Greeks.
That also means that Germany and the ECB have less power than they seem to believe.
Unless they abandon asymmetric adjustment (recessionary deflation), which concentrates all of the pain in the periphery, in favor of a more symmetrical approach (austerity and structural reforms on the periphery, combined with eurozone-wide reflation), the monetary union's slow-developing train wreck will accelerate as peripheral countries default and exit.
The recent chaos in Greece and Italy may be the first step in this process.
Clearly, the eurozone’s muddle-through approach no longer works.
Unless the eurozone moves toward greater economic, fiscal, and political integration (on a path consistent with short-term restoration of growth, competitiveness, and debt sustainability, which are needed to resolve unsustainable debt and reduce chronic fiscal and external deficits), recessionary deflation will certainly lead to a disorderly break-up.
With Italy too big to fail, too big to save, and now at the point of no return, the endgame for the eurozone has begun.
Sequential, coercive restructurings of debt will come first, and then exits from the monetary union that will eventually lead to the eurozone’s disintegration.
Dreaming of a New Edo Era
SEOUL – In mid-November, all eyes will shift to Seoul, when G-20 leaders convene for the first time in the South Korean capital.
The choice is long overdue, as South Korea is a remarkable success story: in one generation, the South Koreans, formerly pummeled by civil war, under constant threat from their Northern communist brethren, long mired in poverty, and ruled by military dictators for 40 years, have built the world’s 13th largest economy and Asia’s most vibrant democracy.
Historically squeezed between its two giant neighbors, China and Japan, South Korea had long been perceived as an underdog with a fuzzy cultural identity.
In Asia, however, Japan’s leaders are not waiting for the Seoul summit to take a closer look at South Korea.
South Korea was formerly a Japanese colony (1910-1945), and the natives were treated like an inferior race.
Today, South Korean’s economy has been growing annually by 5% on average for ten years, whereas Japan grew by 0.42% per year during the same period.
One could argue that South Korea is not yet a mature economy and is only catching up with a more advanced Japan.
This was the case in the 1970’s, but no more.
Whereas China’s growth is fueled by low-cost labor as millions of peasants enter the industrial economy, this is not the South Korean recipe for success, which has been driven by private entrepreneurship, innovation, and quality products: Samsung and Hyundai, not cheap wages, are South Korea’s growth engines.
Another key to South Korea’s success story is the well-balanced relationship between stable governments and the private sector.
This was clearly demonstrated late last year when a South Korean consortium won a contract to build four nuclear reactors in the United Arab Emirates late last year, beating out the French.
The Japanese knew how to coordinate state and private-sector goals in the 1970’s, but then lost their way.
“We should now emulate the South Koreans,” says Eisuke Sakakibara, a leading Japanese economist, who was one of the architects of the Japanese “miracle” of the 1980’s.
Japanese in search of a miracle now travel to Seoul.
“In Japan, 1990 to 2000 was called the ‘lost decade,’” says the free-market economist Fumio Hayashi.
Now Japan is completing its second lost decade.
Hayashi and Sakakibara – indeed, most Japanese economists – more or less agree on the fundamental reason for such spectacular stagnation: the Japanese have stopped working hard.
Fewer hours worked, longer vacations, and a declining population (since 2005) have, predictably, undermined Japanese growth.
To turn this situation around, says Sakakibara, “the Japanese should work more, have more children, and allow immigration.”
But the incentives to make any of this happen are just not there.
The Japanese still live comfortably, better by one-third than the South Koreans, thanks to their past investments.
Japanese companies abroad remain profitable and Japan is still the global leader in high-tech niches like electronics or carbon fibers.
For example, Apple’s iPhone and Boeing’s latest airplane rely heavily on Japanese-patented innovations.
These comparative advantages may keep Japan above water for a while, but only until China or South Korea catch up.
One would thus expect Japan to be anxiety-ridden, but it is not.
True, new forms of poverty and unemployment are rising, but they remain well hidden behind family solidarity or corporate customs.
Companies reduce their superfluous employees’ annual bonuses, but do not get rid of them.
Young Japanese tend not to work before their 30’s, and married women stay at home.
Political parties that rely on an aging constituency are not tempted to call for change.  The sort of shaky short-term political coalitions that rule Japan nowadays prefer to buy time through so-called public stimulus, or to preserve inefficient companies with subsidies.
Twenty years of such shortsighted policies, whatever the party in power, have fueled government debt, hindering private investment.
More strikingly, stagnation has found its promoters in Japan itself.
A leading public intellectual Naoki Inose, who is also Tokyo’s vice governor, has declared that “the era of growth is over.”
When Japan was threatened by Western imperialism, he says, the country had to open up (in 1868) and modernize.
This process has been completed.
Japan is now ready to reconnect with its own tradition of social harmony and zero growth.
Referring to the 1600-1868 period, Inose calls this future the New Edo era: “a smaller population will enjoy the sufficient wealth that has been accumulated, and, from now on, it will invest its creativity in refining the culture.”
The first Edo collapsed when the United States Navy opened up the Japanese market with the arrival of Commodore Perry’s “black ships” in 1853.
Will the second Edo be able to resist Chinese ambitions?
“The New Edo era needs a strong Japanese army,” admits Inose.
This second Edo era may sound like a poetic utopia, but it has some influence: Sakakibara observes that Japanese students do not study abroad anymore, and that “nobody learns English.”
At a time when South Koreans are becoming more globalized, learning English, and welcoming a growing number of immigrants, Japan is entering a “de-globalization process.”
That is a worrying trend, and not only for Japan: South Korea can hardly stand alone as the lone Asian democracy.
If the Japanese do not wake up from their Edo dream, Asia might very well become a Chinese empire.
Will this be debated at the G-20?
Not openly, but certainly in the corridors.
Drifting Towards the Rapids
LONDON – We are told that we live in anxious times, with lots to worry about and no more comforting certainty.
But just how comfortable were all those past certainties, anyway?
I grew up in a world in which peace and stability were assured by the threat of global nuclear annihilation.
My first term at university coincided with the Cuban missile crisis.  The Communist East glowered over the Berlin Wall at the democratic and capitalist West.
The two sides fought proxy wars in Africa and Asia.
Tens of thousands died to hold democracy’s frontline in Vietnam, where foreigners now rush to invest their money.
Hundreds of millions were shut out of global prosperity in China and India by the madness of Mao Zedong and the misguided socialism of the Congress Party.
Were those really better times?
And what are the big problems today that should cause us to lose sleep?
Well, first and foremost, today’s problems are the result of past success.
There are four times more people in the world than there were a hundred years ago, producing 40 times as much output and spewing 17 times as much carbon dioxide into the atmosphere.
That is the existential issue confronting the world, to which our response remains hopelessly inadequate.
Second, we find ourselves in the unusual position of having a global leader – the United States – that is also the world’s biggest debtor.
If America had not in the past borrowed so much, the world would not have grown so fast.
The US was more the world’s emporium than its imperium.
But just think how different everything would look if America had a trade surplus and a more manageable level of domestic borrowing than the $14 trillion run-up in debt by credit-card holders before 2007.
Third, as has always happened in the past, the world is trying with some difficulty to adjust to the arrival of a new and very big kid on the block.
China has been the world’s largest country for millennia, and until the mid-nineteenth century it was the largest economy, too – mainly because it had so many consumers and producers.
That will soon be the case again, even though in terms of per capita wealth China ranks roughly 100th in the world, trailing Albania.
But China has re-emerged a big hitter, along with India – whose population will soon be bigger and younger than China’s – and Brazil.
How do we cope with this growth of economic and political clout?
While China may have started to throw a bit of its weight around – for example, in its own neighbourhood in pursuit of maritime reach and undersea oil – the main threat that it poses is that the country falls apart, not that it continues to thrive.
Fourth, while all this has been happening, the institutions set up after World War II to create global rules and to preside over their implementation have lost much of their political and economic sway and legitimacy.
The United Nations and the Bretton Woods institutions no longer reflect the world’s power balance, and, even as the scale of problems common to all countries has increased, their willingness to share sovereignty to tackle them has diminished.
In these circumstances, we badly need strong and wise leadership.
Absent America, it is difficult to see where this is likely to come from.
An intelligent president in Washington is hobbled by a political system that makes it all but impossible to build a consensus for reform at home or decisive action abroad.
Many of President Barack Obama’s political opponents regard the notion of American leadership of international institutions and a commitment to engagement and multilateralism as a form of un-American treachery.
For their part, America’s post-war partners in Europe, while still representing more than one-fifth of the world’s output, are obsessed with their own inadequate efforts to improve their international competitiveness and save the currency that many of them share.
It is not much good looking to the European Union for self-confident and concerted political initiative on the international stage.
And what of the emerging powers?
China has taken huge advantage of the global marketplace created above all by the US.
But it now challenges the principles on which America’s successful policy of a democratic and prosperous peace was based, and it has no alternative model to put in its place.
Attempting to retain advantages for your exporters and to buy up commodities regardless of the political and economic price is a tactic for China, not a strategy for the world.
Nor is there any plan on offer from other emerging powers, though in time India may show growing alarm about China’s muscle-flexing, and Brazil may question whether it has really been wise to cosset Venezuela and Cuba.
So who will contain Iran’s nuclear ambitions?
Who will broker a Middle East peace?
Who will prevent a global drift into currency wars and trade protectionism?
Who will ensure that the Cancứn climate-change conference this December does not meet the same fate as last year’s Copenhagen summit?
Who will add strength and moral authority to the task of rebuilding the failed and failing states that incubate so many of our problems, from terrorism to illicit drugs?
Yesterday was not as good as we remember it.
But today lacks leadership, and tomorrow could be far more dangerous as a result.
Meanwhile, we drift downstream seemingly oblivious to the looming peril of the rapids ahead.
Drones for Development
LAUSANNE – Unmanned aerial vehicles have populated both the imagination and nightmares of people around the world in recent years.
In April, the United States Navy announced an experimental program called LOCUST (Low-Cost UAV Swarming Technology), which officials promise will “autonomously overwhelm an adversary” and thus “provide Sailors and Marines a decisive tactical advantage.”
With a name and a mission like that – and given the spotty ethical track record of drone warfare – it is little wonder that many are queasy about the continued proliferation of flying robots.
But the industrial use of the lower sky is here to stay.
More than three million humans are in the air daily.
Every large human settlement on our planet is connected to another by air transport.
DJI, a Chinese UAV manufacturer, is seeking a $10 billion valuation.
Cargo drones will grow into an even larger industry in the coming years, simply because, unencumbered by the weight of humans and their life-support systems, they will fly more cheaply but be just as fast and safe.
In rich countries, early interest in cargo drones has focused on the so-called last mile – a tub of sorbet onto a suburban lawn.
But the bigger opportunities are in flying the middle mile in poorer countries.
Some 800 million people around the world have limited access to emergency services, and that will not change in the foreseeable future, because there will not be enough money to build roads to connect them.
By flying medium-size loads middling distances to many of these isolated communities, cargo drones can save lives and create jobs.
Cargo drones embody what Jim Yong Kim, the president of the World Bank, calls the “science of delivery.”
We know what we need to deliver: the solutions to many of our most pressing problems already exist.
The question is how.
Answering that question is why humanitarians, roboticists, architects, logisticians, and others have joined together in a new initiative called Red Line, a Swiss-based consortium to accelerate development of emergency cargo drones and build the world’s first droneports – in Africa.
It sounds techno-utopian – or at least like a huge waste of resources.
After all, the experience of the most successful development organizations suggests that we should be skeptical about advanced technology’s power to bring about meaningful change for the poor.
Yes, the falling cost of processing power creates new efficiencies, particularly in smartphones and related sky-fi connectivity.
But gadgets are mostly blinking bling.
It is boring stuff like low-cost teacher training, community health care, and apprenticeships that produces results for the poor.
That is why many development experts favor “frugal innovation” over technology.
The Bangladesh-based BRAC, the world’s largest development NGO, has 1.3 million children enrolled in one-room schools – and hardly a laptop in sight.
So why be optimistic about cargo drones?
Silicon Valley speaks the bulldozer language of “disruption,” but one reason to favor cargo drones is precisely that they are not disruptive at all.
Instead, they can augment existing distribution networks in remote regions of Africa, Asia, and Latin America where poverty and disease are pervasive, distances are great, and roads will never be built.
Cargo drones are particularly well suited to the so-called local-agent delivery model.
Companies and organizations have shown that in hard-to-reach places in Africa and South Asia, women trained as micro-entrepreneurs are often best positioned to deliver essential goods and services to their villages, even if they have limited literacy and formal education.
BRAC’s community health workers, for example, work entirely on a micro-franchising basis, making their money from margins on sales of basic commodities like de-worming medication, anti-malarial drugs, and contraceptives.
Though cargo drones will never replace ground transport, they can ensure that vital goods and services get to where they are needed.
Mobile phones took off in Africa because the technology was so much cheaper than investment in landline infrastructure.
The same can be said today about Africa’s roads.
Like the mobile phone, the cargo drone can prove to be the rarest of creatures: a gadget that works for those who need it most.
Life-Saving Drugs for All
PRINCETON – The deadly outbreak of Ebola in Liberia, Sierra Leone, and Guinea that began last year highlighted a problem in the production of pharmaceuticals.
Once it became clear that the epidemic would not be rapidly contained, several firms quickly arranged for clinical trials of potential treatments and vaccines, indicating that they already had the ability to produce plausible candidates.
Ebola is not a new disease: it was first identified in 1976.
Prior to 2014, however, the largest outbreak was in Uganda, in 2000, when 425 people were infected and 224 died.
Though Ebola was known to be both contagious and often fatal, it was thought that only Africa’s impoverished rural population was at risk.
For pharmaceutical firms, the development of a vaccine or treatment was not commercially attractive, and so it did not warrant investment.
All that changed with the latest outbreak.
In September 2014, the United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention predicted that, in the worst case, 1.4 million people could be infected within four months.
Media-fed fears that the disease could spread to affluent countries led to extraordinary precautions.
In the United States, President Barack Obama asked Congress for $6.2 billion, including $2.4 billion to reduce the risk of the disease becoming established in America and set up 50 US Ebola treatment centers.
The worst-case scenario did not materialize.
As of April 2015, the best estimate is that about 25,000 people have been infected, with approximately 10,000 deaths.
Outside West Africa, there have been fewer than 30 cases, and only five deaths.
Nevertheless, the fears, and especially the prospect of a new and lucrative market, set pharmaceutical firms scrambling to develop Ebola-related products, while health officials lamented that nothing had been done beforehand.
I am not criticizing pharmaceutical companies for not producing an Ebola vaccine when there was no market for it.
They are not charities.
If we want them to make products that will help the poor in developing countries, we need to find ways of giving them – and their shareholders – a return on their investment.
Whereas pharmaceutical companies lack incentives to aid the poor in developing countries, they have strong incentives to develop products for people in affluent countries.
One drug, Soliris, costs $440,000 per patient per year.
In contrast, GiveWell estimates that the cost of saving a life by distributing bed nets in regions where malaria is a major killer is $3,400.
Given that most of the lives saved are those of children, who even in developing countries have a life expectancy of at least 50 years, this equates to a cost of $68 per year of life saved.
Should we really be valuing the life of a person in an affluent country at more than 6,000 times the value of the life of an impoverished child in a developing country?
Because the overwhelming majority of medical and pharmaceutical research is directed toward products that affect people in affluent countries, it targets only part of the global burden of disease.
Some government- and foundation-funded research addresses diseases that primarily affect poor people, but these efforts are not systematic and do not use the incentives that work well to drive pharmaceutical innovation elsewhere.
One promising attempt to correct this imbalance is the proposal for a Health Impact Fund that Thomas Pogge, director of the Global Justice Program at Yale, and Aidan Hollis, an economist at the University of Calgary, launched seven years ago.
If the Health Impact Fund could be adequately financed, it would provide incentives to develop products in proportion to their impact in reducing the global burden of disease.
It is not certain that the existence of such a fund prior to the recent Ebola outbreak would have led to the development of vaccines or treatments for the disease.
But pharmaceutical companies would have been considering such products – as well as other treatments to save lives or improve health anywhere in the world, regardless of people’s ability to pay.
Pogge and Hollis have now refined their proposal to the point that it is ready for a real-world trial.
A company that develops a product would earn a share of reward money based on its share of the health improvements achieved by all the products competing for the available funds.
What is still needed, however, is sufficient reward money – perhaps $100 million from governments, NGOs, foundations and the pharmaceutical industry – to stimulate serious investment.
Such a pilot program would benefit poor patients and would test scientists’ ability to measure health impact fairly and accurately.
It would also provide the evidence needed to go to governments, foundations, and global institutions for the much larger sums required to expand the present system of incentives that guide pharmaceutical companies’ decisions.
If the pilot is successful, we will have found a way to support the development of drugs and vaccines that gives equal weight to protecting the lives and improving the health of all human beings, irrespective of their nationality or wealth.
Drugs, Sport, and Ethics
When the Olympic Games return to Greece this summer, the results at the drug testing laboratory may get as much attention as what happens at the Olympic stadium.
The history of drugs, and drug control, at the Olympics is discouraging - a farrago of ill-informed rules, outright state-sponsored cheating, and half-hearted and erratic attempts at enforcement.
A tiny advantage can make all the difference.
What if that advantage comes from using a performance enhancing drug?
For athletes who want to compete clean, the threat that they may be beaten by a competitor who is not faster, stronger, or more dedicated, but who takes a drug to gain the edge, is profoundly personal.
When drugs are prohibited but some athletes use them anyway the playing field tilts in favor of the cheater.
If we prohibit drugs in the Olympic Games, we owe it to the athletes to deter, detect, and punish those who cheat.
Integrity seems like an old-fashioned idea, but it is at the heart of who we are and how we live.
Performance enhancing drugs affect the individual athlete's integrity in two ways.
First, if drugs are banned, then choosing not to use them is a test of one's character. A person of integrity does not behave dishonestly.
A person of integrity does not seek to prevail over his competitors by methods that give him an illegitimate advantage.
Second, the concept of integrity implies wholeness, being unbroken, moral soundness and freedom from corruption.
When an athlete wins by using a performance enhancing drug, what does that mean for the athlete's own understanding of what happened?
Am I the world's best?
Or was my supposed victory hopelessly tainted by the drug's effects?
The meaning of a drug-aided victory is ambiguous and elusive even for the athlete.
It is the result of corruption and brokenness, the very opposite of authentic victory.
What makes a victory authentic?
What gives sport its meaning and value?
We expect the winning athlete to combine extraordinary natural talents with exemplary effort, training and technique.
These are all forms of human excellence.
Some we are born with - or not.
As much as I loved playing basketball, I was destined never quite to reach six feet in height.
An accurate jump shot and the willingness to take punishment never made up for my size and mediocre leaping ability.
Whatever natural abilities we have must be perfected.
We achieve this - or not - through a combination of virtues such as fortitude in the face of relentless training, physical courage as we persevere through pain, and cleverness when we outsmart our opponents, along with other factors such as helpful coaching, optimized equipment, and sound nutrition.
Natural talents should be respected for what they are: the occasionally awesome luck of the biological draw. Courage, fortitude, competitive savvy, and other virtues rightfully command our moral admiration.
Performance enhancing drugs disguise natural abilities and substitute for the dedication and focus that we admire.
Performance enhancing drugs cheapen sport, making winners out of also-rans, and depriving virtuous and superior athletes of the victories that should be theirs.
Getting performance enhancing drugs out of sport will not be easy, and success is not assured.
But the effort is worthwhile as long as we care enough about fairness, integrity, and the meaning and value of sport. 
Drugstore Geneticist
LA JOLLA, CALIFORNIA – Back in June 2000, when the draft human-genome sequence was announced, US President Bill Clinton proclaimed, “It will revolutionize the diagnosis, prevention, and treatment of most, if not all, human diseases.”
A decade later, hope has given way to disappointment, reflected in headlines like “Gene Map Yields Few New Cures.”
But pessimism about the potential of human-genome research to yield medical breakthroughs has arisen from unrealistic expectations.
Indeed, while “silver bullets” that can cure our most feared diseases have not been found, progress in the area of gene-drug interactions, known as pharmacogenomics, has been extraordinary.
The ability to determine the principal genes that account for our variable response to prescription drugs has been advanced by a technique known as a genome-wide association study (GWAS).
The whole human genome has approximately six billion bases, but a window into its composition can be probed using approximately one million bases (0.01% of the genome) via a gene chip.
The bases on the chip are selected because they are informative, tagging bins of the genome, like a post-code directory.
Using GWAS methodology, we have learned the biological basis for responses to many drugs – both their effectiveness and important side-effects.
Examples of this progress in the past couple of years are plentiful, and include the statins, Plavix, interferon, warfarin, and the antibiotic flucloxacillin.
The main side-effect of statins, which lower cholesterol in the blood, is severe muscle inflammation, and it can now be predicted with a simple genotype test, as can the response to Plavix, the second most commonly prescribed drug after statins.
Those individuals who carry at least one copy of the gene variant that does not allow the body to metabolize Plavix have a 300% higher risk of clotting a stent.
This variation of the genome is exceptionally common, present in 30% of individuals of European ancestry and more than 50% of those of Asian ancestry.
In many such patients, doubling the dose of Plavix, and checking the platelet function with a point-of-care test to assure suppression, can override the lack of response.
There are alternative drugs, such as prasugrel or ticagrelor, which can be used instead of Plavix to bypass the problem.
The story of interferon, given for one year to patients with hepatitis C virus, is particularly striking.
This treatment is very costly (about $50,000) and makes all patients feel quite ill with flu-like symptoms and general malaise.
But the drug works in only half of the people treated.
We now know that a simple genotype sorts out who will or will not benefit from interferon, and there are many new drugs in development for those who will not.
The list goes on.
For warfarin, a widely prescribed drug used to prevent blood clots, genotyping can guide the right dose and hasten the time it takes to get to steady state.
Genotyping can also predict severe liver toxicity for drugs such as flucloxacillin or lumiricoxib.
To be sure, our predictive ability is far from complete.
We know only common gene variants from the GWAS approach.
Furthermore, most drugs have not even been studied yet, so there is a long way to go fill in the holes.
Nevertheless, substantive and remarkable progress has been made, all in the last few years.
Moreover, someday we will know – via sequencing of the whole genome – about rarer genomic variations that are correlated with treatment response or side-effects.
This has paved the way for next-generation pharmacies.
Genotyping can now be accomplished in 20 minutes, and over time will get even faster.
To fill a prescription for a drug with a known pharmacogenomic profile, a customer can get rapid genotyping to determine appropriate dose, drug, or predilection for serious side-effects.
Or even better, many people will submit a saliva sample to a consumer genomics company, which will analyze all of their pharmacogenomic data and perform an extensive panel of genotypes, updated every month, and store the data on their smart phones.
For mail-order prescriptions, such genomic data would be a routine part of the customer database.
In the United States, pharmacy benefit managers (PBM) handle prescriptions for almost all large employers and account for more than 200 million individuals.
Two of the largest PBMs, Medco and CVS/Caremark, have announced plans to conduct large-scale genotyping for many drugs.
Their motives include more efficient use of prescription drugs, along with getting an edge on other PBM competitors.
With annual expenditures for prescription drugs in the US totaling $300 billion, there is certainly room to cut costs.
Unfortunately, the medical community is resisting the use of pharmacogenomic data in clinical practice, despite regulatory authorities’ recommendations for many drugs.
PBMs and consumer genomic companies can be a positive force by facilitating or advancing the use of such data.
The ultimate goal of pharmacogenomics is to provide the right drug, at the right dose, for the right individual, without any significant side-effects.
Despite widespread misperceptions about the practical impact of genomic research, the science has hit its stride, and we need to capitalize on this momentum if we are to realize the opportunity of individualized medicine.
Next-generation pharmacies represent a promising step toward that goal.
The Drug War on Women
NEW YORK – When I was growing up in communist Poland, International Women’s Day was viewed as an opportunity to celebrate women’s contributions and accomplishments.
But it was a hollow token.
The following day, women went back to their lives of limited opportunity.
No one-day holiday can do much to redress generations of discrimination.
The impact of the international drug-policy regime reflects this reality.
In the drug supply chain, women are most commonly found at the bottom, often acting as “mules.”
When a woman is caught, although she is often a non-violent first time offender, she faces a harsh mandatory minimum sentence.
To the traffickers, these women are expendable.
Bail is rarely put up for them, or a lawyer hired, because they hold no value to the trafficking structures.
And, left on their own, these women lack the knowledge and resources to navigate the criminal justice system.
Nor are they likely to have the right kind of information to trade with authorities in exchange for a lighter sentence.
More women are sent to jail for drug offences than for any other crime.
In Latin America alone, they account for 70% of women in prison.
The impact on the drug trade of incarcerating a drug mule for a decade is minuscule; but the effect on the women and their families is devastating and irreversible.
I first noticed the effects of drug policy on women when I traveled to Tajikistan and Kyrgyzstan after the collapse of the Soviet Union.
In the Kyrgyz mountains, there were entire villages with not a man in sight; they had become migrant workers in Russia.
Within two years of Kyrgyzstan’s independence, prisons filled with women held on drug-trafficking charges.
These were ordinary women, some of them “babushkas” wearing headscarves.
When speaking to senior law enforcement officials, I was told that the women were smuggling drugs from Afghanistan to pay for shoes and schoolbooks.
To the Tajik and Kyrgyz criminal justice system, they were the lowest-hanging fruit in the newly launched war on drugs.
Women in such circumstances face a double punishment: loss of liberty and family.
To be convicted of a drug-related crime often means losing custody of one’s children.
If the woman sent to jail is the head of a single-parent household and her children are placed in foster care, or if she is pregnant when entering prison, it is likely that she will never see them again.
Women can be victims of laws designed to combat trafficking organizations.
Many have been charged with conspiracy simply for living with a man involved in drug sales.
In some US states, applicants for public assistance, who are usually women, have to undergo drug testing.
In many countries, drug-treatment protocols effectively ensure that women with children will be unable to receive services.
In much of Central Asia, a drug-dependent person has to register with authorities to receive treatment, which automatically puts women at risk of losing their children.
In Eastern Europe, most available drug treatment takes place in long-term programs located at centers far from urban centers and without child-care services.
Few women are able to take six months or more from caring for children or parents to enter such a facility.
The criminalization and stigmatization of women who use illicit drugs means that they are less likely than men to self-identify as needing assistance for drug dependence.
This helps explain the low numbers of women who use services.
In the same way that in some cultures a woman eats only when men and children have finished, she injects with syringes that her partner has already used, putting them at higher risk of contracting HIV or Hepatitis C. The significant overlap between sex work and drug use also places women at higher risk.
National drug regimes, moreover, prey on the vulnerabilities of women worldwide.
I sat once with an official at a London airport who picked up a Kenyan woman bringing cocaine into the United Kingdom.
The woman had been told by a person who recruited her that if she was stopped, she would simply be sent home without repercussions because she was a woman and a mother.
In reality, the half-kilo of cocaine brought a ten-year mandatory sentence.
Once imprisoned abroad, such mothers, with no legal support or economic resources, often have no contact with their children back home.
Part of the effort to reform drug policy must address the systemic faults in criminal justice, health care, and welfare that exacerbate the plight of women caught in the crossfire of the war of drugs.
The kind of policy that provides childcare for women seeking drug treatment might be anathema to the righteous occupiers of the world’s moral high ground.
But until we start to look at drug policy through a gender-sensitive lens and focus on harm reduction, we will continue to wage a losing war on drugs, in which generations of our most vulnerable women and girls are casualties.
Dry China
ANSHUN, GUIZHOU PROVINCE, CHINA -- The Huangguoshu Waterfall in China’s southwestern Guizhou Province is a magnificent sight, when there is water. The largest waterfall in Asia, it plunges over a sheer cliff more than 200 feet high in a thundering display of foam, mist, and rainbows.
Unfortunately, this wonder of nature has recently suffered an indignity.
Each evening, it gets turned off as if it were a garden fountain.
This part of China’s southwest, known for its abundant rainfall, mountains, underground rivers and caves, and tropical flora, has recently been gripped by a drought that many say is the worst since the Ming Dynasty.
So, after all the tourists that irrigate this poor region with precious income leave the viewing platforms below the falls, authorities close the sluice gates that dam the White Water River on the dangerously low upstream reservoir, and the falls cease.
Then, each morning, before the tourists reappear, they unceremoniously open the gates again, so that the eerily silent falls suddenly revive in a simulacrum of normalcy.
The disturbance to so elemental a part of this region’s natural architecture is a measure of only one of the many kinds of severe weather aberrations – from floods and droughts to unseasonal blizzards and massive dust storms – that have been unsettling China of late. No one can say with any certainty what the causes are.
To try to compensate for these perturbed weather patterns, Chinese officialdom has launched an unprecedented array of costly projects.
These include the titanic $55 billion South-North Water Transfer Project, a massive engineering effort to construct three canals to bring water from China’s normally wet south to its arid north; a widespread campaign to dig ever-deeper wells; a nationwide tree-planting campaign; and even an extensive effort at  “weather modification.”
According to Zheng Guoguang, the Director of the China Meteorological Administration, “Science and technology will answer the prayers of those living through the harshest drought in decades.”
He says that two-thirds of China’s almost 3,000 counties have tried artificial methods to induce more rainfall, sometimes resulting in lawsuits over rights to mine passing clouds for water.
Such efforts, Zheng reports, have involved some 6,533 cannons, 5,939 rocket launchers, and numerous aircraft in an attempt to seed clouds across one-third of China’s landmass with dry ice, ammonia, and silver iodide.
But can science and technology really solve problems that are not caused by China alone?
More and more scientists are beginning to suspect that global warming has caused the radically changed patterns of precipitation now seen across China.
If true, China will never resolve droughts such as the current one in Guizhou by itself, regardless of how many large-scale engineering projects the government undertakes, or how well organized remedial efforts are.
After all, global problems demand global solutions.
When Chairman Mao still reigned supreme, one of his most vaunted principles was zili gengsheng, or “self-reliance.” Since China had been bullied, invaded, semi-colonized, and even occupied during most of his formative years, he was deeply suspicious that any foreign country – even a “fraternal” Communist ally – could ever be relied upon to leave China alone, much less actually help it.
As a result, the Party leadership became steeped in suspicion and distrust toward the outside world, especially toward the so-called “great powers.”
Even today, with Mao’s revolution long gone and globalization having knit a new fabric of inter-dependence around China, there remains, particularly among older leaders, a residual wariness about relying on collaboration with outsiders, especially when it comes to “core interests.”
But it is not just world markets that have enmeshed China in a new commons. Issues such as nuclear proliferation and the global environment – and especially climate change – have also snuck up on China’s leaders (and everyone else).
Like it or not, leaders everywhere are now enfolded in an inescapable web.
So, despite China’s predilection for aloofness, cooperation is not merely an option, but a necessity.
And that means that China also must reconsider its rigid notion of sovereignty.
This is a difficult adjustment for any country to make, especially one like China, which has a history of imagining itself as being at the center of the world while also remaining an inviolable entity that can close its doors whenever it chooses to do so.
That time is past.
China’s leaders have been committed to a process of “opening” for more than a generation.
But they remain neuralgic about any hint of outside interference, including even the suggestion that their nation’s business might also be the business of other peoples, and vice versa.
The drought in Guizhou, whatever its cause, is a reminder that the fate of China’s people has become inextricably linked to what happens elsewhere, and that no country can opt out or find unilateral solutions separate from the global commonweal any longer.
Rahasia di Balik Kesuksesan Dubai
DUBAI – Ketika sejumlah pemerintah di kawasan Timur Tengah dalam proses melepaskan diri dari ketergantungannya atas sumber daya alam dan mengupayakan diversifikasi ekonomi, mereka patut memetik pembelajaran dari Dubai.
Kisahnya cukup menakjubkan.
Dalam waktu kurang dari satu generasi, Dubai bertransformasi menjadi pusat investasi, perdagangan, dan budaya yang terkemuka di dunia.
Meski krisis keuangan global pada tahun 2008 memberi pukulan tajam (karena dampak aset properti yang melambung), Dubai mampu pulih begitu cepatnya dan itu ditandai dengan usulan penyelenggaran sejumlah event seperti World Expo 2020.
Kemampuan Dubai untuk tidak sekadar bertahan tapi juga berkembang di tengah krisis patut mendapat sorotan.
Maka, pada musim semi lalu, saya mulai menelaah pertumbuhan berdaya tahan yang berlangsung di Dubai, serta tantangan yang mungkin mewarnainya.
Sebagai bagian dari riset ini, saya melakukan lebih dari 40 wawancara mendalam dengan pejabat pemerintah dan elite bisnis, dan saya sempurnakan temuan-temuan yang ada dengan sumber data sekunder.
Pertumbuhan dan ketahanan Dubai diperoleh berkat “model ABS” yang dianut, yaitu attraction, branding, dan state-led development atau pemikat/daya tarik, pemerekan, dan pembangunan yang dimotori negara/pemerintah.
Layaknya sistem rem di mobil yang mencegah hilangnya kendali di kondisi bahaya, tiga strategi Dubai menjaga agenda pembangunan melalui jalur yang benar, meski di tengah krisis ekonomi.
Sehubungan dengan pembangunan yang dimotori pemerintah, pendekatan Dubai relatif sama dengan negara-negara Teluk.
Masyarakatnya mengikuti tradisi yang berdasarkan garis keturunan sehingga penguasanya, dipimpin oleh keluarga kerajaan, memiliki peran sebagai wali dan pemimpin yang berwenang menentukan arah dan bentuk pertumbuhan ekonomi.
Dengan demikian, “Dubai, Inc.” bisa dengan mudah dan cepatnya beradaptasi terhadap situasi ekonomi yang dinamis.
Dubai sering disebut Singapura di Padang Pasir, karena seperti Singapura, Dubai mengalami pertumbuhan ekonomi besar dan mendapat keuntungan dari kepemimpinan yang proaktif dan visioner yang sanggup mengubah city-state kecil dengan sumber daya terbatas menjadi entrepôt yang unggul di kancah internasional.
Selain itu, Dubai berhasil melakukan branding untuk menarik investasi serta tenaga kerja asing yang diperlukan untuk mewujudkan ambisinya.
Ibarat New York, Shanghai, dan Las Vegas yang semuanya memperindah citranya melalui arsitektur, Dubai menghadirkan sebuah identitas yang berorientasi pada inovasi melalui pemandangan kota dan kaki langit yang memiliki 150 gedung pencakar langit, melampaui kota-kota lain di dunia kecuali New York dan Hong Kong.
Dubai juga memiliki gedung kantor pertama dengan cetakan 3-D, pulau-pulau buatan yang mengagumkan, kota dengan satu-satunya “hotel bintang tujuh” (istilah yang mereka populerkan sendiri), pusat perbelanjaan yang disertai akuarium, ski indoor, dan fasilitas skydiving, ditambah lagi dengan berbagai gedung-gedung dan taman hiburan yang populer.
Dubai juga menjadi tuan rumah lomba pacuan kuda termahal di dunia dan event olahraga mewah lainnya.
Citra Dubai semakin diperkuat dengan kestabilan politik, keamanan, toleransi, keberagaman budaya, dan tingginya standar hidup yang semuanya memikat ekspatriat dari banyak negara.
Selain itu, emirat menarik bagi investor asing dengan diberlakukannya zona ekonomi khusus yang sulit ditandingi negara lain.
Dua miliar orang hidup di kawasan yang mudah dijangkau dengan empat-jam penerbangan dari Dubai, maka tidak mengejutkan kota ini menjadi lokasi pilihan bagi pelancong dan investor.
Disampaikan oleh seorang pengusaha perempuan yang saya wawancarai, “Dubai menawarkan semua yang dicari investor dan turis dari seluruh dunia,” ditambah dengan “banyaknya pemuda-pemudi Arab yang antusias mencari dan mewujudkan “the Dubai Dream”.
Dubai melengkapi keunggulan kompetitifnya dalam menarik pekerja dengan keterampilan tinggi plus investasi dengan kebijakan ketenagakerjaan yang juga merangsang masuknya tenaga kerja asing dengan keterampilan lebih rendah untuk menggerakkan mesin pembangunan.
Namun kebergantungan terhadap pekerja asing bisa memunculkan masalah struktural di kemudian hari.
Walaupun perusahaan bisa memutus hubungan kerja di tengah masa sulit, hal ini akan berakibat pada kekurangan suplai buruh ketika kondisi membaik.
Menarik pekerja dengan keterampilan lebih tinggi akan memakan waktu lebih lama dibandingkan dengan melepasnya.
Terdapat risiko lain. Meskipun emirat diberkati dengan kestabilan politik dan ekonomi yang tahan lama, goncangan yang cukup berat di kawasan akan memicu pekerja asing untuk pindah, walau diiming-iming gaji tinggi dan gaya hidup menawan.
Ketergantungan ini akan mengancam kestabilan ekonomi jangka panjang di Dubai dan melemahkan kemampuannya menahan gejolak di masa depan.
Sadar akan risiko-risiko tersebut, penguasa Dubai baru-baru ini menyetujui rencana komprehensif untuk meningkatkan pendidikan yang bertujuan mengembangkan modal manusia dalam negeri.
Penguasa Dubai, Sheikh Mohammed Bin Rashid, mengatakan bahwa “kami siap memupuk generasi siswa baru yang mampu memanfaatkan instrumen masa depan.”