Neither China nor anyone else was found guilty this time.
But Treasury officials believe that they must keep up the pressure, lest Congress follow through on threats to punish supposed currency manipulators, derailing the TPP and other trade agreements.
Then there is the SDR.
Every five years, the IMF reconsiders its composition, which currently is defined in terms of the dollar, euro, yen, and pound.
China’s renminbi is unlikely to be included in the basket now, because it is not “freely usable.”
And, though this will likely be reported as a defeat for China, it should not be.
The issue is of little importance.
It might seem that all of this could be shrugged off as a harmless media spectator sport.
But, to the extent that a misplaced focus on country rankings becomes a barrier to sensible policy, it can do real damage.
Such is the case with the stalled IMF quota reform, an issue where the rankings in fact are of some importance, but not in a zero-sum way.
By any measure of economic importance, China and other major emerging economies have long since merited much larger IMF quota shares, implying greater financial contributions and greater voting weights.
But their increase in shares need not come at the expense of the US.
It is the European countries that are greatly over-represented.
Despite European reluctance to cede ground, US President Barack Obama succeeded in brokering such a reallocation of IMF quota shares at the G-20 summit in Seoul in November 2010.
Five years later, the US Congress is still holding up IMF quota reform – not because it would imply any loss of power or cost to US taxpayers, but because many members do not want to give Obama anything he asks for.
Thirty years ago, the West wanted nothing more than for China to become a capitalist economy.
It has done so, with spectacular success.
The rules of the game now require that China be given a bigger share in the governance of international institutions.
Making room at the table will help the rest of us in the “game” that matters most: world peace and prosperity.
If the Congress does not pass the IMF quota reform, the US can hardly blame the Chinese for undertaking initiatives such as the AIIB on their own.
We often hear about hard power (military) and soft power (the attractiveness of a country’s ideas, culture, economic system, and so forth).
But there is another kind of power.
Ever since Bretton Woods, the US has had the power of global leadership.
During the interwar period (1919-1939), Americans were unprepared to assume that mantle; but World War II taught them the cost of isolationism, and they rose to the challenge in 1944.
Seventy years later, even after America’s massive foreign-policy mistakes in Iraq and elsewhere, and even after Chinese GDP has supposedly caught up with America’s (at least in terms of purchasing power parity), the world remains ready to be led by the US, including on the crucial subjects of trade and IMF reform.
If those who insist on scorekeeping have their way, the US will be unable to exercise the leadership that the world needs.
And the world will look elsewhere.
Last Chance for Japan?
NEW HAVEN – Japan is the petri dish for the struggle against the secular stagnation that is now gripping most major developed economies.
And, notwithstanding all of the fanfare surrounding “Abenomics,” Japan’s economy remains moribund.
In the six quarters of Shinzo Abe’s latest stint as prime minister, annualized real GDP growth has averaged just 1.4% – up only slightly from the anemic post-1992 average of 1%.
Abenomics, with its potentially powerful combination of monetary and fiscal stimulus, coupled with a wide array of structural reforms, was supposed to end Japan’s “lost decades.”
All three “arrows” of the strategy were to be aimed at freeing the economy from a 15-year deflationary quagmire.
Unfortunately, not all of the arrows have been soaring in flight.
The Bank of Japan seems well on its way to delivering on the first one – embracing what it calls quantitative and qualitative easing (QQE).
Relative to GDP, the BOJ’s monetary-policy gambit could actually far outstrip the efforts of America’s Federal Reserve.
But the flight of the other two arrows is shaky, at best.
In recent days, Abe has raised serious questions about proceeding with the second phase of a previously legislated consumer-tax hike that has long been viewed as the linchpin of Japan’s debt-consolidation strategy.
Abe has flinched because the economy remains weak, posing renewed risks of a deflationary relapse.
Meanwhile, the third arrow of structural reforms – especially tax, education, and immigration reforms – is nowhere near its target.
Abenomics, one might conclude, is basically a Japanese version of the failed policy combination deployed in the United States and Europe: massive unconventional liquidity injections by central banks (with the European Central Bank apparently now poised to follow the Fed), but little in the way of fundamental fiscal and structural reforms.
The political expedience of the short-term monetary fix has triumphed once again.
Such a gamble is especially problematic for Japan.
With an aging – and now declining – working-age population, it has limited scope for reviving growth.
Japan must either squeeze more out of its existing workforce by boosting productivity, or uncover new sources of demand at home or abroad.
At home, that could mean adding workers, either by boosting female participation in the work force, which, at 63%, is among the lowest in the developed world, or relaxing immigration restrictions.
Unfortunately, there has been little progress on either front.
Moreover, even if the political will to launch third-arrow structural reforms were suddenly to strengthen – a dubious proposition – any productivity payback would most likely take a long time to materialize.
That leaves external demand, which underscores what is perhaps Abenomics’ most serious strategic flaw: It does not take into consideration some of the biggest changes that are likely to occur in the global economy.
That is a great pity, because Japan is well positioned to take advantage of one of the most powerful global trends – the coming rebalancing of the Chinese and US economies.
China appears to be more committed to restructuring than the US – at least for the foreseeable future.
Its Third Plenum reforms provide a cohesive framework for a pro-consumption transformation.
Though America currently remains intent on resurrecting a tired growth model, there is good reason to hope that it, too, will eventually rebalance.
Japan cannot afford to squander these opportunities.
As the main driver of Chinese growth shifts from external to domestic demand, who could benefit more than Japanese exporters?
China is already Japan’s largest export market, leaving it ideally situated to capture additional market share in the coming surge of Chinese demand for consumer products and services.
Likewise, Japan stands to benefit from its technological prowess in environmental remediation – an urgent priority for China in the years ahead.
Japan already has great expertise in many of the solutions to some of China’s toughest problems.
Japan is also likely to gain from a long-overdue rebalancing of the US economy.
A shift in the US – from excessive consumption of goods largely sourced in low-wage developing countries to the capital equipment that an increasingly investment-led economy will require – would play to Japan’s greatest strengths.
As a global leader in sophisticated machinery and the earth-moving equipment needed for infrastructure investment, Japan should be able to to seize these opportunities.
In looking to external demand, Japan should not lose sight of its earlier achievements.
In the 1970s and 1980s, Japan was the envy of the world, owing to an all-powerful export machine that tapped the demand of a rapidly growing global economy.
“Japan, Inc.” still has a good institutional memory of what it takes to draw support from external demand.
It is time to recapture that memory.
Failure to do so would leave Japan, the world’s third largest economy, at risk of being further marginalized by transformations in the world’s two largest, the US and China.
There is one obvious and important caveat: Poor Sino-Japanese relations, owing to unresolved historical grievances, could prevent Japan from realizing the economic benefits implied by China’s economic rebalancing.
The interplay between economics and politics lies at the heart of the rise and fall of great powers.
In a rapidly changing world, underscored by likely shifts in the economic structure of China and the US, Japan cannot afford to lose sight of that fact.
Just as the US and China have much to gain by transforming their economies, Japan is running out of time.
In the grip of two lost decades and counting, this could be Japan’s last chance.
How China Views Trump
LONDON – Donald Trump’s stunning victory in the US presidential election has shaken the world.
From Mexican President Enrique Peña Nieto’s conspicuous silence to French President Francois Hollande’s statement that it opens up a “period of uncertainty” to the Kremlin’s barely concealed giddiness, Trump has not been received internationally like past US presidents.
But one country has remained largely unmoved: China.
Trump’s stance on China is well known: he has blamed the country for everything from hacks on his opponent (thought by the US government to be the work of Russia) to climate change (which he has called a hoax cooked up by China to undermine US competitiveness).
And he has promised to impose a 45% tariff on Chinese goods.
Yet prudence flows through China’s Confucian veins.
Rather than jumping to conclusions about future US policies, much less taking premature action, China’s leaders have remained neutral in their response to Trump’s victory.
They seem confident that, though the bilateral relationship will change somewhat, it will not be fundamentally transformed.
It will still be neither very good nor very bad.
It helps that Trump has all but ceased China-bashing since the election.
Instead, he posted on Twitter a video of his granddaughter reciting a poem in Mandarin – an instant hit in China.
Whether intended explicitly as a message to China or not, the move highlighted the possibility of a gulf between Trump’s campaign rhetoric and his actual positions and plans.
Some in the West might think that the rhetoric alone would be enough to incense China’s leaders.
But the truth is that the Chinese are far more offended by national leaders meeting with the Dalai Lama, as President Barack Obama did in June.
And, as past US elections have made clear, rhetoric may well bear little relation to reality.
That is all the more true when the rhetoric in question includes promises that would harm everyone involved, as Trump’s proposed tariffs would.
The availability of inexpensive products from China has long placed downward pressure on prices even of non-Chinese goods in the US market.
For low-income households, which are the most likely to consume inexpensive imported goods, this has been a godsend, as it has effectively raised their purchasing power.
If Chinese imports were blocked, prices would rise, undermining consumption, impeding economic growth, and exacerbating inequality.
And the US would not even be protected from manufacturing employment losses; the jobs would just go to Vietnam or Bangladesh, where labor costs are even lower than in China nowadays.
The same goes for investment flows – the second engine of globalization – which are often conveniently forgotten in discussions of the US-China economic relationship.
China is one of the biggest purchasers of US Treasuries, and continues to finance US consumption and investment.
China may even help to finance the large infrastructure projects that Trump has promised, thereby reducing pressure on the US budget.
So Trump is unlikely to change much in terms of US economic policy, at least if he knows what’s good for him.
Where he might make some changes is in foreign policy; but those changes may be more likely to please China than to aggravate it.
The Obama administration has for years been engaged in a strategic rebalancing toward Asia.
At a time when China was rapidly accumulating both economic and military strength, Obama seemed committed to containing its rise as best he could, including by involving the US in territorial disputes in the South China Sea.
By contrast, Trump, with his “America first” approach to foreign policy, has paid little attention to the South China Sea dispute.
That works just fine for China, which would welcome less US involvement in Asia – in particular, in the South China Sea, as well as in Taiwan.
But here, too, there is a gap between rhetoric and reality, and no radical change should be expected.
Soon after the election, Trump assured the leaders of Japan and South Korea of America’s commitment to their countries’ security, despite a campaign vow to demand more payment for US protection.
Add to that the threat posed by North Korea, and a destabilizing US strategic retreat from Asia remains highly unlikely.
If Trump follows through on his pledge to mend fences with Russia, the odds that China will escape US pressure would lengthen further.
Without Russia to deal with, the US would have even more time to dedicate to Asian affairs.
Moreover, a warming of the Russia-US relationship could lead to subtle changes in the Russia-China relationship, which has deepened since Russia’s annexation of Crimea wrecked its relations with the West.
Trump’s victory is far from inconsequential.
He is no ordinary US president, and he must be taken seriously, though not literally, to borrow a phrase from The Atlantic’s Salena Zito.
But, as China’s leaders seem to recognize, he will have little choice but to color mostly inside the lines as president.
Even if he wants to deviate more from the foreign-policy consensus, the US system limits his ability to do so.
So, rather than worrying about Trump’s personal predilections or trying to predict the unpredictable, China’s leaders are remaining focused on what is really important: the need for a cooperative bilateral relationship.
Other world powers should do the same.
The Non-Problem of Chinese Currency Manipulation
CAMBRIDGE – America's two political parties rarely agree, but one thing that unites them is their anger about “currency manipulation," especially by China.
Perhaps spurred by the recent appreciation of the dollar and the first signs that it is eroding net exports, congressional Democrats and Republicans are once again considering legislation to counter what they view as unfair currency undervaluation.
The proposed measures include countervailing duties against imports from offending countries, even though this would conflict with international trade rules.
This is the wrong approach.
Even if one accepts that it is possible to identify currency manipulation, China no longer qualifies.
Under recent conditions, if China allowed the renminbi to float freely, without intervention, it would be more likely to depreciate than rise against the dollar, making it harder for US producers to compete in international markets.
But there is a more fundamental point: From an economic viewpoint, currency manipulation or unfair undervaluation are exceedingly hard to pin down conceptually.
The renminbi's slight depreciation against the dollar in 2014 is not evidence of it; many other currencies, most notably the yen and the euro, depreciated by far more last year.
As a result, the overall value of the renminbi was actually up slightly on an average basis.
The sine qua non of manipulation is currency-market intervention: selling the domestic currency and buying foreign currencies to keep the foreign-exchange value lower than it would otherwise be.
To be sure, the People's Bank of China (PBOC) did a lot of this over the last ten years.
Capital inflows contributed to a large balance-of-payments surplus, and the authorities bought US dollars, thereby resisting upward pressure on the renminbi.
The result was as an all-time record level of foreign exchange reserves, reaching $3.99 trillion by July 2014.
But the situation has recently changed.
In 2014, China's capital flows reversed direction, showing substantial net capital outflows.
As a result, the overall balance of payments turned negative in the second half of the year, and the PBOC actually intervened to dampen the renminbi's depreciation.
Foreign-exchange reserves fell to $3.84 trillion by January 2015.
There is no reason to think that this recent trend will reverse in the near future.
The downward pressure on the renminbi relative to the dollar reflects the US economy's relatively strong recovery, which has prompted the Federal Reserve to end a long period of monetary easing, and China's economic slowdown, which has prompted the PBOC to start a new period of monetary stimulus.
Similar economic fundamentals are also at work in other countries.
Congressional proposals to include currency provisions in the Trans-Pacific Partnership, the mega-regional free-trade agreement currently in the final stage of negotiations, presumably target Japan (as China is not included in the TPP).
Congress may also want to target the eurozone in coming negotiations on the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership.
But it has been years since the Bank of Japan or the European Central Bank intervened in the foreign-exchange market.
Indeed, at an unheralded G-7 ministers' meeting two years ago, they agreed to a US Treasury proposal to refrain from unilateral foreign-exchange intervention.
Those who charge Japan or the eurozone with pursuing currency wars have in mind the renewed monetary stimulus implied by their central banks' recent quantitative easing programs.
But, as the US government knows well, countries with faltering economies cannot be asked to refrain from lowering interest rates just because the likely effects include currency depreciation.
Indeed, it was the US that had to explain to the world that monetary stimulus is not currency manipulation when it undertook quantitative easing in 2010.
At the time, Brazilian Finance Minister Guido Mantega coined the phrase “currency wars" and accused the US of being the main aggressor.
In fact, the US has not intervened in a major way in the currency market to sell dollars since the coordinated interventions associated with the Plaza Accord in 1985.
Other criteria besides currency-market intervention are used to ascertain whether a currency is deliberately undervalued or, in the words of the International Monetary Fund's Articles of Agreement, “manipulated" for “unfair competitive advantage."
One criterion is an inappropriately large trade or current-account surplus.
Another is an inappropriately low real (inflation-adjusted) foreign-exchange value.
But many countries have large trade surpluses or weak currencies.
Usually it is difficult to say whether they are appropriate.
Ten years ago, the renminbi did seem to meet all of the criteria for undervaluation.
But this is no longer the case.
The renminbi's real value rose from 2006 to 2013.
The most recent purchasing power statistics show the currency to be in a range that is normal for a country with per capita real income of around $10,000.
By contrast, the criterion on which the US Congress focuses – the bilateral trade balance – is irrelevant to economists (and to the IMF rules).
It is true that China's bilateral trade surplus with the US is as big as ever.
But China also runs bilateral deficits with Saudi Arabia, Australia, and other exporters of oil and minerals, and with South Korea, from which it imports components that go into its manufactured exports.
Indeed, imported inputs account for roughly 95% of the value of a “Chinese" smartphone exported to the US; only 5% is Chinese value added.
The point is that bilateral trade balances have little meaning.
Congress requires by law that the US Treasury report to it twice a year which countries are guilty of currency manipulation, with the bilateral trade balance specified as one of the criteria.
But Congress should be careful what it wishes for.
It would be ironic if China agreed to US demands to float the renminbi and the result was a depreciation that boosted its exporters' international competitiveness.
China’s Last Soft Landing?
NEW HAVEN – Once again, China has defied the naysayers.
Economic growth picked up in the final quarter of 2012 to 7.9% – half a percentage point faster than the 7.4% increase in GDP in the third quarter.
This was a meaningful increase after ten consecutive quarters of deceleration, and it marks the Chinese economy’s second soft landing in slightly less than four years.
Despite all the talk about the coming shift to internal demand, China remains heavily dependent on exports and external demand as major drivers of economic growth.
It is not a coincidence that its last two slowdowns followed closely on the heels of growth slumps in its two largest foreign markets, Europe and the United States.
Just as the soft landing in early 2009 occurred in the aftermath of a horrific American-made crisis, this latest one followed the European sovereign-debt crisis.
China has several sources of strength that have enabled it to withstand the tough external shocks of the last four years.
Large buffers of saving (53% of GDP) and foreign-exchange reserves ($3.3 trillion) are at the top of the list.
Moreover, unlike the West, which has used up most of its traditional countercyclical policy ammunition, China has maintained ample scope for fiscal and monetary-policy adjustments as circumstances dictate.
Likewise, a powerful urbanization dynamic continues to deliver solid support for China’s high-investment economy, while enabling relatively poor rural workers to raise their incomes by finding higher-paying jobs in the cities.
Nonetheless, this may be the last time that China can escape an external shock with its growth intact.
Premier Wen Jiabao addressed this possibility nearly six years ago, arguing in March 2007 that the seemingly spectacular Chinese economy had become “unstable, unbalanced, uncoordinated, and ultimately unsustainable.”
Since then, many of China’s inherent strengths have been sapped by all-too-frequent external shocks.
The banking sector is still digging out from the bad loans extended in the aftermath of the global meltdown in 2008.
Finding affordable housing has become an increasingly serious problem for those relocating to cities for the first time.
And corruption scandals and the related risks of political turmoil were unsettling, to say the least, in the months prior to last year’s Communist Party leadership transition.
In other words, the vulnerability implied by Wen’s “Four Uns” has increased significantly.
China’s economy has certainly become more unstable, with major slowdowns in real GDP growth in 2009 and again in 2012.
Its imbalances have gotten worse as well, with the investment share of GDP approaching 50% and private consumption falling below 35% of GDP.
Similarly, China has become more uncoordinated, or fragmented, as its income disparities have continued to widen.
And sustainability is being jeopardized by environmental degradation and pollution, which pose a growing threat to the country’s atmosphere and water supply.
In short, China’s growth model has been stretched as never before.
And, like a piece of fabric, the longer it remains stretched, the longer it will take to return to its former resilient state – and the greater the possibility that it will not spring back the next time something goes wrong.
The message to China’s new leadership is unmistakable: There has never been a more urgent time to get on with the heavy lifting of rebalancing and reform.
Now is the time to implement the measures that will accelerate the transition to a more consumer-led economy.
The agenda is long, but it is hardly a secret.
On the surface, its resilience has been impressive – the first to recover, as Chinese leaders always want to remind the rest of the world.
But, beneath the surface, an unbalanced, unstable, uncoordinated, and unsustainable economy risks losing its capacity for resilience.
Without rebalancing and reforms, the days of the automatic Chinese soft landing may be over.
I have been an optimist about China for 15 years.
I still am.
But the clock is ticking.
Wen Jiabao’s critique six years ago was a powerful diagnosis of the Old China’s flaws that pointed to the Next China’s hopes and dreams.
It remains a blueprint that China’s new leadership cannot ignore.
Time is no longer on China’s side. It must act now.
The Chinese Economy and Fed Policy
CAMBRIDGE – Janet Yellen’s speech on September 24 at the University of Massachusetts clearly indicated that she and the majority of the members of the Federal Reserve’s Federal Open Market Committee intend to raise the short-term interest rate by the end of 2015.
It was particularly important that she explicitly included her own view, unlike when she spoke on behalf of the entire FOMC after its September meeting.
Nonetheless, given the Fed’s recent history of revising its policy position, markets remain skeptical about the likelihood of a rate increase this year.
The Fed had been saying for several months that it would raise the federal funds rate when the labor market approached full employment and when FOMC members could anticipate that annual inflation would reach 2%.
But, although both conditions were met earlier in September, the FOMC decided to leave the rate unchanged, explaining that it was concerned about global economic conditions and about events in China in particular.
I was unconvinced.
I have believed for some months that the Fed should start tightening monetary policy to reduce the risks of financial instability caused by the behavior of investors and lenders in response to the prolonged period of exceptionally low interest rates since the 2008 financial crisis.
Events in China are no reason for further delay.
Consider, first, domestic economic conditions, starting with the employment picture.
By the time the FOMC met on September 16, the unemployment rate had fallen to 5.1%, the level that the Fed had earlier identified as full employment.
Although there are still people who cannot find full-time jobs, driving the unemployment rate below 5.1% would, according to the Fed, eventually lead to unwanted increases in inflation.
The current inflation picture is more confusing.
The annual headline rate over the past 12 months was only 0.2%, far short of the Fed’s 2% target.
This reflected the dramatic fall in energy prices during the previous year, with the energy component of the consumer price index down 13%.
The rate of so-called core inflation (which excludes energy purchases) was 1.8%.
Even that understates the impact of energy on measured inflation, because lower gasoline prices reduce shipping costs, lowering a wide range of prices.
The point is simple: When energy prices stop falling, the overall price index will rise close to 2%.
And the FOMC members’ own median forecast puts inflation at 1.8% in 2017 and 2% in 2018.
So if the Fed, for whatever reason, wanted to leave the interest rate unchanged, it needed an explanation that went beyond economic conditions in the United States.
It turned to China, which had been much in the news in recent weeks.
China was reducing its global imports, potentially reducing demand for exports from the US.
The Chinese stock market had fallen sharply, declining some 40% from its recent high.
And China had abruptly devalued the renminbi, potentially contributing to lower import prices – and therefore lower inflation – for the US.
But when it comes to the impact of China’s troubles on the US economy, there is less than meets the eye.
China’s import demand is slowing in line with its economic structure’s shift away from industry and toward services and household consumption.
This means that China needs less of the iron ore and other raw materials that it imports from Australia and South America and less of the specialized manufacturing equipment that it imports from Germany and Japan.
The US accounts for only 8% of China’s imports, and its exports to China represent less than 1% of its GDP.
So China’s cut in imports could not shave more than a few tenths of a percentage point from US GDP, and even that would be spread over several years.
As for the stock market – widely viewed as a kind of casino for a small fraction of Chinese households – only about 6% of China’s population own shares.
The Shanghai stock market index soared from 2,200 a year ago to a peak of 5,100 in mid-summer and then dropped sharply, to about 3,000 now.
So, despite the sharp drop that made headlines recently, Chinese shares are up more than 30% from a year ago.
While official US data show overall import prices down 11% in the 12 months through August, this is almost entirely due to lower energy costs.
When energy products are excluded, import prices are down only 3%.
So the Fed is right to say that inflation is low because of the sharp drop in energy prices; but it need not worry about the effect of major trading partners’ lower currency values.
And, again, when the price of energy stops declining, the inflation rate will rise close to the core rate of 1.8%.
So, unless there are surprising changes in the US economy, we can expect the Fed to start raising interest rates later this year, as Janet Yellen has proposed, and to continue raising them in 2016 and beyond.
I only hope that it raises them enough over the next 18 months to avoid the financial instability and longer-term inflation that could result from the long era of excessively easy monetary policy.
China’s Financial Floodgates
NEW YORK – As China’s economy starts to slow, following decades of spectacular growth, the government will increasingly be exposed to the siren song of capital-account liberalization.
This option might initially appear attractive, particularly given the Chinese government’s desire to internationalize the renminbi.
But appearances can deceive.
A new report argues that the Chinese authorities should be skeptical about capital-account liberalization.
Drawing lessons from the recent experiences of other emerging countries, the report concludes that China should adopt a carefully sequenced and cautious approach when exposing its economy to the caprices of global capital flows.
The common thread to be found in the recent history of emerging economies – beginning in Latin America and running through East Asia and Central and Eastern Europe – is that capital flows are strongly pro-cyclical, and are the biggest single cause of financial instability.
Domestic financial instability, associated with liberalization, also has a large impact on economic performance, as does the lack of control over non-bank financial intermediaries – an issue that China is now starting to face as the shadow banking sector’s contribution to credit growth becomes more pronounced.
Most academic research also supports the view that financial and capital-account liberalization should be undertaken warily, and that it should be accompanied by stronger domestic financial regulation.
In the case of capital flows, this means retaining capital-account regulations as an essential tool of macroeconomic policy.
Indeed, during the 1990s, China – and also India – taught the rest of the developing world the importance of gradual liberalization.
It was a lesson that many countries fully learned only in the wake of the economic and financial crises that began in East Asia in 1997, spread to Russia in 1998, and affected most of the emerging world.
By maintaining strong capital-account regulation, China avoided the contagion.
Even the International Monetary Fund, in late 2012, adopted a cautious approach.
The IMF now recognizes that capital-account liberalization comes with risks as well as benefits, and that “liberalization needs to be well planned, timed, and sequenced in order to ensure that its benefits outweigh the costs.”
Moreover, the Fund now regards capital-account regulations as part of the broader menu of macro-prudential measures that countries should be free to use to prevent economic and financial instability.
To the extent that capital-account volatility is the major pro-cyclical financial shock in emerging economies, regulation should be the major macro-prudential instrument used to counter it.
These regulations should complement, not substitute for, other countercyclical macroeconomic policies.
The IMF recommends giving higher priority to those other policies, whereas we have previously recommended using them and capital-account regulations simultaneously.
It is not just emerging markets that have had to pay heed to the dangers of rapid liberalization.
Japan’s experiences also offer valuable lessons about the importance of prudence in capital-account liberalization for a currency in increasingly high demand internationally.
For an extended period, Japan allowed only strongly regulated financial intermediaries to manage capital flows, effectively discouraging the international use of its currency.
And when a tsunami of capital looked set to flood the economy, policymakers did not shy away from trying to contain the inflows.
In a sense, Western Europe was once in the same boat.
Its capital-account liberalization was also a long-term process, beginning with current-account convertibility in 1958 and ending with capital-account convertibility in 1990.
And it faced a crisis of its payments system two years later that led to significant depreciation for some countries’ currencies.
None of this is intended to suggest that the internationalization of the renminbi should not take place in the foreseeable future.
Given the importance of China in the global economy, the denomination of an increasing share of trade and investment in renminbi seems inevitable.
But China’s authorities should manage that process gradually, choosing the specific channels through which it should take place.
Indeed, China is perhaps the most successful example in history of gradual and pragmatic economic transformation.
It should not allow itself to be tempted from its tried and tested course by calls for a policy that has led too many emerging economies onto the rocks.
The Chinese Economy’s Great Wall
WASHINGTON, DC – The recent decline in China’s currency, the renminbi, which has fueled turmoil in Chinese stock markets and drove the government to suspend trading twice last week, highlights a major challenge facing the country: how to balance its domestic and international economic obligations.
The approach the authorities take will have a major impact on the wellbeing of the global economy.
The 2008 global financial crisis, coupled with the disappointing recovery in the advanced economies that followed, injected a new urgency into China’s efforts to shift its growth model from one based on investment and external demand to one underpinned by domestic consumption.
Navigating such a structural transition without causing a sharp decline in economic growth would be difficult for any country.
The challenge is even greater for a country as large and complex as China, especially given today’s environment of sluggish global growth.
For years, China’s government sought to broaden equity ownership, thereby providing more Chinese citizens with a stake in a successful transition to a market economy.
But, like the United States’ effort to expand home ownership in the years preceding the 2008 crisis, Chinese policies went too far, creating a financially unsustainable situation that implied the possibility of major price declines and dislocations.
As a result, the adjustment challenge has grown dramatically.
With Chinese companies no longer able to sell a rapidly increasing volume of products abroad and support further expansion of productive capacity, the economy has lost some important growth, employment, and wage engines.
The resulting economic slowdown has undermined the government’s capacity to maintain inflated asset prices and avoid pockets of credit distress.
In an effort to limit the detrimental impact of all this on citizens’ wellbeing, Chinese officials have been guiding the currency lower.
A surprise devaluation last August has been followed by a number of lower daily fixes in the onshore exchange rate, all intended to make Chinese goods more attractive abroad, while accelerating import substitution at home.
The renminbi has depreciated even more in the offshore market.
China’s currency devaluations are consistent with a broader trend among both emerging and advanced economies in recent years.
Soon after the global financial crisis, the US relied heavily on expansionary monetary policy, characterized by near-zero interest rates and large-scale asset purchases, which weakened the dollar, thereby boosting exports.
More recently, the European Central Bank has adopted a similar approach, guiding the euro downward in an effort to boost domestic activity.
But in pursuing its domestic objectives, China risks inadvertently amplifying global financial instability.
Specifically, markets worry that renminbi devaluation could “steal” growth from other countries, including those that have far more foreign debt and far less robust financial cushions than China, which maintains ample international reserves.
This concern speaks to the even more challenging balancing act that China must perform as it seeks to play the role in global economic governance that its economic weight warrants.
After all, China is now the world’s second-largest economy (and, by some non-market measures, the largest).
And, indeed, China has lately been showing greater interest in gradually internationalizing its financial system.
Notably, it recently succeeded in persuading the International Monetary Fund to add the renminbi to the basket of currencies that determines the value of the Special Drawing Right, the unit the IMF uses in dealing with its 188 member countries.
That step – which places the renminbi on par with the major global currencies (the US dollar, the euro, the British pound, and the Japanese yen) – will enhance public- and private-sector acceptance of China’s currency in the international monetary system.
At the same time, it created the expectation – though not the obligation – that China will refrain from aggravating global financial instability.
There will come a time when China’s domestic and international responsibilities will again be relatively well aligned.
But that time is not now; and, given the country’s tricky ongoing structural transition, it probably will not come anytime soon.
In the meantime, it seems likely that China will continue to feel compelled to place its domestic obligations first, but in a nuanced way aimed at avoiding large disruptive tipping points for the global economy.
Whether that will be enough to avoid disorderly outcomes, however, is not totally assured.
China’s Political Interventions
TOKYO – In the last week or so, stock markets around the world have been hit by an upsurge in volatility, with large price swings confronting traders in New York, Tokyo, London, and beyond.
And the entire global financial spasm has been largely blamed on a single culprit: China.
In a free economy, market mechanisms can produce stability or instability.
An increase in the price of a tangible good would typically cause demand to fall, leading the market toward a new equilibrium.
By contrast, an increase in the price of an asset like a stock raises expectations of a further increase, causing demand to rise, potentially to excessively high levels.
In a planned economy like China’s, where policymakers use various tools to influence asset prices, such instability could, in theory, be avoided; indeed, the Marxist view is that government intervention to stop crises is precisely why controlled economies are superior to their free-market counterparts.
But, in practice, that does not seem to be the case.
So-called price-keeping operations by China’s monetary authorities (an approach tried in Japan in the early 1990s) are presumably the reason why the domestic stock market rose sharply over the last year, far beyond the levels warranted by the country’s economic fundamentals.
The recent stock-market plunge suggests that investors have concluded that equity prices have become unsustainable.
Yet the Chinese government has remained committed to intervention, responding to the correction with heavy-handed, politically motivated measures, including the complete suspension of trade of many companies’ stocks.
The move seemed to have halted the further deterioration of the Shanghai stock market.
But the effect was only temporary; on August 24, the market fell by 8.5%, the largest drop since 2007.
The long-term systemic impact of China’s interventionist approach may be even more serious than the stock market’s current decline.
Few want to invest in a market where the government can change the rules of the game at any time, especially if they have had first-hand experience of being blocked from trading at a crucial moment.
To make matters worse, Chinese investors do not have the same access to information that investors in other markets do.
Can a highly organized financial market like the one that is emerging in Shanghai ever be compatible with an authoritarian regime?
Another recent intervention by the Chinese authorities – gradual appreciation, followed by the unexpected devaluation of the renminbi – raises similar questions.
To be sure, the first part of the move was probably motivated largely by the desire to strengthen markets’ role in setting the exchange rate, which promises to boost long-term stability and improve the renminbi’s chances of becoming a global reserve currency.
But, as the recent devaluation showed, the shift, coming after years of efforts to strengthen the renminbi, could fuel a sharp increase in volatility in world currency markets.
Of course, the renminbi’s recent depreciation was much smaller than the de facto currency devaluations engineered by the United States and the United Kingdom after the financial crisis of 2008. It was also nowhere near as significant as the devaluation that the Bank of Japan has pursued since 2012.
But the fact that the renminbi has been so highly managed, together with its history of steady appreciation, meant that the sudden devaluation had a more significant effect on the market than the US, British, and Japanese moves, all of which were communicated better in advance.
Still, warnings that renminbi devaluation will spark a “currency war” are unwarranted.
Under the flexible exchange-rate system that now prevails around the world, if each country focuses its monetary policy on achieving ideal inflation and employment conditions at home, the result will be reasonably stable – or even so-called Pareto-optimal – macroeconomic conditions.
To be sure, the US may respond to China’s devaluation by postponing interest-rate hikes or moderating the pace of its withdrawal from quantitative easing, and Japan may intensify its own QE to cope with negative spillovers.
But competitive cumulative devaluations will not arise.
Nonetheless, recent events should compel China’s leaders to reconsider the extent to which they control the country’s economy.
If they maintain their secretive decision-making and continue to manipulate the price system for political ends, their chances of building a stable, resilient, and market-oriented economy, underpinned by a major international reserve currency, will be seriously compromised.
North Korea’s Step Too Far?
BEIJING – After nearly a month of belligerent bluster from North Korea, China appears to have had enough, ending its silence about North Korea’s brinkmanship and suddenly roaring its disapproval of its ally’s reckless threats.
China’s exceptional tough talk does not necessarily mean that it intends to abandon Kim Jong-un’s regime; but, at the very least, it does suggest that a radical shift in China’s policy toward North Korea might no longer be unthinkable.
When Chinese Foreign Minister Wang Yi exchanged phone calls with United Nations Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon on April 6, he expressed China’s rejection of rhetoric and action aimed at destabilizing the Northeast Asian region.
Moreover, Wang made clear that China would not allow “troublemaking on China’s doorstep.”
The next day, Chinese President Xi Jinping, speaking to an assembly of primarily Asian political and business leaders at the annual government-sponsored Boao Forum for Asia, declared that no country “should be allowed to throw a region and even the whole world into chaos for selfish gain.”
Xi did not mention any country by name, but his implicit condemnation of North Korea was clear to all.
Before these official rebukes, there had been much speculation about whether China would risk a fundamental change in its relations with North Korea, the socialist “little brother” that it continues to subsidize heavily.
Following the rare display of open indignation by Xi and Wang, such speculation has now become stronger than ever.
Some ask what “value” Kim’s hermit kingdom provides that prevents China from acting decisively; others wonder to what extent Chinese leaders’ domestic concerns continue to inhibit their willingness to switch course on North Korea.
In fact, China’s leaders have agonized over North Korea’s recent provocations.
They have been struggling to persuade the Kim regime to temper its volatility and accept a “grand bargain”: official recognition and normalization of relations with all of its neighbors, and with the United States, in exchange for denuclearization.
Indeed, this has led to considerable squabbling between the two countries in recent years.
China understands that North Korea’s intractability is rooted in its deep isolation from the world, mass deception of its people, and Kim’s fear of losing control of a country that only his family has ruled.
So the country’s rulers have come to believe that they can gain attention and resources only through provocation.
For China, the Kim regime’s survival can be assured only if it follows China’s lead in reforming and opening up.
But, faced with South Korea’s shining democracy and booming economy, the Chinese model is irrelevant to the North: following it would mean acknowledging the South’s supremacy on the Korean Peninsula, and thus an instant loss of legitimacy.
During the past two decades, North Korea’s leaders have experimented lightly with minimal “reform,” only to retreat from it quickly.
China patiently bore this pattern of intermittent brinkmanship and timid reform, largely owing to its belief that the risks posed by the Kim dynasty could be controlled as long as China did not cut off the regime’s lifeline of oil, food, and other necessities.
More important, China’s leaders believed that by shielding the North from US pressure, it was acting in the interest of its own national security.
But here China’s analysis has been completely wrong, for it underestimates the Kim regime’s unmanageable desperation whenever it believes that its survival in doubt.
Moreover, North Korea does not want to be beholden to any power, including China.
So it exploits China’s goodwill and national-security concerns, and even regards Chinese patronage as its due.
A further complication concerns North Korea’s nuclear aspirations.
The North appears to be convinced that, with nuclear weapons, it can maintain complete diplomatic independence, and that China, fearing nuclear blackmail, will never abandon it.
Now, however, it is North Korea’s turn to make a mistake.
Kim Jong-un’s childish tantrums have genuinely enraged China.
Yes, the country’s leaders have sometimes complained about the heavy burden of subsidizing North Korea; but, until now, they had never shown such open disgust with the North’s performance.
China’s warning that it will not allow North Korean “troublemaking on China’s doorstep” can be considered the equivalent of a “yellow card” in soccer.
China has not decided to abandon North Korea.
But the warning is a stern one for Kim Jong-un: China may send him to the sidelines if he does not change his behavior.
US Secretary of State John Kerry is set to visit Beijing in the coming days.
It is now time for American and Chinese leaders to negotiate a real and viable exit from the current crisis, while productively exploring ways to restart the denuclearization process on the Korean peninsula.
If Kim’s bombast and nuclear threats lead to China-US bonding over a joint North Korea settlement, the entire world will be the safer for it.
Chinese Shadows
NEW YORK – These are interesting times in China.
A senior Communist Party official, Bo Xilai, is brought down – accused of offenses that include wire-tapping other party bosses, including President Hu Jintao – while his wife is investigated for her alleged role in the possible murder of a British businessman.
Meanwhile, a blind human-rights activist escapes from illegal house arrest, finds refuge in the United States’ embassy in Beijing, and leaves the compound only after claims that Chinese authorities in his hometown had threatened his family.
Despite exhaustive press coverage of these events, it is remarkable how little we actually know.
The British businessman’s body was allegedly cremated before any autopsy was conducted.
None of the lurid tales about Bo’s wife have been proven.
And the reasons for her husband’s political disgrace remain murky, to say the least.
Things always tend to get interesting in China before a National People’s Congress, where the Party’s next leaders are anointed.
Leadership change in most democracies is a relatively transparent process; it follows national elections.
To be sure, even open democracies have their share of opaque jockeying and deal-making in what used to be called smoke-filled rooms.
This is particularly true in East Asian countries, such as Japan.
But, in China, everything takes place out of sight.
Because leaders cannot be ousted through elections, other means must be found to resolve political conflicts.
Sometimes, that entails deliberate public spectacles.
The disgrace of Bo, Chongqing’s former Party leader, certainly falls into this category.
A handsome, charismatic populist born into the Party elite, Bo was known as a tough official, whose methods in fighting organized crime – and others who got in his way – were often unrestrained by law.
Bo’s ex-police chief, who is said to have done the dirty work, embarrassed the Party by fleeing to the US consulate in Chengdu in February, after he fell out with his boss.
Despite Bo’s nostalgia for Maoist rhetoric, he is conspicuously wealthy.
His son’s expensive lifestyle as a student at Oxford and Harvard has been described in lavish detail in the press.
In other words, Bo bore all the hallmarks of a gangster boss: corrupt, ruthless towards his enemies, contemptuous of the law, and yet moralistic in his self-presentation.
But the same could be said of most Party bosses in China.
They all have more money than can be explained by their official pay.
Most have children studying at expensive British or American universities.
All behave as though they are above the laws that constrain normal citizens.
What was unusual about Bo was his open ambition.
Chinese party bosses, like Japanese politicians – or, indeed, Mafia dons – are supposed to be discreet in their appetite for power.
Bo behaved more like an American politician.
He liked to throw his weight around in public.
That was enough to annoy other party bosses.
Since factional rivalry inside the Party cannot be handled discreetly, some of Bo’s colleagues felt that he had to go.
The way that party bosses, in China no less than in Japan, get rid of irksome rivals is to bring them down through public scandals, leaked to an obedient press, which then fans the flames.
The appearance of a wicked wife in Chinese public scandals is a common phenomenon.
When Mao Zedong purged his most senior Party boss, Liu Shaoqi, during the Cultural Revolution, Liu’s wife was paraded through the streets wearing ping-pong balls around her neck as a symbol of wicked decadence and extravagance.
After Mao himself died, his wife Jiang Qing was arrested and presented as a Chinese Lady Macbeth.
It is possible that the murder accusations against Bo’s wife, Gu Kailai, are part of such political theater.
In fact, Bo’s fall from grace involves not only his wife, but his entire family.
This, too, is a Chinese tradition.
The family must take responsibility for the crimes of one of its members.
When that individual falls, so must they.
On the other hand, when he is riding high, they benefit, as was the case with many of Bo’s relatives and his wife, whose businesses thrived while he was in power.
There has been a great deal of speculation about the consequences of Bo’s fall, and of the daring escape of the human-rights activist, Chen Guangcheng, after 18 months of house arrest.
Will his flight to the US embassy harden the attitudes of China’s leaders?
Will it force the US to get tougher on human rights in China?
If so, what will follow from that?
Since Bo presented himself as a populist critic of modern Chinese capitalism and an authoritarian promoter of Maoist ethics, his natural enemies inside the Party leadership would seem to be the more “liberal” bosses, who favor free-market capitalism and perhaps even some political reforms.
The current premier, Wen Jiabao, would seem to be this faction’s leader. He has made speeches about the need for democratic reform, and has been openly critical of Bo.
Chen asked him to investigate abuses against him and his family.
So, could the fall of Bo lead to a more open society, less hostile to dissident voices?
It is possible that Chinese Communists who favor more economic liberalism would also be more receptive to a more open society.
But the opposite could also be true: the wider the disparities in wealth, and the more people protest against economic inequality, the more the regime will crack down on dissidents.
Such repression is not meant to protect communism, let alone what little is left of Maoism.
On the contrary, it is meant to protect the Chinese Communist Party’s brand of capitalism.
That may be why Bo had to be toppled, and certainly why dissidents like Chen, as well as his family, have to suffer so much that refuge in a foreign embassy is their final, desperate option.
China’s India Land Grab
NEW DELHI – Stoking tensions with Japan, Vietnam, and the Philippines over islands in the South and East China Seas has not prevented an increasingly assertive China from opening yet another front by staging a military incursion across the disputed, forbidding Himalayan frontier.
On the night of April 15, a People’s Liberation Army (PLA) platoon stealthily intruded near the China-India-Pakistan tri-junction, established a camp 19 kilometers (12 miles) inside Indian-controlled territory, and presented India’s government with the potential loss of a strategically vital 750-square-kilometer high-altitude plateau.
A stunned India, already reeling under a crippling domestic political crisis, has groped for an effective response to China’s land-grab – the largest and most strategic real estate China has seized since it began pursuing a more muscular policy toward its neighbors.
Whether China intends to stay put by building permanent structures for its troops on the plateau’s icy heights, or plans to withdraw after having extracted humiliating military concessions from India, remains an open – and in some ways a moot – question.
The fact is that, with its “peaceful rise” giving way to an increasingly sharp-elbowed approach to its neighbors, China has broadened its “core interests” – which brook no compromise – and territorial claims, while showing a growing readiness to take risks to achieve its goals.
For example, China has not only escalated its challenge to Japan’s decades-old control of the Senkaku (Diaoyu) Islands, but is also facing off against the Philippines since taking effective control of Scarborough Shoal last year.
What makes the Himalayan incursion a powerful symbol of China’s aggressive new stance in Asia is that its intruding troops have set up camp in an area that extends beyond the “line of actual control” (LAC) that China itself unilaterally drew when it defeated India in the 1962 Chinese-initiated border war.
While China’s navy and a part of its air force focus on supporting revanchist territorial and maritime claims in the South and East China Seas, its army has been active in the mountainous borderlands with India, trying to alter the LAC bit by bit.
One of the novel methods that the PLA has employed is to bring ethnic Han pastoralists to the valleys along the LAC and give them cover to range across it, in the process driving Indian herdsmen from their traditional pasturelands.
But the latest crisis was sparked by China’s use of direct military means in a strategic border area close to the Karakoram Pass linking China to India.
Because the LAC has not been mutually clarified – China reneged on a 2001 promise to exchange maps with India – China claims that PLA troops are merely camping on “Chinese land.”
Yet, in a replay of its old strategy of furtively encroaching on disputed land and then presenting itself as the conciliator, China now counsels “patience” and “negotiations” to help resolve the latest “issue.”
China is clearly seeking to exploit India’s political disarray to alter the reality on the ground.
A paralyzed and rudderless Indian government initially blacked out reporting on the incursion, lest it come under public pressure to mount a robust response.
Its first public statement came only after China issued a bland denial of the intrusion in response to Indian media reports quoting army sources.
To add to India’s woes, Salman Khurshid, the country’s bungling foreign minister, initially made light of the deepest Chinese incursion in more than a quarter-century.
The garrulous minister called the intrusion just “one little spot” of acne on the otherwise “beautiful face” of the bilateral relationship – a mere blemish that could be treated with “an ointment.”
Those inept comments fatally undercut the government’s summoning of the Chinese ambassador to demand a return to the status quo ante.
With Prime Minister Manmohan Singh’s corruption-tainted government tottering on the brink of collapse, there has been no official explanation of how India was caught napping in a militarily critical area where, in the recent past, China had made repeated attempts to encroach on Indian land.
In fact, the government inexplicably replaced regular army troops with border police in 2010 to patrol the mountain-ringed plateau into which the PLA has now intruded.
Known as Depsang, the plateau lies astride an ancient silk route connecting Yarkand in Xinjiang to India’s Ladakh region through the Karakoram Pass.
India, with a military staging post and airstrip just south of the Karakoram Pass, has the capacity to cut off the highway linking China with its “all-weather ally,” Pakistan.
The PLA intrusion, by threatening that Indian base, may have been intended to foreclose India’s ability to choke off supplies to Chinese troops and workers in Pakistan’s Gilgit-Baltistan region, where China has expanded its military footprint and strategic projects.
To guard those projects, several thousand Chinese troops reportedly have been deployed in the rebellious, predominantly Shia region, which is closed to the outside world.
For India, the Chinese incursion also threatens its access to the 6,300-meter-high Siachen Glacier, to the west of Depsang.
Pakistan claims the Indian-controlled glacier, which, strategically wedged between the Pakistani- and Chinese-held parts of Kashmir, served as the world’s highest and coldest battleground (and one of the bloodiest) from the mid-1980’s until a cease-fire took effect in 2003.
India’s nonmilitary options to force a Chinese withdrawal from Depsang range from diplomatic (suspension of all official visits or reconsideration of its recognition of Tibet as part of China) to economic (an informal boycott of Chinese goods, just as China has hurt Japan through a nonofficial boycott of Japanese-made products).
A possible military response could involve the Indian army establishing a camp of its own on Chinese territory elsewhere that China’s leaders regard as highly strategic.
But, before it can exercise any option credibly, India needs a stable government.
Until then, China will continue to press its claims by whatever means – fair or foul – it deems advantageous.
Chinese Values?
BERLIN – There can be little reasonable doubt today that the People’s Republic of China will dominate the world of the twenty-first century.
The country’s rapid economic growth, strategic potential, huge internal market, and enormous investment in infrastructure, education, and research and development, as well as its massive military buildup, will see to that.
This means that, in political and economic terms, we are entering an East and Southeast Asian century.
Lest we forget, the outcome for the world would have been far worse if China’s ascent had failed.
But what will this world look like?
We can foresee the power that will shape its geopolitics, but what values will underlie the exercise of that power?
The official policy of “Four Modernizations” (industrial, agricultural, military, and scientific-technological) that has underpinned China’s rise since the late 1970’s has failed to provide an answer to that question, because the “fifth modernization” – the emergence of democracy and the rule of law – is still missing.
Indeed, political modernization faces massive opposition from the Chinese Communist Party, which has no interest in surrendering its monopoly of power.
Moreover, the transition to a pluralist system that channels, rather than suppresses, political conflict would indeed be risky, though the risk will grow the longer one-party rule (and the endemic corruption that accompanies it) persists.
Ideologically, Chinese leadership’s rejection of human rights, democracy, and the rule of law is based on the contention that these supposedly universal values are a mere stalking horse for Western interests, and that repudiating them should thus be viewed as a matter of self-respect.
China will never again submit to the West militarily, so it should not submit to the West normatively either.
And here we return to the concept of “Asian values,” originally developed in Singapore and Malaysia.
But until this day, three decades later, its meaning remains unclear.
Essentially, the concept has served to justify collectivist-authoritarian rule by aligning it with local tradition and culture, with autonomy defined in terms of otherness – that is, differentiation from the West and its values.
Thus, “Asian values” are not universal norms, but rather a self-preservation strategy harnessed to identity politics.
Given the history of Western colonialism in Asia, the desire to maintain a distinct identity is both legitimate and understandable, as is the belief in many Asian countries – first and foremost China – that the time has come to settle old scores.
But the effort to preserve one’s power, the need for a distinct “Asian” identity, and the desire to settle historical scores will not solve the normative question raised by China’s emergence as the century’s dominant power.
How that question is answered is crucially important, because it will determine the character of a global power, and thus how it deals with other, weaker countries.
A state becomes a world power when its strategic significance and potential give it global reach.
And, as a rule, such states then try to safeguard their interests by imposing their predominance (hegemony), which is a recipe for dangerous conflict if based on coercion rather than cooperation.
The world’s acclimation to a global hegemonic structure – in which world powers guarantee an international order – survived the Cold War.
The Soviet Union wasn’t ideologically anti-Western, because Communism and Socialism were Western inventions, but it was anti-Western in political terms.
And it failed not only for economic reasons, but also because its internal and external behavior was based on compulsion, not consent.
By contrast, the United States’ economic and political model, and that of the West, with its individual rights and open society, proved to be its sharpest weapon in the Cold War.
The US prevailed not because of its military superiority, but because of its soft power, and because its hegemony was based not on coercion (though there was some of that, too), but largely on consent.
Which path will China choose?
While China will not change its ancient and admirable civilization, it owes its re-emergence to its embrace of the contemporary Western model of modernization – the huge achievement of Deng Xiaoping, who put the country on its current path more than three decades ago.
But the decisive question of political modernization remains unanswered.
Clearly, national interests, and sometimes pure power, play a part in how the US and other Western countries apply values like human rights, the rule of law, democracy, and pluralism.
But these values are not mere ideological window dressing for Western interests; in fact, they are not that to any significant extent.
They are indeed universal, and all the more so in an era of comprehensive globalization.
The contribution of Asia – and of China, in particular – to the development of this universal set of values is not yet foreseeable, but it will surely come if the “fifth modernization” leads to China’s political transformation.
China’s course as a world power will be determined to a significant extent by the way it confronts this question.
Choosing Mr. Europe
BRUSSELS – America’s riveting presidential election campaign may be garnering all the headlines, but a leadership struggle is also underway in Europe.
Right now, all eyes are on the undeclared frontrunners to become the first appointed president of the European Council.
Nobody – not even people closely involved in the process – really knows how the European Union’s leaders are chosen.
There are no formal rules, much less elections; somehow, names just surface in the media to become part of the EU’s mysterious internal bargaining system.
In fact, there are five jobs up for grabs, so a complex but secretive discussion is being conducted between Europe’s chancelleries over who might do what without disturbing the delicate balances between political families or between large and small states.
At the heart of this process is the even touchier issue of whether the people who will take charge of the EU’s main institutions should be strong leaders.
In principle, everyone wants heavy-hitters; in practice, many national leaders resist the idea of a more independent and assertive team in Brussels.
The dilemma is neatly summed-up by the two clear candidates for the top job as “Mr. Europe.”
On the one hand, there’s the safe pair of hands personified by Jean-Claude Juncker, the veteran prime minister of tiny Luxembourg, who knows the ins and outs of the EU’s political machinery and chairs the euro zone’s ministerial set-up.
He won’t make waves, but he won’t make headlines either.
Then there’s Tony Blair.
World famous but controversial, Blair is capable of rallying public opinion and giving the European project the high profile that the EU craves.
But he’s also liable to turn a 30-month ceremonial post as the EU’s figurehead into one with much more political clout than its 27 national leaders might like.
The other four posts will probably be decided as part of a package deal, owing to the need to achieve some sort of balance.
First, there’s the question of whether the European Commission’s current president, former Portuguese Prime Minister Jose Manuel Barroso, should get another five-year term.
His early promise to be the EU executive body’s new broom has turned into a steady-as-she-goes captaincy, and there’s the added question of whether his re-appointment might turn the job into a standard 10-year post for his successors, regardless of their abilities.
The choice for No. 3 job – the foreign policy supremo who will have extra resources and powers to build on the position created by Javier Solana – looks more straightforward.
Solana, the soft- spoken Spaniard who was previously NATO’s secretary-general, looks like the odds-on favorite to take the new job for a few months before handing it over to Carl Bildt, the Swedish foreign minister and ex-premier who gained international stature in the Balkans in the 1990’s.
But nothing is certain.
If Denmark’s prime minister, Anders Fogh Rasmussen were to succeed as a compromise candidate between Juncker and Blair, as is widely suggested, the presence of two center-right Scandinavians would present a problem.
The remaining two posts, president of the European Parliament and the “Mr. Euro” job currently held by Juncker, will also have to contribute to overall balance and reflect the outcome of the European Parliament elections in mid-2009.
The parliament is a further wild card in this wholly undemocratic and unpredictable process.
Under the Reform Treaty – the look-alike successor to the controversial European constitution that creates the post of EU president – the parliament’s 785 members will also have their say.
In years past, only governments could torpedo candidates for Europe’s top jobs, but now the parliament also will be able to reject them.