LONDON – The future of Europe now depends on something apparently impossible: Greece and Germany must strike a deal.
What makes such a deal seem impossible is not the principled opposition of the two governments – Greece has demanded a debt reduction, while Germany has insisted that not a euro of debt can be written off – but something more fundamental: while Greece is obviously the weaker party in this conflict, it has far more at stake.
Game theory suggests that some of the most unpredictable conflicts are between a weak, but determined, combatant and a strong opponent with much less commitment.
In these scenarios, the most stable outcome tends to be a draw in which both sides are partly satisfied.
In the Greek-German confrontation, it is easy, at least in theory, to design such a positive-sum game.
All we must do is ignore political rhetoric and focus on the economic outcomes that the protagonists really want.
Germany is determined to resist any debt write-offs.
For German voters, this objective matters much more than the details of Greek structural reforms.
Greece, for its part, is determined to gain relief from the punitive and counter-productive austerity imposed on it, at Germany’s insistence, by the “troika” (the European Commission, the European Central Bank, and the International Monetary Fund).
For Greek voters, this objective matters much more than detailed calculations about the net present value of national debt in 30 years.
A deal should be easily negotiable if both sides concentrate on their top priorities, while compromising on their secondary aims.
Unfortunately, human fallibility seems to be working against such a rational solution.
Yanis Varoufakis, Greece’s new finance minister, is a professor of mathematical economics who specializes in game theory.
But his negotiating technique – unpredictable oscillations between aggressiveness and weakness – is the opposite of what game theory would dictate.
Varoufakis’s idea of strategy is to hold a gun to his own head, then demand a ransom for not pulling the trigger.
German and European Union policymakers are calling his bluff.
As a result, the two sides have become stuck in a passive-aggressive standoff that has made serious negotiation impossible.
There was nothing inevitable about this outcome.
Just last month, ECB President Mario Draghi provided a textbook example of how these negotiations could, and should, have progressed, when he outmaneuvered German opposition to the monetary stimulus that Europe clearly needed.
Draghi spent months before the ECB’s January 22 announcement that it would launch quantitative easing (QE) in intense public debate with the Germans over which point of principle they chose as a “red line” – the point beyond which no deal would be possible.
Germany’s red line was debt mutualization: there must be no sharing of losses if any eurozone country should default.
Draghi let Germany win on this issue, which he viewed as economically irrelevant.
But, crucially, he was careful not to back down until the last possible moment.
By focusing the QE debate on risk-sharing, Draghi managed to distract Germany from an infinitely more important issue: the enormous size of the QE program, which completely defied the German taboo against monetary financing of government debts.
By conceding at the right time on an issue of no importance, Draghi achieved an enormous breakthrough that really mattered to the ECB.
Had Varoufakis adopted an equivalent strategy for Greece, he would have stuck doggedly to his demand for debt cancellation until the last moment, then backed down on this “principle” in exchange for major concessions on austerity and structural reforms.
Or he could have adopted a less aggressive strategy: Concede from the start the German principle that debts are sacrosanct and then show that austerity could be eased without any reduction in the face value of Greek debt.
But, instead of consistently pursuing either strategy, Varoufakis veered between defiance and conciliation, losing credibility both ways.
Greece started the negotiation by insisting on debt reduction as its red line.
But, instead of sticking to this position and turning a debate over debt forgiveness into a Draghi-style diversionary tactic, Greece abandoned this demand within days.
Then came the pointless provocation of refusing talks with the troika, despite the fact that the three institutions are all much more sympathetic to Greek demands than the German government.
Finally, Varoufakis rejected any extension of the troika program.
This created an unnecessary new deadline of February 28 for the withdrawal of ECB funding and consequent collapse of the Greek banking system.
Greece’s idealistic new leaders seem to believe that they can overpower bureaucratic opposition without the usual compromises and obfuscations, simply by brandishing their democratic mandate.
But the primacy of bureaucracy over democracy is a core principle that EU institutions will never compromise.
The upshot is that Greece is back where it started in the poker contest with Germany and Europe.
The new government has shown its best cards too early and has no credibility left if it wants to try bluffing.
So what will happen next?
The most likely outcome is that Syriza will soon admit defeat, like every other eurozone government supposedly elected on a reform mandate, and revert to a troika-style program, sweetened only by dropping the name “troika.”
Another possibility, while Greek banks are still open for business, might be for the government to unilaterally implement some of its radical plans on wages and public spending, defying protests from Brussels, Frankfurt, and Berlin.
If Greece tries such unilateral defiance, the ECB will almost certainly vote to stop its emergency funding to the Greek banking system after the troika program expires on February 28.
As this self-inflicted deadline approaches, the Greek government will probably back down, just as Ireland and Cyprus capitulated when faced with similar threats.
Such last-minute capitulation could mean resignation for the new Greek government and its replacement by EU-approved technocrats, as in the constitutional putsch against Italy’s Silvio Berlusconi in 2012.
In a less extreme scenario, Varoufakis might be replaced as finance minister, while the rest of the government survives.
The only other possibility, if and when Greek banks start collapsing, would be an exit from the euro.
Whatever form the surrender takes, Greece will not be the only loser.
Proponents of democracy and economic expansion have missed their best chance to outmaneuver Germany and end the self-destructive austerity that Germany has imposed on Europe.
Satu Lagi Defisit Yunani
OAKLAND – Selama satu dekade terakhir, banyak perhatian tertuju pada keuangan publik Yunani.
Ketika, pada bulan November, Yunani menghadapi pemeriksaan pertamanya yang mengkaji kemajuan reformasi berdasarkan perjanjian terbaru dengan para kreditornya – sebuah aktivitas wajib guna memperoleh sumber pemasukan baru untuk dana talangan – lagi-lagi defisit anggaran di Yunani diawasi dengan ketat.
Tetapi masyarakat Yunani lebih baik mempersiapkan diri menghadapi bentuk defisit lain – defisit yang tidak terlalu banyak disoroti publik, namun dapat menimbulkan konsekuensi ekonomi yang sama buruknya.
Sama halnya dengan negara-negara di kawasan Mediterania (dan seluruh negara), Yunani tidak hanya mengalami defisit fiskal; tapi juga defisit ekologis.
Menurut analisa kami, negara-negara Mediterania saat ini menggunakan sumber daya dan jasa ekologis 2,5 kali lebih banyak dibandingkan yang bisa diperbarui oleh ekosistem masing-masing negara.
Yunani, sebagai contoh, membutuhkan sumber daya dan jasa ekologis dari tiga Yunani guna memenuhi kebutuhan warga negara dari alam atas pangan, serat, kayu, tempat tinggal, infrastruktur perkotaan, dan penyerapan karbon (carbon sequestration).
Athena sendiri memerlukan 22% lebih besar dari alam dibandingkan sumber daya yang dapat disediakan oleh ekosistemnya.
Setelah bertahun-tahun mengalami resesi yang memaksa penurunan sumber daya alam Yunani, kini permintaan mulai naik, karena pertumbuhan PDB sudah membaik.
Agar kemajuan ekonomi bertahan lama, kita perlu memutus keterkaitan antara pertumbuhan PDB dan eksploitasi lingkungan hidup.
Defisit ekologis mengancam sumber-sumber energi dan keamanan pangan, menimbulkan dampak-dampak sosial dan ekonomi yang bersifat langsung.
Jika Yunani dan negara-negara lain ingin memelihara kesehatan dan kesejahteraan warga negaranya dalam beberapa dekade ke depan, mereka harus menemukan solusi untuk mencegah laju aktivitas ekonomi saat ini agar tidak menambahkan beban akibat utang lingkungan hidup yang tidak berkelanjutan.
Hal ini bisa diwujudkan apabila sumber-sumber ekologis dipandang sebagai anugerah berharga yang harus dikelola dengan bijaksana.
Modal alam yang dimiliki kawasan Mediterania yang sangat menakjubkan dan unik merupakan salah satu aset terbesar – alasan mengapa lebih dari 200 juta wisatawan berbondong-bondong mengunjungi kawasan ini setiap tahun, menghidupi perekenomian di kawasan.
Pemakaian sumber daya secara berlebihan, atau kegagalan dalam mengelola sumber daya dengan hati-hati, pasti akan melemahkan kekuatan ekonomi di kawasan.
Tentu saja, negara-negara yang mengalami defisit ekologis dapat mengisi kesenjangan melalui perdagangan global – jika mereka bisa membiayai impor yang diperlukan.
Namun, sebagaimana dipelajari Yunani akhir-akhir ini, negara-negara yang bergantung pada sumber daya alam eksternal akan mengalami goncangan ekonomi ketika harga komoditas naik atau kemampuan membayar menurun.
Menurut perhitungan kami, kenaikan harga komoditas sebesar 10% saja akan mengakibatkan pukulan terhadap neraca perdagangan Yunani – setara dengan 0,3% PDBnya.
Dalam kondisi apapun, kebergantungan pada perdagangan global bukanlah solusi yang tepat untuk menjawab persoalan ini.
Beberapa jasa ekosistem – termasuk air dan udara bersih, mitigasi kejadian iklim yang ekstrim seperti banjir dan kekeringan, dan pemanfaatan alam untuk tujuan rekreasi – tentunya tidak bisa diimpor.
Lebih penting lagi, jika suatu negara mengimpor sumber daya alam, maka negara lain mengekspornya.
Sama halnya dengan pemerintah tidak bisa terus-terusan menjalankan defisit keuangan besar, negara tidak mungkin menciptakan ketidakseimbangan ekologis tanpa menghabiskan modal alam – sehingga melemahkan ketahanan ekonomi mereka.
Untungnya, negara-negara seperti Yunani bukannya tidak berdaya.
Beberapa kota menawarkan peluang-peluang perbaikan yang menjanjikan, khususnya di bidang seperti transportasi dan pemukiman.
Athena, misalnya, merupakan target yang jelas untuk perubahan kebijakan.
Rata-rata jejak ekologis (ecological footprint) warga Athena lebih tinggi dibandingkan rata-rata nasional (dan lebih tinggi dibandingkan rata-rata warga di kota-kota Mediterania lainnya seperti Barcelona, Izmir, Palermo, dan Valencia).
Transportasi merupakan alasan terbesar terciptanya ketimpangan ini, yang berarti intervensi kebijakan yang memihak transportasi publik atau walkability dapat mengurangi defisit ekologis di Athena.
Bidang lain di Yunani yang memerlukan tindakan pemerintah adalah pangan.
Pola makan Mediterania yang terkenal di dunia – kaya akan sayuran, buah-buahan, dan minyak zaitun – tidak hanya sehat tapi juga tidak terlalu memberatkan lingkungan hidup.
Seiring dengan meningkatnya konsumsi daging dan produk makanan olahan di seputaran Mediterania, fokus terbaru pada warisan kuliner di kawasan tersebut dapat membantu meringankan beban sumber daya alam dunia – dan meningkatkan kesehatan masyarakat.
Ketika pemerintah Yunani berupaya menghidupkan kembali perekonomian yang dilumpuhkan oleh bencana fiskal dan meningkatkan kesejahteraan seluruh warganya, jalur yang dibentuk guna mewujudkan kemakmuran jangka panjang tidak boleh mengakibatkan kerusakan lingkungan hidup lebih lanjut.
Yunani tidak mungkin sanggup mengatasi salah satu defisit dengan mengorbankan defisit lainnya.
Austerity Is the Only Deal-Breaker
ATHENS – A common fallacy pervades coverage by the world’s media of the negotiations between the Greek government and its creditors.
The fallacy, exemplified in a recent commentary by Philip Stephens of the Financial Times, is that, “Athens is unable or unwilling – or both – to implement an economic reform program.”
Once this fallacy is presented as fact, it is only natural that coverage highlights how our government is, in Stephens’s words, “squandering the trust and goodwill of its eurozone partners.”
But the reality of the talks is very different.
So, if our government is willing to embrace the reforms that our partners expect, why have the negotiations not produced an agreement?
Where is the sticking point?
The problem is simple: Greece’s creditors insist on even greater austerity for this year and beyond – an approach that would impede recovery, obstruct growth, worsen the debt-deflationary cycle, and, in the end, erode Greeks’ willingness and ability to see through the reform agenda that the country so desperately needs.
Our government cannot – and will not – accept a cure that has proven itself over five long years to be worse than the disease.
Our creditors’ insistence on greater austerity is subtle yet steadfast.
It can be found in their demand that Greece maintain unsustainably high primary surpluses (more than 2% of GDP in 2016 and exceeding 2.5%, or even 3%, for every year thereafter).
To achieve this, we are supposed to increase the overall burden of value-added tax on the private sector, cut already diminished pensions across the board; and compensate for low privatization proceeds (owing to depressed asset prices) with “equivalent” fiscal consolidation measures.
The view that Greece has not achieved sufficient fiscal consolidation is not just false; it is patently absurd.
The accompanying graph not only illustrates this; it also succinctly addresses the question of why Greece has not done as well as, say, Spain, Portugal, Ireland, or Cyprus in the years since the 2008 financial crisis.
Relative to the rest of the countries on the eurozone periphery, Greece was subjected to at least twice the austerity.
There is nothing more to it than that.
Following Prime Minister David Cameron’s recent election victory in the United Kingdom, my good friend Lord Norman Lamont, a former chancellor of the exchequer, remarked that the UK economy’s recovery supports our government’s position.
Back in 2010, he recalled, Greece and the UK faced fiscal deficits of more or less similar size (relative to GDP).
Greece returned to primary surpluses (which exclude interest payments) in 2014, whereas the UK government consolidated much more gradually and has yet to return to surplus.
At the same time, Greece has faced monetary contraction (which has recently become monetary asphyxiation), in contrast to the UK, where the Bank of England has supported the government every step of the way.
The result is that Greece is continuing to stagnate, whereas the UK has been growing strongly.
Fair-minded observers of the four-month-long negotiations between Greece and its creditors cannot avoid a simple conclusion: The major sticking point, the only deal-breaker, is the creditors’ insistence on even more austerity, even at the expense of the reform agenda that our government is eager to pursue.
Clearly, our creditors’ demand for more austerity has nothing to do with concerns about genuine reform or moving Greece onto a sustainable fiscal path.
Their true motivation is a question best left to future historians – who, I have no doubt, will take much of the contemporary media coverage with a grain of salt.
Greece Must Exit
NEW YORK – The Greek euro tragedy is reaching its final act: it is clear that either this year or next, Greece is highly likely to default on its debt and exit the eurozone.
Postponing the exit after the June election with a new government committed to a variant of the same failed policies (recessionary austerity and structural reforms) will not restore growth and competitiveness.
Greece is stuck in a vicious cycle of insolvency, lost competitiveness, external deficits, and ever-deepening depression.
The only way to stop it is to begin an orderly default and exit, coordinated and financed by the European Central Bank, the European Commission, and the International Monetary Fund (the “Troika”), that minimizes collateral damage to Greece and the rest of the eurozone.
Greece’s recent financing package, overseen by the Troika, gave the country much less debt relief than it needed.
But, even with significantly more public-debt relief, Greece could not return to growth without rapidly restoring competitiveness.
And, without a return to growth, its debt burden will remain unsustainable.
But all of the options that might restore competitiveness require real currency depreciation.
The first option, a sharp weakening of the euro, is unlikely, as Germany is strong and the ECB is not aggressively easing monetary policy.
A rapid reduction in unit labor costs, through structural reforms that increased productivity growth in excess of wages, is just as unlikely.
It took Germany ten years to restore its competitiveness this way; Greece cannot remain in a depression for a decade.
Likewise, a rapid deflation in prices and wages, known as an “internal devaluation,” would lead to five years of ever-deepening depression.
If none of those three options is feasible, the only path left is to leave the eurozone.
A return to a national currency and a sharp depreciation would quickly restore competitiveness and growth.
Of course, the process would be traumatic – and not just for Greece.
The most significant problem would be capital losses for core eurozone financial institutions.
Overnight, the foreign euro liabilities of Greece’s government, banks, and companies would surge.
Yet these problems can be overcome.
Argentina did so in 2001, when it “pesofied” its dollar debts.
The United States did something similar in 1933, when it depreciated the dollar by 69% and abandoned the gold standard.
A similar “drachmatization” of euro debts would be necessary and unavoidable.
Losses that eurozone banks would suffer would be manageable if the banks were properly and aggressively recapitalized.
Avoiding a post-exit implosion of the Greek banking system, however, might require temporary measures, such as bank holidays and capital controls, to prevent a disorderly run on deposits.
The European Financial Stability Facility/European Stability Mechanism (EFSF/ESM) should carry out the necessary recapitalization of the Greek banks via direct capital injections.
European taxpayers would effectively take over the Greek banking system, but this would be partial compensation for the losses imposed on creditors by drachmatization.
Greece would also have to restructure and reduce its public debt again.
The Troika’s claims on Greece need not be reduced in face value, but their maturity would have to be lengthened by another decade, and the interest on it reduced.
Further haircuts on private claims would also be needed, starting with a moratorium on interest payments.
Some argue that Greece’s real GDP would be much lower in an exit scenario than it would be during the hard slog of deflation.
But that is logically flawed: even with deflation, real purchasing power would fall, and the real value of debts would rise (debt deflation), as the real depreciation occurs.
More importantly, the exit path would restore growth right away, via nominal and real depreciation, avoiding a decade-long depression.
And trade losses imposed on the eurozone by the drachma depreciation would be modest, given that Greece accounts for only 2% of eurozone GDP.
Reintroducing the drachma risks exchange-rate depreciation in excess of what is necessary to restore competitiveness, which would be inflationary and impose greater losses on drachmatized external debts.
To minimize that risk, the Troika reserves currently devoted to the Greek bailout should be used to limit exchange-rate overshooting; capital controls would help, too.
Those who claim that contagion from a Greek exit would drag others into the crisis are also in denial.
Other peripheral countries already have Greek-style problems of debt sustainability and eroded competitiveness.
Portugal, for example, may eventually have to restructure its debt and exit the euro.
Illiquid but potentially solvent economies, such as Italy and Spain, will need support from Europe regardless of whether Greece exits; indeed, without such liquidity support, a self-fulfilling run on Italian and Spanish public debt is likely.
The substantial new official resources of the IMF and ESM – and ECB liquidity – could then be used to ring-fence these countries, and banks elsewhere in the eurozone’s troubled periphery.
Regardless of what Greece does, eurozone banks now need to be rapidly recapitalized, which requires a new EU-wide program of direct capital injections.
The experience of Iceland and many emerging markets over the past 20 years shows that nominal depreciation and orderly restructuring and reduction of foreign debts can restore debt sustainability, competitiveness, and growth.
As in these cases, the collateral damage to Greece of a euro exit will be significant, but it can be contained.
Like a doomed marriage, it is better to have rules for the inevitable divorce that make separation less costly to both sides.
Make no mistake: an orderly euro exit by Greece implies significant economic pain. But watching the slow, disorderly implosion of the Greek economy and society would be much worse.
Europe’s Vindictive Privatization Plan for Greece
ATHENS – On July 12, the summit of eurozone leaders dictated its terms of surrender to Greek Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras, who, terrified by the alternatives, accepted all of them.
One of those terms concerned the disposition of Greece’s remaining public assets.
Eurozone leaders demanded that Greek public assets be transferred to a Treuhand-like fund – a fire-sale vehicle similar to the one used after the fall of the Berlin Wall to privatize quickly, at great financial loss, and with devastating effects on employment all of the vanishing East German state’s public property.
This Greek Treuhand would be based in – wait for it – Luxembourg, and would be run by an outfit overseen by Germany���s finance minister, Wolfgang Schäuble, the author of the scheme.
It would complete the fire sales within three years.
But, whereas the work of the original Treuhand was accompanied by massive West German investment in infrastructure and large-scale social transfers to the East German population, the people of Greece would receive no corresponding benefit of any sort.
Euclid Tsakalotos, who succeeded me as Greece’s finance minister two weeks ago, did his best to ameliorate the worst aspects of the Greek Treuhand plan.
He managed to have the fund domiciled in Athens, and he extracted from Greece’s creditors (the so-called troika of the European Commission, the European Central Bank, and the International Monetary Fund) the important concession that the sales could extend to 30 years, rather than a mere three.
This was crucial, for it will permit the Greek state to hold undervalued assets until their price recovers from the current recession-induced lows.
Alas, the Greek Treuhand remains an abomination, and it should be a stigma on Europe’s conscience.
Worse, it is a wasted opportunity.
The plan is politically toxic, because the fund, though domiciled in Greece, will effectively be managed by the troika.
It is also financially noxious, because the proceeds will go toward servicing what even the IMF now admits is an unpayable debt.
And it fails economically, because it wastes a wonderful opportunity to create homegrown investments to help counter the recessionary impact of the punitive fiscal consolidation that is also part of the July 12 summit’s “terms.”
It did not have to be this way.
On June 19, I communicated to the German government and to the troika an alternative proposal, as part of a document entitled “Ending the Greek Crisis”:
“The Greek government proposes to bundle public assets (excluding those pertinent to the country’s security, public amenities, and cultural heritage) into a central holding company to be separated from the government administration and to be managed as a private entity, under the aegis of the Greek Parliament, with the goal of maximizing the value of its underlying assets and creating a homegrown investment stream.
The Greek state will be the sole shareholder, but will not guarantee its liabilities or debt.”
The holding company would play an active role readying the assets for sale.
It would “issue a fully collateralized bond on the international capital markets” to raise €30-40 billion ($32-43 billion), which, “taking into account the present value of assets,” would “be invested in modernizing and restructuring the assets under its management.”
The plan envisaged an investment program of 3-4 years, resulting in “additional spending of 5% of GDP per annum,” with current macroeconomic conditions implying “a positive growth multiplier above 1.5,” which “should boost nominal GDP growth to a level above 5% for several years.”
This, in turn, would induce “proportional increases in tax revenues,” thereby “contributing to fiscal sustainability, while enabling the Greek government to exercise spending discipline without further shrinking the social economy.”
In this scenario, the primary surplus (which excludes interest payments) would “achieve ‘escape velocity’ magnitudes in absolute as well as percentage terms over time.”
As a result, the holding company would “be granted a banking license” within a year or two, “thus turning itself into a full-fledged Development Bank capable of crowding in private investment to Greece and of entering into collaborative projects with the European Investment Bank.”
The Development Bank that we proposed would “allow the government to choose which assets are to be privatized and which not, while guaranteeing a greater impact on debt reduction from the selected privatizations.”
After all, “asset values should increase by more than the actual amount spent on modernization and restructuring, aided by a program of public-private partnerships whose value is boosted according to the probability of future privatization.”
Our proposal was greeted with deafening silence.
More precisely, the Eurogroup of eurozone finance ministers and the troika continued to leak to the global media that the Greek authorities had no credible, innovative proposals on offer – their standard refrain.
A few days later, once the powers-that-be realized that the Greek government was about to capitulate fully to the troika’s demands, they saw fit to impose upon Greece their demeaning, unimaginative, and pernicious Treuhand model.
At a turning point in European history, our innovative alternative was thrown into the dustbin.
It remains there for others to retrieve.
Greece-Proofing China
BEIJING – Despite repeated assurances by European Union leaders, after more than two years, there is still no light at the end of Europe’s debt-crisis tunnel.
Recently, the president of the European Commission, José Manuel Barroso, referring to a possible Greek exit from the eurozone, told the European Parliament that there is no “Plan B.”
Barroso’s statement was meant to be reassuring.
But, after so many disappointments, China cannot accept at face value the assurances of European politicians, which even they themselves do not know whether they can redeem.
China should have its own Plan B in case Greece has to leave the eurozone.
Indeed, it is increasingly likely that Greece will renege on its bailout obligations.
If that happens and the “troika” (the European Commission, the European Central Bank, and the International Monetary Fund) cuts off financial support, Greece’s exit from the euro will become all but inevitable.
In that event, China must be prepared for any ensuing global financial turmoil and longer-term consequences.
For starters, Chinese officials should be under no illusion that the country will be immune to financial contagion.
A “Grexit” would hit European banks that hold peripheral eurozone countries’ sovereign bonds.
Shock waves from the deleveraging would, in turn, spread to emerging markets like China.
Although the exposure of Chinese banks and financial institutions to eurozone sovereign and banking-sector assets is negligible, post-Grexit capital flight from risky markets could rival, or even surpass, that in the weeks following Lehman Brothers’ collapse in September 2008.
Compared to 2007 and 2008, foreign investors’ holdings in emerging markets are much higher, owing to these countries’ relative economic strength in recent years and rock-bottom returns on developed-market financial assets.
In fact, China already experienced the impact of deleveraging late last year, when the European financial system seemed on the brink of collapse.
With European banks hunkering down, the renminbi’s exchange rate fell for 11 consecutive days, even though China was running a current-account surplus.
The performance of emerging-market currencies and other assets so far in the second quarter suggests that deleveraging has begun once again.
Disappointing first-quarter growth data have already led foreign investors to have second thoughts about keeping money in China.
A Grexit could prove to be the last straw, and would surely lead to a tightening in domestic monetary conditions at a very precarious point in the economic cycle.
As such, the timing could not be worse to float the idea of speeding up capital-account liberalization.
On the contrary, the Peoples Bank of China (PBoC) and other relevant authorities should consider capital controls, market suspensions, and emergency liquidity provision.
These measures are not dissimilar to those that the eurozone will pursue if Greece exits.
Ideally, the response would be coordinated with China’s international partners in the G-20.
The infrastructure for such cooperation has developed strongly since 2008, and China must not shy away from advocating its deployment.
Moreover, China must have a medium-term plan to deal with the economic aftermath of a Grexit.
Should contagion prove to be limited, with Greece the only casualty, the drop in eurozone output may be severe, but not catastrophic.
Nonetheless, the EU is China’s most important trading partner, and China must be braced for serious job losses in the export sector.
Japan’s experience shows that a recession that results from a financial crisis can be extremely prolonged, because deleveraging is a long process.
It is highly likely that today’s recession will drag on for many more years in both America and the EU.
So China’s government must have a medium- and long-term plan to address problems caused by a drawn-out global slump.
The problems include a surge in unemployment, and the need to reallocate fiscal resources to these individuals, whose welfare is critical to the preservation of social stability.
More importantly, the Chinese government should not retreat from efforts to implement structural reforms aimed at shifting China’s growth model to one that places much greater emphasis on domestic demand.
In addition, net foreign capital inflows are likely to dwindle for several quarters at least, affecting domestic monetary conditions while aggregate demand is weak.
As such, the PBoC will need to maintain counter-cyclical policies in order to avoid a deflationary spiral.
Although bound to be controversial, especially in an election year in the United States, enough flexibility should be given to the renminbi in both directions when it is needed.
One of the biggest failures of the eurozone periphery is a loss in competitiveness, hidden by a wall of credit that has been leveraged from Germany’s balance sheet.
This is always unsustainable.
Any loosening by the PBoC should not be used to avoid painful structural reforms.
Finally, China should be ready to extend a helping hand.
To ensure that the post-Grexit eurozone’s integrity faces no further immediate threats, China must join international partners in establishing a fully credible firewall, via the IMF.
However, the eurozone, and Germany in particular, must fully acknowledge the fundamental causes of Greece’s exit and pledge to move towards fiscal union, while acknowledging that an austerity-only approach towards other at-risk members is a dead end.
An adequate firewall and a European commitment to structural reform would go far toward calming markets and reducing the risks to any Chinese contribution.
In other words, any assistance that China provides must be “throwing good money after good potential results.”
Of course, IMF governance reform will also need to be part of the discussion.
Meanwhile, the eurozone will likely be more open to foreign investment out of necessity, and cash-rich Chinese companies should continue to pursue opportunities via FDI or corporate acquisitions.
A potential Grexit will present entirely new challenges to China in the coming months, and the country must avoid complacency over its own exposure. A battle plan for both the present and the future is needed now.
Greece’s Vote for Sovereignty
CAMBRIDGE – Creditors and debtors have found themselves at odds for as long as money has changed hands.
But rarely have the issues been framed as starkly – and in such a public manner – as in the just completed Greek referendum.
In a vote on July 5, the Greek electorate resoundingly rejected demands for further austerity by the country’s foreign creditors: the European Central Bank, the International Monetary Fund, and the other eurozone governments, led by Germany.
Whatever the economic merits of the decision, the Greek people’s voice rang loud and clear: We are not going to take it anymore.
It would be a mistake, however, to view the vote in Greece as a straightforward victory for democracy – despite what the country’s prime minister, Alexis Tsipras, and his supporters like to claim.
What the Greeks call democracy comes across in many other – equally democratic – countries as irresponsible unilateralism.
There is, in fact, little sympathy for the Greek position in other eurozone countries, where similar referendums would undoubtedly show overwhelming public support for the continuation of the austerity policies imposed on Greece.
And it isn’t just citizens of the large creditor countries, such as Germany, who have little patience for Greece.
Exasperation is especially widespread among the eurozone’s poorer members.
Ask the average person on the street in Slovakia, Estonia, or Lithuania, and you are likely to get a response not too different from this one from a Latvian pensioner: “We learned our lesson – why can’t the Greeks learn the same lesson?”
One might argue that Europeans are not well informed about the plight of the Greeks and the damage that austerity has done to the country.
And, indeed, it is possible that with better information, many among them would change their position.
But the forces of public opinion on which democracies rest rarely take shape in ideal conditions.
Indeed, one need look no further than the Greek vote itself to find an example of raw emotions and outrage winning out over a rational calculation of economic costs and benefits.
It is important to remember that the creditors in this instance are not a bunch of oligarchs or wealthy private bankers, but the governments of the other eurozone countries, democratically accountable to their own electorates.
(Whether they did the right thing in 2012 by lending to Greece so that their own bankers could be repaid is a legitimate, but separate question.)
This is not a conflict between the Greek demos – its people – and the bankers, as much as it is a conflict between European democracies.
When the Greeks voted “no,” they reaffirmed their democracy; but, more than that, they asserted the priority of their democracy over those in other eurozone countries.
In other words, they asserted their national sovereignty – their right as a nation to determine their own economic, social, and political path.
If the Greek referendum is a victory for anything, it is a victory for national sovereignty.
That is what makes it so ominous for Europe.
The European Union, and even more so the eurozone, was constructed on the expectation that the exercise of national sovereignty would fade away over time.
This was rarely made explicit; sovereignty, after all, is popular.
But as economic unification narrowed each country’s room for maneuver, it was hoped, national action would be exercised less frequently.
The Greek referendum has put perhaps the final nail in the coffin of that idea.
It need not have been this way.
Europe’s political elite could have framed the Greek financial crisis as a tale of economic interdependence – you cannot have bad borrowers, after all, without careless lenders – instead of a morality tale pitting frugal, hard-working Germans against profligate, carefree Greeks.
Doing so might have facilitated the sharing of the burden between debtors and creditors and prevented the emergence of the us-versus-them attitude that poisoned the relationship between Greece and the institutions of the eurozone.
More fundamentally, economic integration could have been accompanied by the expansion of a European political space.
Compensating for reduced national autonomy by creating room for democratic action at the European level really would have been a victory for democracy.
It is too late to debate whether the culprit was the unwillingness of the European public to embark on the path toward political union or the timidity of its national politicians to exercise leadership.
The consequence is that in today’s Europe, democracy can be reaffirmed only by asserting national sovereignty.
And that is what the Greek electorate has done.
The referendum is deeply important, but mostly as an act of political symbolism.
What remains to be seen is whether the Greek public also has the stomach for the economic actions – in particular, an exit from the eurozone and the introduction of a national currency – that real sovereignty would entail.
After all, the terms on offer from the country’s creditors are unlikely to change much.
If the Greeks voted “no” based on unrealistic expectations that other eurozone democracies would be forced to bend to their wishes, they may be in for another deep disappointment – and their own lesson in democracy.
Europe’s Attack on Greek Democracy
NEW YORK – The rising crescendo of bickering and acrimony within Europe might seem to outsiders to be the inevitable result of the bitter endgame playing out between Greece and its creditors.
In fact, European leaders are finally beginning to reveal the true nature of the ongoing debt dispute, and the answer is not pleasant: it is about power and democracy much more than money and economics.
Of course, the economics behind the program that the “troika” (the European Commission, the European Central Bank, and the International Monetary Fund) foisted on Greece five years ago has been abysmal, resulting in a 25% decline in the country’s GDP.
I can think of no depression, ever, that has been so deliberate and had such catastrophic consequences: Greece’s rate of youth unemployment, for example, now exceeds 60%.
It is startling that the troika has refused to accept responsibility for any of this or admit how bad its forecasts and models have been.
But what is even more surprising is that Europe’s leaders have not even learned.
The troika is still demanding that Greece achieve a primary budget surplus (excluding interest payments) of 3.5% of GDP by 2018.
Economists around the world have condemned that target as punitive, because aiming for it will inevitably result in a deeper downturn.
Indeed, even if Greece’s debt is restructured beyond anything imaginable, the country will remain in depression if voters there commit to the troika’s target in the snap referendum to be held this weekend.
In terms of transforming a large primary deficit into a surplus, few countries have accomplished anything like what the Greeks have achieved in the last five years.
And, though the cost in terms of human suffering has been extremely high, the Greek government’s recent proposals went a long way toward meeting its creditors’ demands.
We should be clear: almost none of the huge amount of money loaned to Greece has actually gone there.
It has gone to pay out private-sector creditors – including German and French banks.
Greece has gotten but a pittance, but it has paid a high price to preserve these countries’ banking systems.
The IMF and the other “official” creditors do not need the money that is being demanded.
Under a business-as-usual scenario, the money received would most likely just be lent out again to Greece.
But, again, it’s not about the money.
It’s about using “deadlines” to force Greece to knuckle under, and to accept the unacceptable – not only austerity measures, but other regressive and punitive policies.
But why would Europe do this?
Why are European Union leaders resisting the referendum and refusing even to extend by a few days the June 30 deadline for Greece’s next payment to the IMF?
Isn’t Europe all about democracy?
In January, Greece’s citizens voted for a government committed to ending austerity.
If the government were simply fulfilling its campaign promises, it would already have rejected the proposal.
But it wanted to give Greeks a chance to weigh in on this issue, so critical for their country’s future wellbeing.
That concern for popular legitimacy is incompatible with the politics of the eurozone, which was never a very democratic project.
Most of its members’ governments did not seek their people’s approval to turn over their monetary sovereignty to the ECB.
When Sweden’s did, Swedes said no.
They understood that unemployment would rise if the country’s monetary policy were set by a central bank that focused single-mindedly on inflation (and also that there would be insufficient attention to financial stability).
The economy would suffer, because the economic model underlying the eurozone was predicated on power relationships that disadvantaged workers.
And, sure enough, what we are seeing now, 16 years after the eurozone institutionalized those relationships, is the antithesis of democracy: Many European leaders want to see the end of Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras’s leftist government.
After all, it is extremely inconvenient to have in Greece a government that is so opposed to the types of policies that have done so much to increase inequality in so many advanced countries, and that is so committed to curbing the unbridled power of wealth.
They seem to believe that they can eventually bring down the Greek government by bullying it into accepting an agreement that contravenes its mandate.
It is hard to advise Greeks how to vote on July 5.
Neither alternative – approval or rejection of the troika’s terms – will be easy, and both carry huge risks.
A yes vote would mean depression almost without end.
Perhaps a depleted country – one that has sold off all of its assets, and whose bright young people have emigrated – might finally get debt forgiveness; perhaps, having shriveled into a middle-income economy, Greece might finally be able to get assistance from the World Bank.
All of this might happen in the next decade, or perhaps in the decade after that.
By contrast, a no vote would at least open the possibility that Greece, with its strong democratic tradition, might grasp its destiny in its own hands.
Greeks might gain the opportunity to shape a future that, though perhaps not as prosperous as the past, is far more hopeful than the unconscionable torture of the present.
I know how I would vote.
Greece’s “No” is No Victory for Democracy
PARIS – Despite what many are saying – especially those who do not have to bear the consequences of their words – Greek voters’ rejection on Sunday of the latest bailout offer from their country’s creditors did not represent a “victory for democracy.”
For democracy, as the Greeks know better than anyone, is a matter of mediation, representation, and orderly delegation of power. It is not ordinarily a matter of referendum.
Democracy becomes a matter of referendum only in exceptional circumstances: when elected leaders run out of ideas, when they have lost the confidence of their electorate, or when the usual approaches have ceased to work.
Was that the case in Greece?
Was the position of Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras so weak that he had no better choice than to pass the buck to his people by resorting to the extraordinary form of democracy that is democracy by referendum?
What would happen if Greece’s partners, each time they confronted a decision that they lacked the courage to make, broke off discussions and demanded a week to allow the people to decide?
It is often said – and rightly so – that Europe is too bureaucratic, too unwieldy, too slow to make decisions.
The least that can be said is that Tsipras’s approach does not make up for these defects.
(Much more could be said, if it inspires Spanish citizens to take the risky decision of electing a government led by their own anti-austerity party, Podemos.)
Putting this aside, let us suppose that the decision before Tsipras was so crucial and complex that it merited the exceptional step of referendum.
In that case, the event should have reflected that complexity.
It should have been a careful and deliberate sounding out of the will of the people.
It should have been organized and carried out with due respect for the stakes involved, with the government ensuring that adequate information was relayed to the Greek people.
Instead, Greece got a hastily arranged referendum.
It got an opaque – indeed, a downright incomprehensible – referendum question.
It got no public-information campaign worthy of the name.
It got an appeal for a “No” vote that no one understood; the details of the proposals that Greek voters were supposed to reject were not even disclosed to them.
Ancient Greek had two words for the people: the “demos” of democracy and the “laos” of the mob.
With his puerile call to shift the burden of his own errors and his reluctance to reform onto the shoulders of Greece’s fellow Europeans, Tsipras is leaning toward the latter manifestation – and promoting the worst version of Greek politics.
Tsipras might defend his approach to the referendum by asserting that his goal was not so much to sound out the people as to reinforce his position in the confrontation with Greece’s creditors.
But what is the justification for that confrontation?
That they had the audacity to demand progress toward the rule of law and social justice, as well as efforts to tame Greece’s shipping magnates and its tax-avoiding clergy?
The European Union has achieved peace precisely by learning, gradually, to replace the old logic of confrontation and conflict with that of negotiation and compromise.
Despite its defects, the EU has become a laboratory of democratic innovation, in which, for the first time in centuries, an attempt is being made to settle differences not by political war and blackmail but by listening, dialogue, and a synthesis of different points of view.
In this sense, the Greek referendum delivered an insult to 18 countries, including some that are in situations no less difficult than Greece’s, and yet have made considerable sacrifices to grant the country, in 2012 alone, €105 billion ($116 billion) in debt relief while remaining accountable to their own populations.
What twist of the mind enables one to call that an “act of resistance” or the “defense of democracy?”
Yet many have.
Indeed, since the referendum, many have acted as if Tsipras were the last eurozone democrat, as if he had faced a “totalitarian” clique (as described by the far-right French politician Marine Le Pen) against which he valiantly “stood firm” (in the words of far-left politician Jean-Luc Mélenchon).
I will not dwell on Tsipras’s parliamentary alliance with the conspiracy-minded, right-wing Independent Greeks, whose leaders do not shy away from diatribes against homosexuals, Buddhists, Jews, and Muslims.
Nor will I dwell on the fact that Tsipras did not refrain, when assembling parliamentary support for his referendum, from soliciting the support of the neo-Nazi Golden Dawn party, whose help any other European leader would have rejected.
Instead, I will emphasize the fact that Tsipras’s fellow European leaders are no less democratic or legitimate than he.
The countries of Central Europe that endured Nazi and Soviet totalitarianism do not need lessons in legitimacy from anyone – especially not the Greek prime minister.
The brave Baltic countries – the “legality” of whose independence is reportedly being reviewed by Russian President Vladimir Putin, another unsavory pal of Tsipras – have not yielded to panic or succumbed to the temptation to burden others with their misfortune.
They are not using their struggles as a pretext to default on their duty of solidarity with Greece.
None of this means that we should write off Greece’s EU membership.
In other times, the Greeks paid dearly for their “No” to Nazism and their “No” to military dictatorship.
Nothing would be sadder than to see them also have to pay for last Sunday’s “No” – a farcical simulation of those earlier noble acts of defiance.
May eurozone leaders have the forbearance to recognize the flawed “No” that has been delivered, and to be more Greek than the Greeks.
May they act in a way that prevents Greece from ever having to face the true, tragic meaning of Sunday’s vote.
Greece’s Catharsis?
ATHENS – Sunday’s election in Greece will decide whether confrontation or negotiation will be used to change the terms of Greece’s refinancing agreement with the eurozone.
Rather than helping Greece to overcome its crisis, the austerity policies pursued since May 2010 have plunged it into a deep recession that perpetuates fiscal deficits and aggravates financial uncertainty.
It is becoming increasingly clear that if Greece proceeds to unilateral action – whether by repealing unpopular austerity laws or renouncing the loan agreement itself – the eurozone will suspend disbursement of the loan.
The government will find it impossible to fulfill basic obligations, such as paying salaries and pensions, and the country will formally default.
International banks will cease to finance Greek enterprises, including imports, creating shortages of fuel, food, and medicines.
As confidence that Greece will remain in the eurozone plummets, a run on deposits will cause the banking system – and, eventually, the real economy – to collapse.
The next step will be forced exit from the euro and reintroduction of the drachma, implying a dramatic drop in living standards, owing in part to immediate devaluation of the new currency and high inflation.
Meanwhile, the benefits in terms of competitiveness will be very limited, owing to the country’s narrow export base, and will evaporate in a vicious circle of devaluations and rising interest rates.
Long-term stagnation and high unemployment are the likely result of confrontation with the eurozone, which leaves only the path of renegotiation.
The new political balance emerging in Europe after the Socialists’ victory in France’s presidential election creates scope for changes in the terms of the loan agreement that would help to boost economic growth.
Opting for renegotiation assumes the victory of pro-euro political forces in Sunday’s elections.
New Democracy, Pasok, and Democratic Left belong to this group, as opposed to Syriza and some smaller parties on the extreme right and left, which support a confrontational stance vis-à-vis the eurozone, eventually leading to the euro exit.
If a pro-euro majority emerges on June 17, the new government’s main challenge will be to propose a new policy agenda, and then to negotiate a revised deal with the eurozone.
The key to growth is increased competitiveness through higher productivity and lower production costs.
In the 1990’s, in the run-up to joining the eurozone, Greece achieved substantial gains on this front.
With inflation falling sharply, real incomes increased.
Fiscal deficits were reduced.
Important structural reforms were implemented, particularly privatization.
Investment accelerated, and major infrastructure projects were realized.
High growth rates were achieved in conditions of stability.
Unfortunately, that effort ceased over the last decade.
Selfish interests prevailed.
Business groups attempted to capture specific markets.
Public-sector trade unions fought for preserving privileges.
Tax discipline was further weakened.
The welfare state was transformed into a system of endemic waste.
A gap emerged between the economy’s productive base, which remained stagnant, and Greeks’ expectations (and demands), which were rising fast.
The agreement with the eurozone attempted to close the gap in a clumsy and misguided way.
Instead of focusing on structural reforms to liberate the economy’s productive forces, it relied on income cuts and tax increases.
Privatization, opening up closed markets and professions, promoting entrepreneurship, and eliminating public-sector waste should proceed at a fast pace over the next few months.
The European Marshall Plan would offer a unique opportunity to reorient growth policies.
Greece should move beyond its traditional focus on sectors such as tourism, shipping, and construction, and search for new areas of comparative advantage in renewable energy, high-value-added services, and selected lines of manufacturing that benefit from the country’s research potential.
If Greece succeeds in fulfilling the requirements of a revised financing agreement with the eurozone, it may win the confidence bet by convincing financial markets that it is determined to achieve the targets.
Confidence will unlock the door to economic recovery.
The fear of a return to the drachma will recede.
Consumption levels will begin to recover.
Deposit outflows will cease.
The banking system will be reinforced.
Investors will reevaluate opportunities for undertaking new initiatives.
A virtuous circle may be set in motion, leading the country, eventually, to escape the crisis zone.
The outcome of Sunday’s election will determine which way Greece goes – and, also, of course, how the unfolding Greek drama affects the eurozone’s future.
The Mirage of Structural Reform
ATHENS – Every economic program imposed on Greece by its creditors since the financial crisis struck in 2009 has been held together by a central conceit: that structural reforms, conceived boldly and implemented without slippage, would bring about rapid economic recovery.
The European Commission, the European Central Bank, and the International Monetary Fund anticipated that fiscal austerity would be costly to incomes and employment – though they significantly underestimated just how costly.
But they argued that long-delayed (and much-needed) pro-market reforms would result in a compensatory boost to the Greek economy.
Any serious assessment of the actual results produced by structural reforms around the world – particularly in Latin America and Eastern Europe since 1990 – would have poured cold water on such expectations.
Privatization, deregulation, and liberalization typically produce growth in the longer term at best, with short-run effects that are often negative.
It is not that governments cannot engineer quick growth takeoffs.
In fact, such growth accelerations are quite common around the world.
But they are associated with more targeted, selective removal of key obstacles, rather than broad liberalization and economy-wide reform efforts.
The theory behind structural reforms is simple: opening the economy to competition will increase the efficiency with which resources are allocated.
Open up regulated professions – pharmacies, notaries, and taxicabs, for example – and inefficient suppliers will be driven out by more productive firms.
Privatize state enterprises, and the new management will rationalize production (and shed all the excess workers who owe their jobs to political patronage).
These changes do not directly induce economic growth, but they increase the economy’s potential – or long-run – income.
Growth itself occurs as the economy begins to converge to this higher level of long-run income.
Many academic studies have found that the rate of convergence tends to be about 2% per year.
That is, each year, an economy tends to close 2% of the gap between its actual and potential income levels.
This estimate helps us gauge the magnitude of growth we can expect from structural reform.
Let’s be hyper-optimistic and suppose that structural reforms enable Greece to double its potential income over three years – pushing Greek per capita GDP significantly beyond the European Union average.
Applying convergence math, this would produce an annual growth boost of only about 1.3%, on average, over the next three years.
To place this number in perspective, remember that Greek GDP has shrunk by 25% since 2009.
So, if structural reforms have not paid off in Greece, it is not because Greek governments have slacked off.
Greece’s record on implementation is actually pretty good.
From 2010 to 2015, Greece climbed nearly 40 places in the World Banks’s business-environment rankings.
Instead, the current disappointment arises from the very logic of structural reform: most of the benefits come much later, not when a country really needs them.
There is an alternative strategy that could produce significantly more rapid growth.
A selective approach that targets the “binding constraints” – those areas where the growth returns are the greatest – would maximize early benefits.
It would also ensure that the Greek authorities spend valuable political and human capital on the battles that really matter.
So, which binding constraints in the Greek economy should be targeted?
The biggest bang for the reform buck would be obtained from increasing the profitability of tradables – spurring investment and entrepreneurship in export activities, both existing and new.
Of course, Greece lacks the most direct instrument for achieving this – currency depreciation – owing to its eurozone membership.
But other countries’ experience provides a rich inventory of alternative tools for export promotion – from tax incentives to special zones to targeted infrastructure projects.
Most urgently, Greece needs to create an institution close to the prime minister that is tasked with fostering a dialogue with potential investors.
The institution needs the authority to remove the obstacles it identifies, rather than having its proposals languish in various ministries.
Such obstacles are typically highly specific – a zoning regulation here, a training program there – and are unlikely to be well targeted by broad structural reforms.
The absence to date of a single-minded focus on tradables has been costly.
Different reforms have had conflicting effects on export competitiveness.
For example, in manufacturing, the competitiveness benefits of wage cuts (“internal devaluation”) were offset by the increases in energy costs resulting from fiscal austerity measures and price adjustments by state enterprises.
A more focused reform strategy could have protected exporting activities from such adverse effects.
Conventional structural reform tends to be biased toward “best practices” – policy remedies that are supposedly universally valid.
But, as successful countries around the world have discovered, a best-practice mindset does not help much in promoting new exports.
Lacking its own currency, the Greek government will have to be especially creative and imaginative.
In particular, the experience of other countries suggests that a quick supply response is likely to require selective, discretionary policies in favor of exporters, rather than the “horizontal” policies that advocates of conventional structural reform prefer.
Therein lies a paradox: The more orthodox Greece’s macro and fiscal strategy is, the more heterodox its growth strategy will have to be.
Still No Exit for Greece
WASHINGTON, DC – Opinion polls in the run-up to Greece’s early general election on January 25 indicate that the left-wing Syriza party is likely to win the largest share of votes.
As a result, Syriza stands to earn a crucial premium under Greek electoral law, according to which the party that gains the most votes is allocated an extra 50 of the parliament’s 300 seats.
In other words, Syriza could come to power, with enormous implications for Greece and Europe.
Syriza is more a coalition than a unified party, meaning that its leader, Alexis Tsipras, must reconcile moderate socialists, including some of his economic advisers, with radical left-wing members.
The implementation and impact of Syriza’s agenda, especially its decisive economic program, will depend on the new government’s ability to maintain support at home and compromise with Greece’s creditors abroad.
Syriza’s economic program rejects the austerity policies supported – or, some might say, imposed – by the so-called “troika” (the International Monetary Fund, the European Central Bank, and the European Commission).
These policies require Greece to maintain a very high primary budget surplus – more than 4% of GDP – for many years to come.
Syriza also plans to demand a substantial reduction in Greece’s foreign debt, the nominal value of which remains very high – close to 170% of GDP.
In fact, the real present value of the debt is much lower, given that most of it is now held by governments or other public entities and carries long maturities and low interest rates.
Nonetheless, repayment “spikes” this year constitute a real short-term challenge.
The problem for Greece is that its creditors may adopt a very tough stance.
This largely reflects the belief that, if a breakdown of negotiations triggers another Greek crisis, the systemic risks to the eurozone and the wider European Union would be far smaller than they were just a few years ago.
The “acute” phase of the euro crisis is over; even if growth remains elusive, financial contagion is no longer viewed as a risk.
After all, private creditors hold only a minimal share of Greek debt nowadays.
In 2010-2012, by contrast, systemically important European banks were exposed, raising the risk of a domino effect that threatened the entire eurozone.
Moreover, a debt reduction in the form of further interest-rate reductions and maturity extensions on foreign government-held debt would not hurt financial markets.
But debt held by the European Central Bank and the IMF could pose a problem.
If Greece’s new government does not tread lightly in these discussions, withdrawal of these institutions’ liquidity support for Greek banks could follow.
Despite the lack of significant financial contagion risk, a renewed Greek crisis, stemming from a lasting and serious breakdown of negotiations between the new government and EU institutions, would constitute a major problem for European cooperation.
The absence of financial contagion would not rule out serious political repercussions.
Europe’s political landscape is changing.
Populist parties, both on the far right and the far left, are gaining electoral traction.
Some, such as France’s National Front, oppose their country’s eurozone membership; others, such as Podemos in Spain, do not.
Nonetheless, the challenge that these new parties pose to Europe could prove to be extremely disruptive.
A Greek exit from the eurozone, together with financial and political turmoil inside Greece, would be perceived as a major defeat for European integration – especially after the laborious efforts made to hold together the monetary union and, with it, the European dream.
Such an outcome would be even more disheartening in light of the tragic terrorist attacks in Paris, and after unity marches in France and across the continent rekindled a long-fading sense of European solidarity.
A new image of solidarity is precisely what the Greek election should produce.
There is little doubt that the suffering that Greeks have had to endure for the last five years is mainly attributable to the fiscal profligacy and poor public management of a procession of Greek governments.
But as most analysts, including at the IMF, now agree, the troika’s approach was also deeply flawed, as it emphasized wage and income cuts, while neglecting the reform of product markets and the dismantling of harmful public and private oligopolies.
For the sake of Greece and Europe, the new government must work with the European institutions to revise their strategy, while taking responsibility for implementing growth-promoting structural reforms.
Greece’s creditors and partners, for their part, must provide the fiscal space needed for the reforms to work.
Walking away from Greece because it no longer poses a threat of financial contagion is not a politically viable option.
Both sides will have to show more foresight.
The last five years have provided two clear lessons for Europe: procrastination only makes reform more difficult, and the end of financial turmoil does not necessarily mean the end of socioeconomic crisis.
It is time to use these lessons to develop a cooperative strategy that will finally enable Greece to make real progress toward a more stable future.
A Greek exit from the euro is not a more viable solution today than it was three years ago.
Shelter from the Storm in Europe
LAGUNA BEACH – Dark clouds are lowering over Europe’s economic future, as three distinct tempests gather: the Greek crisis, Russia’s incursion in Ukraine, and the rise of populist political parties.
Though each poses a considerable threat, Europe, aided by the recent cyclical pickup, is in a position to address them individually, without risking more than a temporary set of disruptions.
Should they converge into a kind of “perfect storm,” however, a return to sunny days will become extremely difficult to foresee any time soon.
As it stands, the three storms are at different stages of formation.
The Greek crisis, having been building for years, is blowing the hardest.
Beyond the potential for the first eurozone exit, Greece could be at risk of becoming a failed state – an outcome that would pose a multi-dimensional threat to the rest of Europe.
Mitigating the adverse humanitarian consequences (associated with cross-border migration), and geopolitical impact of this storm would be no easy feat.
The second storm, rolling in from the EU’s east, is the costly military conflict in Ukraine’s Donbas region.
The crisis in eastern Ukraine has been contained only partly by the Minsk II ceasefire agreement, and reflects the deepest rupture in the West’s relationship with Russia since the Soviet Union’s collapse.
Further Russian interference in Ukraine – directly and/or through separatist proxies in Donbas – would present the West with a stark choice.
It would either have to tighten sanctions on Russia, potentially tipping Western Europe into recession as Russia responds with counter-sanctions, or accommodate the Kremlin’s expansionist ambitions and jeopardize other countries with Russian-speaking minorities (including the EU’s Baltic members).
The third storm – political tumult brought about by the rise of populist political movements – poses yet another serious threat.
Energized by broad voter dissatisfaction, particularly in struggling economies, these political movements tend to focus on a small handful of issues, opposing, say, immigrants, austerity, or the European Union – essentially whomever they can scapegoat for their countries’ troubles.
Already, Greek voters handed the far-left anti-austerity Syriza party a sweeping victory in January.
France’s far-right National Front is currently second in opinion polls.
The anti-immigration Danish People’s Party finished second in the country’s just-concluded general election, with 22% of the vote.
And, in Spain, the leftist anti-austerity Podemos commands double-digit support.
These parties’ extremist tendencies and narrow platforms are limiting governments’ policy flexibility by driving relatively moderate parties and politicians to adopt more radical positions.
It was concern about the United Kingdom Independence Party’s capacity to erode the Conservatives’ political base that pushed Prime Minister David Cameron to commit to a referendum on the country’s continued EU membership.
With three storms looming, Europe’s leaders must act fast to ensure that they can dissipate each before it merges with the others, and cope effectively with whatever disruptions they cause.
The good news is that regional crisis-management tools have lately been strengthened considerably, especially since the summer of 2012, when the euro came very close to collapsing.
Indeed, not only are new institutional circuit breakers, such as the European Financial Stability Facility, in place; existing bodies have also been made more flexible and thus more effective.
Moreover, the European Central Bank is engaged in a large-scale asset-purchasing initiative that could be easily and rapidly expanded.
And countries like Ireland, Portugal, and Spain have, through hard and painful work, reduced their vulnerability to contagion from nearby crises.
But these buffers would be severely strained if the gathering storms converged into a single devastating gale.
Given the EU’s fundamental interconnectedness – in economic, financial, geopolitical, and social terms – the disruptive impact of each shock would amplify the others, overwhelming the region’s circuit breakers, leading to recession, reviving financial instability, and creating pockets of social tension.
This would increase already-high unemployment, expose excessive financial risk-taking, embolden Russia, and strengthen populist movements further, thereby impeding comprehensive policy responses.
Fortunately, the possibility of such a perfect storm is more a risk than a baseline at this point.
Nonetheless, given the extent of its destructive potential, it warrants serious attention by policymakers.
Securing Europe’s economic future in this context will require, first and foremost, a renewed commitment to regional integration efforts – completing the banking union, advancing fiscal union, and moving forward on political union – that have been crowded out by a never-ending series of meetings and summits on Greece.
Likewise, on the national level, pro-growth economic-reform initiatives – which seem to have lost some urgency in the face of overly complacent and excessively accommodating financial markets – need to be revitalized.
This would ease the policy burden on the ECB, which is currently being forced to pursue multiple ambitious objectives that far exceed its capacity to deliver sustainably good outcomes regarding growth, employment, inflation, and financial stability.