It was ruled unconstitutional, but it began a process of budget consolidation.
The European Union’s Maastricht criteria, which cap deficits at 3% of GDP, belong in the same category: a measure that could be relaxed as the political pressure changed, but which did help initially in reducing deficits and borrowing costs.
The real problem with the German measure is not so much our lack of knowledge about what the world will look like in 2016 or 2020 as it is that Germany is politically and economically bound to European integration, and thus tied to states with very different budgetary perspectives and priorities.
As a result, it makes little sense for Germany to compete to have more solid budgets than its neighbors: all European countries have tied themselves together.
When Germans tie their hands with constitutional budget laws, they are in effect untying their neighbors’.
Europe’s monetary unification of the 1990’s was supposed to be accompanied by fiscal convergence and harmonization.
When budgets move in different directions, pressures shift to regional policy (to redistribute income) and to monetary policy (to boost growth).
The prospects for friction between EU members escalate.
The best hope for Germany is that people – both German voters and Chinese fund managers – will take such promises seriously now, but forget about them in ten years.
Germany’s Five Election Unknowns
On September 18, Germany will hold an election that contains at least five unknowns.
If it were an equation, it would be impossible to solve.
Fortunately, politics is not mathematics – though, unfortunately, this means that there are no clear solutions.
Indeed, even in the opaque terms of contemporary politics, the German case is particularly vexing.
The first unknown is why the election is taking place at all.
Chancellor Gerhard Schröder had another fifteen months to go before the end of the electoral term, and it seemed that he had no difficulty mobilizing his admittedly slender majority in parliament.
To be sure, the big issues that the Federal President listed when he dissolved the Bundestag are real.
The fiscal position is, by German standards, unacceptable, and public debt at current levels is contrary to the European Union’s Stability and Growth Pact and a burden on future generations.
Demographic developments alone require major reforms of social policy.
Moreover, the institutions of the federal system do not permit decisions to be made either expeditiously or clearly.
None of this is new, nor will it be changed by an election.
So it is not obvious to many people why they are voting.
The second unknown concerns what, exactly, separates the major parties in this contest.
The Social Democrats (SPD) and the Christian Democrats (CDU) are both committed to the “social market economy,” to the essentials of corporatist economic management, to maintaining the entitlements of the welfare state, and to the EU and NATO.
True, the campaign has brought out nuances that may turn out to be important.
Schröder’s SPD uses the word “social” a little more emphatically than it did in the last seven years.
The opposition CDU leader, Angela Merkel, has linked its program to the ambitious ideas of an outsider, former Constitutional Court judge Paul Kirchhof, seeking a dramatic simplification of the tax system.
In international affairs, Merkel is more skeptical about European enlargement, notably to include Turkey, than Schröder.
Merkel, an East German by background, is also more cautious in her approach to Russia.
But these are nuances, not fundamental differences.
The third unknown is the performance of the Left Party, a new formation positioned to the left of the SPD and built on East Germany’s ex-communist PDS, with the addition of a significant number of dissident Social Democrats in the West who proclaim themselves to be defenders of the welfare state.
The Left Party is led by two talk show politicians, Gregor Gysi, the former PDS leader, and Oskar Lafontaine, the ex-leader of the SPD, who do not have much more in common than a record of political failure and a talent for populist speeches.
But this clearly appeals to those who feel that they have been neglected and forgotten.
The popular vote for this party – which could be 10% – may well determine what kind of coalition is formed after the election.
The fourth unknown is therefore what the next government will actually do.
It will clearly be a government without the new Left Party.
It will also be a government without the Greens, who continue to have a devoted, if limited, clientele, but are now regarded by many as a luxury that Germany can no longer afford.
This leaves two possibilities: a coalition between the CDU, its Bavarian sister party, the Christian Social Union, and the liberal Free Democrats, or a grand coalition between the SPD and the CDU.
The latter is what most Germans want; the former is what they are most likely to get.
But most people doubt whether it even makes a difference, and they are probably right.
There is a widespread desire for change, including a change of government, but there is an equally widespread belief that nothing momentous will happen.
This underscores the final, and deepest, unknown concerning the upcoming election: who will put a confused and directionless Germany back on a road to initiative and growth?
Who will make Germany an engine of Europe again rather than a gloomy passenger?
What Germany needs is, in fact, fairly clear.
It needs to accept that globalization is above all an opportunity, one that must be grasped by confident, innovative, and entrepreneurial people.
Germans need to understand again – as they did so well after 1945 – that their future lies in their own hands, as citizens, rather than in the power of some remote State.
Above all, Germany must appreciate that the changes it needs are improvements that would guarantee its future security.
Perhaps what it requires most is a touch of Margaret Thatcher’s policies of the 1980’s, combined with Tony Blair’s rhetoric of today.
But it remains to be seen whether, or when, that might be on offer.
Germany’s Five Shocks
Over the last decade, Germany has been the slowest growing economy in the European Union, and Europe has been the slowest growing continent in the world.
From 1995 to 2005, Germany will have grown by only 14.6%, while the old EU on average will have grown by 24%, the US by 39.9%, and the world economy by 45.6%.
Why has Germany performed so badly?
One theory, endorsed by the head of Germany’s ruling Social Democratic Party, Franz Müntefering, is that Germany is already where the others still want to be.
Slow German growth, he maintains, is a sign of natural convergence.
But this theory is not convincing.
Germany has recently been overtaken in terms of per capita income by several EU countries, including Ireland, the UK, the Netherlands, and France, and is still growing more slowly than all of them.
Another, more plausible theory is that over the past fifteen years there have been various external challenges or shocks that have hit the country simultaneously.
Rigid as it was, with an extensive welfare system and an over-regulated labor market, Germany was unable to react to these shocks and ran into trouble.
This theory recalls that of the British historian Arnold Toynbee, according to which empires collapse because they are unable to react to external challenges.
The first shock was intensified globalization, which brought a lot of new low-wage competition.
Although globalization is a gradual process, it gained momentum when China decided to play the game.
China is ten times the size of Japan, and Japan was not easy to deal with, either.
German precision instruments and optical equipment, for example, lost their competitive edge when Japan entered the game.
The second shock was EU integration, including the northern and southern enlargements.
The dismantling of the EU’s internal borders boosted each country’s market size and brought about the predicted economies of scale.
But this helped Europe’s small countries more than the big ones, and it implied more competition for Germany, Europe’s biggest economy.
Think of Nokia, the mobile phone maker.
Due to the economies of scale that the common market made possible, Nokia was able to exploit its inventions fully, while Germany’s Siemens recently decided to give up on the mobile phone market.
The third shock was the euro, which has induced a rapid convergence of long-term interest rates, which in some countries had been five to seven percentage points above the German level.
Freed from exchange-rate risk, international investors no longer demanded a risk premium from these countries and were willing to provide funds to all of them under the same favorable conditions that previously had been reserved for Germany.
This is good for Europe, because it helps improve the allocation of capital and stimulates growth by transporting German savings to the remote and previously disadvantaged regions of the euro zone.
But it is of doubtful benefit to German workers who also would have liked to cooperate with that capital.
The fourth shock was eastern EU enlargement, which has brought extraordinary chances for trade and investment in the east, but has also brought massive low-wage competition.
On average, wage costs in the ten countries that joined the EU in 2004 are only 14% of the West German level.
Low-wage competition has led to substantial outsourcing and off-shoring activities that have kept German firms competitive by reducing their demand for domestic labor.
As neither Germany’s unions nor its welfare state would accept falling wages, the result was higher unemployment and slower growth.
The fifth shock was German unification, which is a failure in economic terms.
GDP per working-age person in East Germany had been 61% of the West German level in 1996, but it is now only 59%.
The slow growth of the eastern part of the country has pulled down the Germany-wide average, while the enormous demand for public funds in the east has increased public debt.
The weak fiscal position has in turn undermined investors’ confidence, with obvious implications for economic growth.
All five shocks constitute historical developments that are good for the world as a whole, but problematic for Germany.
In order for the country to meet the challenges and to continue to grow, it would have to make its labor markets flexible.
Only if wages adjust downward to accommodate the new international environment can German workers become competitive again, so that the country returns to a higher employment level, exploiting its human capital up to the capacity constraint.
The new government that voters will most likely elect in September will be confronted with the difficult task of confronting Germans with reality and pushing through the necessary reforms.
Only then will we know whether Germany can meet the Toynbeean challenge it is facing.
Germany’s Gold Delusion
WASHINGTON, DC – Germany’s gold is on the move.
For the first time since official gold transactions became more transparent, the Bundesbank has given notice that a significant portion of its holdings will be transferred home from France and the United States.
Ostensibly, this is just a matter of monetary housekeeping.
But why now?
One possibility is that German policymakers believe that we are approaching an every-country-for-itself scenario – and only gold guarded by one’s own police is worth anything.
But this is more than far-fetched.
The world in which financial trust breaks down completely between Germany and France or Germany and the US is one in which we have much bigger problems than where a country’s gold is located.
International trade would collapse, and major global companies would struggle to sell their products.
Having more gold at home, rather than in the vaults of the New York Fed, would be neither here nor there in such a situation.
Does Germany think that its gold will be subject to sanctions or some form of confiscation – as sometimes happens to rogue nations?
Again, this is hardly plausible.
Countries like Iran and Venezuela work long and hard to become international pariahs.
Germany, by contrast, is a mainstay of the democratic world. That is not going to change.
Perhaps German central bankers sense a longer-term shift in international preferences away from the dollar and want to be ready in some fashion.
This is plausible in terms of a future decline in the dollar’s importance as a reserve asset and safe haven.
Reserve holdings of dollar assets (primarily by central banks) were worth around 2% of US GDP in 1948 and about the same in 1968.
Today, such holdings are at least 15% of US GDP – with some estimates as high as 30%.
Much of this rise stems from growing prosperity and current-account surpluses in middle-income countries.
When you sell more to the world than you buy, you accumulate claims on the rest of the world – and you need to decide the form in which you want to hold those claims.
At present, the world holds a lot of US dollar assets, and greater diversification of portfolios in coming years would not be shocking.
There is certainly much discussion of the renminbi’s rising international role – an issue on which Arvind Subramanian, my colleague at the Peterson Institute for International Economics, continues to do the most interesting work.
But moving Germany’s gold is hardly helpful in this regard.
What would help is to turn the euro around – in the sense of convincing investors that the common currency has a bright future, because it is underpinned by a stronger monetary, fiscal, financial, and political union.
When seen in this light, the physical location of gold is purely a distraction.
It is as if German political elites think that they are back in the era of the gold standard.
But, even back then, what mattered was the amount of gold you owned – not where it was actually stored.
The broader and more worrying trend is the politicization of central banking.
Leading German political figures are becoming increasingly suspicious of the European Central Bank, while also worrying aloud about the US Federal Reserve’s monetary policy.
Their motivating fear is the prospect of inflation.
But the real fear is not inflation itself – that is, that prices might rise at a surprisingly fast clip this year or next. Rather, the fear is that central banks will not see inflation coming until it is too late, and that this will cause a major upward shift in inflation expectations.
Again, moving gold does nothing to keep inflation under control or change the behavior of central banks.
The link between currencies and gold was irrevocably broken in 1971, when US President Richard Nixon decided to suspend the convertibility of dollars into gold for central banks.
We have lived in a purely fiat money system ever since – meaning that our money’s value is not backed by gold or any other physical item.
Such monetary systems can succeed only as long as the central bank can credibly commit to keeping inflation under control.
German politicians would thus seem to be suffering from some serious delusions about the importance of gold and the effects of shifting its location.
But they are right to worry about the ECB’s policies: Providing unconditional credit to eurozone governments is unlikely to make these governments more careful.
There is a real danger that so-called “fiscal dominance” will undermine monetary policy and make it much harder to control inflation.
The German fascination with gold is a red herring.
Its fear of wayward monetary policy is not.
The End of German Hegemony
BRUSSELS – Without anyone quite noticing, Europe’s internal balance of power has been shifting.
Germany’s dominant position, which has seemed absolute since the 2008 financial crisis, is gradually weakening – with far-reaching implications for the European Union.
Of course, from a soft-power perspective, the mere fact that people believe Germany is strong bolsters the country’s status and strategic position.
But it will not be long before people begin to notice that the main driver of that perception – that Germany’s economy continued to grow, while most other eurozone economies experienced a prolonged recession – represents an exceptional circumstance, one that will soon disappear.
In 12 of the last 20 years, Germany’s growth rate been lower than the average of the other three large eurozone countries (France, Italy, and Spain).
Although German growth surged ahead during the post-crisis period, as the graph shows, the International Monetary Fund predicts that it will fall back below that three-country average – and far below the eurozone average, which includes the smaller high-growth countries of Central and Eastern Europe – within five years.
To be sure, Germany still has some apparent advantages.
But a closer examination shows that they are not quite as positive as they seem.
For starters, Germany is close to full employment – in sharp contrast to the double-digit unemployment rates that prevail in much of the eurozone.
But the combination of full employment and low growth rates actually points to an underlying problem: very slow productivity growth.
Add to that a shrinking pool of workers capable of meeting the needs of Germany’s labor market – the country’s population is aging, and the arriving refugees lack the needed skills – and the German economy seems set for a protracted period of sluggish performance.
Another apparent advantage is Germany’s large financial reserves, which not only cushioned it from the crisis, but also conferred upon it considerable political sway.
Indeed, because German funds were indispensable in bailing out the eurozone’s deeply stressed periphery, the country became central to all efforts to address the crisis.
Germany’s consent was needed to create Europe’s “banking union,” which entailed the transfer of supervisory powers to the European Central Bank and the creation of a common fund to resolve failing banks.
And German resistance contributed to a delay in the ECB’s intervention in bond markets; when the ECB finally did launch its bond-buying program, it did so with Germany’s tacit approval.
But now that interest rates are at zero, Germany’s large savings are no longer doing it much good.
And with the financial storm having largely abated, Germany lacks new opportunities to demonstrate its political clout, both within and outside the eurozone.
Indeed, whereas Germany, owing to its deep involvement in Central and Eastern European economies, was a key player in the Minsk agreements that were meant to end the conflict in Ukraine, it has little influence in the Middle Eastern countries that are occupying the world’s attention today.
While many have highlighted Germany’s political leadership in the refugee crisis, the reality is that being thrust into the front line of that crisis, without having much influence over the factors that are driving it, is placing considerable strain on the country.
Germany is now, for the first time, in the position of having to ask its EU partners for solidarity, as it cannot absorb all the newcomers alone.
As usual, however, perceptions are lagging behind reality, which means that Germany is still widely viewed as the eurozone’s most powerful force.
But, as the global business cycle accelerates Germany’s return to the “old normal,” the power shift within Europe will become increasingly difficult to ignore.
Germany, which exports a large volume of investment goods, benefited more than other eurozone member countries from the investment boom in China and other emerging economies.
But emerging-economy growth is now slowing considerably, including in China, where demand is shifting from investment toward consumption.
This tends to undermine German growth and benefit southern European countries, which export more consumer goods.
The ongoing shift in Europe’s economic and political power dynamics is likely to have a major impact on the EU’s functioning – and especially that of the eurozone.
For example, without a strong Germany to enforce the eurozone’s fiscal strictures and urge the implementation of difficult but necessary structural reforms, countries may lose their motivation to do what is needed to ensure fairness and stability in the long term.
If inflation remains low, the ECB might feel freer to pursue further rounds of monetary stimulus, undermining fiscal objectives further.
In short, we may be headed toward a less “Germanic” economic policy in the eurozone.
While that might enhance the EU’s popularity in the periphery, it could increase resistance to EU membership in Germany – a country that, despite its waning economic strength, remains an important piece of the integration puzzle.
Germany’s Neighborhood Watch
FRANKFURT – On a recent trip to Germany, I was struck by two distinct narratives.
One narrative features a robust German economy with low unemployment, strong finances, and the right competitive position to exploit the most dynamic segments of global demand.
The other narrative describes an economy that is encumbered by never-ending European debt crises whose perpetrators seek to shift their responsibility – and their financing needs – onto Germany’s pristine balance sheet.
Both narratives are understandable.
But they cannot co-exist forever.
After all, it is difficult to be a good house in a deteriorating neighborhood.
Either the neighborhood improves, or the value of the house declines.
And it matters a great deal which narrative prevails – for Germany, for Europe, and for the global economy.
Germany today is reaping the benefits of many years of responsible domestic economic management.
In addition to maintaining sound public finances, German leaders implemented difficult structural reforms aimed at improving international competitiveness, including painful labor-market reforms.
As a result, Germany is one of the few advanced economies today that has created many jobs and maintained financial stability.
In other words, it is the AAA of AAAs.
Yet Germany is also part of a highly challenged neighborhood, if not its anchor.
Its neighbors include countries – most notably on the eurozone’s periphery – that are struggling.
They have high overall unemployment (and alarmingly high youth joblessness), and are unable to grow on their own power.
In some cases, they also face solvency questions, and are far from achieving the socio-political consensus needed to get their economic houses in order.
To state the obvious, this contrast between Germany and its neighborhood is very awkward.
It fuels endless internal and external tensions, encourages finger pointing, and promotes a loud and disruptive blame game.
And all of this distracts attention from the need to compete in a rapidly changing global economy.
The longer all of this persists, the more it tears at the fabric of European unity.
Accordingly, European officials need to continue to make steadfast progress in three major areas:
·&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Improve individual countries’ domestic policy mix in a manner that targets debt sustainability through both growth promotion and deficit reduction, especially in the most vulnerable peripheral economies;
·&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Enhance the eurozone’s internal financial circuit breakers to reduce the risk of disruptive financial feedback loops and destabilizing multiple equilibria; and
·&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Strengthen the eurozone’s institutional underpinnings, as well as its mechanisms for policy coordination and peer review.
None of these steps is easy; and they are certainly not automatic.
Moreover, to maximize their effectiveness, they must be implemented simultaneously; indeed, this is a situation in which one plus one plus one equals more than three.
And this will not happen unless two other, even more controversial steps are taken.
First, Germany must play an even larger role in conducting and coordinating the eurozone’s policy responses.
I know that many Germans are uncomfortable with this.
But there is no workable alternative for Europe’s well-being – and, therefore, that of Germany.
The European Union’s institutions still lack the authority and credibility needed to take on this role.
The European Central Bank does not possess the proper structural policy tools, and it has already been forced to bear burdens that, arguably, are beyond its strictly defined mandate.
And there is no other economy that comes close to Germany in size, influence, and economic and financial health.
Second, the eurozone, led by a Germany that is working closely with France, needs to clarify decisively what it intends to look like in the medium term.
There are two alternatives, both sensitive and controversial, and the choice is for Europeans alone to make and sustain; but they must make it if they are decisively to put behind them the risk of eurozone fragmentation.
On one hand, they can decide to let politics dominate economics.
This is not easy for politicians to sell, especially in the core countries (particularly Germany, Finland, and the Netherlands), as it would involve large multi-year subsidies to the periphery – or the analytical equivalent of the difficult decision made over 20 years ago to reunify Germany at a currency parity.
Here, however, there is the added difficulty of a potential conflict between regional politics and national democratic processes.
On the other hand, they can decide to allow economics to prevail. Here, eurozone members would collectively opt for a smaller and less imperfect union that includes countries with more similar initial conditions – economically, financially, politically, and socially.
And, again, there is no easy way to do this, especially given that the eurozone was intentionally designed with no exit in mind.
Until these difficult and controversial decisions are made, periods of relative tranquility in Europe are likely to be interrupted by the recurrent eruption of financial instability and bouts of political bickering and dithering.
And the longer this continues, the greater the risk that Germany’s neighborhood will erode the robustness of what the country has painstakingly built.
Ultimately, there can be no strong Germany without a stable eurozone; no stable eurozone without a strong Germany; and no global economic stability without both.
It is time for Europeans to make the difficult longer-term choices that are critical to sustaining and enhancing their historical regional project.
Germany’s Pathological Export Boom
Germany is the world’s industrial bazaar.
No other country can offer its international clients such a broad variety of industrial products.
Germany has 450 hidden world champions for niche products, and is home to 15 of the 20 biggest trade fairs in the world.
It is also the world’s top exporter of merchandise and the second-largest exporter of goods and services.
But Germany is gradually becoming a bazaar economy in a different sense, because nowadays it specializes in packaging and selling its products, while outsourcing an ever-larger share of its high value-added manufacturing to low-wage countries.
In other words, Germany’s role in the world economy is shifting from that of a producer to that of a merchant.
As a result, its exports contain an ever-increasing share of imported goods and services and the share of domestic value-added in its exports per unit of output is rapidly declining.
This does not mean that the German-made share of exports is falling in absolute terms.
It only means that the total volume of German exports has been rising faster than the total German value-added in those exports.
Is this good or bad?
A favorable assessment cannot rest on the fact that the overall German value-added in exports has been growing because this is simply an effect of the German specialization in export-related production.
When a country specializes in a certain area, capital and labor move into that area at a rate faster than they move into other areas – indeed, the growth of export-related sectors may come at the cost of a decline in other areas.
Simply put, there is such a thing as excessive specialization.
To assess whether excessive specialization has occurred in Germany, we must focus on the labor market, for it is here that the effect of specialization is most visible.
Unfortunately, there is no reason to be optimistic.
From 1995 to 2004, Germany lost a total of 1.09 million full-time equivalent jobs in manufacturing and trade.
At the same time, no new jobs were created in the rest of the economy.
On the contrary, employment outside manufacturing and trade declined, so that the economy as a whole suffered a net loss of 1.26 million full-time equivalent jobs.
In fact, since the fall of communism, the percentage decline in German industrial employment has been larger than in any other OECD country.
In part, this was due to the decline in the former East Germany.
But even western Germany holds the second-lowest rank of all developed countries.
The automobile and electrical engineering industries have been at the forefront of the bazaar economy.
To remain price competitive, they have had to rely on imported components.
The manufacture of electrical products, such as chips and passive devices, has quite often been shifted completely to Asia, while even automobiles that are still assembled in Germany rely heavily on components produced in Eastern Europe.
At bottom, the coincidence of unemployment and booming exports can be explained by the high and rigid wages from which Germany still suffers.
As a consequence of its welfare state and aggressive unions, Germany has had the highest hourly labor costs in the world for most of the last twenty years; only recently has Denmark taken the lead due to a revaluation of the krona.
Excessive wages destroy the labor-intensive upstream product stages too fast and also impairs other labor-intensive sectors like textiles, simple services, tourism, and construction.
As a result, these labor-intensive sectors must release a lot of labor and capital, which push into the capital-intensive export sectors that are better able to cope with high wages.
But, while these sectors therefore grow especially fast, their high capital intensity means that they cannot fully employ the released labor, with the result that some of the unemployed workers have nowhere to turn but the welfare state.
At the same time, since returns to capital are kept low by high wages, very little investment occurs.
The excess of savings over investment flows abroad as capital exports.
Economic growth and job creation slow, while exports soar.
Astonishingly, many interpret Germany’s export boom and current-account surplus, which measures these capital exports, as an indicator of the strength of Germany as an investment location.
But, according to the Bundesbank, net investment abroad (including financial investment) has already roughly matched domestic investment in recent years.
As the international division of labor proceeds further, the import content of German products will continue to increase, which means that rising exports will lead to fewer domestic jobs and less income growth.
Unless and until German workers accept the need for greater flexibility in the face of global competition, export profits will continue to be invested abroad, reducing overall production costs – and reinforcing the bazaar economy at home.
Germany’s Political Stagnation
A year ago, Angela Merkel, Germany’s charming new chancellor, was in the final phase of her election campaign.
The incumbent, Gerhard Schröder, lagged so far behind her Christian Democrats (CDU) in public opinion polls that she thought she would win a landslide victory and could therefore afford to expound the cruelties of the liberal austerity program delineated in her electoral campaign.
She even announced a value-added tax increase (which her new government has, indeed, decided to implement in 2007).
But German voters did not appreciate her honesty.
When she named the law professor Paul Kirchhof, who advocated a flat tax, as her candidate for finance minister, Merkel’s electoral cakewalk turned into a nightmare.
She lost nearly her entire lead, and in the end won by only a tiny margin – a margin too small to form her preferred coalition with the liberal Free Democrats.
Instead, she had to form a coalition with Schröder’s Social Democrats (SPD), though without Schröder himself.
Merkel’s first year of government will soon be over.
It has been successful in terms of international relations.
She won the respect of her European Union partners and managed to salve Germany’s damaged relationship with the United States.
Her unpretentious manner and intellectual capacity (she holds a doctorate in physics) quickly won her the respect of many, even of Vladimir Putin, whose language she speaks fluently.
However, Merkel has disappointed everyone who hoped that she would continue and even expand Schröder’s domestic economic reform agenda.
While her party program speaks of opening union contracts, relaxing job protection, and, in particular, overhauling the incentive structure of the welfare system, her government has been mostly silent about these issues.
The cautious steps toward wage subsidies that her government has taken are mere window dressing and cannot be taken seriously.
Thus, Merkel has so far dampened any hope that the important and hard reforms that she announced during her campaign and that Germany urgently needs will be carried out under the CDU-SPD “grand coalition” government.
To be sure, she has put healthcare reform and a reform of company taxation on the agenda, but the plans presented so far give no indication of a major breakthrough.
This stagnation in policymaking has been heavily criticized by the media and the influential Wirtschaftsrat (Economic Council), an association of entrepreneurs who sympathize with the CDU.
Even Germany’s Christian Democratic president, Horst Köhler, has continually reminded the government of the need to press ahead with economic reforms in order to pave the way for sustainable growth.
So why does Merkel not dare more?
Why is she not sticking to the announcements she made during her campaign?
No less than 41% of the voting-age adult population lives primarily on government transfers such as state pensions, full-scale public stipends, unemployment benefits, disability benefits, and social assistance. (In East Germany, the figure is a whopping 47%.)
Among those adults who actually vote, recipients of public transfers form a clear majority. Indeed, the upper 10% of income recipients pay more than 50% of aggregate income tax revenue, and the upper 20% pays about 80%, while 40% of income recipients pay no income taxes whatsoever.
Small wonder that a huge majority of the population – and even a slight majority of CDU voters – prefer a strengthening of the welfare state to a more market-oriented system.
The SPD learned about these preferences the hard way, when Schröder’s liberal reforms, as cautious as they were, prompted an internal revolt and induced his predecessor as party chairman and temporary former Minister of Finance, Oskar Lafontaine, to desert the SPD and found a new party.
Lafontaine now plays directly on the preferences of public transfer recipients and firmly occupies the left margin of German politics, dreaming the dream of the everlasting welfare state that can draw on unlimited resources.
Indeed, after Lafontaine’s “The Left” party merged with eastern Germany’s ex-communists, it secured a firm base among voters, changing the political equilibrium in the country.
Germany’s Same Old Election
BERLIN – Germany’s current parliamentary election campaign looks like a front-running contender for the title of the most boring in the history of the Federal Republic.
The predominant response among commentators to the sole television debate between Chancellor Angela Merkel and her challenger, Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier, held two weeks before the election, was a collective yawn – all the more remarkable considering the historical events that overshadow this election.
Twenty years ago, the Berlin Wall came down, triggering a seismic shift that moved the borders of the old Federal Republic and of Western Europe as a whole, hundreds of miles to the east.
The vast Soviet empire exited the historical stage without a single shot being fired.
This anniversary should have provided ample reason for a heated debate about the successes and failures of German reunification and for offering a vision for Germany and Europe for the next 20 years.
Former German Chancellor Helmut Schmidt once quipped that politicians who have a vision should go and have their eyes checked.
That warning made sense in the 1970’s, when even young parliamentarians in his Social Democratic Party dreamed of revolution.
But Schmidt would never have imagined that there would come a day when there would be no politician in search of a vision check.
Likewise, in the fall of 2008, the threat of financial Armageddon brought not just Germany but the whole world to the brink of disaster.
The worst has been mitigated and obscured in the wealthy countries by running up unprecedented levels of debt, but any moderately streetwise person knows that the next generation – and even the one after that – will be paying for the excesses of the investment bankers.
One cannot help but marvel at how discreetly this topic is being dealt with by Merkel and Steinmeier.
Ask the party strategists and they will tell you that the financial crisis is a topic for losers; voters want to hear something positive.
The electorate is experiencing the greatest slump since 1929 like a bad dream that is half over – and politicians don’t want to wake them up.
The so-called “autonomous” violent left-wing radicals in Berlin-Kreuzberg enjoy themselves by torching luxury cars, but not a single bank window has been smashed in Germany.
Nor has a single criminal financier-gambler, who misled the financial regulators with fudged figures, been brought to justice.
On the contrary, these bankrupts are filing lawsuits to get the million-dollar bonuses to which they feel entitled.
Quite a few of them are already back at the table gambling away with the taxpayer’s money and peddling their new “financial products”; they know that when the next crash comes, the taxpayer will have no choice but to bail them out again.
Only some stalwarts timidly point to the inflammatory question posed by Mack the Knife in Berthold Brecht’s Threepenny Opera: “What is a bank robbery compared to the founding of a bank?
What is a pick-lock compared to a debenture share?”
But this slogan is from the 1920’s and seems like a nostalgic reminder of past turmoil that one prefers to see on the stage.
The greatest miracle in the 2009 election campaign is the resurgence of the Liberal Democrats (FDP).
In fact, the German political landscape needs nothing more than a truly liberal party, in the US sense of the word “liberal” – a champion of the cause of individual freedom.
Unfortunately, under the far-too-long leadership of Guido Westerwelle, the FDP has degenerated into a party notable for defending the freedom only of a few privileged individuals: bankers and businessmen.
Just a year ago, the FDP fervently adhered to the religion of the American neo-cons, according to which markets regulate themselves. So it vigorously opposed all of the half-hearted attempts to regulate the financial sector.
As late as this past May, the FDP defended the ownership rights of US billionaire Christopher Flowers, a major stockholder in the failed German bank Hypo Real Estate, which was saved from oblivion by state guarantees worth more than €100 billion of taxpayers’ money.
Nevertheless, at a time when finance is under a cloud, the party that defends the freedom of the financial gamblers over the freedom of the individual is winning favor with the electorate like no other.
The FDP can count on about 13-14% of the vote, which means that it may be able to join with Merkel’s Christian Democratic Union to form a government.
I cannot explain this dynamic.
I do not believe in Karl Marx’s iron laws of history.
Yet one historical law does seem to apply: in an immense economic crisis, the voters stick with the people whose economic competence they have traditionally trusted – that is, the very people who led them to ruin.
But there is an exception to every rule.
In this case, it is the former PDS, the successor party to the former East Germany’s ruling party, the SED.
Dissidents in the GDR translated those three letters as “ P ractically t he S ame.”
This party, now using the presumptuous name “The Left,” has gained a foothold in West Germany with its impossible promises of higher pensions, a minimum hourly wage of €10, huge public investment schemes, and zero unemployment – in short, exactly the kind of socialist paradise that failed in East Germany.
And, of course, The Left, which still counts large numbers of former Stasi personnel among its members, also calls for a reassessment of East Germany itself; many party veterans object to the term “dictatorship” for this phase of their lives.
So, besides the FDP, this party, too, is profiting from the mainstream political parties’ half-hearted handling of the global economic crisis.
The only “winner” when Germans vote on September 27 will most likely be the “party” of non-voters.
I do not sympathize with this group, but I do understand that non-voters expect only one thing of Germany’s political parties these days: “practically the same”
German Banks on Top
CHICAGO – Overcoming the European Union’s current economic malaise, as almost everyone acknowledges, requires deeper integration, with the first step taking the form of a banking union supervised by the European Central Bank.
But Europe’s banking union also requires uniform rules for winding up insolvent financial institutions –&#160;and this has become a sticking point.
Germany opposes the new bank-resolution mechanism proposed by the European Commission, generating moral and political support at home by portraying its stance as an effort to protect German taxpayers: Why should the German ants pay for the southern European grasshoppers?
In fact, Germany’s position is a ploy to hide its anticompetitive behavior, whereby the government subsidizes German banks and industry at the expense of everyone else – including German taxpayers.
Europe’s common market has been the single greatest success of post-World War II European policy, boosting economic growth and fostering cultural interchange.
But a common market requires a level playing field, and the European Commission has worked hard to achieve this in many sectors over the years.
Until now, the main exception was banking.
The emerging banking union is not only the first step toward a European fiscal union; it is also the final step toward completing the European common market.
Without a common resolution mechanism that levels the playing field, the common market will remain unfinished.
In principle, the EU’s banking rules are common to all member states.
In practice, their implementation was, until recently, left to national regulators, who applied very different standards.
Most important, while state subsidies in all other sectors are forbidden, they are commonly accepted in banking – not only explicit subsidies, such as Germany’s bailout of several Landesbanks after the American subprime-mortgage crisis, but implicit subsidies as well.
Some French banks’ traders openly boast of backing by the French government, which will never let its banks fail.
Unfortunately, this is not just a French or a German problem.
All market players know that EU governments will not let big banks fail.
This implicit subsidy not only costs each country’s taxpayers billions of euros; it also distorts competition, because not all implicit subsidies are created equal.
Regardless of its fundamentals, a German bank would be considered safer than an Italian one, because the German government’s implicit guarantee is much more valuable than the Italian government’s.
As a result, German banks have a lower cost of funding and – all else being equal –&#160;higher profitability.
To the extent that some of the lower cost is rebated to their clients, even industrial firms in Germany enjoy a lower cost of capital, giving them an unfair advantage vis-à-vis their European competitors.
One way to prevent this distortion would be to create a mechanism to bail out all banks with European money.
But this approach would not only leave German taxpayers on the hook; it would also create perverse incentives in the entire European banking system, maximizing instability.
The preferred alternative is to create a common resolution mechanism, which would apply throughout Europe, regardless of a bank’s country of origin.
Such a mechanism would prevent the need for government intervention.
The recent proposal by Michel Barnier, the European Commissioner for the Internal Market and Services, is an effort to implement this solution.
It provides a common resolution mechanism for all banks in Europe, which forces losses to be absorbed by shareholders, bondholders, and large depositors before any government money is committed.
To provide short-term financing to a bank during any restructuring, the Commission’s plan would create a European Fund, putting all banks on an equal footing.
The Commission’s proposal is far from perfect.
After a bank’s shareholders are wiped out and its creditors take an 8% “haircut,” the European Fund transforms itself into a bailout fund, justifying some of Germany’s fears.
And there is no explicit prohibition of some form of national government bailout.
Even so, the proposal is a step in the right direction.
German criticism should be directed at improving it, not at sandbagging it.
German taxpayers have paid dearly for German banks’ mistakes.
In 2008, when the Landesbanks were found to be full of American subprime mortgages, the German government bailed them out with a €500 billion ($650 billion) rescue package at its taxpayers’ expense.
In 2010, when German banks were badly over-exposed – to the tune of $704 billion – to Greece, Ireland, Italy, Portugal, and Spain, European taxpayers and the ECB helped them to bring most of that money home.
The biggest threat to German taxpayers is not southern European profligacy, but their own country’s banks.
In this sense, the banking union is not a scheme to burden German taxpayers with the losses of failed southern European banks; rather, it is a mechanism to render all banks (including German ones) accountable for their own mistakes, thereby reducing the burden that they impose on domestic taxpayers.
It is about time that German voters understood that the largest grasshoppers are in the center of their own towns.
Germany’s Zero Hour
The 8th of May always brings back memories of 1945, because for me the end of the war in Europe really was a zero hour.
When the first Soviet soldiers came up our little street in the Western suburbs of Berlin, we knew that the great slaughter was coming to an end.
My father who had been in the resistance would come back from Brandenburg prison.
I no longer needed to hide as I had done after my release from a Gestapo camp at the beginning of February.
Somehow a new life would begin.
First, however, was the chaos.
The Nazis were gone, and the occupation powers had not yet set up any kind of administration.
We all went looting the local shops; I still have the slim volumes of romantic poetry which my 16-year-old self took from a bookshop.
The occupation troops went on a rampage. Food was hard to find.
My father was taken from prison and transported straight to central Berlin, where he was told to set up the office for Berlin’s energy supply, a task that had to be done literally from nothing.
There was no power, no transport, no organised life of any kind for a period.
Was it defeat or liberation?
For Germans this question was not easily answered, though clearly our family was liberated in every sense.
The question then was this: liberated for what?
Where do we go from here?
“You must help,” my mother said to me.
So I offered my services to the local Soviet authority and helped distribute basic foodstuffs to a small number of outlets in our district of Zehlendorf.
Five weeks later, however, I was back at school.
I carried a special pass as a “victim of fascism,” but others showed their Iron Cross which they had got for late military action.
Some were refugees from the East, many had their homes destroyed in air raids, almost all grieved for lost loved ones.
Yet the zero hour did not last.
It is almost unbelievable, but three years later the liberalising policies that followed a currency reform set in motion what came to be known as Germany’s economic miracle.
To be precise: this is how West Germany’s economic miracle began.
The German example shows just how different occupation powers can be.
In the Soviet zone of occupation, progress was slow and above all coupled with a new enslavement.
Even concentration camps like Buchenwald changed their guards and inmates but remained in use.
The Western powers in Germany, on the other hand, pursued, after a short period of non-fraternisation, a policy of controlled empowerment.
Within a year of the end of the war there were indigenous administrations, within two years elections.
Democracy was not just preached but practised, and it could build on German traditions.
All this, to be sure, was not just benevolence on the part of the occupying powers. It was also a result of the incipient Cold War, and the desire of both sides to consolidate “their” part of Germany.
Even so, there are lessons to be learned from the process.
Two of these deserve to be mentioned.
One is economic and has to do with the Marshall Plan.
It is perhaps regrettable but nonetheless real that democracy finds roots more easily if economic conditions improve.
Such improvement requires above all self-help, the actions of individuals who will not accept the misery of the zero hour for long.
Such self-help can be encouraged by policies (which is what Ludwig Erhard, the father of the “social market economy” did in Germany), but some starting capital helps.
This is where the Marshall Plan of American support became crucial.
Similarly, the European Union has helped, and continues to help the postcommunist countries on their way.
The other lesson is moral, and it is more difficult.
The Nuremberg trials exposed the guilt of the Nazi leaders beyond doubt, if indeed any such doubt was left in people’s minds.
While these were important, however, Germany did not begin its arduous path away from zero hour with concern for the past.
Indeed, the Adenauer years after 1949 were described by many as years of “restoration” because too many minor Nazi figures had remained in their jobs.
In some ways, the country simply ignored their past and moved forward.
Years later when a market economy and political democracy were established, Germany did turn toward “coping with the past”, and did so very effectively.
Germany’s Nazi past is uniquely horrible, so comparisons with other countries with blighted histories are misleading.
Still, in its own way Poland has followed a similar path after 1989: first the new, then the attempt to come to terms with the past.
On balance this is a better method of dealing with a nation’s zero hour than doing things the other way round.
In Europe then, the 8th of May 2005 is an occasion to look back in sorrow and anger. It is also an occasion to look forward with pride in the achievements of recent decades and therefore for hope.
Masalah Ekonomi yang akan Timbul dari Rencana Schäuble
ATHENA – Krisis di Eropa siap memasuki fase paling berbahaya.
Setelah memaksa Yunani untuk menerima kesepakatan “extend-and-pretend” lanjutan pada dana talangan (bailout), garis pertempuran baru tengah dibentuk.
Dengan masuknya pengungsi yang membongkar kerusakan yang disebabkan oleh prospek ekonomi yang berbeda dan tingginya jumlah pengangguran pemuda di sekitar Eropa, konsekuensinya akan berbahaya, sebagaimana diungkapkan dengan jelas baru-baru ini oleh tiga politisi Eropa – Perdana Menteri Italia Matteo Renzi, Menteri Ekonomi Perancis Emmanuel Macron, dan Menteri Keuangan Jerman Wolfgang Schäuble.
Renzi sudah hampir menghapuskan, setidaknya secara retoris, aturan-aturan fiskal yang selama ini dipegang teguh oleh Jerman.
Dalam tindakan perlawanan yang luar biasa, ia mengancam jika Komisi Eropa menolak anggaran nasional Italia, ia akan mengirimkan ulang tanpa membuat perubahan. 
Ini bukan pertama kalinya Renzi mengasingkan pemimpin Jerman.
Memang sudah bisa diperkirakan bahwa pernyataan beliau ini mengikuti upaya berbulan-bulan yang dilakukan oleh menteri keuangan dalam kabinetnya, Pier Carlo Padoan, untuk menunjukkan komitmen Italia kepada “aturan” Eurozone yang didukung oleh Jerman.
Renzi memahami bahwa kepatuhan terhadap sifat hemat yang terinspirasi oleh Jerman akan mengarahkan perekonomian dan keuangan publik Italia menuju stagnasi lebih dalam, disertai dengan penurunan rasio utang terhadap PDB.
Sebagai politisi yang sempurna, Renzi tahu bahwa ini adalah jalur cepat menuju bencana elektoral.
Macron sangat berbeda dari Renzi, baik dari segi gaya maupun substansi.
Seorang bankir yang beralih menjadi politis, ia adalah satu-satunya menteri di kabinet Presiden François Hollande yang menggabungkan pemahaman serius atas tantangan-tantangan ekonomi makro di Perancis dan Eropa dengan reputasi Jerman sebagai reformis dan teman bicara yang terampil.
Jadi ketika ia bicara tentang perang agama yang akan terjadi di Eropa, antara kaum Calvinis dari bagian timur laut Jerman dan kaum Katolik di sebagian besar wilayah pinggiran Eropa, kini saatnya untuk memperhatikan.
Pernyataan Schäuble baru-baru ini tentang trajektori ekonomi Eropa yang sekarang juga menyoroti kuldesak Eropa.
Selama bertahun-tahun, Schäuble telah memainkan permainan untuk mewujudkan visinya akan arsitektur optimal di Eropa yang dapat dicapai dalam keterbatasan politik dan budaya yang selama ini diterima begitu saja.
“Rencana Schäuble”, itu sebutan yang saya berikan, menyerukan panggilan untuk kesatuan politik terbatas untuk mendukung euro.
Singkatnya, Schäuble memilih pembentukan Eurogroup yang resmi (terdiri dari menteri keuangan negara-negara Eropa), dipimpin oleh seorang presiden yang memegang hak veto – disahkan oleh Kamar Euro (Euro Chamber) yang terdiri dari anggota dewan/parlemen dari negara-negara anggota Eurozone – dengan anggaran nasional.
Sebagai pengganti atas hilangnya kendali terhadap anggaran mereka, Schäuble menawarkan Perancis dan Italia – sasaran utama dari rencana ini – janji atas adanya small Eurozone-wide common budget yang akan membiayai sebagian skema pengangguran dan penjaminan deposito.
Kesatuan politik yang berpegang pada displin dan minimalis ini tidak akan dapat diterima di Perancis, dimana kaum elit selalu menolak pelepasan kedaulatan.
Ketika politisi seperti Macron telah bergeser jauh untuk menerima pentingnya mengalihkan kekuasaan atas anggaran nasional ke “pusat”, mereka takut bahwa rencana Schäuble ini meminta terlalu banyak tapi menawarkan terlalu sedikit; besarnya pembatasan pada kewenangan fiskal Perancis dan anggaran bersama yang secara makro ekonomi tidak signifikan.
Akan tetapi, walaupun Macron bisa membujuk Hollande untuk menerima rencana Schäuble, masih belum jelas apakah Kanselir Jerman Angela Merkel akan menyetujuinya.
Gagasan Schäuble sejauh ini gagal membujuknya, atau bahkan Bundesbank (dimana presidennya, Jens Weidmann, sangat bersikap negatif terhadap setiap tindakan mutualisasi fiskal, bahkan versi terbatasnya yang mana Schäuble siap berkorban untuk kendali atas anggaran Perancis dan Italia).
Terperangkap antara Kanselir Jerman yang enggan dan Perancis yang tidak sehat, Schäuble memperkirakan bahwa turbulensi yang diakibatkan oleh keluarnya Yunani dari Eurozone akan membantu meyakinkan Perancis, serta rekan-rekan satu kabinetnya, akan pentingnya menerapkan rencana tersebut.
Kini, sembari menunggu “program” Yunani yang terkini untuk runtuh  karena kontradiksi yang sifatnya pasti, kementerian keuangan Jerman tengah menyiapkan pertempuran yang akan datang.
Pada bulan September, Schäuble membagikan ikhtisar tiga proposal kepada rekan-rekannya di Eurogroup guna mencegah krisis euro yang baru.
Pertama, obligasi pemerintah negara-negara Eurozone harus memuat klausa yang memudahkan “bail-in” bagi pemegang obligasi.
Kedua, aturan-aturan Bank Sentral Eropa (ECB) harus direvisi untuk mencegah bank-bank komersial dari memperhitungkan obligasi tersebut sebagai aset-aset yang ultra-aman dan likuid.
Ketiga, Eropa harus menghilangkan gagasan penjaminan deposito bersam dan menggantikannya dengan komitmen untuk membiarkan bank gagal ketika bank tidak lagi mampu memenuhi aturan-aturan penjaminan utang menurut ECB.
Penerapan proposal-proposal ini katakanlah di tahun 1999 mungkin bisa membatasi aliran modal ke pinggiran segera setelah penetapan mata uang tunggal.
Sayangnya, pada tahun 2015, mengingat utang-utang publik dan kerugian perbankan yang dihadapi negara-negara anggota Eurozone, skema tersebut akan mengakibatkan resesi yang semakin buruk di pinggiran dan hampir pasti menyebabkan pecahnya integrasi moneter.
Jengkel dengan Schäuble yang mangkir dari rencananya sendiri atas kesatuan politik, Macron baru-baru ini menyampaikan rasa frustasinya: “kaum Calvinis ingin membuat orang lain membayar sampai akhir masa hidup mereka”, keluhnya.
“Mereka menginginkan reformasi namun tidak berkontribusi pada solidaritas apapun.”
Aspek yang paling mengganggu dari pernyataan Renzi dan Macron ini adalah keadaan putus asa yang mereka sampaikan.
Penolakan Renzi atas aturan fiskal yang mendorong Italia ke dalam spiral utang-deflasi yang dapat dihindari ini dapat dimengerti; namun, karena tidak adanya proposal tentang aturan-aturan alternatif, hal ini pun tidak menghasilkan apa-apa.
Kesulitan Macron ialah nampaknya tidak ada serangkaian reformasi yang bisa ia tawarkan kepada Schäuble untuk meyakinkan pemerintah Jerman agar menerima tingkat daur ulang surplus yang diperlukan untuk menstabilkan Perancis dan Eurozone.
Sementara itu, komitmen Jerman terhadap “aturan-aturan” yang tidak sepadan dengan ketahanan Eurozone akan melemahkan politisi-politis Perancis dan Jerman yang sejak dulu hingga sekarang mengharapkan aliansi dengan negara-negara ekonomi terbesar di Eropa.
Beberapa diantaranya, seperti Renzi, merespon dengan penolakan.
Lainnya, seperti Macron, dengan enggan mulai menerima bahwa kerangka kelembagaan dan gabungan kebijakan Eurozone yang sekarang pada akhirnya akan mengarah pada pemutusan atau penyiksaan dalam berbagai bentuk divergensi ekonomi yang berkelanjutan.
Hikmah di balik awan badai ekonomi ini adalah proposal-proposal minimalis mengenai kesatuan politik, seperti rencana Schäuble, akan gagal.
Reformasi kelembagaan secara makro ekonomi yang signifikan kurang-lebih akan menstabilkan Eropa. Dan hanya aliansi warga negara pan-Eropa yang demokratis yang dapat menciptakan dorongan besar yang dibutuhkan agar reformasi tersebut dapat bekerja.
Germany’s Golden Opportunity
BERLIN – The German economy appears unstoppable.
Output is expected to grow by more than 2% this year, and wages by 3%, with the current-account surplus set to reach a towering 8.4% of GDP.
Unemployment has been halved over the last decade, and now stands at an all-time low.
German exporters remain highly innovative and competitive.
And the government is recording a sizeable budget surplus.
While the rest of Europe remains mired in crisis and self-doubt, Germany’s future seems bright and secure.
But appearances can be deceiving.
In fact, today’s rosy macroeconomic data tell only part of the story.
Since the euro was established in 1999, Germany’s productivity growth has been no more than average among European countries, real wages have declined for half the workforce, and annual GDP growth has averaged a disappointing 1.2%.
A key reason for this lackluster performance is Germany’s notoriously paltry investment rate, which is among the lowest in the OECD.
The result is deteriorating infrastructure, including roads, bridges, and schools.
This, together with an inadequate regulatory and business environment, has raised concerns among companies; since 1999, the largest German multinationals have doubled their employee headcounts abroad, while cutting jobs at home.
In their 2013 coalition agreement, the Christian Democratic Union and the Social Democrats set a goal of raising public and private investment by 3% of GDP, or €90 billion ($100.8 billion) annually, to reach the OECD average.
Although this is not a particularly ambitious objective – after all, Germany’s current-account surplus at the time amounted to 7.8% GDP – achieving it is vital to the country’s continued prosperity.
Last August, the German government appointed a 21-member committee of experts (including the three authors) from business, labor unions, finance, and academia to determine how to achieve the target.
Last month, the committee presented its ten-point action plan, which, despite disagreement on taxes and private financing of public investment, reflects an unusually broad consensus.
For starters, the action plan calls for limiting the impact on public investment of the pressure to consolidate the government budget.
The plan does not challenge the constitutional debt brake that forbids the federal government from running structural deficits above 0.35% of GDP.
But it does recommend a legally binding commitment to keep investment levels at least as high as the rate of depreciation of state assets, and to use unexpected budget surpluses, first and foremost, for increased public investment.
In order to support local investment, the expert committee proposes creating a “national investment pact” to enable municipalities to increase investment by at least €15 billion over the next three years.
And it recommends establishing a public advisory institution to help municipalities realize their investment projects, of which there is currently a €118 billion backlog.
The most controversial issue, within the committee and in Germany, relates to financing infrastructure via public-private partnerships, a seemingly promising solution that nonetheless has proved to be far from a panacea.
To strike an effective balance, the action plan proposes two publicly owned investment funds – one raising money from institutional investors, and the other from individuals.
The public projects financed by the funds would provide sufficient efficiency gains to attract private financing.
As for purely private-sector investment, the committee recommends a focus on developing the sectors that will dominate tomorrow’s economy.
As it stands, Germany is strong in traditional industrial sectors, but has fallen behind its competitors in Asia and the United States in terms of investment in research and development.
To catch up, R&amp;D spending should be raised from less than 3% to at least 3.5% of GDP.
Nowhere is the need to overcome financing bottlenecks more apparent than with Germany’s Energiewende (energy transition).
To succeed, more than €30 billion, or 1% of GDP, will have to be invested annually in network infrastructure, renewable-energy generation, combined heat and power systems, and storage technologies in the coming decades.
While some of these funds will come from public budgets, the vast majority will have to be provided by the private sector.
Moreover, bringing Germany’s digital infrastructure, especially its broadband networks, up to international standards will require significant investment, which an improved regulatory framework could help to encourage.
Regulatory reform is also needed to strengthen support for startup companies – an area in which Germany is notoriously weak, reflected in the difficulties such companies face in obtaining venture capital.
A substantial increase in private investment is necessary not just for Germany; it is critical to Europe’s recovery from its ongoing crisis.
Given Germany’s relative economic strength, it has a special responsibility to help foster investment throughout Europe, including by promoting European-level reforms of transport and energy, supporting incentives for innovation, and backing digital modernization.
The expert committee supports EU Commission President Jean-Claude Juncker’s plan to channel some €300 billion of private-sector money toward infrastructure, and proposes that if the scheme is successful, it should be transformed into a permanent European investment mechanism.
This would require more funding in the long run for the European Fund for Strategic Investments, to which the German government should contribute directly.
Germany’s combination of strong growth, low unemployment, favorable financing conditions, and large budget surpluses present it with a golden opportunity.
With increased investment in infrastructure, not to mention a competitive education system and more investment-friendly business conditions, it can place its economy on a stronger footing for the future, and help pull Europe out of its malaise.
We now have a plan; all that is needed is the will to implement it.
Germany’s Four Neins
BERLIN – Germany’s stance toward Europe has become one of rejection and disengagement.
Its policymakers deny the eurozone’s crisis-ridden countries a more active fiscal policy; refuse to support a European investment agenda to generate demand and growth; have declared a fiscal surplus, rather than faster potential growth, as their primary domestic goal; and have begun turning against the European Central Bank (ECB) in the struggle against deflation and a credit crunch.
On all four counts, Germany is wrong.
To be sure, Germany is justified in rejecting narrow-minded calls by France and Italy for unconditional fiscal expansion.
After all, fiscal stimulus can work only if it supports private investment and is accompanied by much more ambitious structural reforms – the kind of reforms that France and Italy are currently resisting.
But Germany has all of the leverage it needs to implement the stability-oriented reforms that it wants for Europe.
For starters, Germany, together with the European Commission, can compel France to pursue deeper reforms in exchange for more time to consolidate its deficit.
Germany cannot, however, indulge its obsession with supply-side reforms without also pursuing growth-enhancing policies.
As Germany knows from its own experience in the early 2000s, the benefits of supply-side reforms – namely, improved competitiveness and higher long-term growth rates – take a long time to emerge.
Time is a luxury that Europe does not have.
With every month that the economy loses productive capacity, the likelihood of stagnation and deflation rises.
The key to ending the European crisis is a stimulus plan that addresses deficiencies on both the supply and demand sides.
That is why Germany’s refusal to help find a way to finance the proposed European investment agenda – which, for a limited time, would fund productive private investment – is a mistake.
Equally problematic is Germany’s focus on maintaining a fiscal surplus.
With projections for German GDP growth this year and next revised downward by more than 0.6 percentage points in the last few months, the government could be forced to initiate a pro-cyclical fiscal policy to achieve its goal, inducing even lower growth at home and throughout the eurozone.
Given that the German economy’s output gap remains negative, the government should be implementing expansionary fiscal policy that targets the country’s infrastructure weaknesses.
In this sense, Finance Minister Wolfgang Schäuble’s plan to spend an additional €10 billion ($12.5 billion) on public investment in 2016-2018 is a step in the right direction.
But, at just 0.1% of Germany’s annual GDP, Schäuble’s scheme looks more like an attempt to quiet criticism from the rest of Europe than a genuine policy shift.
Germany’s fourth policy mistake is its apparent withdrawal of support for the ECB.
Over the last seven years, the ECB’s actions have helped Germany’s economy and taxpayers as much as those of its neighbors.
Moreover, the claim that the ECB’s purchases of asset-backed securities amount to “toxic loans” that transfer risk to German taxpayers is unfounded; after all, there have been almost no defaults since 2008.
Germany’s leaders need to recognize this – and to defend the ECB publicly from baseless fear mongering.
Failure to do so may reflect an effort to forestall the rise of the far-right anti-European political forces, particularly the Alternative for Germany.
But this strategy merely plays into the party’s hands.
If Germany refuses to take a more reasoned approach, it risks undermining the ECB’s credibility, thereby reducing the effectiveness of its measures.
If that happens, the ECB may well be compelled to initiate large-scale purchases of eurozone government bonds through its so-called “outright monetary transactions” scheme – a plan that many German policymakers and economists staunchly oppose.
The German government can use its considerable leverage to compel France and Italy to pursue the structural reforms that both countries need, while allowing a growth-friendly demand stimulus to lift the threat of deflation hanging over the eurozone.