But nicotine is only partly responsible for tobacco dependence.
Other substances from tobacco smoke – such as monoamine oxidase inhibitors, which have antidepressant effects –reinforce tobacco dependence, but are absent from vaporized nicotine.
That may be why PNV user surveys suggest that nicotine is less addictive in its vaporized form.
In reality, nicotine is a relatively safe drug at dosages that a smoker or “vaper” inhales, with similar effects to caffeine.
Moreover, smokers and PNV users control very precisely, on a puff-by-puff basis, the dose of nicotine they consume, virtually eliminating the risk of overdose.
In fact, a lethal dose of nicotine is a lot higher than the 30-60 milligrams that many scientific papers claim.
After reviewing case reports of nicotine intoxications and suicide attempts, the pharmacologist Bernd Mayer found that the lethal dose of nicotine in humans must be somewhere between 500-1000 mg of absorbed – not just ingested – nicotine.
Given that one of the first symptoms of intoxication is vomiting, and that 70% of the remaining nicotine in the digestive tract is metabolized by the liver before it reaches other organs, absorbing that much nicotine is not easy.
With minimal health risks compared to tobacco smoking, PNVs face only one real barrier to use: smokers’ willingness to switch.
But, even on this front, the devices have had considerable success, with PNV use increasing exponentially in the last few years.
Though, in an ideal world, people would simply be able to quit using nicotine altogether, experience suggests that many smokers cannot – or do not want to – give it up, and will continue to smoke if there is no safe and acceptable alternative.
If smokers are willing to accept PNVs as a viable option, high-risk tobacco use could become a thing of the past.
So far, converted smokers have taken the lead in promoting the shift to PNVs, sharing their experiences online, in Internet forums and on Facebook and Twitter.
They are spreading the news that, for the first time in history, people can quit smoking without giving up the pleasure they derive from nicotine.
Meanwhile, health authorities and governments have adopted a fear-based approach, scrambling to regulate – or even ban – PNVs.
The European Union’s Tobacco Products Directive and the United Kingdom’s Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency plan to introduce strict regulations of PNV sales and use, based on drug legislation, even though the devices are neither tobacco nor medical products.
Even the World Health Organization has released a report expressing serious concern about the marketing and use of electronic nicotine-delivery systems.
He was right.
And it is tobacco smoke, not nicotine, that kills.
That makes PNVs the ideal solution.
It is time for health authorities to get on board.
Triangulating Brexit
BRUSSELS – More than 100 days after the United Kingdom voted narrowly to leave the European Union, it remains far from clear what arrangement will regulate cross-Channel trade after Brexit.
Political discussions tend to revolve around three key issues: immigration controls, access to the single market, and passporting rights for financial services.
Which balance should European leaders strike?
Many in Britain know exactly what they want: to impose controls on the movement of workers from the rest of the EU, thereby protecting the domestic labor market, but without losing access to the single market or passporting rights, which allow British firms to sell their financial services on the continent.
That was, after all, the kind of deal many leaders of the “Leave” campaign promised before the June referendum.
But the Brexiteers’ promise remains wishful thinking.
As German Finance Minister Wolfgang Schäuble has pointed out, access to the single market is inextricably linked to the free movement of people.
Indeed, he has even offered to send Boris Johnson, the UK’s foreign secretary, a copy of the Treaty of Lisbon, where that link is established.
This may sound legalistic, and it certainly reflects political motivations.
But basic economic principles imply that free movement is, indeed, at least as important as free trade.
Trade usually benefits both sides.
It is thus clear that it is in the common interest of the UK and the EU to minimize the losses from the introduction of new barriers through Brexit.
From the point of view of European welfare, it is the size of the trade barriers that matters, not which side is a net exporter or importer.
Low barriers typically have low costs, unless very large volumes of trade are affected.
But as barriers become higher, the negative impact on welfare grows disproportionately.
The good news for the UK is that it probably wouldn’t face substantially higher trade barriers even if it did leave the single market.
After all, the EU has, in general, a liberal trade regime, with low external tariffs.
That is why so many studies do not consider the economic benefits of tariff-free transatlantic trade as the primary reason for pursuing it.
Even if the UK faced some additional barriers – such as new customs requirements and certificates of origin – their impact would most likely be relatively small.
The case of Switzerland – which is even more integrated into EU production chains than the UK – shows that efficient customs administrations on both sides are enough to keep such barriers to a minimum.
In any case, exports of goods to the EU generate only about 6% of the UK’s GDP.
Yet another reason why the introduction of some low trade barriers is unlikely to produce large losses is that the differences in the cost of producing goods in one market or the other are small.
Producing a car in Britain, for example, costs about the same as producing one in Germany.
Barriers to the free movement of labor are a different story.
Productivity and income per worker in the UK remains significantly higher than in, say, Poland.
A worker would get about €25 ($27.70) for an hour of work in the UK, but only €8.50 in Poland.
In other words, not allowing a Polish worker to work in the UK would imply large economic costs for Europe.
Moreover, if British Prime Minister Theresa May follows through on her stated goal of reducing annual net immigration to less than 100,000, the UK would have to implement drastic – potentially costly – measures to close off the UK labor market.
This means that the barriers that EU negotiators are in a position to impose – which largely affect trade in goods – are likely to have a much smaller impact than the UK-imposed barriers, such as quotas on EU workers.
But there is one more issue that negotiators must consider: financial services.
While overall trade in services is unlikely to suffer enormously from Brexit – the internal market for services never worked all that well, anyway – finance constitutes a special case, largely because of the passporting arrangements for banks.
Economists are often ambivalent about the benefits of financial integration, not least because large flows of bank credit can have a serious impact on macroeconomic stability.
Whereas securitization, for example, can help to reduce risk and increase the availability of credit for risky borrowers under the right framework, the 2008 global financial crisis starkly demonstrated that it can imply huge costs if it goes too far.
But steps can be taken to maximize the benefits of cross-Channel provision of financial services after Brexit.
The key is to base decisions not on sustaining the City of London’s role as Europe’s financial hub, but on ensuring that the services provided strengthen Europe’s capital markets.
That would require an emphasis on equity over debt instruments, and on market-based financing over bank credit.
From an economic standpoint, the priorities that should guide Brexit negotiations are clear.
Negotiators must focus on minimizing new barriers to the free movement of labor; indeed, this should be an even higher priority than maintaining the free movement of goods.
And British financial services should be welcomed in the EU, but only if they help it to move away from its bank-centric system and complete the capital market union.
But politics continues to distort discussions, driving leaders to draw red lines on free movement and adopt mercantilist stances on financial services.
It will take some statesmanship on both sides to shift attention to the common good.
The Business Case for Europe’s Refugees
LONDON – In the face of the largest influx of refugees into Europe in decades, the responses and policy proposals from the European Union and its member governments have varied enormously, and the debate has become deeply politicized.
International organizations and non-governmental agencies such as the UNHCR and the International Rescue Committee, and religious leaders such as Pope Francis and the Archbishop of Canterbury, have weighed in as well.
But one group’s voice has been conspicuous by its absence: business.
While governments, charities, and donor organizations actively discuss how to share responsibility for refugees on all steps of their journey – from camps in Jordan, Lebanon, and Turkey to transit to settlement – European business has been strangely silent.
But, at a time when business is more powerful than ever, with multinational corporations stretching around the world, the private sector must work with governments and NGOs to help address the short-term and long-term challenges posed by the massive refugee inflows.
Indeed, industry leaders in all sectors owe it to themselves to be involved from the start.
Only by turning the challenges into opportunities can social, political, and economic risks be mitigated.
There has been one notable exception to the pattern of private-sector silence.
Just as German Chancellor Angela Merkel has been at the political forefront of the migration crisis, the Federation of German Industries (BDI) has been at the business forefront.
The BDI has spoken clearly and decisively about the benefits of refugees for business and has proposed changes to Germany’s labor laws and regulations, including fast-tracking the newcomers’ right to work.
In order to make business engagement and investment sustainable, the BDI has also sought assurances that migrants who find employment will not be deported.
Now it is time to hear from other countries’ business associations.
How do the Confederation of British Industry or France’s MEDEF intend to respond?
And what of individual multinational corporations?
What legislative changes do they think they will need to aid governments and the EU in addressing the refugee crisis and ensuring long-term stability in Europe?
The challenge, everyone agrees, is not confined to managing the huge inflows and processing asylum applications.
In the coming months and years, destination countries must lay the foundations for integrating refugees into their workforces.
To wait too long is to miss an important opportunity to be involved in developing a strategy that works for businesses, governments, and societies alike.
Becoming involved early in the process of assessment, education, and integration planning would allow the private sector to help shape policy from the outset, rather than complaining about the government’s failures after the fact.
Business leaders can help identify the skills and abilities that would most benefit their sectors, establish guidance and training programs, and offer apprenticeships.
The benefits are clear.
The refugees arriving on Europe’s shores are often young, well educated, skilled, and eager to integrate quickly into society.
They are an antidote to aging populations and low birth rates, and many come ready to work.
By collaborating with the public sector, business can help to ensure that they get the training and jobs they need.
Business also has a role to play in helping to shape societal attitudes toward refugees.
This is particularly true of public-facing organizations.
Football clubs across Europe are not only donating money, but also taking concrete steps to encourage a welcoming atmosphere, with welcome banners, training camps for refugees, and, in the case of Bayern Munich, language lessons.
Not all of these refugees will remain in Europe permanently.
One day, many may return to their homeland.
When they do, they will have the skills to help rebuild their societies and economies, as well as provide strong ties to the country where they sought refuge.
The importance of this investment in future state building, as well as business relationships, cannot be underestimated.
Although the payoff may seem distant, investing in today’s refugees could make all the difference in building tomorrow’s strong, stable trading partners.
Europe’s refugee crisis continues to be viewed solely as a political problem, in part because that is how the media portray it.
The only business coverage tends to focus on the financial impact caused by the disruption of transport links such as the port of Calais.
But Europe’s refugee crisis is also a business problem.
By addressing it now, business can turn that problem into an opportunity for all.
The Consequences of a Trump Shock
WASHINGTON, DC – With the United States’ presidential election on November 8, and a series of elections and other political decisions fast approaching in Europe, now is a good time to ask whether the global economy is in good enough shape to withstand another major negative shock.
The answer, unfortunately, is that growth and employment around the world look fragile.
A big adverse surprise – like the election of Donald Trump in the US – would likely cause the stock market to crash and plunge the world into recession.
There is always a great deal of insight in the International Monetary Fund’s semi-annual economic outlook, which is based on detailed data from around the world.
And, because the latest version was published in early October, it is particularly relevant.
The British issues are not helping, but the deeper issues continue to be related to the eurozone itself (Britain never adopted the euro).
The headline growth number in Spain is somewhat encouraging, continuing to show some rebound.
But the ongoing gloom about Italy – the third-largest eurozone economy, growing at less than 1% per year – is a serious matter.
Compounding these macroeconomic issues is the continuing pressure on eurozone banks.
These banks have never fully recovered from earlier losses, and their equity capital levels remain low relative to international competitors (like the US) and to what investors regard as reasonable.
The bigger problem remains uncertainty about who is on the hook if a bank’s losses imply potential insolvency.
These banks are clearly too big to fail – no European government in its right mind would allow a default on bank debt.
But there is no agreement on how to share bank losses across countries.
Taken as a whole, the eurozone has enough fiscal capacity to stand behind its banks.
But, unfortunately, doing so is still a country-by-country decision – the collective mechanisms for recapitalizing European banks remain partial and far too weak.
Compounding these difficulties, growth in middle-income emerging markets is not strong.
Slower growth in these countries is reflected in lower projected imports and lower expected commodity prices, which will negatively affect countries that export raw materials and energy resources.
It is far more likely that his anti-trade policies would cause a sharp slowdown, much like the British are experiencing.
In fact, the impact of a Trump victory on the US could well be worse.
Whereas British Prime Minister Theresa May’s government wants to close the UK’s borders to immigrants from the EU, it does want trade with the world.
Trump, on the other hand, is determined to curtail imports through a variety of policies, all of which are well within the power of a president.
He would not need congressional approval to slam the brakes on the US economy.
Even in the best of times, US policymakers often do not think enough about the impact of their actions on the rest of the world.
Trump’s trade-led recession would tip Europe back into full-blown recession, which would likely precipitate a serious banking crisis.
If this risk were not contained – and the probability of a European banking debacle is already disconcertingly high – there would be a further negative spiral.
Either way, the effects on emerging markets and all lower-income countries would be dramatic.
Investors in the stock market currently regard a Trump presidency as a relatively low-probability development.
But, while the precise consequences of bad policies are always hard to predict, if investors are wrong and Trump wins, we should expect a big markdown in expected future earnings for a wide range of stocks – and a likely crash in the broader market.
Masa Depan yang Menua
MUNICH – Penuaan yang dialami masyarakat kita merupakan salah satu kisah sukses terbesar di abad ke-20.
Usia lebih dari tiga dekade telah ditambahkan ke dalam kehidupan ratusan juta penduduk selam\a seratus tahun terakhir.
Hal ini merupakan pencapaian yang layak dirayakan; akan tetapi kita perlu menyadari bahwa seiring dengan bertambahnya umur panjang akan timbul konsekuensi ekonomi jangka panjang yang signifikan – dan banyak masyarakat mengalami penuaan dengan cepat.
Tahun lalu OECD memberikan peringatan bahwa kita sedang mengalami penuaan dengan laju yang tidak pernah terjadi sebelumnya dan kondisi ini dapat menurunkan pertumbuhan ekonomi tahunan global dari rata-rata 3,6% di dekade ini menjadi 2,4% di tahun 2050 hingga 2060.
Negara-negara OECD khususnya akan mengalami double demographic shock.
Tidak hanya masyarakatnya akan menjadi tua dengan cepat; semakin berkurangnya kesenjangan pendapatan antara negara-negara maju dengan negara-negara berkembang menciptakan kemungkinan menurunnya aliran perpindahan penduduk, menyusutkan jumlah tenaga kerja sebesar 20% di eurozone dan 15% di Amerika Serikat.
Peneliti demografi membagi negara ke dalam empat kategori, berdasarkan jumlah populasi di atas usia 65 tahun: young (kurang dari 7% penduduk berusia 65 tahun atau lebih), aging (7-13%), aged (14-20%), dan super-aged (lebih dari 20%).
Kini, hanya tiga negara – Jerman (21%), Italia (22%) dan Jepang (26%) – termasuk kategori masyarakat super-aged.
Dalam lima tahun ke depan, ketiga negara ini akan diikuti oleh Bulgaria, Finlandia, Yunani dan Portugal.
Dalam satu dekade berikutnya, Eropa pun akan semakin mengalami penuaan, bersama dengan 17 negara lainnya seperti Austria, Perancis, Swedia, dan Britania Raya yang diperkirakan akan menjadi super-aged, serta Kanada, Kuba dan Korea Selatan.
Dalam kurun waktu itu, tantangan-tantangan dari cepatnya penuaan yang terjadi pada masyarakat akan muncul utamanya di negara-negara maju.
Tetapi pada tahun 2040 nanti sekitar 55 negara juga akan berjuang mengatasi tingginya jumlah penduduk lanjut usia, ketika Amerika Serikat, Tiongkok, Singapura, Thailand dan Puerto Riko juga masuk ke dalam kategori super-aged.
Hal lain yang menjadikan fenomena ini semakin mengagumkan adalah kecepatan terjadinya pergeseran ini.
Ketika Perancis berpindah dari yang awalnya negara muda (young) menjadi negara yang mengalami penuaan (aging) di tahun 1850, perbudakan masih dianggap sah di Amerika Serikat, bohlam belum diciptakan, dan Jerman belum menjadi negara yang bersatu.
Membutuhkan tambahan waktu 130 tahun bagi Perancis untuk menjadi aged society di tahun 1980.
Perancis diperkirakan akan menjadi super-aged di tahun 2023.
Selama beberapa tahun, Jepang dipandang memiiki populasi aging yang tercepat di dunia.
Jepang beralih dari negara yang memiliki populasi termuda di antara negara-negara G-7 pada awal tahun 1960an hingga menjadi negara tertua di tahun 2008.
Tetapi jika perkiraan ini terbukti benar, beberapa negara akan mengalami transformasi yang serupa bahkan dalam waktu satu dekade lebih cepat.
Memang benar bahwa kini negara dengan laju aging tercepat di dunia adalah Korea Selatan, negara ini menjadi aging society di tahun 1999, diperkirakan menjadi aged di tahun 2017, dan akan menjadi super-aged di tahun 2027.
Dengan kata lain, Korea Selatan akan mengalami transformasi ini dalam waktu kurang dari tiga dekade, sementara itu Perancis membutuhkan waktu hampir 175 tahun.
Meskipun Korea Selatan mungkin akan mengalami penuaan yang tercepat, perubahan ini akan terjadi pada sekelompok negara serupa seperti Bangladesh, Singapura, Thailand dan Vietnam.
Iran, masih dianggap negara muda, adalah salah satu pesaing yang tengah memperebutkan gelar negara dengan laju penuaan tercepat.
Penuaan (aging) merupakan hasil dari kenaikan angka harapan hidup dan penurunan tingkat kesuburan.
Laju penurunan tingkat kesuburan ini sangat dramatis di seluruh dunia; di Iran, angkanya sungguh menakjubkan, penurunan dari rasio awal yakni tujuh anak per ibu di tahun 1984 menjadi 1,9 di tahun 2006.
Kondisi seperti ini tentu memiliki dampak jangka panjang seiring dengan berkurang jumlah penduduk usia kerja dan melonjaknya jumlah penduduk lanjut usia.
Iran diperkirakan akan tetap menjadi negara muda hingga tahun 2020 namun dalam waktu kurang dari 30 tahun negara ini akan menjadi super-aged.
Dengan demikian apapun dampak negatif yang mungkin timbul akibat dari penuaan ini, penting untuk kita pikirkan alternatifnya.
Negara-negara seperti Sierra Leone, Lesotho, Republik Afrika Tengah dan Zimbabwe memiliki angka harapan hidup terendah di dunia.
Negara-negara ini menghadapi banyak tantangan – kelaparan, korupsi, konflik, kurang akses pada air bersih dan pendidikan, AIDS, dan Ebola – namun cepatnya penuaan tidak menjadi salah satu permasalahan bagi mereka.
Penuaan penduduk dengan cepat bisa jadi merupakan suatu masalah namun secara umum permasalahan semacam ini cenderung cukup baik.
Syria’s agony continues unabated; sectarian attacks in Iraq are becoming more frequent and deadly; the threads of Lebanon’s fragile peace are fraying; Jordan is awash in refugees; Libya’s militias are running rampant and distorting its politics; Tunisia faces political crisis; and Turkey’s star as the embodiment of Islamic democracy has dimmed.
Yet even with this litany of problems, US Secretary of State John Kerry has decided to focus on Israel and Palestine.
His justification – “if not now, never” – is almost certainly true.
But there is another, equally strong (albeit often overlooked) rationale: the tremendous potential for an Israeli-Palestinian-Jordanian economic zone that would drive the entire region’s growth and development.
In the immortal words of James Carville, Bill Clinton’s campaign manager in 1992, “It’s the economy, stupid.”
The dismal failure of Middle Eastern and North African economies to deliver the prosperity that their people desperately want is a constant factor pushing people into the streets.
It is not the only factor, but rising food prices helped to spread revolutionary fervor from a small group of activists to much of Egypt’s population in 2011, and again this year in June, when the most frequent grievance against former President Mohamed Morsi concerned not his ideology but his indifference to ordinary Egyptians’ needs.
Against this backdrop, Israel and the Palestinian territories are relatively stable places.
Israel’s high-quality infrastructure could easily be extended to the West Bank and Gaza if security could be assured, and a young generation of entrepreneurs and technologists has grown up on both sides of the border.
Forbes magazine reports that “hundreds of Israeli[s] and Palestinians are becoming actual business partners and colleagues in startups that are slowly transforming the Palestinian economy, at least in the West Bank.”
This is most true in high-tech industries, the sector in which the Middle East lags the most.
The author of the Forbes article describes a scene in Ramallah that is “indistinguishable from one in Austin or San Francisco,” where “twentysomething Palestinians sip cocktails, their laptops open, their smartphones on.”
All of this activity is taking place against the odds.
Alec Ross, a former senior adviser for innovation to former US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, argues that the best way to reinvigorate the peace process is to provide 3G Internet connectivity to the West Bank.
He quotes a young woman in the audience at Palestine Polytechnic University, who said, to loud applause, “We must have a better economy to have better lives, and we must have 3G to have…a better economy.”
Without high-speed Internet, foreign investment and indigenous entrepreneurship are almost impossible.
The human capital for rapid economic growth is there (roughly 2,000 Palestinians graduate every year with technical skills, yet only 30% of them find a way to use such skills in a paying job), as is the will and the investment capital; but the necessary infrastructure is lacking.
A vision of a very different Palestine, and of the Israel beside it, is not hard to find.
In 2005, the Rand Corporation, a US research institute, developed the “Arc,” a genuinely inspiring plan to build a transportation corridor that would link Palestine’s principal business and population hubs in the West Bank, then curve across Israel into Gaza, where a long-planned airport and seaport would be built.
The concept behind this vision is that the size and population density of a future Palestine will be roughly the same as in extended urban regions like the San Francisco Bay area or greater Cairo.
Thus, the West Bank should be viewed as “an integrated urban region of independent but connected cities.”
Anyone who spends nine minutes watching the video presentation of the Arc will see that its potential is nothing short of breathtaking.
While Palestine would gain economically, Israel would gain politically and socially.
The costs of not reaching a peace settlement may not show up in Israel’s economic statistics or in formal diplomatic interactions.
But young Israelis, in particular, are increasingly aware of the invitations to meetings and conferences that they do not receive – and of the increasing frequency with which their own are not accepted, even by sincere friends of Israel.
Bernard Avishai, a distinguished Israeli professor of business and government who divides his time between Israel and the US, notes that whatever Israel’s young people may think of the Palestinians, they “expect to fly off from Ben-Gurion Airport and land, accepted, in the Western world.”
Now they know that the stakes are rising.
So are the opportunities.
Whereas the Israeli-Palestinian conflict has long been an island of violence and turmoil in a relatively stable (if oppressed) region, now the tables are turned.
An Israel and Palestine that could resolve their differences and live side by side as democracies would become an island of stability and sanity in a sea of political disorder and economic retrenchment.
Add a free-trade agreement, or even a customs union with Jordan, and you have the makings of a Middle Eastern Benelux (the grouping of Belgium, the Netherlands, and Luxembourg that formed the economic kernel of what became the original European Community).
A late summer night’s dream?
Perhaps.
But, Iran aside, all of the region’s major players – Saudi Arabia and its fellow Gulf states, Turkey, and both sides in Egypt – have plenty of reasons to want to see it realized.
And Israelis and Palestinians themselves, with actual or potential civil war on three of their four borders, need no reminders of what could happen if they do not start spreading peace from the inside out.
Fanatics, Charlatans, and Economists
DAVOS – Throughout the world, it seems, crisis is gripping national politics.
In election after election, voter turnout has hit historic lows.
Politicians are universally reviled.
Mainstream parties, desperate to remain relevant, are caught in a vice, forced to choose between pandering to extremism and the risk of being overwhelmed by populist, anti-establishment movements.
Meanwhile, not since the end of World War II has money played such an important role in politics, trumping the power of ideas.
In the United States, for example, the sound of billions of dollars flowing into election-campaign coffers is drowning out the voices of individual voters.
In parts of the world where the rule of law is weak, criminal networks and corruption displace democratic processes.
In short, the pursuit of the collective good looks sadly quaint.
The trouble began at the end of the Cold War, when the collapse of a bankrupt communist ideology was complacently interpreted as the triumph of the market.
As communism was discarded, so was the concept of the state as an agent around which our collective interests and ambitions could be organized.
The individual became the ultimate agent of change – an individual conceived as the type of rational actor that populates economists’ models.
Such an individual’s identity is not derived from class interests or other sociological characteristics, but from the logic of the market, which dictates maximization of self-interest, whether as a producer, a consumer, or a voter.
Indeed, economics has been placed on a pedestal and enshrined in institutions like central banks and competition authorities, which have been intentionally separated and made independent from politics.
As a result, governments have been confined to tinkering at the margins of markets’ allocation of resources.
The 2008 global financial crisis, the resulting recession, and rapidly widening income and wealth inequality have punctured the glib triumphalism of economics.
But politics, far from rising to take its place, continues to be discredited, as mainstream leaders – particularly in North America and Europe – call on economic theories to justify their policy choices.
The pursuit of individual attainment is the hallmark of our time, eclipsing the collective dimension of human destiny.
And yet the deep human need to be part of a group has yet to disappear.
It lingers, but without a credible outlet.
National projects ring hollow, and the so-called international community remains an abstraction.
This unfulfilled desire for community may be felt particularly acutely by young people – including, for example, young jihadists.
Indeed, nationalist politicians and religious leaders have been the first to spot the vacuum, and they are rapidly filling it.
Pope Francis, Vladimir Putin, Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, and Marine Le Pen have little in common.
But they share one insight: There is a deep longing for the creation of communities defined by shared values, not functional needs.
The crisis of national politics has consequences that echo far beyond the borders of individual countries.
National chauvinism and religious fundamentalism are here to stay, and with them the terrorism that extremists of all stripes embrace, because both phenomena are ideally suited to the age of the individual: They provide imaginary answers to personal angst, instead of political answers to collective challenges.
These movements’ amorphous nature – often channeled through charismatic leaders – allows each individual to project onto them his or her dreams, making them difficult to counter within the framework of traditional politics.
But this strength can also be a weakness.
When tasked with managing territories and governing populations, these movements begin to face the same bothersome logistical and organizational constraints as their rivals.
As a result, bureaucracy is constantly at their heels, leaving them in perpetual need of upheaval and renewal.
If politics is to retake the field of values from the fanatics, the charlatans, and the economists, it must be rebuilt from the ground up.
More than half of the world’s population now lives in cities, and any political renaissance must counterbalance the appeal of vast virtual communities with resilient urban societies.
Citizens must become reengaged with the political process, educated in public affairs, and provided with real (not merely virtual) platforms to air their differences and debate alternative views.
Furthermore, institutions that provide bridges between states and the global community, such as the European Union, must be strengthened and refocused.
In particular, their technical functions must be clearly distinguished from their political roles.
But, above all, politicians must stop trying to shore up their diminished credibility with the pretense of economic science.
Politics begins where contemporary economics ends – with ethics and the attempt to create a justly ordered society.
The Messy Politics of Economic Divergence
LAGUNA BEACH – The world is increasingly characterized by divergence – in economic performance, monetary policy, and thus in financial markets.
Global divergence has already contributed to stock-market volatility, unprecedented declines in advanced economies' government bond yields, and outsize currency movements.
And the trend is not abating, placing increasing pressure on already-strained political systems.
The world's systemically important economies can be placed into four categories.
The first group includes countries like India and the United States, where economic recovery is broadening, enabling them to overcome financial imbalances.
The second group is exemplified by China, which is achieving a soft landing onto a growth path that, while lower than in recent years, remains adequate to support continued progress toward high-income status and financial stability.
The third group includes economies – such as Brazil, several eurozone countries, and Japan – that are not growing fast enough, and face downside risks.
And, finally, the fourth group consists of economic and financial wildcards like Greece and Russia – countries that could succeed in restoring growth and financial stability, but could just as easily implode, sending shock waves across Europe and beyond.
This divergence is as much a political phenomenon as it is an economic and financial one.
Overcoming it – and ensuring steady, financially stable global growth – will require responsive national policymaking and multilateral coordination.
Unfortunately, today's rather messy national and international political environments have so far precluded such an approach.
Nonetheless, experimental monetary policies in advanced economies – such as the large-scale asset purchases initiated this month by the European Central Bank – have slowed the vicious circle of subpar economic performance and muddled politics.
But it is far from clear that this will continue, especially given the US Federal Reserve's gradual exit from such policies, which puts America on a different path from most of the other advanced economies.
Moreover, market forces have gained an ever-larger role in reconciling global economic divergence, leading to dramatic shifts in exchange rates.
The list of such currency movements – which so far has included the euro's 25% fall against the dollar, a record low for the Mexican peso, and disorderly depreciations of the Brazilian real and other emerging-economy currencies – is getting longer by the day.
Even healthy economies like South Korea are keen to weaken their currencies, leaving the US alone in its willingness to tolerate significant currency appreciation.
On their own, currency markets will not bring about the growth-enhancing global economic rebalancing that is needed.
Better policies at the national, regional, and global levels are also essential – and that requires better politics.
Too many political leaders around the world remain unable – or unwilling – to fulfill their economic-governance responsibilities.
This is particularly regrettable, given that there is a broad consensus regarding the technical components of the required policy response: structural reforms to revamp growth engines, efforts to rebalance aggregate demand, and the elimination of debt overhangs.
(The eurozone must also work to complete the essential underpinnings of its historic integration project.)
What is missing is implementation.
But governments seem unlikely to overcome their dysfunction anytime soon.
In the US, Congress and the executive branch are locked in a stalemate.
Europe's political systems are being shaken by the rise of populist parties, many of which are winning support with an anti-European platform.
In the emerging world, Brazil's government has faced multiple corruption scandals.
And Russia's leadership remains committed to its disruptive regional adventures, regardless of their devastating impact on its economy.
In most, if not all, of these cases, we see examples of a broader phenomenon: what might be called governing by inertia – a “can't, won't, and shouldn't" mentality, to paraphrase the economist Mark Blyth, that blocks effective policymaking.
As policy inertia prolongs sluggish growth and impairs job creation, it becomes even more difficult to abandon.
Given how hard it is for governments to initiate a shift to a new policymaking mode (that is, to disrupt themselves), pressure will build from the outside.
In a democracy, this tends to occur through the fragmentation of traditional parties and the emergence of non-traditional parties – some offering genuine alternatives, and others relying on fear and prejudice.
The global economy is at a critical juncture.
Most economists agree on what is needed to avoid another round of lost growth opportunities, inadequate employment, financial instability, and worsening inequality.
Central banks and markets cannot achieve an orderly global rebalancing on their own.
As difficult as it may be, politicians need to pursue comprehensive policy responses.
The longer they delay, the less effective their efforts will be.
As bad politics block economic opportunity, public trust in governments will continue to erode – with serious potential consequences for political systems, and the economies they administer, worldwide.
Happiness Is Equality
LONDON – The king of Bhutan wants to make us all happier.
Governments, he says, should aim to maximize their people’s Gross National Happiness rather than their Gross National Product.
Does this new emphasis on happiness represent a shift or just a passing fad?
It is easy to see why governments should de-emphasize economic growth when it is proving so elusive.
The eurozone is not expected to grow at all this year.
The British economy is contracting.
Greece’s economy has been shrinking for years.
Even China is expected to slow down. Why not give up growth and enjoy what we have?
No doubt this mood will pass when growth revives, as it is bound to.
Nevertheless, a deeper shift in attitude toward growth has occurred, which is likely to make it a less important lodestar in the future – especially in rich countries.
The first factor to undermine the pursuit of growth was concern about its sustainability.
Can we continue growing at the old rate without endangering our future?
When people started talking about the “natural” limits to growth in the 1970’s, they meant the impending exhaustion of food and non-renewable natural resources.
Recently the debate has shifted to carbon emissions.
As the Stern Review of 2006 emphasized, we must sacrifice some growth today to ensure that we do not all fry tomorrow.
Curiously, the one taboo area in this discussion is population.
The fewer people there are, the less risk we face of heating up the planet.
But, instead of accepting the natural decline in their populations, rich-country governments absorb more and more people to hold down wages and thereby grow faster.
A more recent concern focuses on the disappointing results of growth.
It is increasingly understood that growth does not necessarily increase our sense of well-being.
So why continue to grow?
The groundwork for this question was laid some time ago.
In 1974, the economist Richard Easterlin published a famous paper, “Does Economic Growth Improve the Human Lot?
Some Empirical Evidence.”
After correlating per capita income and self-reported happiness levels across a number of countries, he reached a startling conclusion: probably not.
Above a rather low level of income (enough to satisfy basic needs), Easterlin found no correlation between happiness and GNP per head.
In other words, GNP is a poor measure of life satisfaction.
That finding reinforced efforts to devise alternative indexes.
In 1972, two economists, William Nordhaus and James Tobin, introduced a measure that they called “Net Economic Welfare,” obtained by deducting from GNP “bad” outputs, like pollution, and adding non-market activities, like leisure.
They showed that a society with more leisure and less work could have as much welfare as one with more work – and therefore more GNP – and less leisure.
More recent metrics have tried to incorporate a wider range of “quality of life” indicators.
The trouble is that you can measure quantity of stuff, but not quality of life.
How one combines quantity and quality in some index of “life satisfaction” is a matter of morals rather than economics, so it is not surprising that most economists stick to their quantitative measures of “welfare.”
But another finding has also started to influence the current debate on growth: poor people within a country are less happy than rich people.
In other words, above a low level of sufficiency, peoples’ happiness levels are determined much less by their absolute income than by their income relative to some reference group.
We constantly compare our lot with that of others, feeling either superior or inferior, whatever our income level; well-being depends more on how the fruits of growth are distributed than on their absolute amount.
Put another way, what matters for life satisfaction is the growth not of mean income but of median income – the income of the typical person.
Consider a population of ten people (say, a factory) in which the managing director earns $150,000 a year and the other nine, all workers, earn $10,000 each.
The mean average of their incomes is $25,000, but 90% earn $10,000.
With this kind of income distribution, it would be surprising if growth increased the typical person’s sense of well-being.
That is not an idle example.
In rich societies over the last three decades, mean incomes have been rising steadily, but typical incomes have been stagnating or even falling.
In other words, a minority – a very small minority in countries like the United States and Britain – has captured most of the gains of growth.
In such cases, it is not more growth that we want, but more equality.
More equality would not only produce the contentment that flows from more security and better health, but also the satisfaction that flows from having more leisure, more time with family and friends, more respect from one's fellows, and more lifestyle choices.
Great inequality makes us hungrier for goods than we would otherwise be, by constantly reminding us that we have less than the next person.
We live in a pushy society with turbo-charged fathers and “tiger” mothers, constantly goading themselves and their children to “get ahead.”
NEW YORK – Two new studies show, once again, the magnitude of the inequality problem plaguing the United States.
The first, the US Census Bureau’s annual income and poverty report, shows that, despite the economy’s supposed recovery from the Great Recession, ordinary Americans’ incomes continue to stagnate.
Median household income, adjusted for inflation, remains below its level a quarter-century ago.
It used to be thought that America’s greatest strength was not its military power, but an economic system that was the envy of the world.
But why would others seek to emulate an economic model by which a large proportion – even a majority – of the population has seen their income stagnate while incomes at the top have soared?
A second study, the United Nations Development Program’s Human Development Report 2014, corroborates these findings.
Every year, the UNDP publishes a ranking of countries by their Human Development Index (HDI), which incorporates other dimensions of wellbeing besides income, including health and education.
America ranks fifth according to HDI, below Norway, Australia, Switzerland, and the Netherlands.
But when its score is adjusted for inequality, it drops 23 spots – among the largest such declines for any highly developed country.
Indeed, the US falls below Greece and Slovakia, countries that people do not typically regard as role models or as competitors with the US at the top of the league tables.
The UNDP report emphasizes another aspect of societal performance: vulnerability.
It points out that while many countries succeeded in moving people out of poverty, the lives of many are still precarious.
A small event – say, an illness in the family – can push them back into destitution.
Downward mobility is a real threat, while upward mobility is limited.
In the US, upward mobility is more myth than reality, whereas downward mobility and vulnerability is a widely shared experience.
This is partly because of America’s health-care system, which still leaves poor Americans in a precarious position, despite President Barack Obama’s reforms.
Those at the bottom are only a short step away from bankruptcy with all that that entails.
Illness, divorce, or the loss of a job often is enough to push them over the brink.
The 2010 Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (or “Obamacare”) was intended to ameliorate these threats – and there are strong indications that it is on its way to significantly reducing the number of uninsured Americans.
But, partly owing to a Supreme Court decision and the obduracy of Republican governors and legislators, who in two dozen US states have refused to expand Medicaid (insurance for the poor) – even though the federal government pays almost the entire tab – 41 million Americans remain uninsured.
When economic inequality translates into political inequality – as it has in large parts of the US – governments pay little attention to the needs of those at the bottom.
Neither GDP nor HDI reflects changes over time or differences across countries in vulnerability.
But in America and elsewhere, there has been a marked decrease in security.
Those with jobs worry whether they will be able to keep them; those without jobs worry whether they will get one.
The recent economic downturn eviscerated the wealth of many.
In the US, even after the stock-market recovery, median wealth fell more than 40% from 2007 to 2013.
That means that many of the elderly and those approaching retirement worry about their standards of living.
Millions of Americans have lost their homes; millions more face the insecurity of knowing that they may lose theirs in the future.
These insecurities are in addition to those that have long confronted Americans.
In the country’s inner cities, millions of young Hispanics and African-Americans face the insecurity of a dysfunctional and unfair police and judicial system; crossing the path of a policeman who has had a bad night may lead to an unwarranted prison sentence – or worse.
Europe has traditionally understood the importance of addressing vulnerability by providing a system of social protection.
Europeans have recognized that good systems of social protection can even lead to improved overall economic performance, as individuals are more willing to take the risks that lead to higher economic growth.
But in many parts of Europe today, high unemployment (12% on average, 25% in the worst-affected countries), combined with austerity-induced cutbacks in social protection, has resulted in unprecedented increases in vulnerability.
The implication is that the decrease in societal wellbeing may be far larger than that indicated by conventional GDP measures – numbers that already are bleak enough, with most countries showing that real (inflation-adjusted) per capita income is lower today than before the crisis – a lost half-decade.
The report by the International Commission on the Measurement of Economic Performance and Social Progress (which I chaired) emphasized that GDP is not a good measure of how well an economy is performing.
The US Census and UNDP reports remind us of the importance of this insight.
Too much has already been sacrificed on the altar of GDP fetishism.
Regardless of how fast GDP grows, an economic system that fails to deliver gains for most of its citizens, and in which a rising share of the population faces increasing insecurity, is, in a fundamental sense, a failed economic system.
And policies, like austerity, that increase insecurity and lead to lower incomes and standards of living for large proportions of the population are, in a fundamental sense, flawed policies.
Taming the Populists
MADRID – In many Western democracies, right-wing populists, energized by self-proclaimed victories over “establishment elites,” are doubling down on the claim that globalization lies at the root of many citizens’ problems.
For those whose living standards have stagnated or declined in recent decades, even as political leaders have touted free trade and capital flows as the recipe for increased prosperity, the argument holds considerable appeal.
So it must be addressed head on.
Of course, economic grievances alone do not fuel anti-globalization sentiment; populism has emerged even in countries with low unemployment and rising incomes.
But such grievances provide the kernel of truth that populist leaders need to attract support, which they then attempt to secure with distortions and exaggerations.
If the economic issues are not addressed, support for such leaders will continue to grow, potentially taking their societies backward, to a less tolerant – and less prosperous – time.
The likes of Donald Trump and Marine Le Pen did not gain a foothold in their countries’ politics – not to mention the chance of leading them – on their own.
They exploited the feeling of many citizens that the political classes – which touted the benefits of globalization, while allowing inequality to rise to unprecedented levels – had abandoned them.
To be sure, globalization has reduced inequality among countries substantially.
But within countries, inequality has risen sharply.
The largest gains from globalization have not only accrued to the middle and upper classes in Asia, but also to the top 1% of earners worldwide.
In the United States, for example, the Gini coefficient (the most common measure of inequality) increased by five points from 1990 to 2013.
Inequality has also risen, albeit more slowly, in China, India, and most European countries.
Despite rising inequality, the benefits of globalization have been more tangible in developing countries.
Indeed, economic openness has helped to lift millions of developing-country citizens out of poverty, which is why the economist Branko Milanovic argues that globalization has driven “the greatest reshuffle of individual incomes since the Industrial Revolution.”
But, for many advanced-country citizens, that is precisely the problem.
They are not opposed to poverty reduction in faraway countries.
But if they believe that, say, the Chinese are becoming wealthier, while their own real (inflation-adjusted) wages remain largely stagnant, they will not accept globalization.
If their own societies’ wealthiest members are also becoming richer, conditions become ripe for anti-establishment rebellion.
The image of “untrustworthy elites” is ideal fodder for populists, who claim that globalization has given the wealthy and powerful more money and power than ever.
But the world that the populists and their constituents hope to recreate – a world of self-sufficient, egalitarian states insulated from developments around them – never existed.
Any effort to close economies – much less borders – would fail disastrously.
The only way to stem the rising tide of destructive populism and prevent the drift toward damaging protectionist measures is to reconnect with frustrated constituencies, and find ways to respond to people’s real economic grievances.
A national government’s main job is to protect the social equilibrium that forms the backbone of democratic systems.
For that reason, leaders must not reject globalization, but work to guide it, so that it advances their citizens’ interests and wellbeing.
Bold initiatives to tackle inequality are crucial.
In addition to stopgap measures, aimed at immediately improving people’s economic circumstances, leaders must develop systems to ensure that citizens are equipped to thrive in a globalized world in the long term.
Creativity, problem-solving skills, and heightened interpersonal competence will be essential.
Moreover, national authorities must engage with one another to improve global governance.
In recent years, the inadequacies of existing global governance structures, particularly with regard to issues like taxation and employment, have become starkly apparent.
The agenda for next month’s G20 summit in China includes discussion of concrete measures to reduce inequality.
But talk is not enough; leaders must ensure that discussion is translated into real action.
The sooner, the better: the labor-market transformation now occurring as a result of progress in robotics and artificial intelligence will only make inequality more difficult to address in the future.
As the OECD has warned, the automatization of manual and repetitive tasks will chiefly affect those without college degrees – the same group that is already frustrated with their economic circumstances.
Over the next year, important national elections will take place in Europe and in the US.
If populists triumph, many important social achievements will be put at risk.
That is why it is so important that national leaders prove, right now, that they can and will tackle inequality and the plight of those who feel left behind by globalization.
A victory for populism would indicate that the political classes really have failed their citizens.
The victory of the campaign in the United Kingdom to leave the European Union should have jolted all of us from the illusion that we are somehow protected from the risks we see around us.
The unthinkable can happen.
Populists can win.
It is time for national leaders to show that they are paying attention.
Inspiring Economic Growth
NEW HAVEN – In his First Inaugural Address, during the depths of the Great Depression, US President Franklin Delano Roosevelt famously told Americans that, “The only thing we have to fear is fear itself.”
Invoking the Book of Exodus, he went on to say that, “We are stricken by no plague of locusts.”
Nothing tangible was causing the depression; the problem, in March 1933, was in people’s minds.
The same could be said today, seven years after the 2008 global financial crisis, about the world economy’s many remaining weak spots.
Fear causes individuals to restrain their spending and firms to withhold investments; as a result, the economy weakens, confirming their fear and leading them to restrain spending further.
The downturn deepens, and a vicious circle of despair takes hold.
Though the 2008 financial crisis has passed, we remain stuck in the emotional cycle that it set in motion.
It is a bit like stage fright.
Dwelling on performance anxiety may cause hesitation or a loss of inspiration.
As fear turns into fact, the anxiety worsens – and so does the performance.
Once such a cycle starts, it can be very difficult to stop.
According to Google Ngrams, it was during the Great Depression – around the late 1930s – that the term “feedback loop” began to appear frequently in books, often in relation to electronics.
If a microphone is placed in front of a loudspeaker, eventually some disturbance will cause the system to produce a painful wail as sound loops from the loudspeaker to the microphone and back, over and over.
Then, in 1948, the great sociologist Robert K. Merton popularized the phrase “self-fulfilling prophecy” in an essay with that title.
Merton’s prime example was the Great Depression.
But the memory of the Great Depression is fading today, and many people probably do not imagine that such a thing could be happening now.
Surely, they think, economic weakness must be due to something more tangible than a feedback loop.
But it is not, and the most direct evidence of this is that, despite rock-bottom interest rates, investment is not booming.
In fact, real (inflation-adjusted) interest rates are hovering around zero throughout much of the world, and have been for more than five years.
This is especially true for government borrowing, but corporate interest rates, too, are at record lows.
In such circumstances, governments considering a proposal to build, say, a new highway, should regard this as an ideal time.
If the highway will cost $1 billion, last indefinitely with regular maintenance and repairs, and yield projected annual net benefits to society of $20 million, a long-term real interest rate of 3% would make it nonviable: the interest cost would exceed the benefit.
But if the long-term real interest rate is 1%, the government should borrow the money and build it.
That is just sound investing.
In fact, the 30-year inflation-indexed US government bond yield as of May 4 was only 0.86%, compared with more than 4% in the year 2000.
Such rates are similarly low today in many countries.
Our need for better highways cannot have declined; on the contrary, given population growth, the need for investment can only have become more pronounced.
So why are we not well into a highway-construction boom?
People’s weak appetite for economic risk may not be the result of pure fear, at least not in the sense of an anxiety like stage fright.
It may stem from a perception that others are afraid, or that something is inexplicably wrong with the business environment, or a lack of inspiration (which can help overcome background fears).
It is worth noting that the US experienced its fastest economic growth since 1929 in the 1950s and 1960s, a time of high government expenditure on the Interstate Highway System, which was launched in 1956.
As the system was completed, one could cross the country and reach its commercial hubs on high-speed expressways at 75 miles (120 kilometers) an hour.
Maybe the national highway system was more inspirational than the kinds of things that Roosevelt tried to stimulate the US out of the Great Depression.
With his Civilian Conservation Corps, for example, young men were enlisted to clean up the wilderness and plant trees.
That sounded like a pleasant experience – maybe a learning experience – for young men who would otherwise be idle and unemployed.
But it was not a great inspiration for the future, which may help to explain why Roosevelt’s New Deal was unable to end America’s economic malaise.
By contrast, the apparent relative strength of the US economy today may reflect some highly visible recent inspirations.
The fracking revolution, widely viewed as originating in the US, has helped to lower energy prices and has eliminated America’s dependency on foreign oil.
Likewise, much of the rapid advance in communications in recent years reflects innovations – smartphone and tablet hardware and software, for example – that has been indigenous to the US.
Higher government spending could stimulate the economy further, assuming that it generates a level of inspiration like that of the Interstate Highway System.
It is not true that governments are inherently unable to stimulate people’s imagination.
What is called for is not little patches here and there, but something big and revolutionary.
Government-funded space-exploration programs around the world have been profound inspirations.
Of course, it was scientists, not government bureaucrat, who led the charge.
But such programs, whether publicly funded or not, have been psychologically transforming.
People see in them a vision for a greater future.
And with inspiration comes a decline in fear, which now, as in Roosevelt’s time, is the main obstacle to economic progress.
China’s Growth Challenge
BEIJING – Throughout the just concluded 18th Congress of the Chinese Communist Party ubiquitous television screens in trains and metro stations broadcast a live feed of the Chinese assembly.
Beijing’s busy people, however, seemed not to pay close attention: for them, it was business as usual.
The Chinese public’s indifference to their country’s ceremonial transition of power is hardly surprising.
All critical decisions were taken well ahead of the Congress, behind closed doors, with very little input from outsiders.
This apparently seamless transition, however, is widely expected to usher in a complex and potentially difficult decade for China – and for the rest of the world.
China is at a turning point.
With more than 100 million people still below the official poverty line and per capita income currently just over $6,000 in nominal terms, robust economic growth must be maintained.
Outgoing President Hu Jintao indicated that China’s total GDP and per capita income should double by 2020, which will require 7.5% average annual growth.
Is this feasible?
Recent improvements in data for industrial production, fixed investment, and retail sales suggest that the Chinese economy, which had slowed in recent quarters, may already be on the mend.
This has now become a matter of urgency, as the United States and Europe are unlikely to provide much support to Chinese exports.
Indeed, China is now expected to undershoot its 10% growth target for trade in 2012, even though exports to emerging-market economies were up by more than that in the first nine months of the year.
Income growth and a lower household savings rate are essential to the shift in China’s growth model, and each presupposes key reforms.
For example, improving the provision of health care, education, and care for the elderly, and bringing it into line with the needs and expectations of the emerging middle class should encourage more households to allocate a larger share of their income to consumption.
Likewise, increasing the interest rates paid on bank deposits would enable savings to decline without loss of income.
At the same time, as China proceeds along the path toward a market-based economy established more than 30 years ago by Deng Xiaoping, policymaking has become more complex.
The economy needs to be steered in the desired direction without triggering instability, making correct sequencing and coordination of policy measures essential.
As some Chinese colleagues told me, the success of reforms in the next decade will depend more than ever on good design.
In particular, the new leadership will have to attend to the linkages between the real economy and the expanding financial sector as it overhauls state-owned companies and liberalizes the banks.
From commodities to financial assets, price formation should become more market-based and transparent, while capital allocation should become more efficient and the scope for rent-seeking and corruption should be reduced.
Moreover, as the renminbi’s internationalization continues at a steady pace, domestic liberalization should occur in tandem with deeper global integration.
In the coming years, the key issue, reflected in Hu’s Congress-opening speech, will be the relationship between the state and the market.
But reforms will continue to be top-down and gradual, especially in the financial sector, where most efforts will be concentrated in the next decade.
Many Chinese seem to believe that market discipline will bring fair competition and contribute to closing the widening gap between rich and poor.
China’s income distribution has become highly skewed: at 0.438, the Gini coefficient, which measures income inequality, puts the country closer to the United States than to northern Europe’s egalitarian societies (with the exception of the United Kingdom).
And the unjust allocation of resources, which has enriched so many politically well-connected individuals and families, has become more difficult to bear.
A key question for the next decade, therefore, is whether the Chinese authorities’ growth targets will be enough to preserve social cohesion as further economic and political reforms are gradually implemented.
As the economic pie grows less rapidly, greater fairness will be crucial to social stability.
This much seems clear to the new leadership.
Whether they will be able to engineer the necessary institutional shifts remains to be seen.
The Limits to Panic
COPENHAGEN – We often hear how the world as we know it will end, usually through ecological collapse.
Indeed, more than 40 years after the Club of Rome released the mother of all apocalyptic forecasts, The Limits to Growth, its basic ideas are still with us.
But time has not been kind.
The Limits to Growth warned humanity in 1972 that devastating collapse was just around the corner.
But, while we have seen financial panics since then, there have been no real shortages or productive breakdowns.
Instead, the resources generated by human ingenuity remain far ahead of human consumption.
But the report’s fundamental legacy remains: we have inherited a tendency to obsess over misguided remedies for largely trivial problems, while often ignoring big problems and sensible remedies.
In the early 1970’s, the flush of technological optimism was over, the Vietnam War was a disaster, societies were in turmoil, and economies were stagnating.
Rachel Carson’s 1962 book Silent Spring had raised fears about pollution and launched the modern environmental movement; Paul Ehrlich’s 1968 title The Population Bomb said it all.
The first Earth Day, in 1970, was deeply pessimistic.
The genius of The Limits to Growth was to fuse these worries with fears of running out of stuff.
We were doomed, because too many people would consume too much.
Even if our ingenuity bought us some time, we would end up killing the planet and ourselves with pollution.
The only hope was to stop economic growth itself, cut consumption, recycle, and force people to have fewer children, stabilizing society at a significantly poorer level.
That message still resonates today, though it was spectacularly wrong.
For example, the authors of The Limits to Growth predicted that before 2013, the world would have run out of aluminum, copper, gold, lead, mercury, molybdenum, natural gas, oil, silver, tin, tungsten, and zinc.
Instead, despite recent increases, commodity prices have generally fallen to about a third of their level 150 years ago.
Technological innovations have replaced mercury in batteries, dental fillings, and thermometers: mercury consumption is down 98% and, by 2000, the price was down 90%.