Quite simply, we stopped viewing our geography and history as a curse or disadvantage.
On the contrary, we began to regard our location at the crossroads of Europe, Asia, and the Middle East as an opportunity to interact simultaneously with multiple players.
As a result, we began to reach out to countries in our neighborhood and beyond. We tried to expand political dialogue, enhance economic interdependence, and strengthen cultural and social understanding.
And, while ten years is too short for a definitive assessment of such an ambitious policy, we have undoubtedly covered considerable ground.
For example, we have quadrupled our trade volume just with our neighbors.
On several occasions, we have also been instrumental in facilitating peace and reconciliation.
This approach has been reflected in the Arab Spring, which Turkey ardently supported from the outset. We have not hesitated in siding with those fighting for their rights and dignity.
Indeed, in countries like Tunisia, Egypt, Libya, and Yemen, which are now attempting to institutionalize change, Turkey is their most active partner, sharing our own experience and providing tangible assistance in the form of economic cooperation and political capacity building.
In Syria, on the other hand, the revolution has not yet come to fruition, owing to the regime’s brutal repression of its opponents.
Every day, scores of people there die in pursuit of dignity.
Turkey is doing all that it can to alleviate the Syrian people’s suffering.
Unfortunately, the international community as a whole has so far performed poorly in providing an effective response to the crisis.
Turkey’s position on Iran’s nuclear program has been similarly clear: we are categorically opposed to the presence of weapons of mass destruction in our region.
Attempts to develop or acquire WMDs might well trigger a regional arms race, leading to further instability and threatening international peace and security.
That is why we have always called for the establishment of a WMD-free zone in the Middle East, including both Iran and Israel.
We support Iran’s right to use nuclear energy for peaceful purposes.
But Iran’s program must be transparent, and its leaders must assure the international community of its non-military nature.
The key is to close the confidence gap and pave the way for meaningful dialogue.
In April, we hosted the inaugural round of revived talks between the international community and Iran.
Let us be clear: there is no military solution to this problem.
Military intervention would merely further complicate the issue, while creating new layers of conflict in our region and beyond.
In this and other matters, Turkey strives to act as a “virtuous power,” which requires us to align our national interests with values such as justice, democracy, and human dignity, and to achieve our foreign-policy goals through mutual cooperation rather than coercion.
Effective multilateralism is a key facet of this vision.
Turkey served as a member of the United Nations Security Council in 2009-2010, and is now seeking another term in 2015-2016.
Given the crucial importance of developments in our part of the world, Turkey’s contribution to the Council’s work promises to be highly valuable.
In 2015, moreover, we will assume the presidency of the G-20, and we are committed to using our means and capabilities to make it a more effective organ of global governance.
Turkey’s internal transformation over the past decade has placed it in an ideal position to benefit the region – and thus the global community.
While we have accomplished much already, more is required of us.
Given the challenges of our neighborhood, and the region’s central role in global affairs, Turkey will not refrain from taking on new responsibilities.
Erdoğan’s Kurdish Gambit
ISTANBUL – Conflict in the Middle East threatens not only the security of many of its states, but also their continued existence.
Syria, Iraq, Lebanon, and others, now gripped by sectarian fighting, risk fragmenting into ethnic sub-states, transforming a region whose political geography was drawn nearly a century ago.
Surveying the regional scene, Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdoğan has conceived of an audacious plan to enhance Turkey’s regional standing and extend his own political dominance at home.
Facing the end of a self-imposed three-term limit as prime minister, he is intent on changing the Turkish constitution to introduce a presidential system – with himself on top as the first incumbent to wield much-enlarged power.
Erdoğan’s plan, however, depends on ending Turkey’s 30-year conflict with its own Kurdish population.
As a result, the Erdoğan government has decided on negotiations with Abdullah Ocalan, the jailed leader of the Kurdish Workers’ Party (PKK), the armed Kurdish resistance movement.
The hope is to agree on a new, more liberal constitution that will strengthen the rights of Turkey’s largest ethnic minority and include substantial devolution of power to regional governments.
In return, the PKK is expected to end its three-decade-long fight against the Turkish state.
On March 21, at a mass rally attended by almost one million people in the southeastern Turkish city of Diyarbakir, Ocalan delivered a message of peace from his prison cell.
He called for the end to armed struggle, and invited the PKK’s fighters to leave the country.
For Erdoğan, the stakes could not be higher.
Erdoğan envisions putting the constitutional changes and the terms of peace to a national referendum, a linkage that would transform Turkish politics.
If the negotiations succeed, he will be remembered for his historic role in bringing peace, and will likely stand a better chance of realizing his presidential ambition, having gained parliamentary support for revising the constitution from the Kurdish Peace and Democracy Party.
If negotiations fail, however, Erdoğan will be held responsible for any deterioration in the security environment that results.
A recently leaked account of Ocalan’s strategy highlights the risk, for it cites the PKK leader as threatening the government with full-scale war.
At the same time, the Turkish government is pursuing a separate path of negotiations, through a rapprochement with another Kurdish authority – the Kurdish Regional Government (KRG) in northern Iraq.
The grand vision is to integrate Iraqi Kurdistan into the Turkish economy.
Turkey already supplies most of the KRG economy’s imports, which accounted for 70% of Turkey’s almost $11 billion in exports to Iraq last year.
But it is the incipient energy deal between Turkey and the KRG that is set to build the foundation for a real strategic alliance.
The undisclosed deal is believed to grant Turkey substantial concessions to explore new oil and gas fields in northern Iraq, as well as preferential rates for energy exports to Turkey.
In return, Turkey is to help the KRG build pipeline infrastructure that will allow oil and gas to be exported to Turkey without relying on Iraq’s national pipeline, which is controlled by the central government in Baghdad.
Within the Turkish government, this opening is viewed as an immense opportunity to reduce Turkey’s heavy dependence on energy imports.
In addition to securing energy supplies, the deal would help Turkey to overcome its chronic current-account deficit: roughly 70% of the country’s $84 billion trade deficit is due to the import bill for energy supplies.
For the KRG, the deal would secure the region’s future economic wealth without holding it hostage to an increasingly unsympathetic Iraqi government.
Under Iraq’s constitution, the Kurdish region is entitled to 17% of the country’s oil and gas revenues.
But the distribution of proceeds from hydrocarbons is irregular, and the central government has accumulated significant arrears.
The KRG hopes that a deal with Turkey would allow it to obtain more regular and predictable hydrocarbon revenues.
But the United States remains adamantly opposed to such a deal between Turkey and the KRG, claiming that it would undermine Iraq’s stability and fuel secessionist tendencies in the north.
In late February, during his overseas trip, which included a stop in Ankara, US Secretary of State John Kerry reiterated these concerns in his talks with his Turkish counterparts.
America’s fears are not shared in Turkish government circles, where the deals between the US oil giants Exxon and Chevron and the KRG are seen as proof that America is more concerned about its share of the pie in northern Iraq than it is about alleged threats to that country’s stability.
Not surprisingly, Erdoğan’s government has decided to pay little heed to US government concerns.
The sectarian strains that are now rending societies across the Middle East are likely to change the regional map.
Erdoğan has now developed a plan that would take advantage of this development, ensure his political control, and lock in energy security for his country.
He envisions a new regional order under Turkish leadership, based on a realignment between Turks and Kurds that underpins a strategic partnership for exploiting the region’s last untapped energy resources.
Turkey’s Transformation
Abdullah Gül’s election as Turkey’s 11th president marks a watershed in the country’s history.
In July, the ruling Justice and Development Party (AKP) – religiously conservative but economically liberal – won a landslide in parliamentary elections called after the military balked at seeing Gül become president.
That victory, combined with Gül’s election, confirm the AKP’s emergence as a party of realignment, and that, despite an upsurge of xenophobic nationalism, Turks wanted to integrate with the European Union.
Last April, Gül’s candidacy brought a threat of a coup from the military, precipitating the recent elections.
Thus, the electorate also made it clear that it no longer wanted the military involved in domestic politics, rejecting the generals’ warnings that the AKP would lead the country into the darkness of theocratic rule.
The fierce debate concerning the presidency underscored the symbolic significance of the post in Turkey’s domestic balance of power.
The headscarf that Gül’s wife wears for religious reasons was seen as an assault on Turkey’s sacrosanct principle of secularism.
Indeed, outgoing President Ahmet Necdet Sezer refused to invite the wives of AKP deputies who covered their hair to state dinners and Republic Day receptions.
The president obviously represents the state, but he is not a mere figurehead.
After all, he sits in Ataturk’s chair.
He has wide-ranging powers, including the authority to make senior government appointments.
He appoints judges to high courts and members to the Higher Educational Council (YOK).
He selects the presidents of state universities from a list submitted by the YOK.
In times of peace, he is the commander-in-chief of the armed forces.
This is why the crisis over the presidential election was actually a crisis of the constitutional order installed by the military when it ruled from 1980-1983.
That constitution – unlike Ataturk’s – was written by and for the military on the assumption that the Cold War would never end, and that the president would always be either a military person or someone close to the military.
But the Cold War is long over, and a lot has since changed in Turkey.
An IMF-supported program in 2001 unleashed rapid economic growth, based on Turkey’s gradual but definitive transformation into a market economy.
At the same time, Turkey moved decisively onto the path of political and administrative reform in order to start EU accession negotiations.
Moreover, Turkey’s economic and social transformation brought forth a new elite.
The AKP came to represent this new elite and its quest for political power.
Many foreign commentators described the presidential and parliamentary elections as a contest between Turkey’s secular past and a putative Islamist future.
However, the contest is more accurately seen as one between an open and an introverted Turkey; between civilian, democratic rule and military tutelage; and between a globalizing and a protectionist economy.
The AKP’s support came from both the winners and losers of globalization, from conservative middle Anatolia and cosmopolitan Istanbul, from the nationalist Black Sea region and the predominantly Kurdish Southeast.
Following the AKP’s parliamentary election victory in July, and now with the election of Gül, many observers predicted military intervention.
Although there is no doubt that the military, as the bastion of the secular establishment, does not like these results, a coup is virtually out of the question.
One reason is that relations between the military and the Islamist movement are more complicated than they appear.
Back in 1997, when the military pushed the then Islamist-led government of Necmettin Erbakan out of power, the Islamist movement fractured.
The younger, more modern, and outward-looking elements broke away from the traditional, anti-western, anti-Semitic older generation.
This year’s crisis led Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, the prime minister, to complete the transformation of the AKP away from doctrinaire Islamism.
Following the AKP’s victory in July, Erdoğan initially sought to avoid antagonizing the military by not renewing Gül’s presidential candidacy.
Yet Gül insisted, and the AKP united behind him.
As a result, Turkey is entering uncharted waters.
Gül will be an engaged president.
As Turkey faces many regional challenges, his experience as foreign minister ought to serve him well.
But an engaged and active president may cause tension with the prime minister who, in the Turkish system, is the real chief executive.
Gül’s ascent to the presidency should consolidate the transformation of Turkish politics.
Turkey has integrated its Islamist movement into the political mainstream.
Representatives of an economically dynamic and socially conservative heartland are moving Turkey toward reform.
The republican project of modernization will continue, with a wider mobilization of society.
Thus, Turkey will continue its unprecedented amalgam of Islam, capitalism, and secular liberal democracy.
As unlikely as it may seem in the wake of the crisis over Gül’s candidacy, so far Turkey is managing this challenge well.
Turkey: The New Indispensable Nation
ANKARA – Turkey put its imprint as one of the most influential countries not only on 2010, but on the first decade of the third millennium.
At the start of the new decade, too, Turkey’s geopolitical position, rich historical heritage, cultural depth, well-educated young population, ever-strengthening democracy, growing economy, and constructive foreign policy make it an indispensable country in a world transformed by rapid globalization.
By making use of all of its assets, Turkey is contributing to regional stability and peace and working towards a global order based on justice, equality, and transparency.
As an emerging power, Turkey will continue to realize its own potential and simultaneously contribute to global peace.
The chaotic conditions of the post-Cold War world have made civil wars, occupations, nuclear armament, and human trafficking chronic problems.
While globalization offers new opportunities, it also causes new global problems and deepens the inequalities embedded in the world order.
It is no longer possible to sustain the current world order, which, based as it is on a skewed notion of center-periphery relations, merely produces injustice and inequality.
Turkey seeks to contribute to regional and global peace by facilitating democratic reforms domestically and implementing a principled foreign policy.
As a NATO member, Turkey aims to become a full member of the European Union and establish cordial relations with all of its southern and eastern neighbors.
Turkey’s posture – looking both East and West – is neither paradoxical nor inconsistent.
On the contrary, Turkey’s multidimensional geopolitical position is an asset for the region.
There are few countries that can play such a critical role.
Turkey constitutes a new synthesis because of its ability to link such diverse qualities and backgrounds. Turkey is thus capable of overcoming the dichotomies of East-West, Europe-Middle East, and North-South.
Indeed, this capacity is essential because we need to leave behind the Manichean disagreements, conflicts, and fears of the Cold War era.
Those who see the world through those old, fearful lenses have difficulty understanding Turkey’s rising profile and dynamism.
But the realities of the twenty-first century necessitate a multi-dimensional and inclusive political perspective.
Acting on these principles, Turkey is following a proactive foreign policy stretching from the Balkans to the Middle East and the Caucasus.
This geography is Turkey’s natural historical and cultural hinterland.
Turkey’s cultural and historical links with the peoples of these regions are deep and conducive to regional peace.
Turkey cannot remain indifferent to this geography, for it stands at the center of it.
History clearly shows that it is impossible to establish and sustain global peace without ensuring peace and stability in the Balkans and the Middle East.
Turkey is following a constructive and inclusive policy for these regions, which are marked by remarkable models of cohabitation, science, arts, culture, and civilization.
Due to our recent efforts, the wounds of the Bosnian war are being healed, facilitating peace and stability among Balkan peoples.
Turkey’s efforts are also helping to prevent wars in the Middle East, and our intense efforts have helped keep a diplomatic track open on the Iranian nuclear issue.
Moreover, we are helping to facilitate political stability in Iraq and helping the NATO mission in Afghanistan.
And, of paramount importance, Turkey is making enormous efforts to help establish an independent and sustainable Palestinian state – efforts that are appreciated by Turkey’s Western and Eastern friends alike.
Today, Turkey is following a policy that represents a sense of justice in the Middle East, and is working toward the removal of artificial borders and walls among the region’s peoples.
We desire to live in a region where the dignity of every person is respected. That is why we have objected to Israel’s aggression in and blockade of Gaza, and will continue to do so.
We know that it is not possible to attain global peace unless we establish sustainable peace in the Middle East, which requires resolving the Palestinian question.
Therefore, we urge Israel and all other countries involved to follow constructive and peaceful policies.
Motivated by these principles, Spanish Prime Minister José Luis Rodríguez Zapatero and I showed through our “Alliance of Civilizations Initiative” in 2004 that cultural, historic, and religious differences are no reason for conflict.
The basis for our approach to humanity is the following principle of the famous Turkish poet Yunus Emre: “We love and respect the created because of the Creator.”
As a result, we stand firmly opposed to discrimination against any society, religion, sect, culture, or country.
I consider anti-Semitism, Islamophobia, and prejudice against Christianity crimes against humanity, whose common values and ethical rules oblige us to confront and reject all forms of discrimination.
Besides its cultural, historic, and diplomatic values, Turkey’s vibrant economy has become a source of stability and welfare.
When my party took office in 2002, the Turkish economy totaled around $250 billion. Today, Turkey’s annual GDP has reached $800 billion, making it Europe’s sixth largest economy and the 17th largest in the world.
It has also been one of the least impacted by the global economic crisis, with growing foreign trade, a strong banking system, and diverse and prospering small and medium-size enterprises.
Thus, the Turkish economy returned to its pre-crisis levels in 2010.
All of these qualities have transformed Turkey into an attractive place for business, media, artists, diplomats, students, and non-governmental organizations from around the world.
Turkey’s ever-increasing soft power is becoming one of its most significant traits, which we will continue to use to enhance regional and global peace.
The impact of globalization has brought about a rebalancing of power, but the demand for justice, transparency, and legitimacy remains constant.
The global problems of our times necessitate cooperation, political will, and sacrifice. That is why we are following a proactive policy in multilateral institutions to facilitate an equitable sharing of our world’s resources.
Turkey will continue to work toward a just and equitable global order in 2011 and beyond.
This is a responsibility emanating from our history, geography, and the universal values that we hold.
Turkey to the EU’s Rescue
LAUSANNE – The Copenhagen Climate Change Conference was an unmitigated disaster for the European Union. Instead of the EU claiming center stage, as its leaders assumed it would, the key actors were the United States, Brazil, South Africa, India, and China.
Indeed, when the accord was reached, the EU was not even in the room. Copenhagen exposed the demise of Europe not only as a global power, but even as a global arbiter.
So what is the EU left with?
As its “hard power” ebbs, its “soft power,” as illustrated by the Copenhagen summit, seems to be very weak.
This in part arises from a failure to provide the EU with political power.
The Lisbon Treaty was a compromise constitutional arrangement that would nevertheless give the EU greater weight and authority precisely for occasions such as the Copenhagen summit, when global issues are addressed.
Though multiple European actors on the world stage were more than justified in the old days, this is no longer the case.
With China, India, the US, Indonesia, Brazil, and other major global players speaking with one voice, Europe could no longer afford a cacophony of voices.
But in Copenhagen, the structure established by the Lisbon Treaty failed.
Beyond the failure in Copenhagen, the EU has several other problems.
It tends to be perceived globally as supercilious, petulant, and prim. Its know-it-all attitude grates almost everywhere.
With only 7% of the world’s population (and rapidly dwindling) and composed mainly of post-industrial low-growth economies, the EU is increasingly seen as marginal.
Europeans do not realize how little interest in “European affairs” there is in Seoul, Sydney, São Paolo, or San Francisco.
There is a growing general global consensus that Europe is a pompous old has-been.
There are many causes for the decline of the EU’s global position and prestige, one of which has been the way in which the Union has evolved as an aloof and bureaucratic citadel.
This is unfortunate, because, despite its problems, the EU does have much to offer. But there seems little prospect for a European revival.
The EU will continue to decline and become increasingly marginalized as it fails to find the spirit or the structure to adjust to the profound transformations and challenges of the twenty-first century.
There is one thing, however, that could revive the EU, give it much enhanced global respectability, and make it an “interesting” place, as well as ensure a return to the international limelight: Turkey’s admission as a full member.
The debate about whether Turkey is European is absurd. It is impossible to airbrush Turkey out of European history.
Apart from being an integral part of Europe, membership for Turkey, with its young and dynamic population, would provide a great fillip for Europe’s aging demographic profile.
In a highly complex and diverse world, the EU stands out for its homogeneity.
While the EU flatters itself on diversity, it is in fact one of the least diverse regions of the world.
There is more ethnic diversity in, say, Malaysia than in the entire EU.
ASEAN as a whole, with a population of 580 million, is not significantly bigger than the EU (with 500 million), yet it encompasses an infinitely greater degree of ethnic, linguistic, cultural, and religious diversity.
With Turkey as a member, the EU would gain legitimacy as a more “normal” world region.
By admitting Turkey, with the world’s fifth-largest Muslim population (after Indonesia, Pakistan, Bangladesh, and India), the EU would be in a position to establish close ties with the world’s 1.8 billion Muslims, and could become a credible voice on reform within the Islamic world. Turkish membership in the Union would also greatly ease the assimilation of the EU’s own Muslim minorities.
EU lethargy and growing irrelevance in global public affairs owes much to Eurocentric political atavism.
One potential benefit of the Copenhagen debacle could be that it forces the Union to wake up to the new world of the twenty-first century.
An EU with Turkey as a member would be far better situated to meet today’s challenges than an EU without Turkey.
But, unfortunately, Turkey, like much of the rest of the world, is rather turned off by the EU.
Indeed, now it is the Union that will need to seduce the Turkish people, rather than the other way around.
That seduction should begin this year, with an agenda that sets the process and timeframe for accession, to be followed by an EU-Turkey Treaty that confirms the country’s accession by 2020.
Exit Afghanistan?
NEW DELHI – In his victory speech to a rapturous crowd in Chicago following his reelection, President Barack Obama affirmed that America’s “decade-long conflict” in Afghanistan will now end.
The line was greeted with prolonged applause – and understandably so.
In fact, this ill-advised war – launched on the basis of a United Nations Security Council resolution – has been grinding on for 11 years, making it the longest in American history.
At the beginning, the war was aimed at eliminating Al Qaeda, vanquishing the Taliban, and transforming Afghanistan into something resembling a Western-style nation-state.
With none of these goals fully achieved, America’s intervention – like every other intervention in Afghanistan’s history – is ending unsatisfactorily.
As the curtain drops, two developments will greatly influence the withdrawal process and the ultimate outcome.
The first is the management of the transition to Afghan control, which depends on an orderly withdrawal of American and NATO forces by 2014.
The second is the election, also to be held in 2014, of a new Afghan president – a process that needs to permit the United States and its NATO allies to claim plausibly that they are handing the country over to a legitimate government.
For Afghanistan, ravaged by war without respite since the “Saur Revolution” of 1978, the endgame will be even more nerve-wracking.
As the US military leaves, it will enter another period of political and strategic uncertainty, after almost a half-century of disorder and civil war.
A previous period of such uncertainty was the spur to Pakistan’s creation of the Taliban, which proceeded to disrupt Afghanistan’s (and Pakistan’s) already-fragile social order.
Today, almost three generations of Afghans have lived from birth to adulthood without having known stability and peace.
And, as a visiting American scholar/diplomat recently told me in a confidential conversation: “In the US, too, at least a generation of our children, from birth till the age of 15, have seen their country almost continuously at war.”
That is an arresting thought.
It is against this bitter backdrop that a new Afghan president will be elected and the withdrawal of forces carried out.
Will these two developments bring about a stable peace, or will Afghanistan succumb to instability once more?
And what consequences are in store for the US following this war without victory or defeat?
Last May, Obama declared that the US had “turned the tide of war” in Afghanistan, an eerie echo of Richard Nixon’s rhetoric as he withdrew US forces from Vietnam.
And, like Vietnam, will the US – exhausted and nearly bankrupted by the effort – see all of its supposed gains evaporate soon after it leaves?
After all, Al Qaeda, albeit weakened, remains capable of regenerating inside Afghanistan, where the Taliban remain dominant in the country’s east and south, as well as in neighboring North Waziristan in Pakistan.
Just how weakened America is in the region matters.
As the US strategist Daniel Twining has observed: “Over the coming four years, US leadership…will be essential” for “the consolidation of a wide-ranging strategic partnership with India,” as well as for efforts “to prevent Pakistan’s many pathologies…from spilling over in ways that undermine fundamental US (and Indian) interests.”
So where does this leave Afghanistan’s neighbors?
Deeply concerned.
Our primary aim is the restoration of peace and, if not stability, an acceptable political equilibrium.
Even if we did not incur the same costs as the US over the past decade – the hundreds of billions of dollars spent, and the many young people killed or injured – we have paid the price that regional uncertainty always imposes: lost trade, lost growth, refugees, and violence.
In the face of these costs, the overblown and sometimes clearly dishonest claims about the war are an obscenity.
This strategically myopic and militarily ill-conceived war was unwinnable from the beginning.
As a result, Afghanistan will remain what it was: a violent and ungovernable tribal melange.
Indeed, across the region, apprehension is growing that when foreign troops leave, Afghanistan will again descend into civil war, ultimately bringing the Taliban back to power.
That is why “bringing the troops home early” has become the prime objective of Western politicians who are engaged in the region.
The West needs to get out before the bloodletting starts again in earnest.
My fear is that we have not seen the last of Al Qaeda or the Taliban.
As a neighboring country, India would face disturbing consequences if they returned to power in Afghanistan, as would Iran, which would not sit idly by if sectarian strife intensified and the Shia became targets of a resurgent Taliban.
Other neighbors would also pay a price should the Taliban’s seemingly invariable return turn bloody, however immune they believe they are.
China, which has invested billions of dollars in developing Afghanistan’s natural resources –investments protected, ironically, by the US – would be certain to experience greater unrest in Xinjiang Province, home to millions of disaffected Muslims.
But the country that will be most affected is Pakistan, which faces challenges to its territorial and political integrity.
The territorial challenge is, no doubt, a mushrooming anxiety; an innocuous remark by an American envoy about the Durand Line, which marks the Afghanistan-Pakistan border, drew sharp retorts from both countries.
Afghanistan’s history of occupation by foreign troops and their eventual withdrawal has been repeated so many times that one wearies of repeating the tale.
Yet this history is the litmus test.
With the US withdrawal, turmoil is bound to reemerge, and the entire region will again bear the consequences.
Turning North Korea Around
SEOUL – Negotiations over the denuclearization of the Korean peninsula look set to resume.
Sadly, they are unlikely to end soon. Talk of a “grand bargain” remains just that – talk.
Trust between North Korea and the United States, South Korea, and Japan is almost non-existent.
While all leaders – including North Korea’s Kim Jong Il – remain committed to denuclearization in public, none appears ready to risk much in terms of domestic politics to achieve that end.
So the best the world can currently hope for is revived dialogue, an agreement to freeze the North’s Yongbyon nuclear plant, and perhaps a moratorium on further missile and nuclear tests.
To speed the process, a new long-term strategy aimed at the underlying factors at work in North Korea – and in relations with its rulers – is needed.
Simply put, the US and other powers need to pursue constructive economic engagement with North Korea to help the regime achieve “strength and prosperity” through economic transition and integration with the global economy.
Constructive economic engagement will benefit ordinary North Koreans, who have suffered as much as any people on Earth since the Cold War’s end.
The root cause of North Korea’s economic difficulties is its isolation from the forces of globalization, from which East Asia in particular has profited.
In the late 1990’s, as China and Vietnam were posting rapid GDP growth, North Korea was ravaged by one of the worst famines in modern history.
Today, North Korea is a de-industrializing, near-subsistence economy.
The best hope for most North Koreans is the subterranean market economy that fills the gaps in the state’s planned economy and public distribution system.
Trade with China is keeping those market forces supplied with goods and business opportunities across the border.
Rather than pressure China to shut down the cross-border flow of fuel and food in order to “teach Pyongyang a lesson,” the US and its allies must find ways to support North Korea’s economic integration with the region.
More effective than freezing accounts and barring travel by officials with ties to the missile and nuclear programs would be to work with North Korea’s younger technocrats, banking and financial officials, and economic advisers to improve their expertise in managing North Korea’s economic transition.
Of course, economic engagement will not solve the nuclear conundrum in the short term.
Nothing will.
The Korean Peninsula will most likely achieve “complete, verifiable, and irreversible denuclearization” only when North Korea is already moving in the direction of economic growth and integration.
North Korea’s regime will require demonstrable evidence that a secure, prosperous, non-nuclear development model is available to it before it abandons its nuclear program.
So, as nuclear talks proceed, the US and its partners should help North Korea lay the foundations for a new political economy based on international commerce, investment, and cooperation, as an alternative to the current model predicated on a hostile security environment.
We should think of North Korea’s economic transition process as a prerequisite for full denuclearization, rather than simply holding out the promise of a big assistance package as a quid pro quo .
During the recent visit of a high-level North Korean delegation to the US, there were encouraging signals that its rulers would welcome increased economic contacts, including with international financial institutions.
Moreover, North Korea is actively courting foreign investment.
The United Nations Development Program recently reopened its office in Pyongyang, another positive sign of the regime’s readiness to work toward common development goals.
Of course, new sources of growth in North Korea could threaten vested interests, leading to institutional rivalries, factional tension, or a conservative backlash.
And the regime will not want the process of economic opening to get too far ahead of security agreements and political normalization.
After all, the main lesson that North Korean leaders take from China’s success is that security (Mao Zedong’s rapprochement with the US) precedes economic transition (Deng Xiaoping’s reform and opening policy).
Constructive economic engagement will be a tough sell outside North Korea.
In the US, North Korea is seen mostly through the prism of nuclear non-proliferation, and the new administration is wary of being tricked into giving its rulers anything without getting fissile material in return.
In South Korea, President Lee Myung-bak’s political base wants to roll back, not reinvigorate, the Sunshine Policy, and there is a widespread (though by no means universal) weariness with engagement.
In Japan, fear of North Korea’s nuclear threat and anger over the abduction of Japanese citizens generates powerful political pressure against engagement.
China is the one place that quietly implements a constructive economic engagement approach.
Instead of pressing Beijing to cut off North Korea, the US and its allies should further develop their own efforts to draw North Korea out of its insularity.
Turning Point at Chernobyl
The nuclear meltdown at Chernobyl 20 years ago this month, even more than my launch of perestroika, was perhaps the real cause of the collapse of the Soviet Union five years later.
Indeed, the Chernobyl catastrophe was an historic turning point: there was the era before the disaster, and there is the very different era that has followed.
The very morning of the explosion at the Chernobyl nuclear station on April 26, 1986, the Politburo met to discuss the situation, and then organized a government commission to deal with the consequences.
The commission was to control the situation, and to ensure that serious measures were taken, particularly in regard to people’s health in the disaster zone.
Moreover, the Academy of Science established a group of leading scientists, who were immediately dispatched to the Chernobyl region.
The Politburo did not immediately have appropriate and complete information that would have reflected the situation after the explosion.
Nevertheless, it was the general consensus of the Politburo that we should openly deliver the information upon receiving it.
This would be in the spirit of the Glasnost policy that was by then already established in the Soviet Union.
Thus, claims that the Politburo engaged in concealment of information about the disaster is far from the truth.
One reason I believe that there was no deliberate deception is that, when the governmental commission visited the scene right after the disaster and stayed overnight in Polesie, near Chernobyl, its members all had dinner with regular food and water, and they moved about without respirators, like everybody else who worked there.
If the local administration or the scientists knew the real impact of the disaster, they would not have risked doing this.
In fact, nobody knew the truth, and that is why all our attempts to receive full information about the extent of the catastrophe were in vain.
We initially believed that the main impact of the explosion would be in Ukraine, but Belarus, to the northwest, was hit even worse, and then Poland and Sweden suffered the consequences.
Of course, the world first learned of the Chernobyl disaster from Swedish scientists, creating the impression that we were hiding something.
But in truth we had nothing to hide, as we simply had no information for a day and a half.
Only a few days later, we learned that what happened was not a simple accident, but a genuine nuclear catastrophe – an explosion of a Chernobyl’s fourth reactor.
Although the first report on Chernobyl appeared in Pravda on April 28, the situation was far from clear.
For example, when the reactor blew up, the fire was immediately put out with water, which only worsened the situation as nuclear particles began spreading through the atmosphere.
Meanwhile we were still able to take measures in helping people within the disaster zone; they were evacuated, and more than 200 medical organizations were involved in testing the population for radiation poisoning.
There was a serious danger that the contents of the nuclear reactor would seep into the soil, and then leak into the Dnepr river, thus endangering the population of Kiev and other cities along the riverbanks.
Therefore, we started the job of protecting the river banks, initiating a total deactivation of the Chernobyl plant.
The resources of a huge country were mobilized to control the devastation, including work to prepare the sarcophagus that would encase the fourth reactor.
The Chernobyl disaster, more than anything else, opened the possibility of much greater freedom of expression, to the point that the system as we knew it could no longer continue.
It made absolutely clear how important it was to continue the policy of glasnost, and I must say that I started to think about time in terms of pre-Chernobyl and post-Chernobyl.
The price of the Chernobyl catastrophe was overwhelming, not only in human terms, but also economically.
Even today, the legacy of Chernobyl affects the economies of Russia, Ukraine, and Belarus.
Some even suggest that the economic price for the USSR was so high that it stopped the arms race, as I could not keep building arms while paying to clean up Chernobyl.
This is wrong.
My declaration of January 15, 1986, is well known around the world.
I addressed arms reduction, including nuclear arms, and I proposed that by the year 2000 no country should have atomic weapons.
I personally felt a moral responsibility to end the arms race.
But Chernobyl opened my eyes like nothing else: it showed the horrible consequences of nuclear power, even when it is used for non-military purposes.
One could now imagine much more clearly what might happen if a nuclear bomb exploded.
According to scientific experts, one SS-18 rocket could contain a hundred Chernobyls.
Unfortunately, the problem of nuclear arms is still very serious today.
Countries that have them – the members of the so-called “nuclear club” – are in no hurry to get rid of them.
On the contrary, they continue to refine their arsenals, while countries without nuclear weapons want them, believing that the nuclear club’s monopoly is a threat to the world peace.
The twentieth anniversary of the Chernobyl catastrophe reminds us that we should not forget the horrible lesson taught to the world in 1986.
We should do everything in our power to make all nuclear facilities safe and secure.
We should also start seriously working on the production of the alternative sources of energy.
The fact that world leaders now increasingly talk about this imperative suggests that the lesson of Chernobyl is finally being understood.
Turning the Page in Mexico
Three months from now, when Mexico’s new president Felipe Calderón takes office, many will consider it a dubious honor.
This is why Calderón’s opponent in July’s presidential election, the populist Andrés Manuel López Obrador, obtained such a large percentage of the vote compared to the Mexican left’s previous high-water mark in the election of 2000.
But it was not enough to win an election that López Obrador and his backers thought was in the bag.
The extremely tight race – Calderón won by 0.5% of the vote – and the profound disappointment suffered by López Obrador and his supporters led them to contest the ruling of Mexico’s electoral authorities, and to refuse to acknowledge Calderón’s victory.
Instead, López Obrador, a former Mexico City mayor, and his supporters demanded a vote-by-vote recount, which is not mandated – though it is not proscribed – by the country’s electoral laws.
The Electoral Court, however, decided otherwise.
This is where Mexico stands today: a mess by any definition, with no obvious solution in sight.
In the long run, the answer undoubtedly lies in the transformation of the Mexican left, and partly also of the Mexican right.
For years, both were de facto subsumed within the Institutional Revolutionary Party (PRI), which ruled Mexico for seven decades.
That epoch came to an end in 2000, and will not return.
Today, right and left, as well as the PRI itself, are all separate entities, and have a great deal of reconstruction to do.
The right-of-center Party of National Action (PAN), the grouping of current President Vicente Fox and Calderón, needs to acquire a sincere and profound social conscience.
It must transform itself into something like the Social Christian or Christian Democratic parties that exist in Costa Rica, Chile, Venezuela, and Peru.
Otherwise, it will continue to be seen by Mexico’s impoverished masses as the party of the rich – perhaps unfairly, but not entirely unjustly.
PAN’s metamorphosis is underway, but there is still much work to be done.
Much more importantly, however – and perhaps to the surprise of many benevolent international observers – the Mexican left is nowhere near transforming itself into a modern, reformist, social-democratic party.
Not only is it not New Labor; it is not even like the French, Spanish, or Chilean Socialist Parties, or Brazil’s Workers’ Party.
It continues to be a movement with a revolutionary faction – not a majority, but certainly a large minority – bent on insurrection, socialism, and “anti-imperialist” alignment with Cuba and Venezuelan President Hugo Chávez.
Mexico’s left refuses truly to embrace market economics, representative democracy, and the rule of law.
Obviously, many of its members and leaders do subscribe to these tenets, and disapprove in private of López Obrador’s rabble-rousing antics.
But, as long they remain relatively powerless, Mexico will remain unbalanced, deprived of the modern left that it needs to combat poverty and inequality, and hostage to those who still believe in revolution and the assault on the Winter Palace.
Without these twin transformations of its right and left, Mexico can only keep running in place, while so many others speed forward.
But change will not happen overnight, so Mexico needs short-term solutions to its travails.
The most urgent, feasible, and relevant steps involve electoral and legal reforms aimed at avoiding a repeat of the current protests over the presidential vote.
These include establishing a second-round run-off in presidential elections, so that Mexico’s next president has a mandate supported by more than 50% of the voters.
But they also entail the re-election of representatives and senators, recourse to referendums for constitutional amendments, and independent candidacies.
Perhaps most importantly, Mexico must devise a French-style semi-presidential system whereby a designated Prime Minister is responsible for building majorities in Congress, and must be ratified by the latter.
Eliminating the purchase of air time on radio and television during campaigns, with the consequent reduction in their cost, would complement these changes.
None of these indispensable and long-postponed reforms will convince López Obrador’s followers that the end of poverty and inequality in Mexico is around the corner.
But no significant improvement on these fronts can occur without thoroughly refashioning the country’s decision-making process.
Fox and his team thought that the mechanisms that worked during the authoritarian period could simply be transferred to the democratic era and function smoothly.
In fact, none of the major economic and social reforms Mexico desperately needs in order to grow more rapidly, distribute wealth more evenly, and combat poverty more effectively can be passed if the institutional scaffolding is not rebuilt.
That is what Calderón can and must do in order to render moot today’s debates about the fairness of the election that brought him to power.
It is time for Mexico to turn the page, but it must turn the right page.
Tweets of Freedom
NEW YORK – Google has been widely celebrated for its loud refusal to continue censoring its search results in China.
It is still unclear whether Google will continue to operate in China, but in any event we are not about to see much change in China’s Internet policy.
More likely, all this “foreign meddling” will merely cause the Chinese government to dig in its heels.
Even if Google does ultimately leave China, the game is not over.
Western companies can promote Internet freedom from the outside, by providing useful technology as well as the keys to access it.
Call this “Twitter diplomacy.”
Twitter is largely blocked by China’s “great firewall” (GFW), which prevents Chinese people from accessing certain sites.
Yet Twitter has an almost religious following among tech-savvy Chinese, whose determination to use the service outstrips authorities’ efforts to block access to it.
These “netizens” surmount the firewall by way of proxy servers or virtual private networks (VPNs) that allow them to browse the Web as if they were outside of China.
Earlier this month, Chinese twitterati helped get the GFW onto the list of Twitter’s top ten “trending topics” (or most tweeted terms) – an impressive feat given that Twitter is supposed to be inaccessible in China.
Twitter, which lets people send bite-size messages to large groups, allows Chinese to quickly disseminate urgent news or even uncomfortable facts.
“Twitter can create a faster information flow than any official agency,” says Michael Anti, a journalist in Beijing who has long been at the forefront of the Chinese Internet movement.
“That means people would get information faster than the government.
That’s a real crisis for Communists.”
Twitter also helps protect individual citizens.
Blogger Peter Guo claims that Twitter got him out of jail.
He says that he was arrested after spreading word about a crime that allegedly involved local officials.
He tweeted an SOS via his mobile phone after he was arrested last July, and his case quickly attracted both domestic and international attention, which helped secure his release a little over two weeks later.
So just imagine if Twitter were available to the larger Chinese population.
The problem is that many Chinese still lack the simple tools that would enable them to get past the GFW.
When I asked Guo how the outside world could make Twitter more accessible in China, he replied that we could help by “providing affordable VPN service.”
Foreign companies, he added, could make available more secure browsers that would help “Chinese people to circumvent the GFW.”
Government can also play a role in empowering Chinese netizens.
Jonathan Zittrain, Co-Director of Harvard University’s Berkman Center for Internet and Society, has suggested that the United States, for example, could start with some basic funding for the kind of “science and technology innovation that gave us the Internet to begin with.”
This could include potential “game changers” in China such as ad hoc mesh networking, which allows users to communicate with one another by hopping from one device to the next without an Internet service provider in the middle.
But, given the political sensitivities of foreign pressure on China, it is unclear how far Western governments will be able to go.
That is where companies like Twitter come in.
Even if Twitter’s co-founders did not necessarily develop it to be a tool of democratization, that is precisely what it has become.
In April 2009, young people in Moldova used Twitter to organize protests against their government.
Two months later, Twitter famously helped Iranians assemble and share information during their election protests.
Now, we are beginning to see a similar phenomenon in China.
In November, citizen protests against the construction of an incinerator in Guangzhou became a widely Tweeted event.
Referring to the role that Twitter played in protests in Iran and Moldova, Twitter co-founder Jack Dorsey told me, “These are all events and movements that people chose to make happen, and Twitter was a tool that happened to be there to make it more easy.”
Twitter may now be taking more aggressive steps to promote Internet freedom abroad.
Co-founder and CEO Evan Williams recently suggested that software developers were working on technology to evade government barriers, though he did not give specific details.
Google’s adamant stance on Chinese censorship may have been well intentioned.
The problem is that the standoff has now taken on the tone of a state-to-state confrontation.
China, apparently still reeling from a “century of humiliation” at the hands of outsiders, will not be pushed around by America.
This view is not limited to the Chinese government.
Right now, many netizens are applauding Google’s move.
But if they begin to perceive Google as a pawn of the US government, this sentiment could turn on a dime.
Ultimately the Chinese Internet cat-and-mouse game will be won with innovation, not political pressure.
The world should continue to flood the Chinese market, and those of other countries that restrict freedom of expression, with cutting-edge technology.
Of course, censors will often be just one step behind, filtering information and shutting down sites.
But Chinese netizens are remarkably adept at using the limited tools available to them.
In doing so, they are transforming their country in a slow but irreversible way.
Twenty-Five Years of HIV/AIDS
It is now a quarter-century since the acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS) was recognized.
The knowledge that has been gained since then has been breathtaking, and the pace at which basic research has been translated into lifesaving treatments is unprecedented.
The discovery of the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) as the cause of AIDS was followed by elucidation of its pathogenesis, natural history, and epidemiology, the creation of a diagnostic blood test, and the development of antiretroviral drugs.
In 1996, the approval of the first drug of a class called protease inhibitors led to the adoption of a multi-drug, anti-HIV regimen known as highly active antiretroviral therapy, or HAART.
This advance dramatically transformed the quality of life and extended the life expectancy of HIV-infected individuals.
Moreover, antiretroviral drugs given to pregnant HIV-infected women and newborns have proven enormously successful in preventing mother-to-child transmission of HIV.
As a result, since these combinations of drugs were introduced, at least three million years of life have been saved in the United States alone.
We now have more than two dozen approved anti-HIV drugs and drug combinations, and a robust pipeline of next-generation drugs in various stages of development and clinical testing. 
But nowadays our task is to apply these scientific and technological advances to delivering treatment and prevention strategies to people throughout the world, particularly those in resource-poor nations.
With 4.3 million new HIV infections each year throughout the world, we face an untenable situation, as new HIV infections far outstrip our ability to treat all those infected.
So improvements in our ability to prevent HIV infections from occurring are desperately needed.
A wide array of prevention strategies, including behavioral modification, distribution of condoms, and the provision of clean needles and syringes to intravenous drug users, has emerged.
Recent studies suggest that adult male circumcision can be a promising prevention strategy, if properly and hygienically performed and accompanied by appropriate counseling and post-surgical care.
Likewise, the ongoing development of topical microbicides offers the hope of empowering women to protect themselves from HIV infection when using condoms or refusing sexual intercourse is not feasible.
But the greatest scientific and public health goal in HIV/AIDS research still eludes us: the development of an effective HIV vaccine.
This challenge has been particularly difficult because of the nature of the virus, particularly its ability to integrate itself into the genome of host cells, to readily mutate, and to conceal that part of its outer coat that would induce protective antibodies.
We also know that the body’s natural immune response against HIV is inadequate in containing or controlling the virus.
Indeed, since the discovery of HIV, there has never been a documented case in which an individual’s immune system has ever completely eradicated the virus following established infection.
Many current studies focus on developing vaccines that might not completely prevent HIV infection, but that still could slow the progression of HIV or make a person less likely to pass the virus on to others.
But our ultimate goal is to develop a vaccine that can prevent HIV infection.
To succeed, we must solve the mystery of how to induce the human body to produce a protective immune response.
Despite the extraordinary scientific and medical accomplishments in the battle against HIV/AIDS so far, history will judge us by what we accomplish in the next quarter-century, and how we respond to the challenge of delivering the fruits of our research efforts to those who need them most.
Twilight of a Pontiff
Once again Pope John Paul II has returned to hospital, gravely ill.
Even for non-Catholics like myself, this is an occasion to ponder what the world will lose when the Pope’s body finally succumbs to his ailments.
The picture that emerges is one of a mixture of colors.
For those of us who regard the collapse of communism in 1989 as a seminal event of twentieth-century history, Pope John Paul is a hero.
In Poland, he was the focus of all the activities of civil society.
While in other countries, most emphatically in Romania, but also in what was then Czechoslovakia and in Hungary, the alternative to communism was a vacuum or at best a few isolated organizations in civil society, Poland had an alternative source of legitimacy.
Before and after his election, the then Cardinal Karol Wojtyla of Krakow was its most effective representative.
Cardinal Wojtyla’s election as Pope therefore had a significance far beyond the confines of the Church.
Actually he himself did not like the identification of his church with civil society.
In a conversation he protested: “No, the Church is not civil society, it is sacred society.”
This points to another aspect of John Paul II’s papacy, more relevant to insiders than to outsiders.
In matters of doctrine and ethics, John Paul II represented the conservative view.
He was the counterpoint to Pope John XXIII, who, through the Second Vatican Council of the 1960’s and in numerous other ways, tried to reconcile Catholics with the modern age.
Pope John Paul arrested this process and even tried to reverse it.
For progressive theologians like Hans Küng, he was and is therefore a force of anti-modernism, even counter-enlightenment.
At the same time, the Pope became the first great traveling Pontiff of modern times, almost a symbol of a globalized world.
This meant that his image if not his words reached out to millions who do not belong to his church.
There can be few people who will be recognized as widely all over the globe as John Paul II.
By that fact alone, he added a spiritual dimension to an age which is dominated by worldly concerns, such as wealth and show business.
Those of us who believe in a multidimensional culture will be grateful to him for his enormous efforts, thus for his “catholicism” in the original sense of the word, his all-embracing concerns.
On the other side of the balance sheet, and despite his global outreach, Pope John Paul II cannot be described as particularly ecumenical.
The beginnings of Christian ecumenicism under his predecessors did not advance much in his 25 years.
Paradoxically, he found it easier to reach out to non-Christian religions.
The Catholic-Jewish dialogue in particular was in good hands with him.
When a distinguished Jewish scholar thanked him for what he had done to cultivate Catholic-Jewish relations, he replied: “That was not me, that was Providence,” and then added with his inimitable smile: “And me.”
Has he been a man of peace?
Yes, of course.
But his reign spans a time in which numerous regional conflicts turned violent.
There was little he could do in Kosovo or the Congo.
The years of John Paul II’s papacy have not actually been a time in which “soft power” could achieve a great deal anywhere, so that Stalin’s famous question, “How many divisions has the Pope?,” remained topical.
This was all the more relevant to the extent that Pope John Paul II is not enamored with the United States.
There are indications that he shares the old central European prejudice of America as a materialist civilization that provides the wherewithal – but not the ideas – for what needs to be done.
The Pope’s legacy is, in other words, a story of great strengths and considerable weaknesses.
It would be incomplete, however, were one not to mention the warm, curious, friendly, and humorous human being underneath it all.
Pope John Paul II is in many ways an intellectual; he may have been underrated in that regard.
However, he is also a simple man who connected without effort to others.
He bore his suffering since the assassination attempt of 1981 with dignity.
As a person, he never failed to impress his many visitors.
Even in his current reduced state due to his illness, Pope John Paul II symbolizes human potential.
Twilight of Our Political Gods
For some time I thought that the Twenty-Second Amendment to the United States Constitution was probably the best way to ensure that political leaders do not overstay their welcome, and, just as importantly, wear out their effectiveness.
This Amendment bars US Presidents from holding office for more than two four-year terms.
Perhaps I had forgotten the travails of President George W. Bush’s predecessors in their second term, but his own current predicament shows that the constitutional limit has its own problems.
For one thing, it makes the President a lame duck sometime in his second term.
Does anyone remember that after his re-election Bush promised to reform the pension system (“Social Security”)?
Now he is clearly hamstrung not only by the Democratic opposition, but also, and perhaps more so, by the succession struggles within his own party.
However, the fate of Bush’s friend, British Prime Minister Tony Blair, shows that lame-duck status can occur even without a constitutional term limit – indeed, without a written constitution at all.
Blair made the fatal mistake of setting his own limit to his tenure of office by saying that he would not contest a fourth election as leader of the Labour Party.
But, even without such a vow, he would find it difficult after nine years in office to combine a program of reform with a sense of what can be achieved given the mood of his party and of the country.
Indeed, reforms announced by Blair increasingly sound like empty promises, because the apparently inevitable has happened: the Prime Minister has lost touch with the public.
What used to be his charisma is now the permanent re-enactment of the all-too-familiar.
Of course, it is always very hard for leaders to relinquish power.
Some have done so, more or less voluntarily, only to re-emerge suddenly from oblivion.
Can it be the same President Oscar Arias who (barely) won the recent presidential election in Costa Rica and now returns to power after 20 years?
And was not Silvio Berlusconi’s candidate for the presidency of the Italian Senate, Giulio Andreotti, a junior member of one of Italy’s first post-1945 governments?
Did Portugal’s Cavaco Silva, the successful Prime Minister of the 1990’s, have to reappear as President in 2006?
Who can forget Margaret Thatcher’s tears when her “friends” told her that her time was up?
When Prime Minister Harold Wilson suddenly resigned in 1976 and left No. 10 Downing Street to the late James Callaghan, people became suspicious: had he been forced out by some secret service plot concerning South Africa?
It appears that there is no way for political leaders to leave the scene gracefully.
Even if there is an “orderly transition” – a term much used about Tony Blair and Gordon Brown at the moment – it is accompanied by sorrow, or at least by pain.
Political office, it seems, is more addictive than heroin.
Abandoning the habit involves not only the inconvenience of losing perks and a certain lifestyle, but also the loss of power.
Power may be increasingly illusory in a globalized world, but it is an illusion that is shared by others, and the longer one inhabits it, the more one’s circle consists of others who share the belief.
The addiction to political office is always worrisome, because democracies turn into autocracies when leaders cease to recognize the limits of their power.
Disconnection is the beginning, followed by the belief that one is the only person who knows what is right and good.
When Tony Blair says that the most important liberty is security from terrorist attacks, he has forgotten the first principles of his party and his country.
Overstaying one’s welcome may be the professional disease of political leaders, but it is above all incompatible with democracy as a framework for bringing about change without violence.
The question, then, is whether there is any way to ensure that political leaders leave in time.
While the US Constitution shows the limits of institutional safeguards, the role of political parties is clearly significant when it comes to limiting terms in power.
Like Thatcher, Blair now hears from his party that he should go and replies that “the people” still want him.
Yet the party might have a better sense of what is viable not just today, but also tomorrow – at the next election, for example.
In the end, there is no foolproof method to guarantee that political leaders leave without tears.
What matters is that mechanisms are in place that do make them leave, probably rather too late, and certainly with some pain and unhappiness, but in time for the constitution of liberty to remain intact.
Two and a Half Cheers for the Mediterranean Union
Maybe it is time to be a bit more generous to French President Nicolas Sarkozy and look at the outcome of what he does rather than the way that he does it.
The original launch of the Mediterranean Union almost sank the whole enterprise.
Appearing to speak without giving the issue much thought, Sarkozy initially proposed a club of European and mostly Arab states along the Mediterranean’s shore.
It would have been in essence a French-run enterprise that the rest of Europe would have paid for.
This did not go down well, particularly with the Germans.
There was also a strong suspicion that the French were trying to find a way to buy off Turkey with a relationship falling well short of European Union membership.
So the auguries for an attempt to revitalize Europe’s relationship with its Mediterranean partners were not good.
But by the time of the grand Paris Summit in July to send the new club on its way, the initial suspicions had largely been overcome.
Sarkozy bowed to his European critics and enjoyed a diplomatic triumph.
We shall soon see whether there is substance to the initiative, or whether it is just a coat of fresh paint on an old and tired idea.
There was some lowering of agricultural and other tariffs by the EU.
Dialogue on political reform, and euros to support it, helped further the process in some countries, notably Morocco and Jordan.
There was some co-operation on common problems like drugs and illegal immigration.
But, as a significant component of Europe’s policy toward its most crucial neighbors, the successes of the Barcelona Process were modest: a great idea on the launch pad had difficulty getting off the ground.
So Sarkozy deserves at least two and a half cheers for trying to revitalize it.
But if the Mediterranean Union is to achieve more than was managed in its first manifestation, a number of things will need to happen.
First, Europe is better at talking about free-trade areas than delivering free trade.