As long as America remains the sole world power, the next US President will be neither able nor willing to change the basic framework of America’s foreign policy.
It will, of course, be important who wins the presidency: a candidate expected to continue Bush’s foreign policy or someone ready for a new beginning.
In the former case, the transatlantic rift will deepen dramatically.
Four, or even eight, more years of US policy à la Bush would inflict such damage on the substance of the transatlantic alliance as to threaten its very existence.
But if America’s next president is committed to a new direction, US foreign policy might again become more multilateral, more focused on international institutions and alliances, and willing to bring the relationship between military force and diplomacy back to within its historical proportions.
That is the good news.
The bad news is that, even under such auspicious conditions, the US, as a world power, will not relinquish its “free-hand” policy or forget its strength and its claim to preeminence among nations.
Another piece of bad (or good?) news is that a more multilateral American policy will increase the pressure on Europeans to take on more responsibility for international crisis management and conflict resolution – in Afghanistan, Iran, Iraq, the Middle East, Transcaucasia, and Russia, and with respect to Turkey’s future.
To this common agenda, the Europeans should add Africa, climate change, and reform of the United Nations and the world trading system.
For a long time, Europe has underestimated its weight and importance.
Europe’s geopolitical, economic, and social weight is quite obvious.
But Europe’s integration of sovereign states’ interests by means of common institutions could also be an example for much of the world.
In particular, the way Europe, in the process of its enlargement, has projected its power to achieve lasting peace across the whole continent, and fostered development by integrating entire economies, states, and societies within its institutional framework, could become a model for shaping a cooperative world order in the twenty-first century.
This modern, progressive, and peaceful model is unique and superior to all other currently available approaches to the fundamental questions of political order.
But could doesn’t mean will.
Europe’s global influence is feeble because of its internal quarrels and lack of unity, which render the European Union weak and limit its ability to act.
Objectively strong, subjectively infirm – that is how the EU’s present condition can be described.
The current moment of American weakness coincides with a substantially changed international political environment, defined largely by the limits of US power, Europe’s ineffectiveness, and the emergence of new global giants like China and India.
In light of these developments, does it still make sense to speak of “the West”?
I believe it does, more than ever, because the rift between Europe and America leaves both sides substantially weaker in global terms.
The unilateral overstretching of American power offers a chance for a new beginning in US-European relations.
America, more than in the past, will depend on strong partners and will seek such partnerships.
So what are the Europeans waiting for?
Why not start now to overcome the traditional tension between NATO and the EU – especially as French policy toward NATO under President Nicolas Sarkozy has been moving in the right direction?
A regular mutual presence of the Secretary General of NATO and of the head of EU foreign policy in the councils of both organizations doesn’t require much time and effort.
Why not initiate EU-US consultations at a high political level (with the Secretary-General of NATO participating in security matters) – for instance, by inviting the US Secretary of State and other members of the administration, such as the Treasury Secretary or the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, to sit several times a year on the appropriate EU Council meetings?
Why not have routine annual meetings between the European Council and the US President?
Periodic meetings between the appropriate committees of the US Congress and the European Parliament would also be of great importance, as ultimately both bodies will have to ratify any international treaties.
The fate of the Kyoto Protocol should be a lesson to all parties involved.
No such US-EU consultations would require any new agreements, so they could start without any further preliminaries.
There is one certainty that Europeans can take home from the US election campaign even today: with a more multilaterally oriented US foreign policy, Europe won’t be riding comfortably in the US world-political slipstream much longer.
And that is a good thing.
The new transatlantic formula must be greater say in decision-making in exchange for a greater share of responsibility.
America at Stall Speed?
NEWPORT BEACH – Judging from the skittishness of both markets and “consensus expectations,” the United States’ economic prospects are confusing.
One day, the country is on the brink of a double-dip recession; the next, it is on the verge of a turbo-charged recovery, powered by resilient consumers and US multinationals starting to deploy, at long last, their massive cash reserves.
In the process, markets take investors on a wild rollercoaster ride, with the European crisis (riddled with even more confusion and volatility) serving to aggravate their queasiness.
This situation is both understandable and increasingly unsettling for America’s well-being and that of the global economy.
It reflects the impact of fundamental (and historic) economic and financial re-alignments, insufficient policy responses, and system-wide rigidities that frustrate structural change.
As a result, there are now legitimate questions about the underlying functioning of the US economy and, therefore, its evolution in the months and years ahead.
One way to understand current conditions – and what is needed to improve them – is to consider two events that recently attracted considerable worldwide attention: the launch of Boeing’s Dreamliner passenger jet and the tragic death of Apple’s Steve Jobs.
Let us start with some simple aeronautic dynamics, using an analogy that my PIMCO colleague, Bill Gross, came up with to describe the economic risks facing the American economy.
For the Dreamliner to take off, ascend, and maintain a steady altitude, it must do more than move forward.
It has to move forward fast enough to exceed critical physical thresholds, which are significantly higher than those for most of Boeing’s other (smaller) planes.
Failure would mean succumbing to a mid-air stall, with tepid forward motion giving way to a sudden loss of altitude.
Unless we are convinced of the Dreamliner’s ability to avoid stall speed, it makes no sense to talk about all the ways in which it will enhance the travel experience for millions of people around the world.
America’s economy today risks stall speed.
Specifically, the question is not whether it can grow, but whether it can grow fast enough to propel a large economy that, according to the US Federal Reserve, faces “balance-sheet deleveraging, credit constraints, and household and business uncertainty about the economic outlook.”
And, remember, it is just over a year since certain US officials were proclaiming the economy’s “summer of recovery” – a view underpinned by the erroneous belief that America was reaching “escape velocity.”
Stall speed is a terrifying risk for an economy like that of the US, which desperately needs to grow robustly.
Without rapid growth, there is no way to reverse persistently high and increasingly structural (and therefore protracted) unemployment; safely de-leverage over-indebted balance sheets; and prevent already-disturbing income and wealth inequalities from growing worse.
The private sector alone cannot and will not counter the risk of stall speed.
What is desperately needed is better policymaking.
Specifically, policymakers must be open and willing to understand the unusual challenges facing the US economy, react accordingly, and possess sufficiently potent policy instruments.
Unfortunately, this has been far from the case in America (and in Europe, where the situation is worse).
Moreover, US policymakers in the last few weeks have been more interested in pointing fingers at Europe and China than in recognizing and responding to the paradigm shifts that are at the root of the country’s economic problems and mounting social challenges.
This is where the insights of Steve Jobs, one of the world’s best innovators and entrepreneurs, come in.
Jobs did more than navigate paradigm shifts; he essentially created them.
He was a master at converting the complicated into the simple; and, rather than being paralyzed by complexity, he found new ways to deconstruct and overcome it.
Teamwork was an obligation, not a choice.
And he eschewed the search for the single “big bang” in favor of aiming for multiple breakthroughs.
Underlying it all was a willingness to evolve – a drive for perfection through experimentation.
Moreover, he excelled at selling to audiences worldwide both his vision and his strategy for realizing it.
So far, America’s economic policymakers have fallen short on all of these fronts.
Rather than committing to a comprehensive set of urgently-needed reinforcing measures, they seem obsessed with the futile search for the one “killer app” that will solve all of the country's economic problems.
No surprise that they have yet to find it.
Teamwork has repeatedly fallen hostage to turf wars and political bickering.
Little has been done to deconstruct structural complexity, let alone win sufficient public support for a medium-term vision, a credible implementation strategy, and a set of measures that is adequate to the task at hand.
The longer the policymaking impasse persists, the greater the stall-speed risk for an economy that already has an unemployment crisis, a large budget deficit, many underwater mortgages, and policy interest rates floored at zero.
This is an atmosphere in which unhealthy balance sheets come under even greater pressure, and healthy investors refuse to engage.
In the process, the risk of recession remains uncomfortably high, the unemployment crisis deepens, and inequities rise as already-stretched social safety nets prove even more porous.
America, China, and the Productivity Paradox
NEW HAVEN – In the late 1980s, there was intense debate about the so-called productivity paradox – when massive investments in information technology (IT) were not delivering measureable productivity improvements.
That paradox is now back, posing a problem for both the United States and China – one that may well come up in their annual Strategic and Economic Dialogue.
Back in 1987, Nobel laureate Robert Solow famously quipped, “You can see the computer age everywhere except in the productivity statistics.”
The productivity paradox seemed to be resolved in the 1990s, when America experienced a spectacular productivity renaissance.
Average annual productivity growth in the country’s nonfarm business sector accelerated to 2.5% from 1991 to 2007, from the 1.5% trend in the preceding 15 years.
The benefits of the Internet Age had finally materialized.
Concern about the paradox all but vanished.
But the celebration appears to have been premature.
Despite another technological revolution, productivity growth is slumping again.
And this time the downturn is global in scope, affecting the world’s two largest economies, the US and China, most of all.
Over the past five years, from 2010 to 2014, annual US productivity growth has fallen to an average of 0.9%.
It actually fell at a 2.6% annual rate in the two most recent quarters (in late 2014 and early 2015).
Barring a major data revision, America’s productivity renaissance seems to have run into serious trouble.
China is witnessing a similar pattern.
Although the government does not publish regular productivity statistics, there is no mistaking the problem: Overall urban employment growth has been steady, at around 13.2 million workers per year since 2013 – well in excess of the government’s targeted growth rate of ten million.
Moreover, hiring seems to be holding at that brisk pace in early 2015.
At the same time, output growth has slowed from the 10% trend of the 33 years ending in 2011 to around 7% today.
That downshift, in the face of sustained rapid job creation, implies an unmistakable deceleration of productivity.
Therein lies the latest paradox.
With revolutionary technologies now driving the creation of new markets (digital media and computerized wearables), services (energy management and DNA sequencing), products (smartphones and robotics), and technology companies (Alibaba and Apple), surely productivity growth must be surging.
As a modern-day Solow might say, the ���Internet of Everything” is everywhere except in the productivity statistics.
But is there really a paradox?
Northwestern University’s Robert Gordon has argued that IT- and Internet-led innovations like automated high-speed data processing and e-commerce pale in comparison to the breakthroughs of the Industrial Revolution, including the steam engine, electricity, and indoor plumbing.
He maintains that, although these innovations led to dramatic transformations of the major advanced economies – such as higher female labor-force participation, increased transportation speed, urbanization, and normalized temperature control – these changes will be extremely hard to replicate.
Indeed, as taken with today’s revolutionary technologies as we are – I say this staring at my sleek new Apple Watch – I am sympathetic to Gordon’s argument.
If US productivity figures are to be taken at anything close to face value – a persistently sluggish trend interrupted by a 16-year spurt that now appears to have faded – it is possible that all America has accomplished are transitional efficiency improvements associated with the IT-enabled shift from one technology platform to another.
Optimists maintain that the official statistics fail to capture marked quality-of-life improvements, which may be true, especially in the light of promising advances in biotechnology and online education.
But this overlooks a much more important aspect of the productivity-measurement critique: the undercounting of work time associated with the widespread use of portable information appliances.
In the US, the Bureau of Labor Statistics estimates that the length of the average workweek has held steady at about 34 hours since the advent of the Internet two decades ago.
Yet nothing could be further from the truth: knowledge workers continually toil outside the traditional office, checking their email, updating spreadsheets, writing reports, and engaging in collective brainstorming.
Indeed, white-collar knowledge workers – that is, most workers in advanced economies – are now tethered to their workplaces essentially 24 hours a day, seven days a week, a reality that is not reflected in the official statistics.
Productivity growth is not about working longer; it is about generating more output per unit of labor input.
Any undercounting of output pales in comparison with the IT-assisted undercounting of working hours.
China’s productivity slowdown is probably more benign.
It is an outgrowth of the Chinese economy’s nascent structural transformation from capital-intensive manufacturing to labor-intensive services.
Indeed, it was only in 2013 that services supplanted manufacturing and construction as the economy’s largest sector.
Now the gap is widening, and that is likely to continue.
With Chinese services requiring about 30% more workers per unit of output than manufacturing and construction, combined, the economy’s structural rebalancing is now shifting growth to China’s lower-productivity services sector.
China has time before this becomes a problem.
As Gordon notes, there have been long-lasting productivity dividends associated with urbanization – a trend that could continue for at least another decade in China.
But there will come a time when this tailwind subsides and China begins to converge on the so-called frontier of the advanced economies.
At that point, China will face the same productivity challenges that confront America and others.
Chinese policymakers’ new focus on innovation-led growth seems to recognize this risk.
Without powerful innovations, sustaining productivity growth will be an uphill battle.
China’s recent shift to a slower-productivity trajectory is an early warning of what may well be one of its most daunting economic challenges.
There is no escaping the key role that productivity growth plays in any country’s economic performance.
Yet, for advanced economies, periods of sustained rapid productivity growth have been the exception, not the rule.
Recent signs of slowing productivity growth in both the US and China underscore this reality.
For a world flirting with secular stagnation, that is disturbing news, to say the least.
A New Blueprint for US-China Relations
NEW YORK – In the coming decades, nothing will matter more for global peace, prosperity, and governance than how the United States and China handle the ongoing shift in their relative power.
In the long term, today’s other pressing challenges – including Russia’s relationship with the West and events in the tumultuous Middle East – will amount almost to sideshows by comparison.
What makes the Sino-American relationship dangerous is that powerful forces in both countries seem intent on a collision course.
On the Chinese side, under Xi Jinping’s assertive leadership, the government is no longer heeding Deng Xiaoping’s injunction that the country should “hide its strength, bide its time, and never take the lead” in international affairs.
It has pursued manifestly expansionist territorial claims, most notably in the South China Sea, and shown a clear determination to resist the indefinite continuation of American dominance in the region.
The prevailing Chinese mindset is that the US is intent on isolating, containing, and undermining it.
Unhappily, there is plenty of evidence on the US side to feed that sentiment.
Whatever many American policymakers may be saying in private, their public discourse almost invariably reflects an intention to remain the world’s dominant power – and specifically in Asia – in perpetuity.
The most confrontational recent articulation of this position can be found in a report for the Council on Foreign Relations, by Robert Blackwill and Ashley Tellis, arguing that the central objective of American grand strategy must be “preserving US primacy in the global system,” and urging a series of aggressive economic, political, and military measures to “balance” China.
They say this is not a “containment” strategy, but it amounts to nothing less.
Is there another way to manage the relationship that, while reflecting the reality of these forces and mindsets on both sides, would not risk turning legitimate competition into dangerous confrontation?
In a new report for the Harvard Kennedy School’s Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs, Kevin Rudd, former Australian Prime Minister and now head of the Asia Society Policy Institute, outlines just such a strategy, which he calls “constructive realism”.
It’s a clunky label, but his analysis and policy prescriptions are compelling.
The “realist” dimension of Rudd’s argument recognizes that certain areas of disagreement – including Taiwan, territorial disputes in the South and East China Seas, US alliances in Asia, Chinese military modernization, and the legitimacy of China’s political system – will remain intractable for the foreseeable future.
They will defy easy solutions – and thus will require very careful management.
The “constructive” part of Rudd’s thesis argues for systematic collaboration – with the US treating China more as an equal – in tackling a series of other difficult issues at bilateral, regional, and global levels.
Bilaterally, such cooperation might involve an investment treaty, a joint intelligence task force on terrorism, a cyber-security protocol, agreed measures for managing unplanned military incidents, and mutual ratification of the Comprehensive Nuclear Test-Ban Treaty.
On a regional level, Rudd argues, the US and China could work on joint strategies to denuclearize and, ultimately, reunify the Korean Peninsula; tackle the lingering sore of Japan’s war history; harmonize regional trade agreements; and transform the East Asia Summit into a more complete Asia-Pacific Community.
Globally, Rudd believes that the joint agenda could focus on combating climate change, revitalizing the G-20, further internationalizing the renminbi; giving China a greater role in the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank; and reforming other key international institutions within the UN system.
Some in the West – including veteran China watcher David Shambaugh – remain convinced that this kind of collaborative accommodation will not be necessary, because failures of economic and political management will bring about China’s implosion.
Rudd argues that they are wrong, and that Xi will neither overplay his authoritarian hand nor under-deliver on growth.
China’s rise will continue, and the world – including the US – will have to find principled ways of peacefully accommodating it.
Rudd’s recommendations are undoubtedly ambitious.
But, given his credentials – he is a formidable Chinese linguist and creative policy thinker, with long and close personal relationships with key figures in both the US and China – his argument must be taken seriously.
Indeed, though Rudd’s tenure as Australia’s prime minister was anything but smooth, his sheer force of intellect is unmatched by that of any public figure with whom I have interacted over the last 30 years.
(Not that this will much help his evident willingness to be drafted as the next UN Secretary-General: in that role the major powers have always preferred bland secretaries to creative generals.)
No American presidential candidate is likely to be comfortable talking about the US as anything other than Number One.
But we must hope that in the years ahead we hear less talk of “primacy” and “dominance” and much more about cooperation and collaboration.
It is only with such US policies toward China that the world can begin to be confident that the twenty-first century will not, like the last, become a vale of tears.
America Confronts Old and New Europe
US Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld's petulant remark of last year about "old and new Europe" was right for the wrong reasons.
He meant it to refer to Europe's divisions, but in May, ten additional states joined the European Union.
The expanded Europe truly forms a new Europe.
Should America be nervous?
Fifty-four years after the announcement of the Schuman Plan that began to knit together the economies of France and Germany, the EU now has 25 countries and a population larger than that of the United States.
Eight of the new members are former Communist countries that were locked behind the Iron Curtain for nearly half a century.
Their attraction to the Union is a sign of the appeal - the "soft power" - of the idea of European unification.
Of course, this new Europe faces many problems.
The per capita income of the new countries is less than half of that of the fifteen members they are joining. Concerns have been raised about the influx of cheap labor.
But average GDP growth rates in the new members are twice as high as in the original members, and this can provide a welcome stimulus to stagnant labor markets and sluggish economies.
Political arrangements are somewhat more problematic.
Negotiations are underway to revise a draft EU constitution.
Some Europeans worry that the constitution will enable courts to carry the integration process further and faster than public opinion in member states will tolerate.
Lack of grassroots support might lead to rejection of the constitution in countries like Britain, where referenda have been promised before the new arrangements come into force.
Across the Atlantic, most Americans (to the extent they pay attention) regard these changes with general approval.
But some express concern that the new Europe will be defined in opposition to the US.
Not only do the remarks of French leaders about recreating a multi-polar world arouse alarm, but recent public opinion polls show a decline in the popularity of the US among Europeans and a desire for more independent policies.
The Iraq War proved costly to American soft power, with the US losing about 30 percentage points of attractiveness on average in Europe, including in countries like Britain, Spain, and Italy, whose governments supported the war.
The recent photographs of detainees being abused and sexually degraded in Baghdad's Abu Ghraib prison added fuel to the fire.
Now some American neo-conservatives argue that the US should drop its longstanding support for European integration.
Such a policy change would be a serious mistake.
Not only would it add to anti-American attitudes and fail to accomplish its objectives, but it over-estimates the extent to which the new Europe is being formed in opposition to the US.
Whatever the rhetoric in France, for example, the policies and attitudes in countries such as Britain or Poland demonstrate that good trans-Atlantic relations can be maintained.
If anything, the risks of a US-Europe split will be reduced rather than increased by the EU's recent enlargement.
Moreover, there are several objective reasons why the current friction between Europe and the US is unlikely to lead to divorce.
Europe and America also share a common structure of economic interests and values.
While trade produces frictions in democracies, it also enhances wealth.
If one looks at foreign direct investment, it is clear that the two sides of the Atlantic are closely integrated.
In terms of values, while some differences exist between Europe and America, at the fundamental level of democracy and human rights, no other two parts of the globe share more.
As the writer Robert Kagan concluded in the revision of his book in which he declared Europeans to be from Venus and Americans from Mars, it turns out that Americans seeking democratic legitimization of their policies and self-images cannot escape Europe.
In short, it is good for Americans - and for the world - that old and new Europe are becoming one.
We can all benefit from the soft power of an enlarged Europe.
What Makes America Great
CAMBRIDGE – Presidential inaugurations and commencement ceremonies are usually very emotional events.
They are rites of passage that mark both an end and a new beginning in the life of a country or an individual.
As a professor at Harvard’s Kennedy School of Government, I attend our commencement ceremony every year.
Despite this regularity, I still become emotional as I see my students complete a phase of their lives and contemplate their future.
One of the highlights of our ceremony is a video in which several professors and public personalities read, line by line, John F. Kennedy’s inaugural address.
It is a text written 56 years ago, in a different world, where the Cold War, the threat of nuclear Armageddon, and the challenges faced by so many newly independent poor states dominated policymakers’ concerns.
And yet, running at under 14 minutes, it never fails to move and inspire everyone in the audience, including that half of the graduates and their families who hail from other countries, near and far.
To understand why, it is useful to recall a few of the most famous passages.
For starters, there was Kennedy’s vow to defend freedom for its friends and from its enemies: “Let every nation know, whether it wishes us well or ill, that we shall pay any price, bear any burden, meet any hardship, support any friend, oppose any foe to assure the survival and the success of liberty.”
There was also his commitment to fight poverty: “To those people in the huts and villages of half the globe struggling to break the bonds of mass misery, we pledge our best efforts to help them help themselves, for whatever period is required – not because the communists may be doing it, not because we seek their votes, but because it is right.
If a free society cannot help the many who are poor, it cannot save the few who are rich.”
And this commitment was part and parcel of hemispheric solidarity: “To our sister republics south of our border, we offer a special pledge – to convert our good words into good deeds – in a new alliance for progress – to assist free men and free governments in casting off the chains of poverty.”
Finally, there was Kennedy’s ethic of service on behalf of the commonwealth: “And so, my fellow Americans: ask not what your country can do for you – ask what you can do for your country.
My fellow citizens of the world: ask not what America will do for you, but what together we can do for the freedom of man.”
These words’ enduring emotional appeal is rooted in their embrace of a potentially difficult course of action, motivated by a pledge to uphold values shared by citizens of America and the world alike.
It was this approach – one founded on a value-based system of rules, not on individual deals – that enabled the US to create and sustain a coalition of countries that could maintain peace and international cooperation.
Fast forward to today.
President-elect Donald Trump’s campaign narrative was based on the assumption that the US has fallen from its former greatness.
Jobs have moved to Mexico and China because weak leaders negotiated bad deals.
Immigrants, mostly illegal, have taken the few jobs that remain, killing and raping in their free time.
It follows that the US needs a president who will put America first and knows how to extract the best deals for it at every opportunity, using the country’s full might to advance its interests.
I doubt that an inaugural address based on these ideas will awe and inspire many audiences at commencement ceremonies, especially where many of those in attendance are citizens of other countries.
Such a speech will encourage no one to “bear any burden” for the sake of any universal principle or challenge, be it human rights or global warming.
It will not exhort us to focus on something bigger than ourselves.
Over the course of history, very few powerful states have developed a sense of themselves as being based not on ethnic heritage, but on a set of values that all citizens can live by.
For the US, it was “life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness.”
For the Soviet Union, it was international proletarian solidarity – “workers of the world, unite.”
The European Union is based on universal values and principles that are so attractive that 28 countries have opted to join it; and, Brexit notwithstanding, some half-dozen more are trying to get in.
By contrast, a great and powerful Russia or China today – or the Third Reich in its time – may be able to garner the support of its citizens; but such states cannot constitute the basis of an international order that others find appealing, because they are based on a vision of themselves that does not encompass others.
The basis of America’s greatness and ability to lead the world stems from universal values that underpin a set of rules that uphold the others’ rights, not an America that tries to base its greatness on a set of deals aimed at getting the better of others.
Such an America will find its ability to lead the world compromised by a shortage of goodwill and an abundance of distrust.
Other countries will huddle together to protect themselves from the US bully.
If Trump really wants to make America great again, he should ponder how his inaugural address will sound to a global audience 56 years from now.
Will it inspire the Class of 2073 the way Kennedy’s address still inspires graduates today?
America Goes from Teacher to Student
Cambridge &#45;&#45; As the United States’ epic financial crisis continues to unfold, one can only wish that US policymakers were half as good at listening to advice from developing countries as they are at giving it.
Americans don’t seem to realize that their “sub-prime” mortgage meltdown has all too much in common with many previous post-1945 banking crises throughout the world.
The silver lining is that there are many highly distinguished current and former policymakers out there, particularly from emerging market countries, who have seen this movie before.
If US policymakers would only listen, they might get an idea or two about how to deal with financial crises from experts who have lived through them and come out safely on the other side.
Unfortunately, the parallel between today’s US crisis and previous financial crises is not mere hyperbole.
The qualitative parallels are obvious: banks using off-balance loans to finance highly risky ventures, exotic new financial instruments, and excessive exuberance over the promise of new markets.
But there are strong quantitative parallels as well.
Professor Carmen Reinhart of the University of Maryland and I systematically compared the run-up to the US sub-prime crisis with the run-up to the 19 worst financial crises in the industrialized world over the past 60 years.
These include epic crises in the Scandinavian countries, Spain, and Japan, along with lesser events such as the US savings and loan crises of the 1980’s.
Across virtually all the major indicators – including equity and housing price runs-ups, trade balance deficits, surges in government and household indebtedness, and pre-crisis growth trajectories – red lights are blinking for the US.
Simply put, surging capital flows into the US artificially held down interest rates and inflated asset prices, leading to laxity in banking and regulatory standards and, ultimately, to a meltdown.
When Asia and Latin America had their financial meltdowns in the 1990’s and early 2000’s, they took advice not only from the IMF, but also from a number of small panels composed of eminent people representing diverse backgrounds and experiences.
The US should do the same.
The head of the IMF, Frenchman Dominique Strauss-Kahn, could easily select a superb panel from any range of former crisis countries, including Mexico, Brazil, Korea, Turkey, Japan, and Sweden, not to mention Argentina, Russia, Chile, and many others.
Admittedly, the IMF’s panel would have to look past America’s current hypocrisy.
The US Treasury strongly encouraged Asia to tighten fiscal policy during its 1990’s crisis.
But today the US Congress and President are tripping over themselves to adopt an ill-advised giant fiscal stimulus package, whose main effects will be to tie the hands of the next president in simplifying the US tax code and closing the budget deficit.
Americans firmly told Japan that the only way to clean up its economy was to purge insolvent banks and regenerate the financial system through Schumpeterian “creative destruction.”
Today, US authorities appear willing to contemplate any measure, no matter how inflationary, to insure that none of its major banks and investment houses fails.
For years, foreign governments complained about American hedge funds, arguing that their non-transparent behavior posed unacceptable risks to stability.
Now, many US politicians are complaining about the transparency of sovereign wealth funds (big government investors mainly from Asia and the Middle East), which are taking shares in trophy American assets such as Citibank and Merrill Lynch.
In fact, having countries like Russia and China more vested in the well-being of the US economy would not be a bad thing.
Yes, the IMF ought to develop a voluntary code of conduct for SWF’s, but it should not be used as a weapon to enforce financial protectionism.
For years, I, along with many others, have complained that emerging markets need greater representation in global financial governance.
Today, the issue goes far beyond symbolism.
The US economy is in trouble, and the problems it spins off are unlikely to stop at the US border.
Experts from emerging markets and elsewhere have much to say about dealing with financial crises.
America should start to listen before it is too late.
Obamacare and Effective Government
BERKELEY – When historians look back on the United States’ Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA), President Barack Obama’s controversial 2010 health-care reform, we predict that they will not devote much attention to its regulations, its troubled insurance exchanges, or its website’s flawed launch.
Instead, we think that they will focus on how “Obamacare” encouraged a wave of innovation that gradually tamed the spiraling costs of a dysfunctional system, even as millions of previously excluded Americans gained access to health insurance.
Innovation is probably the least discussed aspect of health-care reform.
Yet it is crucial to “bending” the sector’s cost curve, because it enables the delivery of quality health care in cost-effective ways.
Obamacare has provided powerful new incentives for such innovation.
From 1980 to 2010, US health-care spending grew almost twice as fast as the economy, rising from 9.2% to 17.4% of GDP.
While many factors contributed to this surge, most experts agree that the single most important cause was a fee-for-service system that rewarded health-care providers for billing as many services as possible, rather than for keeping people healthy and treating their illnesses efficiently.
The ACA has been changing that, by establishing myriad new incentives to foster efficiency in health-care delivery – for example, by reducing costly and unnecessary hospital infections and readmissions, and by adopting electronic health records.
Most important, the ACA is providing incentives for the creation of “affordable care organizations,” “bundled payment systems,” and other delivery innovations to encourage better coordination of care, especially for patients with numerous chronic conditions.
Such patients are among the 10% who account for an estimated 64% of overall health care costs.
Around the US, providers, insurers, non-profits, and local governments are responding to the ACA’s incentives.
The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (which provide health insurance to pensioners and the poor) has just announced its second round of grants – $665 million to 28 states, three territories, and the District of Columbia – to encourage innovations in health-care delivery.
Of course, it is still too early to declare victory, but Obamacare seems to be working.
According to a recent analysis by the Council of Economic Advisers (CEA), about ten million people gained health insurance coverage in 2014 as a result of the ACA – the largest increase in coverage in four decades.
But the real surprise is that growth in health-care spending slowed dramatically from 2010 to 2013, to roughly the same pace as GDP growth.
This represented a sharp break from the previous half-century; indeed, this period was characterized by the slowest growth in real per capita health-care spending on record.
To be sure, the ACA is only one factor in this promising trend; growth in health-care spending often slows in the wake of an economic downturn.
But Medicare spending, which is not affected by recessions, has slowed along with private health-care spending.
In a recent study, the CEA concluded that the ACA’s Medicare reforms account for a significant share of the slowdown.
The ACA is an example of how government can promote innovation to address major societal challenges by providing goals, directions, and incentives, rather than dictating solutions.
The government plays a role akin to that of a venture capitalist providing seed money and financial support to foster innovation.
In this scenario, different players – Medicare and Medicaid, state and local governments, private insurers, physicians, and social entrepreneurs – collaborate to hammer out effective solutions that can be scaled with government revenues.
For example, responding to the ACA’s incentives and flexibility, Arkansas and Oregon have launched bold experiments to revamp Medicaid, in part by rewarding health-care providers who deliver better outcomes and keep patients healthier.
In Camden, New Jersey, Jeffrey Brenner, a family doctor, has pioneered strategies to reduce hospital stays by “super-utilizers,” a small share of Medicaid patients who are frequently admitted for expensive acute care.
Brenner mapped “hot spots” around Camden, and sought to find out why people in some areas ran up such huge bills.
The problem was not fraud. It was an absence of coordinated medical care, especially basic primary care, and a lack of attention to people’s underlying risk factors.
The most expensive 1% of patients, those with a tangle of issues, accounted for 30% of Camden’s public health-care spending.
Brenner’s Camden Coalition of Healthcare Providers, founded in 2003, received its first funding from a philanthropy, the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, and a private insurer, United Health Care.
The remarkable success in Camden has prompted the foundation to fund similar experiments in Boston, Cleveland, Cincinnati, western Michigan, and Humboldt County, California.
Now the government is providing additional support, with grants to similar programs in Maryland, Colorado, Pennsylvania, and North Carolina.
Oregon has entered into a pay-for-success bargain with the federal government.
The state will receive $1.9 billion over five years to revamp its Medicaid services along the lines of Camden’s approach.
Oregon will get the money only if its per-person Medicaid costs climb substantially more slowly than other states’.
At the moment, Oregon is on track.
Arkansas has moved 20 different “episodes” of health-care delivery (including hip and knee replacements, pregnancy, colonoscopies, asthma, and congestive heart failure) from fee-for-service to paying for quality outcomes.
The results so far are promising – not just by reining in costs, but also by better aligning service delivery with best practices.
The government can spur innovation by offering incentives that tap many different players’ strengths.
In health care, that means taking advantage of the purchasing clout of Medicare and Medicaid, the risk-taking of social entrepreneurs and philanthropists, and the dynamism of markets and private business.
And health-care reform is just one example in which government can deliver what the public wants by setting goals, encouraging creativity, and providing the resources to scale up what works.
Twenty-five years from now, we hope that historians look back on the ACA as the start of a new era of public-private collaboration to develop innovative solutions to complex social problems – and thus to restore trust in government itself.
America’s Second Chance with India
NEW YORK – Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s visit to Washington, DC, in June garnered little public attention outside of India.
Yet diplomats and military professionals in Asia and beyond were certainly watching closely.
For good reason: the rapprochement between the world’s two most populous democracies could shape the world’s future.
It is worth noting that in his address to the US Congress, Modi invoked the word “partner” or “partnership” no fewer than 15 times.
The official joint statement released by the two governments described India as a “Major Defense Partner” of the United States, eligible for advanced technologies with military applications.
The relationship between India and the US has evolved from one of cool distance to strategic proximity in a generation – lightning fast for geopolitics.
The factors underlying this shift merit attention, for many of them are likely to bring the two countries even closer.
The Cold War’s end was a significant part of the bilateral rapprochement, because it eliminated the possibility of India’s continued association with the Soviet Union, as well as its rationale for embracing non-alignment.
A second factor is Pakistan.
For a long time, the US pursued an even-handed policy toward South Asia’s two most strategically important countries.
Nonetheless, during most of the Cold War, Pakistan was seen as a friendly country, whereas its great rival, India, was viewed as difficult.
This view was reinforced when Pakistan became the essential conduit of weapons to Afghans fighting the Soviet occupation of their country.
But the bond between the US and Pakistan weakened when Soviet forces withdrew from Afghanistan in 1989.
Relations suffered further from Pakistan’s development of nuclear weapons, its provision of sanctuary and support to the Taliban, and its willingness to extend hospitality to some of the world’s most dangerous terrorists, including Osama bin Laden.
As a result, US ties to India were no longer constrained by fear of complications in Pakistan.
China is also animating the improvement in India-US ties.
The motivation is far more fundamental than the fact that India and China still have an unresolved border.
China’s rise has created a strong incentive for countries with a stake in Asia to increase their cooperation with the US, as well as with one another, to ensure that they can stand up to China’s political, military, and economic might.
Domestic politics also loom large in the relationship’s development – on both sides.
The decline of India’s Congress party reduced the influence of the political force most associated with maintaining distance from the US.
Meanwhile, there are now more than three million Indian-Americans, and, as with many other immigrant populations, they have become ever more prominent and powerful.
Supporting closer ties with India has become a rare example of bipartisan US foreign policy, and it can be expected to continue regardless of which party controls the White House or Congress after this November’s elections.
The breakthrough in bilateral ties came a decade ago, when the US lifted sanctions introduced in response to India’s nuclear weapons program and then signed an accord paving the way for US involvement in India’s civil nuclear energy program.
India, unlike both Pakistan and North Korea, is seen as a responsible nuclear power, a country the US now supports for membership in various groups designed to stem the further spread of nuclear materials and weapons.
Economic ties are also growing, along with India’s economy.
Bilateral trade has increased to more than $100 billion a year.
High-level visits have become commonplace.
Closer economic ties and large-scale collaboration on clean energy are a high priority.
One can also predict increased cooperation between the two countries’ military and intelligence establishments.
Indeed, joint efforts to keep the Indian Ocean open and safe are already a reality.
The US and India need not be formal allies for their relationship to have the desired effect on Chinese strategic calculations.
Challenges remain, of course.
Bureaucracy, corruption, and poor infrastructure continue to hold back India’s economy.
Indian leaders must also be careful not to do or say things that could alienate the country’s large Muslim minority.
And they must still ensure that close ties with the US are not simply the policy of one prime minister or party.
This means getting the Congress party fully on board and overcoming the resistance of career officials to new ways of thinking and acting.
It is difficult to overlook the irony in much of this.
More than a half-century ago, in the early years of the Cold War, many in Washington saw India as a potential model of non-Communist political and economic development.
For many reasons, things did not work out that way, as India became economically statist, for a time politically authoritarian, and geopolitically closer to the USSR than US officials liked.
Now, however, India is emerging as a successful example of a market-oriented democracy with close ties to the US.
Second chances are rare in life, but both India and the US may be getting just that.
America Keeping Haiti Down
The IDB, the world's largest regional development bank, works in Latin America and the Caribbean purportedly to “contribute to the acceleration of economic and social development.”
Its actions in Haiti, however, have severely undermined those goals.
Roughly $54 million in IDB loans for water infrastructure in Haiti, home to literally the world’s worst water, offered a proven path to preventing deadly water-borne diseases. Designed to assist in fulfilling the right to water in the most impoverished nation in the Western Hemisphere, these loans and the lives they could have saved instead have become pawns in a deliberate political power play.
In 2001, US officials threatened to use their influence to stop previously approved IDB funding unless Haiti’s majority political party submitted to political demands to accept a particular apportionment of seats in a Haitian electoral oversight body.
Soon after, at the behest of the US, instead of disbursing the loans as planned, the IDB and its members took the unprecedented step of implicitly adding conditions to require political action by Haiti before the funds would be released.
These actions violated the IDB’s own charter, which strictly prohibits the Bank and its members from interfering in the internal political affairs of member states.
Internal emails reveal that a US legal counselor inside the IDB proposed to the US Treasury Department that, though the loans faced no legitimate technical obstacles, the US could effectively block them by “slowing” the process.
Indeed, by requesting further review of the loans, Haiti would have to make scheduled payments before the funds were even disbursed.
“While this is not a ‘bullet-proof’ way to stop IDB disbursements,” the counsellor wrote, “it certainly will put a few more large rocks in the road.”  
In 2001, then-US Ambassador to Haiti Dean Curran publicly and explicitly linked the withholding of IDB loans to the demand that Haiti’s political parties reach a compromise that America wanted.
These tactics worked.
Deprived of funds that had already been committed and expected, Haiti fell into arrears on money owed for loan repayment, triggering IDB policies that prevented the Bank from releasing loans.
In subsequent years, the US employed additional delaying tactics, working with the IDB to move the goal posts whenever Haiti appeared to be meeting their demands.
The results have been devastating.
The town of Port-de-Paix, slotted ten years ago by the IDB as the first project site due to its particularly deplorable water situation, has yet to see the implementation of any water projects.
A study conducted by Zanmi Lasante, Partners In Health, the Robert F. Kennedy Memorial Center for Human Rights, and New York University’s Center for Human Rights and Global Justice found no functioning public water sources in the city.
Researchers found three-quarters of water sources in the city contained high levels of coliform bacteria, a key indicator of contamination with fecal matter.
A frightening 15% of households reported symptoms likely related to typhoid.   
If the US and other member states join the IDB and take on the responsibility to improve conditions in the Americas, they cannot then use their membership to undermine the basic rights of the people they claim to serve simply to advance their own political agenda.
The IDB and the US government must take responsibility for their actions and implement the necessary transparency mechanisms to ensure that such abuses do not recur.  Congressional inquiries and annual reviews of the Treasury Department by the Government Accountability Office could provide the oversight necessary to prevent future political misuse of the IDB and its funds.
The people of Haiti, as well as US taxpayers, deserve a system that makes public the status of IDB loans and projects in Haiti in order to ensure that the US and IDB member states uphold their commitments to development and human rights.
Alliances for Peace
WASHINGTON, DC – I grew up in the shadow of World War II, and at the dawn of the Cold War.
My father’s work as a Foreign Service officer gave me an opportunity to see history up close in a searing way: I will never forget walking the beaches of Normandy with him and seeing the burned hulks of Higgins’ boats still on those shores, just a few years after so many young men went to their graves so the world could be free.
Likewise, I will never forget the eerie feeling of riding my bike through the Brandenburg Gate from West Berlin into the East, and seeing the contrast between people who were free and those who were trapped behind the Iron Curtain.
What strikes me now, all these years later, is that a generation of leaders won not only a war, but also the peace.
They did it together.
The United States and our partners worked to create alliances that brought prosperity and stability to Western Europe, Japan, and South Korea.
Old enemies became new allies, and together pioneered a new global economic system that made the world more prosperous.
And even as the Cold War raged, leaders found ways to cooperate on arms control and prevent a nuclear Armageddon.
In short, by building effective and indispensable international institutions and strategic partnerships, we did not just avoid another catastrophic world war; we ultimately ended the Cold War and lifted global living standards for hundreds of millions of people.
That is the remarkable story of the twentieth century.
The question now is what story will emerge from the twenty-first century.
Today, the world order faces new challenges.
Russian aggression is rattling allies.
Extremists who hijack religion threaten governments and people everywhere.
Technology is accelerating a shift in the balance of power between governments and governed that offers both opportunities for democratic accountability and obstacles to inclusive politics.
We have gone from a world where power resided in hierarchies to one where it inhabits networks.
Statecraft has yet to adapt.
The international institutions and partnerships that emerged in the postwar years demand both maintenance and modernization.
In the face of all of this turbulence, some suggest that America should turn inward.
That is nothing new.
Some argued the same after WWII.
They argued it again 25 years ago, after the fall of the Berlin Wall.
They were wrong then – and they are wrong now.
The need for leadership has never been greater, and the US has never been more engaged with the world.
Our role in Afghanistan’s first-ever peaceful, democratic transition reminds us all that, having invested so much blood and treasure in helping to give Afghans a chance to succeed in battle, the world has just as much responsibility to help its leaders succeed in governance.
We know that the destruction of 100% of Syria’s declared chemical weapons would not have happened without direct, hands-on diplomacy and perseverance, just as Syria’s immoral and horrifying civil war will not end without an equal commitment.
So, too, in Asia, where President Barack Obama and Chinese President Xi Jinping just announced ambitious commitments to tackle climate change, we are reminded of what countries can accomplish together with real leadership – and of how much additional leadership is required to conclude a successful climate agreement in Paris next year.
The world has changed, and we are changing with it.
Lines on the map no longer contain the gravest threats, and the players are no longer divided neatly into two camps.
In the twenty-first century, next door is everywhere.
That is why the world needs coalition diplomacy.
No country can defeat terrorism on its own.
No country can solve the existential threat of climate change alone.
No country can eradicate extreme poverty, combat potential pandemics, or improve nuclear security by itself.
None of us can live safer, richer lives by turning our back to the world.
We must build on our history of working with allies by forming new coalitions – with governments, with civil society, and, yes, with everyday people.
A good example is the international effort to confront the Islamic State’s malign brutality in Iraq and Syria.
Political, humanitarian, and intelligence tools from more than 60 countries are being used to support unified military action.
Success depends not on what one or even a handful of countries can do alone, but on what all of us are able to achieve by moving forward together against this common threat.
On an equally important front, the US is working with the United Nations to galvanize a global response to the danger posed by the Ebola virus.
I have personally talked with more than 50 foreign leaders, and we all agree that only by coordinating our actions can we stop the devastation in West Africa and halt Ebola’s spread.
We are making progress on both issues, but much work remains.
Bringing together countries with competing interests and varying resources is hard work.
It demands intense diplomatic engagement and calls upon relationships that have been built and maintained over decades, as well as alliances with new partners.
But by overcoming differences and coordinating efforts to defeat the Islamic State and conquer Ebola, we are reinforcing support for a world order grounded in collective solutions to common problems.
Cooperation is equally vital in reinforcing the bedrock economic principles on which America and other countries built their postwar prosperity.
Frustration cannot grow faster than opportunity in any country.
For example, the negotiations on the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) reflect President Obama’s determination to strike an accord with countries that represent one-third of global trade and 40% of global GDP.
The benefits – for both the US and our partners – are enormous.
Estimates are that the TPP could provide $77 billion a year in real income and support 650,000 new jobs in the US alone.
The Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership being negotiated with the European Union offers another major step toward increasing trade.
Whether for mutual security or shared prosperity, genuine partnerships are not built overnight.
Patient diplomacy and a collective will are needed to advance common goals. America’s objectives remain the same as they have been for decades – peace, prosperity, and stability for the US and for our partners around the world.
Closing the Investment Gap
BERKELEY – The weakness of private investment in the United States and other advanced economies is a worrisome – and perplexing – feature of the recovery from the 2008 global financial crisis.
Indeed, according to the International Monetary Fund, through 2014, private investment declined by an average of 25% compared to pre-crisis trends.
The shortfall in investment has been deep and broad-based, affecting not only residential investment but also investment in equipment and structures.
Business investment remains significantly below pre-2008 expectations, and has been hit hard again in the US during the last year by the collapse of energy-sector investment in response to the steep drop in oil prices.
Interestingly, the investment shortfall in the US coincides with a strong rebound in returns to capital.
By one measure, returns to private capital are now at a higher point than any time in recent decades.
But extensive empirical research confirms that at the macro level, business investment depends primarily on expected future demand and output growth, not on current returns or retained earnings.
According to the IMF, this “accelerator” theory of investment explains most of the weakness of business investment in the developed economies since the 2008 crisis.
In accordance with this explanation, investment growth in the US has been in line with its usual historical relationship with output growth.
In short, private investment growth has been weak primarily because the pace of recovery has been anemic.
Businesses have marked down their pre-crisis investment plans to reflect a post-crisis “new normal” of slower and more uncertain growth in demand for their output.
Under conditions of weak aggregate demand, stronger public investment encourages more private business investment.
But public investment, too, has fallen below pre-crisis expectations, aggravating rather than ameliorating the slump in private investment.
The accelerator explanation of the shortfall in business investment in the US is consistent with evidence that, where projected demand growth has been relatively strong – for example, in cable, telecommunications, digital platforms, social networking, and, until recently, energy – investment growth has also been relatively strong.
Indeed, telecom and cable companies accounted for the largest share of business capital expenditures during the last three years, with energy production and mining second on the list.
Differences in innovation opportunities across industries are also consistent with the changing composition of business investment.
During the 2009-2015 period, while business investment in equipment slowed in the US, it accelerated in intellectual property products, including research and development, software, and so-called artistic originals (the output of artists, studios, and publishers).
R&D investment usually expands faster than GDP during cyclical expansions, and the current period is in line with historical trends.
Indeed, as a share of the economy, R&D investment is now at its highest level on record, which bodes well for future productivity growth.
As the accelerator theory of investment would predict, much R&D investment is occurring in technology-intensive sectors where current and future expected demand has been strong.
There is also evidence that the distribution of returns to capital is becoming increasingly skewed toward these sectors.
According to a recent McKinsey Global Institute report, the most digitized sectors – ranked by 18 metrics on digital assets, digital usage, and digital workforce – enjoy significantly higher profit margins than traditional sectors.
In a recent letter to the chief executives of the S&P 500 companies and large European corporations, Larry Fink, the CEO of BlackRock, the world’s largest investment management company, expressed concern that many global firms may be sacrificing value-creating investments by distributing dividends and buying back their own shares.
Among US nonfinancial corporations, the proportion of investable funds used for dividends and share buybacks has been trending upward, albeit with cyclical ups and downs, since the 1980s.
After a sharp downturn during the 2008-2009 recession, this proportion has now recovered to nearly 50%, a high point relative to historical averages.
The macro evidence indicates that the primary cause of disappointing business investment in the US and other developed countries in the years following the global financial crisis has been anemic demand, not a lack of investable funds resulting from excessive distributions to shareholders.
Over the longer term, however, the upward trend in dividends and share buybacks as a percentage of corporate investable funds is a symptom of mounting shareholder pressure on corporations to focus on short-term returns at the expense of long-term investments.
In a recent McKinsey survey of 1,000 top executives and corporate directors, 63% reported that shareholder pressure to realize short-term returns has increased over the last several years.
Indeed, some 79% reported pressure to demonstrate strong financial returns in two years or less.
Shareholder pressure tends to be greater in older firms, and in the US over the last few decades, the proportion of older firms has been growing as the startup rate for new businesses has fallen.
In addition, as Fink and others have warned, compensation practices that link top executives’ pay to measures of short-term success like quarterly earnings per share or annual equity performance also encourage “short-termism” in corporate investment decisions.
A sliding capital gains tax, with rates that decline as the holding period for investments increases, would reduce incentives for short-termism among investors.
Among others, Larry Fink, the Center for American Progress, and Hillary Clinton propose this approach.
In his recent CEO letter, Fink also calls on companies to issue annual “strategic frameworks” for long-term value creation, supported by quantifiable financial metrics and linking long-term executive compensation to performance on them.
These frameworks, Fink notes, should cover environmental, social, and governance (ESG) factors that are core determinants of long-term value.
Companies can use the new evidence-based standards developed by the Sustainability Accounting Standards Board to disclose material information about their ESG performance to their investors.
Strategic frameworks, along with ESG disclosure, should encourage both companies and their shareholders to focus more on long-term value and less on short-term financial performance.
But at the macro level, expected growth in demand and associated innovation opportunities will remain the primary drivers of business investment.
Inequality and the American Child
NEW YORK – Children, it has long been recognized, are a special group.
They do not choose their parents, let alone the broader conditions into which they are born.
They do not have the same abilities as adults to protect or care for themselves.
That is why the League of Nations approved the Geneva Declaration on the Rights of the Child in 1924, and why the international community adopted the Convention on the Rights of the Child in 1989.
Sadly, the United States is not living up to its obligations.
In fact, it has not even ratified the Convention on the Rights of the Child.
The US, with its cherished image as a land of opportunity, should be an inspiring example of just and enlightened treatment of children.
Instead, it is a beacon of failure – one that contributes to global sluggishness on children’s rights in the international arena.
Though an average American childhood may not be the worst in the world, the disparity between the country’s wealth and the condition of its children is unparalleled.
About 14.5% of the American population as a whole is poor, but 19.9% of children – some 15 million individuals – live in poverty.
Among developed countries, only Romania has a higher rate of child poverty.
The US rate is two-thirds higher than that in the United Kingdom, and up to four times the rate in the Nordic countries.
For some groups, the situation is much worse: more than 38% of black children, and 30% of Hispanic children, are poor.
None of this is because Americans do not care about their children.
It is because America has embraced a policy agenda in recent decades that has caused its economy to become wildly unequal, leaving the most vulnerable segments of society further and further behind.
The growing concentration of wealth – and a significant reduction in taxes on it – has meant less money to spend on investments for the public good, like education and the protection of children.
As a result, America’s children have become worse off.
Their fate is a painful example of how inequality not only undermines economic growth and stability – as economists and organizations like the International Monetary Fund are finally acknowledging – but also violates our most cherished notions of what a fair society should look like.
Income inequality is correlated with inequalities in health, access to education, and exposure to environmental hazards, all of which burden children more than other segments of the population.
Indeed, nearly one in five poor American children are diagnosed with asthma, a rate 60% higher than non-poor children.
Learning disabilities occur almost twice as frequently among children in households earning less than $35,000 a year than they do in households earning more than $100,000.
And some in the US Congress want to cut food stamps – on which some 23 million American households depend, threatening the poorest children with hunger.
These inequalities in outcomes are closely tied to inequalities in opportunities.
Inevitably, in countries where children have inadequate nutrition, insufficient access to health care and education, and higher exposure to environmental hazards, the children of the poor will have far different life prospects from those of the rich.
And, partly because an American child’s lifetime prospects are more dependent on his or her parents’ income and education than in other advanced countries, the US now has the least equality of opportunity of any advanced country.
At America’s most elite universities, for example, only around 9% of students come from the bottom half of the population, while 74% come from the top quarter.
Most societies recognize a moral obligation to help ensure that young people can live up to their potential.
Some countries even impose a constitutional mandate for equality of educational opportunities.
But in America, more is spent on the education of rich students than on the education of the poor.
As a result, the US is wasting some of its most valuable assets, with some young people – bereft of skills – turning to dysfunctional activities.
American states like California spend about as much on prisons as on higher education – and sometimes more.
Without compensatory measures – including pre-school education, ideally beginning at a very young age – unequal opportunities translate into unequal lifelong outcomes by the time children reach the age of five.
That should be a spur to policy action.
Indeed, while inequality’s harmful effects are wide-reaching, and impose huge costs on our economies and societies, they are largely avoidable.
The extremes of inequality observed in some countries are not the inexorable result of economic forces and laws.
The right policies – stronger social safety nets, progressive taxation, and better regulation (especially of the financial sector), to name a few – can reverse these devastating trends.
To generate the political will that such reforms require, we must confront policymakers’ inertia and inaction with the grim facts of inequality and its devastating effects on our children.
We can reduce childhood deprivation and increase equality of opportunity, thereby laying the groundwork for a more just and prosperous future – one that reflects our own avowed values.
So why don’t we?
Of the harm that inequality inflicts on our economies, politics, and societies, the damage done to children demands special concern.
Whatever responsibility poor adults may bear for their lot in life – they may not have worked hard enough, saved enough, or made good decisions – children’s circumstances are thrust upon them without any sort of choice.
Children, perhaps more than anyone, need the protection that rights afford – and the US should be providing the world with a shining example of what that means.
American Conservatism’s Crisis of Ideas
BERKELEY – On the back left corner of my desk right now are three recent books: Arthur Brooks’ The Battle, Charles Murray’s Coming Apart, and Nicholas Eberstadt’s A Nation of Takers.
Together, they constitute an important intellectual movement, which also happens to be a large part of the reason that American conservatism today has little that is constructive to say about managing the economy – and little purchase on the center of the American electorate.
But let’s back up historically, to the founding of what we might call modern conservatism in early nineteenth-century Britain and France.
There were some – Frédéric Bastiat and Jean-Baptiste Say come to mind – who believed that government should put the unemployed to work building infrastructure when markets or production were temporarily disrupted.
But they were balanced by those like Nassau Senior, who spoke out against even famine relief: Although a million people would die in the Irish Potato Famine, “that would scarcely be enough.”
The main thrust of early conservatism was root-and-branch opposition to every form of social insurance: make the poor richer, and they would become more fertile.
As a result, farm sizes would drop (as land was divided among ever more children), labor productivity would fall, and the poor would become even poorer.
Social insurance was not just pointless; it was counterproductive.
The proper economic policy was to teach people to venerate the throne (so that they would respect property), the paternal hearth (so that they would not marry imprudently young), and the religious altar (so that they would fear pre-marital sex).
Then, perhaps, with women chaste for half or more of their childbearing years, the surplus population would diminish and conditions for the poor would be as good as they could be.