The final result was never discernible in the polls more than six weeks in advance.
So, for the moment, the election is too far off to know or predict anything with certainty.
What we hear is idle speculation.
But at least the media are doing brisk business, and we are being entertained.
France’s Royal Visage
Ségolenè Royal has surged to the front of the pack of Socialists who aim to succeed Jacques Chirac as President of France.
Nobody would have bet a single euro on such a prospect a few months ago.
Until recently, Royal – who now is merely the head of one France’s 22 regional governments – was best known as the non-married partner of François Hollande, the Socialist Party leader.
Yet, according to the polls, she is the only left-leaning candidate who looks able to defeat Nicolas Sarkozy, the current Interior Minister and odds-on favorite to be the center-right’s standard bearer in the presidential election next May.
How did Royal rise so far and so fast?
One reason is that she is the only fresh face among those Socialists vying for the party nomination.
Laurent Fabius, Martine Aubry, Dominique Strauss-Kahn, Jack Lang, and even Hollande are all former senior ministers who neutralized each other, while Lionel Jospin, the former Prime Minister, decided to put an end to his political career after his defeat in 2002.
Each of them has strengths and weaknesses, but none seems able to challenge Sarkozy.
Indeed, confronted with her lead, both Jospin and Hollande have dropped out of the race.
So there was a vacuum to fill, accompanied by a strong desire among the party faithful for revival.
Royal’s chief virtue is that she has not taken part in the numerous internal battles that infuriate socialist militants and voters, and her lack of direct association with the party’s leadership has enabled her to avoid blame for its mistakes.
That is why, far from being a disadvantage, her peripheral position is one of her main assets.
She has slim and politically minor ministerial experience – Environment Minister in 1992-1993, Deputy Minister for Secondary Education in 1997-2000, and Minister for Family Affairs in 2000-2002 – and has drawn attention mainly for her work on subjects related to daily problems, such as kids’ TV programs and mistreatment in schools.
But, while other politicians do not regard these matters as politically important, they mean a lot to most ordinary citizens.
That is why people tend to view her as a sincere politician, rather than one concerned only about personal ambition.
On security issues and education, Royal differs from the classical left, being something of a hardliner.
This, too, is an advantage in a country where security is the top priority for most people nowadays.
A mother of four children who proclaims to believe in traditional family values, she is attractive to right-wing voters, while her non-matrimonial relationship with Hollande makes her seem a quintessentially modern woman.
Moreover, being a woman is a great asset.
When disturbed by a question, she usually replies, “Would you have asked the same question to a man?”
Ever since Laurent Fabius took a hit in the polls when he mocked her candidacy by asking, “Who will mind the children?”, her opponents have feared appearing misogynous when attacking her, and when they do criticize her, she immediately assumes the pose of innocent victim, unfairly bashed by schoolboy bullies.
As a political tactician, she has also been innovative, organizing her campaign on the Internet with a plan to write her program from the responses of users.
Her motto, “My program is yours,” could prove popular with citizens who, as in many other democracies, do not trust their political elite.
Even though, like the majority of France’s political class, she was educated at Ecole Nationale d’Administration (ENA), she spurns the language and habits of this elite factory.
Last but not least, she is attractive.
Photos of her in a swimming suit, taken by paparazzi during the summer, triggered much discussion across France.
But the game is not over.
The Socialist will decide on November 17th who will be their candidate.
Trailing her in opinion polls, the other contenders cite her lack of credibility on economic policy and international relations.
No one knows her opinion on the Middle East, terrorism, nuclear deterrence, and international security.
During the recent Lebanon war, she called for Bill Clinton’s intervention – an insufficient answer for many people.
Royal’s lack of program has been her strength, but it could yet be her undoing.
Eventually, she will be obliged to abandon her studied ambiguity, and she will probably pay a price for doing so.
Few voters will support someone whose political program is based only on education and defense of the family.
Some Socialists fear that, once nominated, she would not be able to confront Sarkozy in direct debates.
Moreover, opinion polls in France are fickle omens.
Since 1981, no poll favorite has won the presidency.
According to the polls, Valéry Giscard d’Estaing, not François Mitterrand, should have been elected in 1981.
In 1988, just months before the election, Raymond Barre (a former Prime Minister) was the arch-favorite, but did not even qualify for the second-round run-off.
A few weeks before the election in 1995, Jacques Chirac looked so weak that a journalist bluntly asked him on live TV whether it would not be better for him to give up.
And Jospin was considered the only possible winner in 2002, before finishing third, behind Chirac and Jean-Marie Le Pen.
But Royal is confident in her fate.
She is far from being a weak contender, and she is a fast learner with a strong campaign team.
If she can strengthen her program on foreign policy, she may yet open a new chapter in French political history.
France’s Third Man
Should we be watching the French presidential campaign with admiration or alarm?
Or perhaps a bit of both?
It is undeniably a great “show” with all the ingredients of a Hollywood blockbuster, including a surprising plot twist: the emergence of a “Third Man,” François Bayrou.
Even if his victory remains unlikely, Bayrou must now be taken seriously.
First and foremost, he has found in Ségolène Royal and Nicolas Sarkozy two remarkable spokespersons for his candidacy.
The more Royal returns to the “classics” of the Socialist Party, and the more Sarkozy openly courts the extreme right, the more Bayrou’s popularity rises.
Indeed, persistent doubts among the French about Royal’s competence and Sarkozy’s character are the primary reasons for his dramatic rise in public opinion polls, from 7% support at the start of the campaign to 22% now.
The second reason for Bayrou’s spectacular rise has less to do with personalities and more with France’s national mood.
The very reason that led a majority of the French to say “no” to the referendum on the European Union’s draft Constitutional Treaty in May 2005 may lead them to vote for Bayrou, the most pro-European of all candidates.
Why this paradox?
A vote that meant saying “no” to the Constitutional Treaty in 2005 now means saying “no” to the leaders of the French left and right.
In the 2002 presidential election, frustration with the system fueled strong support for the extremes, with Jean-Marie Le Pen, the leader of the far right, qualifying for the second-round runoff.
In 2007, by contrast – and this constitutes real progress – a large segment of the French population is expressing its frustration with the system by being tempted to vote for the “extreme center,” i.e., Bayrou.
Bayrou has been in politics for a long time, including as a presidential candidate in 2002.
But, while his record as education minister is far from impressive, he has successfully reinvented his image in the last few months, becoming the “new man” of French politics.
He looks more reassuring than Sarkozy and sounds more competent than Royal.
This would not be enough for Bayrou in ordinary times, but today, on both sides of the political divide, opponents of the main candidates seem ready to join forces with him and betray their respective camps.
What makes Bayrou potentially so strong is the fact that widespread reservations about the two leading candidates are influencing the calculus of militants and politicians alike.
On the conservative side, Jacques Chirac now officially supports Sarkozy, but he may also secretly encourage his most loyal supporters to vote for Bayrou, even if there is no love lost between the two men.
On the left, the social democratic wing of the Socialist party, which backed Dominique Strauss-Kahn against Royal, may be tempted to align with Bayrou, too, owing to the prospect of a post-electoral alliance between the center left and the center right.
That said, surveys of the electorate demonstrate that a large proportion is still undecided, particularly among Bayrou’s supporters.
So it is too early to say whether Bayrou can reach the second round.
But if he does, he is likely to prove irresistible.
A Bayrou victory, which is unlikely but not impossible, would constitute a triple revolution.
It would lead first to the end of the Socialist Party created by François Mitterrand.
Following Lionel Jospin’s humiliating defeat in 2002, the Socialists simply would not survive a second consecutive failure to reach the second round.
Moreover, a Bayrou victory could signify the end of the conservative party created by Chirac, as well as of Charles de Gaulle’s Fifth Republic.
But de Gaulle’s legacy would most likely be snuffed out gently, with nostalgia for both Mitterrand and Chirac possibly proving very tempting for a people disaffected with the political system but desiring to be reassured.
France wants the illusion of change, but is continuity what she truly desires?.
Finally, while this election was expected to usher in a new generation of politicians, few were prepared to anticipate the peaceful political tsunami that a Bayrou victory would bring.
Yet that would be the outcome if the attraction towards the center proves to be as irresistible for significant segments of the Socialists and conservative parties as it now seems .
France is a marvelously paradoxical country, so the search for novelty, if not modernity, could lead to the reinvention of the Fourth Republic, a parliamentary regime characterized by its weaknesses and instability.
That will depend in part on whether the perception of Sarkozy as a risky candidate will prove greater than the very real institutional risk represented by Bayrou.
There is maybe less of a French presence in the world today than there was twelve years ago when Jacques Chirac came to power, especially since the rejection of the Constitutional Treaty in 2005.
But the world’s interest in the French presidential campaign is greater than ever, and can be compared only with the attention generated by Mitterrand’s election in 1981.
Much may change in the few weeks left before the first round of the presidential vote.
But the campaign has now become a question of numbers: will the Third Man bury the Fifth Republic?
A Meeting of Minds on HIV/AIDS
GENEVA – An ounce of prevention, Benjamin Franklin famously said, is worth a pound of cure.
But that is not always true when it comes to research into infectious diseases.
Though scientists have traditionally tended to focus on either prevention or cure, defeating the HIV/AIDS virus will require researchers – and their funders – to collaborate to address the challenge from both directions.
Advances in prevention and treatment have reduced annual HIV infections by one-third over the past decade, and cut AIDS-related deaths by 30% over the past five years.
Yet 35 million people still live with the virus.
Last year, 2.1 million became infected, and 1.5 million died from AIDS-related causes.
Even in the best-case scenario for maximizing existing prevention and treatment, at least a half-million new HIV infections would occur annually in low- and middle-income countries by 2050.
The world needs a vaccine and a cure to get ahead of the disease, and great progress is being made in both areas.
But, though research in these two distinct fields is beginning to overlap, too many scientists still see themselves as being strictly on one side or the other.
The mechanisms for funding HIV/AIDS research reinforce this separation, because they rarely allow for – much less invite – the kind of innovative cross-field approaches that will be needed to translate recent breakthroughs into testable products.
The divide is apparent even among activists and advocates for HIV/AIDS research.
It must not be allowed to prevent further progress.
Because HIV/AIDS is already the world’s most studied infectious disease, an HIV diagnosis is no longer a death sentence.
Yet we are still far from defeating the virus.
Infection rates continue to rise in specific regions and populations, and more than half of the people living with HIV worldwide do not even know that they have it.
Three of five HIV-positive people still are not receiving antiretroviral therapy.
Moreover, long-term treatment is not the same as a cure, and no public-health tool (apart from clean drinking water) has ever matched the preventive power of a vaccine.
HIV is an extremely complex virus.
It mutates rapidly within an individual and among geographic locations, establishing latent reservoirs within cells that enable it to emerge and replicate months or even years later.
It evades the immune system, so the body’s natural ability to fight or clear it is limited.
Although there are no precedents that might guide us to a vaccine or cure, we have learned a lot about how HIV works – and its weaknesses – in the last five years.
In 2009, for example, researchers found so-called “proof of concept” when a clinical trial showed that a vaccine could prevent HIV infection in humans, and Timothy Ray Brown (known as “the Berlin patient”) was cured of HIV via a bone-marrow transplant.
Researchers are also learning a great deal from the responses of three groups of patients.
The first group comprises “post-treatment controllers,” in whom early treatment allowed for long-term control of the infection even after antiretroviral therapy was stopped.
The second group are “elite controllers,” who can carry HIV for ten years or more without treatment and without falling ill.
The third group, “elite neutralizers,” includes patients who naturally produce antibodies against a wide range of HIV variants.
With the insights gained from following these patients, researchers are increasingly beginning to recognize that the same science may bring us to both a vaccine and a cure.
The two research paths, long pursued in separate labs and discrete projects, have been converging in several exciting areas.
For example, scientists working to design a vaccine that will induce production of broadly neutralizing antibodies to protect people from HIV infection have found that these antibodies also control and even clear infection by the simian version of the virus in monkeys.
A similar result, dubbed a “functional cure,” has been achieved with a simian vaccine aimed at inducing a response by the monkeys’ “killer T-cells,” another weapon in the immune system’s arsenal.
Meanwhile, cure-focused studies of elite controllers are yielding clues about regions of the virus that mutate less, which could hold important lessons for vaccine researchers.
As science advances across disciplines and diseases in ways that were unimaginable even five years ago, the research walls that divide prevention and cure must fall.
We must stop weighing pounds against ounces, and collaborate to develop the tools needed to eliminate the HIV/AIDS scourge once and for all.
François Hollande Meets the World
PARIS – When François Hollande, fresh from his election as France’s next president, was asked by a journalist which language he would use when he meets US President Barack Obama for the first time, his answer was revealing. “I speak English more fluently than the former president,” the Socialist leader insisted, referring to the outgoing Nicolas Sarkozy.
“But a French president must speak French!”
In proclaiming his mastery of the lingua franca of global affairs, Hollande was asserting himself as a modern statesman, while also suggesting that France will remain as influential as possible on the international scene.
Indeed, he was proclaiming his commitment to internationalism and multilateralism.
In order to remain a country that punches above its weight diplomatically, it is in France’s interest to operate through international organizations rather than to rely on bilateral relationships.
Hollande is also aware that, for historical and cultural reasons, France’s international role must be different from that of other countries.
In his book Changer de destin (Changing Destiny), published in February, he affirms that France’s message will continue to be a universal one – a stance reminiscent of the birth in 1789 of the French Republic, which, like the United States, was originally conceived as the triumph of liberty and democracy.
Unlike in France, however, the word “socialist” is an epithet for most Americans.
But this could be a source of strength for Hollande, who, as a new leader with no foreign-policy experience, will have to prove his ability through action.
And here, Obama, in particular, will soon understand that Hollande has no intention of bringing sweeping change.
On the contrary, his intention will be to appear as a reliable and unsurprising partner.
Hollande is unlikely to be less friendly with America than was Sarkozy, regarded by many as France’s most pro-US president.
Hollande supported the military intervention in Libya in 2011, and has joined the condemnation of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad’s regime.
One of his close political allies recently declared that should the United Nations Security Council approve military intervention in Syria, France “could envision” participating in that effort.
Hollande also supports a tough line on Iran and, regarding the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, his book indicates that he subscribes to the “Clinton parameters” – two states with secure borders and a status for Jerusalem that is acceptable to both sides.
With regard to relations between France and the Arab world, one can be certain that Hollande would agree with the pro-engagement thrust of Obama’s 2009 Cairo speech.
Last but not least, Hollande is not likely to call into question Sarkozy’s decision in 2009 to reintegrate France into NATO’s military command.
That decision remains controversial in France, including among Socialists, but Hollande is well aware of the weaknesses of a European defense policy that simply cannot compete with NATO.
Nevertheless, at the NATO Summit in Chicago at the end of May, Hollande will confirm his pledge to withdraw French troops from Afghanistan by the end of 2012, two years ahead of the NATO timetable (though he recognizes the need to negotiate the practical details).
This will be an important test of Hollande’s ability to deal effectively with allies.
The second test of his ability to negotiate with other leaders will be within Europe.
One of the highest-flying proposals of his electoral platform was a call for renegotiation of the European Union’s new “fiscal pact,” endorsed by all member states with the exception of the United Kingdom and the Czech Republic.
Inspired by German Chancellor Angela Merkel, approval of the pact was a precondition for Germany’s participation in the financial rescue plan for Greece and the other distressed eurozone countries.
Hollande’s proposal was initially regarded as lèse-majesté against Germany.
Now all European leaders – from Mario Monti in Italy to Mariano Rajoy in Spain and Elio Di Rupo in Belgium – agree on the need to revive the European economy.
So do Mario Draghi, the president of the European Central Bank, Jose Manuel Barroso, the president of the European Commission, EU Council President Herman Van Rompuy, and, indeed, Merkel herself.
Merkel and Hollande will discuss the main question – how to spur economic growth without increasing public debt – on May 15 in Berlin.
While Merkel opposes Hollande’s proposal to create Eurobonds with a view to financing industrial projects, they cannot afford to waste time in reassuring jittery markets with a message of cohesion.
Merkel has already welcomed Hollande’s ideas for a growth plan for Europe.
Hollande, too, will have to make concessions.
For the French, as for all Europeans, the EU is not a foreign entity, and its decisions are an integral part of domestic policies.
In this regard, Hollande has a chance to succeed on the international scene as a truly pro-European leader.
Only a stronger Europe will ensure fair trade with emerging countries, especially China.
Only a stronger Europe will at last implement the principle of reciprocity in order to protect European businesses and prevent them from relocating, which has been the main cause of unemployment.
In a recent interview, Hollande declared that, “France is not just any European country, and its president is not just any world leader.”
The French are happy to hear that.
But that affirmation also represents Hollande’s main challenge: ensuring that this remains true in the context of twenty-first-century globalization.
François Hollande’s Wrong Idea of France
LONDON – France’s new president, François Hollande, has achieved a remarkable series of political victories – at home and in Europe – since his election in May.
Unfortunately, his streak of success will inevitably call forth an economic reckoning that will shock France’s apparently unsuspecting citizens and doom the French elite’s approach to the “construction of Europe.”
Since winning the presidency, Hollande has won a parliamentary majority and pushed Germany toward accepting joint liability for eurozone countries’ debts.
But forebodings of crisis have become widespread in French business and economic circles.
But the real danger – which even Hollande’s sternest critics may be underestimating – is not so much his individual policy failings (serious though they may be) as his approach to the twin challenges posed by France’s economic imbalances and the eurozone crisis.
On each front separately, he might manage to muddle through; together, they look likely to cement France’s loss of competitiveness.
Declining competitiveness is best captured in a single indicator: unit labor costs, which measure the average cost of labor per unit of output.
In a monetary union, discrepancies in wage growth relative to productivity gains – that is, unit labor costs – will result in a chronic accumulation of trade surpluses or deficits.
Since the euro’s introduction, unit labor costs have risen dramatically faster in France than they have in Germany.
According to Eurostat data published in April 2011, the hourly labor cost in France was €34.2, compared to €30.1 in Germany – and nearly 20% higher than the eurozone average of €27.6.
France’s current-account deficit has risen to more than 2% of GDP, even as its economic growth has ground to a halt.
The high cost of employing workers in France is due not so much to wages and benefits as it is to payroll taxes levied on employers.
The entire French political class has long delighted in taxing labor to finance the country’s generous welfare provisions, thus avoiding excessively high taxation of individuals’ income and consumption – though that is about to come to an end as Hollande intends to slap a 75% tax on incomes above €1 million.
This is a version of the fallacy that taxing companies (“capital”) spares ordinary people (“workers”).
Of course, such taxes on firms are always passed on to households – usually through straightforward price hikes, and, in France, also through unemployment.
High tax rates on labor – together with rigid regulation of hiring and firing – make employers extremely reluctant to recruit workers.
As a result, France has had chronic long-term unemployment – forecast to reach 10.5% by 2013 – for many years.
Hollande’s predecessor, Nicolas Sarkozy, tried to address this problem.
He exempted voluntary overtime pay from employment tax and shifted some of the burden of labor taxation onto consumption (via a hike in VAT).
But Hollande quickly reversed both of these reforms.
The repeal of the tax break on overtime reflects another economic fallacy to which French Socialist politicians are deeply attached: the “lump of labor” notion that underlay the most disastrous of their economic policies – the 35-hour workweek, introduced in 2000.
The idea behind the policy is that demand for labor is a constant, and that this fixed number of aggregate working hours required by employers to meet final demand can be spread more evenly among workers to reduce unemployment.
Such measures, designed to create jobs by freeing up work hours, are futile at best, and are often detrimental.
French Socialists should recall their school physics lesson about communicating vessels: when a homogeneous liquid is poured into a set of connected containers, it settles at the same level in all of them, regardless of their shape and volume.
Generating more “liquid” (jobs) requires not discouraging the entrepreneurs on whose activities sustainable job creation ultimately depends.
The effect of fiscal and regulatory pressure on employment is to encourage French firms to invest and hire outside France.
Hollande’s apologists praise his gradualist and consensual approach to addressing the economy’s structural distortions.
They argue that his penchant for setting up consultative commissions is the best way to forge the consensus required for structural reform, whereas Sarkozy’s combative style was counterproductive.
Even banishing skepticism and assuming that Hollande could over time persuade his supporters to embrace competitiveness-boosting policies, the eurozone crisis is denying France the time that such gradualism requires.
A simple, effective way to buy time would be to abandon the euro and restore competitiveness through a devalued national currency.
But this expedient is incompatible with mainstream French politicians’ devotion to the “European project,” which amounts to a projection of French soft power; indeed, building Europe lies at the heart of the French establishment’s version of what Charles de Gaulle used to call “a certain idea of France.”
For mainstream French politicians, renouncing the European project to buy the time required to restore competitiveness is as unthinkable as is the logical alternative: an all-out push for full European political union.
This would reestablish monetary sovereignty and create a normal central bank (like the Federal Reserve or the Bank of England) at the European level.
But it would also mean abandoning France’s republic in favor of a federal European government – anathema to that “certain idea of France.”
The combination of gradualism (on the most generous interpretation) in domestic economic reform and the paralyzing effect of the eurozone crisis will lead to a massive shock.
Remaining in a currency union with the much more competitive German economy will require wrenching and rapid reforms, for which Hollande’s tepid approach will fail to prepare the complacent French.
The result will be even more support than was seen in last April’s presidential election for extremist political parties that reject both Europe and competitive market capitalism.
Freedom, Blasphemy, and Violence
PARIS – Violent attacks on US diplomatic outposts across North Africa and the Middle East have once again raised the question of how to respond when Americans and other Westerners engage in provocative expression that others consider blasphemous.
Though the attack on the US diplomatic mission in Benghazi, in which Ambassador J. Christopher Stevens and three members of his staff were murdered, may well have been planned, as the State Department has maintained, the killers clearly exploited the opportunity created by outrage at an anti-Muslim film produced in the US.
There have been several episodes in recent years in which perceptions of blasphemy have led to threats of violence or actual killings, starting with the publication of Salman Rushdie’s novel The Satanic Verses more than two decades ago, and including the Danish newspaper Jyllands-Posten’s cartoons of the Prophet Muhammad.
In the Netherlands, Theo Van Gogh was murdered on an Amsterdam sidewalk in retaliation for his film Submission, which criticized Islam’s treatment of women.
Even some who defended freedom of expression in those cases may be disinclined to do so now.
This time, the film that triggered riots in Cairo, Benghazi, Sana, and elsewhere is so crude and inflammatory as to seem clearly intended to elicit the outrage that it produced.
Yet judgments about literary or artistic merit should not be the basis for decisions about freedom of expression.
The proclivity of some elsewhere to react violently to what they consider blasphemous cannot be the criterion for imposing limits on free expression in the US, the United Kingdom, Denmark, or the Netherlands (or anywhere else).
It is important to differentiate blasphemy from hate speech.
What is objectionable about hate speech, and makes it punishable by law in countries around the world, is that it is intended to incite discrimination or violence against members of a particular national, racial, ethnic, or religious group.
Even in the US, where freedom of expression is zealously protected, such incitement may be prosecuted and punished in circumstances in which violence or other unlawful behavior is imminent.
By contrast, in cases of blasphemy, it is not the speaker (or the filmmaker) who is directly inciting discrimination or violence. Rather, it is those who are enraged by the expressed views who may threaten or actually engage in violence, either against the speaker, or against those, like US government officials, whom they believe have facilitated (or failed to suppress) the blasphemer’s activities.
It is, of course, impossible to be certain what will arouse such anger.
At times, as seems to be the case with the video that triggered the current protests in cities across North Africa and the Middle East, a long period may elapse between the offensive material’s dissemination and an outpouring of popular rage.
The rage, it seems, is not spontaneous; rather, it is an artifact of local or regional politics.
This does not diminish the irresponsibility of those who gratuitously engage in such offensive behavior, but it does make clear that outrage against their actions should not be a basis for abandoning our commitment to freedom of expression.
What, then, is to be done?
The only appropriate response is the one chosen by the US Embassy in Cairo, which denounced the film and said that the American government condemns those who offend others’ religious beliefs.
And Secretary of State Hillary Clinton reinforced the condemnation when she called the film “disgusting and reprehensible.”
Plainly, that was not enough to deter those who sought an occasion to attack the US Consulate in Benghazi.
If they had not grasped this opportunity, they would have sought another.
Simply condemning a film will not mean much to those who believe that, as may be true in their own countries, a powerful government like that of the US can simply decide whether a film should be made or broadcast.
Though the statement from the US Embassy in Cairo has become the target of political criticism, it warrants praise for exemplifying American values.
Contrary to the criticism, condemnation of the film is not censorship.
While rejecting censorship, the US government should not renounce its authority to speak sensibly and condemn an appalling and apparently intentional provocation that produced such tragic consequences.
Freedom, Not Democracy, For Russia
Twenty years ago this month, Mikhail Gorbachev began his policies of perestroika and glasnost , which led to the end of the Cold War.
Now, however, a new chill has entered relations between Russia and the West.
President Vladimir Putin is frequently criticized for taking Russia in the wrong direction.
The very people who in 2000 called Putin a man they could do business with are having second thoughts.
People once fascinated by Putin now publicly rebuke him.
Putin is shooting back, accusing the West of trying to weaken and dismember Russia.
As politicians in the West compare him to Mugabe or Mussolini, Putin’s Kremlin aides invoke the Munich appeasers who tried to push Hitler eastward.
Putin himself once blamed the West for trying to channel Muslim radicalism toward Russia.
Why this sharp change in tone?
Initially, most nations exiting from Communism reached out, almost instinctively, to their immediate pre-Communist period.
The Baltic states revived their constitutions of the 1930’s, the Armenians and the Azeris revived their political parties of the late 1910’s, and Eastern Europe, with the exception of East Germany, which reunited with the Federal Republic, suddenly became once again Mitteleuropa.
This revival of the past was a big worry for West Europeans and Americans, who feared the re-emergence of historical enmities and tensions, which did indeed come to the fore in the former Yugoslavia.
These fears underpinned the dual enlargement of NATO and the European Union.
Russia, for its part, also went backwards, to tsarism.
Initially, this was not obvious to all.
Boris Yeltsin was friendly to the West, tolerated open debate, and appointed a few individuals as oligarchs.
He was given the benefit of the doubt, and his anti-Communism was elevated to a surrogate of democracy.
Russia was doubtless freer than ever before, in virtually all respects, good and bad.
But the picture Russia presented to others and to itself was massively distorted.
Parliament was lively, but essentially powerless.
The electronic media were routinely critical of the authorities, but were owned by a handful of people and depended on their owners’ taste, interests, and fate.
Yeltsin’s handover of power to Putin, like a king with his dauphin, tells us more about his regime than almost anything else.
Putin’s regime is openly tsarist.
His Duma is much like the Duma of Nicholas II, docile and acquiescent.
His governors are also like Nicholas’s; many are governor-generals.
The capitalism now being practiced is dependent on the authorities, and plays no independent role in politics.
Of course, this does not mean that there is no difference between the Russia of Vladimir Putin and Nicholas Romanov.
What it means is that Russia is back on its historical path of development, back at the point where things started to go wrong.
The domestic situation, the global environment, and the historical memory of its people all militate against Russia being bound to relive its own tragic history.
But Russia is like Western Europe, in the sense that it will have to advance in stages.
It is not like Central Europe, which could leapfrog over some of them by jumping on the NATO/EU springboard.
This means that we need to be more careful in using the language of democracy when talking about Russia.
Democracy almost everywhere has been a fairly late child of capitalism, for it requires a self-conscious middle class to take root and flourish.
This can only be produced by successful and sustained capitalist development.
Russia is generating it, but the process will take time.
Meanwhile, politics belongs to the elites.
If Russia is to move forward, its high and mighty must agree about who owns what, who makes the rules, and how to change the rules.
Rather than calling for democracy, this calls for a genuine constitutional rule of law.
In other words, the task is to turn tsarist Russia into a version of the Kaiser’s Germany.
This won’t be easy, but there are good reasons for optimism.
With so much being written about Putin’s Russia, the rest of the country is often overlooked.
Even now, Russia, though undemocratic, is largely free.
What it needs is to institutionalize that freedom by building a modern state to replace the antiquated tsarist system.
It also needs a modern civil society to consolidate its multi-ethnic post-imperial population.
This calls for a kind of liberalism that is now lacking in Russia, one that stands for freedom, reform, and the nation-state.
Neither the government nor the current opposition possesses it, which means that Russians must look beyond Putin’s Russia.
As for the West, it is fruitless to try to bring Putin and his team back to democracy, where Russia does not belong, or to punish Russia with sanctions, which won’t work.
The West must recognize where Russia stands on history’s timeline and not seek to wish this away.
The political gap can be narrowed only by indigenous capitalist development.
In the meantime, America and Europe should base their policies toward Russia on mutual interests, not the expectation of mutual values.
Freedom of Religion or Freedom of Speech?
PRINCETON – Last month, the United Nations Human Rights Council adopted a resolution condemning “defamation of religion” as a human rights violation.
According to the text of the resolution, “Defamation of religion is a serious affront to human dignity” that leads to “a restriction on the freedom of [religions’] adherents.”
The resolution was originally proposed by the 56-nation Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC), and was put to the Human Rights Council by Pakistan.
It supports that it was aimed at such things as the derogatory cartoons of the prophet Mohammad published in a Danish newspaper three years ago.
Germany opposed the resolution.
Speaking on behalf of the European Union, a German spokesperson rejected the concept of “defamation of religion” as not valid in a human rights context, because human rights belonged to individuals, not to institutions or religions.
Many non-government organizations, both secular and religious, also opposed the resolution.
Ronald Lauder, president of the World Jewish Congress, said that that body saw the resolution as weakening “the rights of individuals to express their views.”
This seems like a sound argument.
While attempts to stir up hatred against adherents of a religion, or to incite violence against them, may legitimately be suppressed, criticism of religion as such should not be.
The resolution is non-binding, but if nations were to enact laws putting it into effect, there can be no doubt that it would interfere with freedom of expression.
For a start, what counts as “defamation of religion” is contested.
For example, the OIC said in its statement that “Islam is frequently and wrongly associated with human rights violations and terrorism.”
Are those associations wrong?
If the OIC wishes to change many people’s perception that Islam violates human rights, suppressing freedom of speech is hardly the best way to go about it.
The way to change such a perception would be to marshal evidence against it, and to make the case that human rights – including the rights of women – are as well protected in Islamic countries as they are in non-Islamic countries.
To demonstrate that it is wrong to associate Islam with terrorism, the OIC might begin to compile statistics on the religious affiliations of those who engage in terrorism.
By contrast, suppressing the freedom of speech of Islam’s critics merely gives rise to the suspicion that evidence and sound argument cannot show their arguments to be mistaken.
Coincidentally, in the same week that Germany and the World Jewish Congress rejected the idea that defamation of religion is an affront to human dignity, and upheld the right to freedom of expression, Germany’s highest court issued its ruling on a case brought by a Jewish organization, and two Jewish individuals.
The court ruled against the right of the United States-based animal rights group People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals to exhibit posters that juxtapose photographs of victims of the Holocaust with photographs of animals in factory farms and at slaughterhouses.
The posters bear the heading: “To Animals, All People are Nazis” – a line from the Polish-born Jewish writer Isaac Bashevis Singer.
According to the court, Germany’s laws on freedom of speech did not protect PETA’s campaign, because to make “the fate of the victims of the Holocaust appear banal and trivial” was an offense against human dignity.
PETA was, of course, not arguing that Holocaust victims’ fate was banal or trivial.
On the contrary, it was using the Holocaust – which we would all agree was utterly horrific – to suggest, as Isaac Bashevis Singer did, that there are parallels between the way the Nazis treated Jews and the way we treat animals.
The conclusion PETA wants us to reach is that both the Holocaust and the mass confinement and slaughter of animals are horrific.
A free society should be open to discussing such a claim.
Irrespective of the merits of PETA’s campaign, however, those who stood up for free speech at the UN Human Rights Council should be able to see that the fact that some forms of speech cause offense is not sufficient reason to censor them.
If PETA is not allowed to state its case against our abuse of animals in the way that they judge best, because doing so might offend some people, then criticism of religion could also be prohibited on the same grounds.
If, on the other hand, a religion’s adherents have no right to protection against criticism of their religion, then, even in Germany, Holocaust victims and their descendants (I am one) should not be protected against advertising campaigns that, though not intended to incite hatred or violence, may cause them offense.
Free-Market Babies?
LONDON – Does India need a new independence struggle?
The fight this time would not be against British colonialism, but rather against the United Kingdom’s approach to regulating reproductive medicine.
At a time when India is considering a sort of matchmaking service for Western couples seeking to hire Indian surrogate mothers, the UK government has announced the abolition of two leading medical regulatory agencies.
Meanwhile, as these countries move farther down the road to free markets in reproductive medicine, France is debating all of its bioethics laws – and continuing to stand up for a different model, focused on social justice and protection of vulnerable women.
There is an alternative simply to letting the market decide, the French Assembly insists.
At some point, many countries are likely to find themselves embroiled in similar debates and controversies over reproductive rights and obligations.
So it is necessary to clarify what is at stake in how we regulate – or de-regulate – in vitro fertilization (IVF), egg sales, and surrogacy.
It may come as a surprise to American observers, in particular, that the UK approach could be considered “free market.”
After all, the UK forbids outright payment for eggs, whereas in the United States, a highly differentiated market has grown up around “consumer demand.”
And the UK has a national regulatory agency for IVF, whereas the US has a patchwork of state regulations (or a lack thereof).
But the UK’s Human Fertilization and Embryology Authority (HFEA) might not be around for much longer.
Prime Minister David Cameron’s government announced last July that it intended to abolish the HFEA by 2014, along with the Human Tissue Authority, which deals with non-reproductive tissues.
Already, the HFEA appears to be attempting to preempt the government by softening its regulatory touch.
Last month, the HFEA finished a consultation on increasing the level of “expenses” payable for eggs used in IVF.
European law forbids outright payment for eggs, but the Authority suggests that increasing “expenses” considerably would not constitute an impermissible inducement.
The HFEA is merely “removing disincentives,” not “creating incentives.”
You could be forgiven for missing the difference.
Proponents of the Assisted Reproductive Technologies Regulation Bill 2010, now before the Indian Parliament, employ a similar rhetorical twist.
They say that the bill actually protects surrogate mothers – for example, by limiting the number of pregnancies they can undergo.
But the law would make surrogacy contracts legally binding, requiring the mother to give up the baby even if she changes her mind.
Opponents say that the agencies making the arrangements will be the biggest winners – that the huge profits they reap will dwarf the fees paid by foreign couples to the women bearing their children.
As N.B. Sarojini and Aastha Sharma wrote in the Indian Journal of Medical Ethics, “The Bill actively promotes medical tourism in India for reproductive purposes.”
France, like most European countries, has a problem with reproductive tourism: a yearly shortage of about 700 egg donors sends some couples over the Pyrenees to Spain, where private IVF clinics pay providers more in “expenses” than the UK allows.
Even so, the draft bill continues to prohibit payment for eggs.
And it’s not just France’s official ethics committee that takes an anti-commodification stance.
The French have recently conducted a series of two-day meetings in several provincial cities.
In Rennes, the panel debating reproductive medical issues supported the policy of not paying for eggs or sperm – not even by the back door of increasing the level of “expenses.”
While the HFEA document calls for ethical concerns to be “balanced” against increasing egg supply, French Assembly members insist that law, morality, and progress are compatible.
They reject the view that ethics is optional, even though some influential professors, like René Frydman, who helped to create the first French IVF baby, have warned that France will fall behind in the science race unless it abandons its principles.
The upper house, the Senate, was much more minded to listen to that view, so the outcome is still uncertain.
France is not a Shangri-La, isolated from global markets or the pressures of international research.
In the words of Emmanuel Hirsch, professor of medical ethics at the University of Paris-XI, “How long can our bioethical standards continue to resist the rise of other logics – particularly financial ones?”
To be sure, French regulation can be heavy-handed – for example, IVF is restricted to heterosexual couples who are married or in long-term relationships.
The official rationale was that eggs and sperm are not commodities, but gifts from a fertile couple to an infertile one.
That is also one reason why the French restricted egg donation to women who had already had at least one baby (though this is being changed).
But the limitation to heterosexual couples was rightly condemned as homophobic by the French public in the consultations.
So the draft bill has been amended to allow lesbian women to receive donated eggs.
(Gay men will still be barred, because they would require a surrogate, and surrogacy remains prohibited.)
That sort of responsiveness to popular sentiment in the legislative process gives the lie to the canard that French regulation is inflexible and hopelessly bureaucratic.
In fact, the free-market “Anglo-Saxon” attitude sounds like nothing so much as the old prejudices about the French that have been around since the novelist Thackeray told English readers: “The Frenchman has after his soup a dish of vegetables, where you have one of meat.
You are a different and superior animal – a French-beating animal.”
Of course, we now know that a diet of bully beef is likely to result in hardening of the arteries, whereas the vegetable-centered Mediterranean diet is much better for human health.
Enough said?
Free Speech on Trial
Not so long ago, there was jubilation that the free world and its values had prevailed in the Cold War.
When the Communist empire collapsed, some even announced that the victory of liberty and democracy implied the “end of history.”
But history never bowed out; at most, it only took a decade-long intermission, with its next act heralded by the terrorist attacks in the United States in September 2001.
And here the plot has thickened.
Instead of rejoicing in the liberal order, those of us who have the pleasure of living under it have had to struggle to keep it intact and strong.
Since 9/11, more and more freedoms are being restricted in the name of defending liberty.
New visa requirements and other obstacles to travel, more intimate data collected by governments, and the presence of video cameras everywhere – at once benign and intrusive – remind one more of George Orwell’s Big Brother than of John Stuart Mill’s On Liberty.
Britain is not the only country where ancient rights of habeas corpus, of the inviolability of the person, are to be restricted by new legislation that, for example, extends the permissible length of detention without charge.
Now, even the fundamental right of a liberal order, free speech, is under pressure.
Some restrictions are understandable legacies of the past, but must nevertheless be re-examined.
In Austria, the historian David Irving was arrested recently because he has denied that the Holocaust happened.
In the prison library, however, Irving found two of the books he had written that had led to his arrest!
In Berlin, there is much concern about the possible desecration of the Holocaust Memorial, although its author, the American architect Peter Eisenmann, takes a relaxed view of what is said and done about his creation.
Other restrictions of free speech have more recent triggers.
In the Netherlands, the shock that arose over the killing of the film maker Theo van Gogh runs deep and has led to demands for legislation against hate speech.
In Britain, proposed legislation concerning incitement to religious hatred and terrorism has led to emotional parliamentary debates – and to doubts about the liberal credentials of Tony Blair’s government.
Can such demands for restricting free speech ever be legitimate?
The first and principled answer must surely be no.
All freedoms can be abused by liberty’s enemies, but in the case of speech, the risk posed by restricting freedom is surely greater.
Moreover, the benefits of tolerating free speech outweigh the harm of abusing it.
Indeed, the Nobel laureate economist Amartya Sen has demonstrated that free speech even helps mitigate seemingly natural catastrophes like famines, because it reveals the ways in which a few haves exploit the many have-nots.
As the watchdog organization Transparency International reminds us, corruption exposed is in many cases corruption prevented.
These practical consequences are above and beyond the liberating effect of allowing the “marketplace of ideas,” rather than state authorities, to judge people’s expressed views.
Are there really no exceptions to this rule?
The classic example comes to mind of the man who shouts “Fire!” in a crowded theatre.
In the resulting panic, people may be hurt or even killed.
Nowadays, we worry about incitement ­– using free speech to provoke violence.
I do not know how many Islamic leaders preach murder and mayhem in mosques and help recruit suicide bombers from among their congregants; but even if it is only a handful, they pose a question that must be answered.
That answer must be given carefully.
For free societies to flourish, the boundaries of free speech should always be widened rather than narrowed.
In my view, Holocaust denial should not be outlawed, in contrast to the demand for all, or any, Jews to be killed.
Similarly, attacks against the West in mosques, however vicious, should not be banned, in contrast to open encouragement to join suicide death squads.
What about the mere praise of “martyrs” who have died while murdering others?
The boundary between implicit and explicit incitement is not easily drawn, but, again, it should be wider rather than narrower.
Free speech is immensely precious, and so is the dignity and integrity of humans.
Both require active and alert citizens who engage what they do not like rather than calling for the state to clamp down on it.
Direct incitement to violence is regarded – as it should be ­– as an unacceptable abuse of free speech; but much that is disagreeable about the David Irving’s and the hate preachers does not fall into this category.
Their rants should be rejected with argument, not with police and prisons.
Free Tilly – and all Circus Animals
MELBOURNE – Last month, at the Sea World amusement park in Florida, a whale grabbed a trainer, Dawn Brancheau, pulled her underwater, and thrashed about with her.
By the time rescuers arrived, Brancheau was dead.
The death of the trainer is a tragedy, and one can only have sympathy for her family.
But the incident raises broader questions: was the attack deliberate?
Did the whale, an orca named Tilikum and nicknamed Tilly, act out of stress at being held captive in a sterile concrete tank?
Was he tired of being forced to perform to amuse the crowds?
Is it right to keep such large animals in close confinement?
Tilly had been involved in two previous human deaths.
In one episode, a trainer fell into the pool and Tilly and two other whales drowned him.
In another, a man who appears to have gotten into the enclosure at night, when Sea World was closed, was found dead in the pool with Tilly.
An autopsy showed that he had a bite mark.
One of Tilly’s offspring, sold to an amusement park in Spain, has also killed a trainer, as have orcas in other parks.
Richard Ellis, a marine conservationist at the American Museum of Natural History, believes that orcas are smart and would not do such a thing purely on impulse.
“This was premeditated,” he told The Associated Press.
We will never know exactly what was going on in Tilly’s mind, but we do know that he has been in captivity since he was about two years old – he was captured off the coast of Iceland in 1983.
Orcas are social mammals, and he would have been living with his mother and other relatives in a pod.
It is reasonable to suppose that the sudden separation was traumatic for Tilly.
Moreover, the degree of confinement in an aquarium is extreme, for no tank, no matter how large, can come close to meeting the needs of animals who spend their lives in social groups swimming long distances in the ocean.
Joyce Tischler, of the Animal Legal Defense Fund, described keeping a six-ton orca in Sea World’s tanks as akin to keeping a human in a bathtub for his entire life.
David Phillips, director of the International Marine Mammal Project for the Earth Island Institute, which led the efforts to rehabilitate the orca Keiko – made famous by the movie Free Willy – said “Orcas deserve a better fate than living in cramped pools.”
But if we are pointing the finger at Sea World for what it does to its captive animals, we should also look more broadly at the way we confine performing animals.
In most countries, it is possible to visit zoos and see bored animals pacing back and forth in cages, with nothing to do but wait for the next meal.
Circuses are even worse places for animals.
Their living conditions are deplorable, especially in traveling circuses where cages have to be small so that they can go on the road.
Training animals to perform tricks often involves starvation and cruelty.
Undercover investigations have repeatedly shown animals being beaten and given electric shocks.
Several countries – among them Austria, Costa Rica, Denmark, Finland, India, Israel, and Sweden – ban or severely restrict the use of wild animals in circuses.
In Brazil, a movement to ban wild animals from circuses started after hungry lions managed to grab and devour a small boy.
Several major cities and many local governments around the world do not permit circuses with wild animals.
Last year, Bolivia became the first country to ban all animals, wild or domestic, from circuses.
That decision followed an undercover investigation by Animal Defenders International, which exposed shocking abuse of circus animals.
Now the British government is holding a public online consultation on the use of animals in circuses.
Many hope it will be a first step towards a ban.
Attempts to defend amusement parks and circuses on the grounds that they “educate” people about animals should not be taken seriously.
Such enterprises are part of the commercial entertainment industry.
The most important lesson they teach impressionable young minds is that it is acceptable to keep animals in captivity for human amusement.
That is the opposite of the ethical attitude to animals that we should be seeking to impart to children.
Nor should we be swayed by the argument that circuses provide employment.
The human slave trade also provided employment, but that was no argument for perpetuating it.
In any case, in many countries that have restrictions or bans on circuses with animals, human-only circuses have flourished.
There is no excuse for keeping wild animals in amusement parks or circuses.
Until our governments take action, we should avoid supporting places where captive wild animals perform for our amusement.
If the public will not pay to see them, the businesses that profit from keeping animals captive will not be able to continue.
When our children ask us to take them to the circus, we should find out if the circus uses wild animals.
If it does, we should explain to our children why we will not take them there, and offer to take them to a circus that does not.
Free Trade Ad Nauseam
The first misconception is that exports create jobs, while imports do not – a fallacy that the great trade economist Harry Johnson traced to mercantilism, and which the US has resurrected.
In fact, in a world where parts and components come from everywhere, interference with imports imperils competitiveness.
The success of parcel-delivery companies, for example, depends on imports, which must be brought from the borders inland, as well as on exports.
Second, the credo “Trade, not aid” has given way to the mistaken belief that trade matters less than foreign assistance.
The labor constituency, ever fearful of import competition, has undermined trade policy.
It has also shifted aid policy in directions that assign priority to areas where the returns to US efforts are relatively minuscule.
Thus, the US State Department has ceased being an advocate of multilateral trade liberalization, despite decades of massive gains from the removal of trade barriers.
Instead, its aid arm, the US Agency for International Development, has now retreated into low-yield programs conceived as randomized experiments.
That technique impresses Bill Gates, and the new USAID administrator, Rajiv Shah, has experience with it.
But, even if all such programs succeeded, their benefits would not add up to a fraction of the documented gains that have accrued from trade and other macro-level policies in which the US has lost interest.
Third, many believe that manufactures deserve preferential support.
This is practically the mantra of US President Barack Obama’s administration, and it has cost him the support not only of much of the economics profession, but also of Christina Romer, who chaired his Council of Economic Advisers.
In a recent newspaper commentary, she refuted virtually all of the arguments advanced by manufacturing lobbyists for special treatment.
Add to the critiques that of Nobel laureate Robert Solow, a staunch supporter of Obama’s Democratic Party.
He agrees that there are activities that yield higher social returns than private returns.
The problem, he notes, is that neither he nor anyone else can possibly know which ones they are, whereas the lobbyists claim that they know this precisely.
Proponents of a “manufacturing first” policy argue that “clusters” of businesses are more productive than individual businesses are.
But big clustering effects are hard to find.
The economists Glenn Ellison and Edward Glaeser have found that clustering is only marginally greater than if businesses are allocated randomly.
Besides, it is hard not to accept that, in the economist Frances Cairncross’s famous words, we are increasingly seeing the “death of distance.”
Finally, the financial sector has come to be viewed as the bane of morality.
In a world of financial fraud and insider trading, it is easy enough to believe this, and to accept that the financial sector must be taxed.
But morality cuts across sectors.
There are plenty of honest people in all walks of life, and crooks as well.
The quasi-Marxist view that our morality stems from our economic position overlooks the moralizing role of family, religion, culture, and art.
Given these misconceptions, protectionism has re-emerged as a formidable foe.
In 1999, when the ministerial meeting of the World Trade Organization erupted into bomb threats and mayhem, I asked then-Director-General Mike Moore whether we ought not to be prepared to die for the great cause of free trade.
I should have said: we ought at least to be prepared to live for it.
Between old and new muddle, and the certain prospect that the demolition of each bad idea merely allows others to take root and grow in its place, the task of the free trader is never finished.
Free-Trade Blinders
CAMBRIDGE – I was recently invited by two Harvard colleagues to make a guest appearance in their course on globalization.
“I have to tell you,” one of them warned me beforehand, “this is a pretty pro-globalization crowd.”
In the very first meeting, he had asked the students how many of them preferred free trade to import restrictions; the response was more than 90%.
And this was before the students had been instructed in the wonders of comparative advantage!
We know that when the same question is asked in real surveys with representative samples – not just Harvard students – the outcome is quite different.
In the United States, respondents favor trade restrictions by a two-to-one margin.
But the Harvard students’ response was not entirely surprising.
Highly skilled and better-educated respondents tend to be considerably more pro-free trade than blue-collar workers are.
Perhaps the Harvard students were simply voting with their own (future) wallets in mind.
Or maybe they did not understand how trade really works.
After all, when I met with them, I posed the same question in a different guise, emphasizing the likely distributional effects of trade.
This time, the free-trade consensus evaporated – even more rapidly than I had anticipated.
I began the class by asking students whether they would approve of my carrying out a particular magic experiment.
I picked two volunteers, Nicholas and John, and told them that I was capable of making $200 disappear from Nicholas’s bank account – poof! – while adding $300 to John’s.amp#160; This feat of social engineering would leave the class as a whole better off by $100.
They appeared taken aback.
Let’s assume, I said next, that Nicholas and John own two small firms that compete with each other.
Suppose that John got richer by $300 because he worked harder, saved and invested more, and created better products, driving Nicholas out of business and causing him a loss of $200.
How many of the students now approved of the change?
This time a vast majority did – in fact, everyone except Nicholas approved!
I posed other hypotheticals, now directly related to international trade.
Suppose John had driven Nicholas out of business by importing higher-quality inputs from Germany?
By outsourcing to China, where labor rights are not well protected?
By hiring child workers in Indonesia?
Support for the proposed change dropped with each one of these alternatives.
But what about technological innovation, which, like trade, often leaves some people worse off.
Here, few students would condone blocking technological progress.
Banning the light bulb because candle makers would lose their jobs strikes almost everyone as a silly idea.
So the students were not necessarily against redistribution. They were against certain kinds of redistribution.
Like most of us, they care about procedural fairness.
To pass judgment on redistributive outcomes, we need to know about the circumstances that cause them.
We do not begrudge Bill Gates or Warren Buffett their billions, even if some of their rivals have suffered along the way, presumably because they and their competitors operate according to the same ground rules and face pretty much the same opportunities and obstacles.
We would think differently if Gates and Buffett had enriched themselves not through perspiration and inspiration, but by cheating, breaking labor laws, ravaging the environment, or taking advantage of government subsidies abroad.
If we do not condone redistribution that violates widely shared moral codes at home, why should we accept it just because it involves transactions across political borders?
Similarly, when we expect redistributive effects to even out in the long run, so that everyone eventually comes out ahead, we are more likely to overlook reshufflings of income.
That is a key reason why we believe that technological progress should run its course, despite its short-run destructive effects on some.
When, on the other hand, the forces of trade repeatedly hit the same people – less educated, blue-collar workers – we may feel less sanguine about globalization.