The hard-to-do is preferable to the unacceptable and the unthinkable.
Still, there is little indication so far that the two reform laggards are up to the challenge.
Europe\u0027s Unity in European Values
Alongside the debate about the European Union constitution, a debate about European values has also developed.
This debate is important not only for implanting meaning in the constitution, but will also determine the vitality and energy of the EU itself.
The EU, being the product of several great religious and philosophical traditions, is a community of values.
The ideas of the Greeks and Romans, Christianity, Judaism, humanism, and the Enlightenment have made us who we are.
Dialogue with Islamic and Arabic cultures also helped form our identity.
The pattern of our values has been woven over hundreds of years.
Europe is the continent of Michelangelo and Montesquieu, but also of the guillotine and the gas chamber.
Indeed, the bitter experience WWII taught Europeans how fundamental is the importance of shared values.
In an impoverished, war-ravaged Europe, people yearned for peace, freedom, stability, and a new chance to prosper.
The architects of European integration - Monnet, Schuman, Adenauer, De Gasperi, and others - understood that these ideals could be achieved only by combining and interweaving the practical interests of Europe's countries.
They built their fragile house of peace on a foundation of coal and steel.
The founders passed the torch on to the generation of Jacques Delors, Helmut Kohl, François Mitterrand, Václav Havel, Valéry Giscard d'Estaing, and others. They broadened and deepened European cooperation.
Their leadership made it possible for Europe to make great strides towards its post-war ideals - peace, stability, and prosperity.
We now stand at the threshold of a new phase of European cooperation.
In late October, the EU's Constitutional Treaty will be signed.
A new generation of politicians is ready to carry the torch onwards.
But is the torch still burning bright?
In the early 1950s, Jean Monnet wrote: "We are not forming a coalition of states.
We are uniting people."
Apparently not.
As the Union races ahead, it seems that it has lost Europe's citizens along the way.
Many are turning their backs on the whole project.
They have trouble seeing what is common to Europe.
They do not feel part of the great whole.
Even in the new member states, enthusiasm for the European family of democracies is cooling.
We have achieved a united Europe without uniting Europeans.
Today's post-war generations, lacking direct memory of WWII, view Europe's great achievements - liberty, peace, and prosperity - as a given.
The idea of Europe as a heritage and a mission does not mean much.
But, without ideals, Europe's foundations will erode.
The emphasis on pure self-interest increases this threat.
My generation grew up with the image of Europe as an economic form of cooperation.
Political motives behind European integration were overshadowed by the economic project.
The result is an impression of Europe as a marketplace.
A Europe of markets and money, not of man and morals, dominated the project.
But without a moral foundation, there can be no free-market economy.
Today, we are paying the price for not attending to Europe's shared values and common mission. Until Europeans know precisely what Europe stands for, what inspires and motivates us, the Union will not be able to take joint action in the world.
The EU Constitution will make Europe more democratic and more transparent.
It provides further guarantees that decisions will be taken by those closest to citizens, and it acknowledges the significance the values on which the Union rests: respect for human rights and dignity, liberty, democracy, equality, and the rule of law.
These shared values are the glue that binds governments together in the recognition that clinging to pure self-interest is no longer reasonable when common concerns call for a common strategy.
For what is the point of doing away with Europe's physical borders if borders between its citizens remain?
How can Europeans be happy that the Iron Curtain is gone if individuals and groups across the Union barricade themselves behind private iron curtains?
Indeed, fear, insecurity, and nationalism are again raising their heads.
It is important for Europeans to reflect on that as they prepare for further rounds of enlargement and consider starting accession negotiations with Turkey.
The preamble of the Constitution states that Europe is "united in its diversity."
This may be the most concise statement of what makes Europe Europe.
But the words "united in diversity" raise the question of where this unity lies.
The answer lies in the values on which the Union is based.
They are contained in three concepts: freedom, solidarity, and mutual respect.
These three together make it possible for Europe to open its doors to a great diversity of peoples and at the same time to speak as a community of peoples prepared to take responsibility for one another.
Making such a community a reality will not come about by believing that Europe's culture is better than others.
We will make it a reality through dialogue and deep reflection about Europe's common values.
Values must be the road that leads to what cannot be reached by markets and institutions alone - the accession of Europe's citizens to the European Union.
Only by embracing their shared values can Europeans prevent their Union from becoming a spiritless machine.
Together, Europeans must find what connects them, and derive new enthusiasm, new spirit from what they find - a spirit sorely needed to tackle the great issues of today.
No country can address these issues along.
After more than fifty years, Europe as a community of values remains as necessary as ever.
Europe’s Renminbi Romance
ROME/MADRID – The Chinese are losing confidence in their currency.
Faced with faltering economic growth, the People’s Bank of China has stepped up efforts to restore stability to the renminbi, using its vast foreign reserves to prop up its exchange rate and stem the flow of funds fleeing the country.
The PBOC’s governor, Zhou Xiaochuan, has repeatedly stated that there is no basis for continued depreciation, but few in the country seem to be listening.
In the last quarter of 2015 alone, the net capital outflow amounted to $367 billion.
And yet crumbling confidence within China has not prevented the West – and Europe in particular – from doubling down on the currency.
When the International Monetary Fund announced in December that the renminbi would join the US dollar, the British pound, the euro, and the Japanese yen in the currency basket underlying its unit of account, the Special Drawing Rights basket, the decision was clearly political.
Few would argue that the renminbi meets the IMF’s criteria for inclusion in the SDR currency basket.
It is not freely convertible, and access to it is limited both inside and outside China.
Some foreign branches of Chinese banks offer renminbi-denominated deposit accounts, and qualified investors can purchase debt instruments pegged to the currency in mainland China.
But the volume is capped.
To be sure, the renminbi performs well in trade-related statistics.
According to the financial network SWIFT, it is the second most used currency in trade finance, having overtaken the euro, and ranks fifth in terms of international payments.
These figures are inflated, however, by transactions with Hong Kong, which accounts for roughly 70% of international trade payments settled in renminbi.
Vanishingly few contracts are issued in renminbi; the dollar remains king in invoicing, with the euro a distant second.
Even the shares of the Japanese yen and the British pound, though very small, are still higher than that of the renminbi.
The IMF’s decision to add the Chinese currency to the SDR basket owes much to the decision by the United States to defer to Europe.
The US had argued for years that the renminbi should be included in the SDR only if China opened its capital account, let its currency float freely, and had a more independent central bank.
None of this has happened.
But after China established the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank with the support of Europe, the US agreed to drop its objections.
After all, the SDR basket plays a minor role in global finance, and admitting the renminbi was seen as a small price to pay to keep China embedded in the Bretton Woods institutions.
Europe’s investment in the renminbi, however, goes far beyond political symbolism.
The continent’s leaders have been strong supporters of the internationalization of the renminbi and the efforts of reform-minded officials such as Zhou.
The currency’s inclusion in the SDR, it is hoped, will encourage China to liberalize its capital account further.
European governments and central banks are also actively working to make the renminbi a viable reserve currency, to increase trade with China.
British Chancellor George Osborne has made it clear that he would like the City of London to be the most important offshore market for renminbi trading and services.
It was no coincidence that during President Xi Jinping’s state visit to the United Kingdom in October 2015, China chose London to issue its first overseas renminbi sovereign debt.
The rest of Europe is equally enthusiastic.
Today, the continent is home to the largest number of renminbi bank clearings.
Offshore renminbi hubs have emerged in Frankfurt, Paris, Milan, Luxemburg, Prague, and Zurich, and most of Europe’s central banks have added – or are considering adding – China’s currency to their portfolios.
In October 2013, the PBOC and the European Central Bank signed a bilateral currency swap agreement for €45 billion ($50 billion), the largest ever for China outside of Asia.
By propping up the renminbi as a reserve currency, Europe is hoping to support the liberalizers inside China and welcome the country to the core group of world powers that decide global monetary affairs.
Unfortunately, however, it is doing so at a time when the renminbi is under speculative attack and the Chinese themselves are losing confidence.
Europe’s efforts could succeed; but unless China makes its currency even more widely accessible and opens its market further, they are almost sure to fail.
Europe’s Vicious Spirals
BERKELEY – The euro crisis shows no signs of letting up.
While 2011 was supposed to be the year when European leaders finally got a grip on events, the eurozone’s problems went from bad to worse.
What had been a Greek crisis became a southern European crisis and then a pan-European crisis.
Indeed, by the end of the year, banks and governments had begun making contingency plans for the collapse of the monetary union.
None of this was inevitable.
Rather, it reflected European leaders’ failure to stop a pair of vicious spirals.
The first spiral ran from public debt to the banks and back to public debt.
Doubts about whether governments would be able to service their debts caused borrowing costs to soar and bond prices to plummet.
But, critically, these debt crises undermined confidence in Europe’s banks, which held many of the bonds in question.
Unable to borrow, the banks became unable to lend.
As economies then weakened, the prospects for fiscal consolidation grew dimmer.
Bond prices then fell further, damaging European banks even more.
The European Central Bank has now halted this vicious spiral by providing the banks with guaranteed liquidity for three years against a wide range of collateral.
Reassured that they will have access to funding, the banks again have the confidence to lend.
Cynical observers suggest that the ECB’s real agenda is to encourage the banks to buy the crisis countries’ bonds.
But that would only further weaken the banks’ credit portfolios at a time when European regulators are desperate to strengthen them.
The ECB’s decision to provide the banks with unlimited liquidity does not solve governments’ debt problems, nor is that its intent.
But it at least prevents the debt problem from creating banking problems, which, in turn, worsen the debt problem without end.
Europe’s second vicious spiral runs from fiscal consolidation to slow growth and back to fiscal consolidation.
Tax increases and cuts in public spending are still needed; there is no avoiding this reality.
But these demand-reducing measures also reduce economic growth, causing deficit-reduction targets to be missed.
Getting fiscal consolidation back on track then requires more spending cuts, which depress growth still further, causing budget performance to worsen even more.
At some point, recession and unemployment will provoke a political reaction.
Angry electorates will boot out austerity-minded governments.
And uncertainty about what kind of governments come next will not reassure investors or positively influence growth.
Interrupting this second vicious spiral will require jump-starting growth, which, under current circumstances, is easier said than done.
The external environment is not favorable.
Economic growth in the United States is still weak, and growth in emerging markets seems poised to slow.
So what are Europe’s policymakers to do?
Restarting growth requires a two-handed approach that addresses both supply and demand.
Consider first the supply side.
Research on the European economy has shown that small and medium-size enterprises (SMEs) are engines of employment creation.
But SMEs need credit in order to grow and hire, which underscores the importance of the ECB’s recent steps to restore liquidity to the banking system.
The other supply-side measures will have to be taken by governments.
The Italian parliament, for example, has agreed to remove limits on store-opening hours as a first step toward liberalizing the retail sector.
But taxi drivers and pharmacists have successfully resisted efforts to open their professions and make provision of their services more flexible and efficient.
The need to placate such interest groups is a serious obstacle to jump-starting economic growth, because comprehensive reform is more effective than piecemeal reform.
Getting all of the stakeholders to go along will require compensating losers.
And here Europe’s social model can be an asset rather than a liability.
The losers from reform can be provided generous but temporary unemployment benefits.
They can enroll in government-funded, industry-organized training schemes.
European governments that promise to aid the losers are more likely to retain political support. They will be better able to stay the reformist course.
Likewise, taxi drivers will be more agreeable to the award of additional medallions if demand for their services is buoyant.
Hence the continuing need for demand-side measures, which puts the ball back in the ECB’s court.
Cutting interest rates will not be enough.
Pushing up asset prices and pushing down the euro’s exchange rate will require the ECB to buy bonds on the secondary market – not the crisis countries’ bonds per se, but those of all eurozone members.
In other words, it will require quantitative easing.
Nothing is guaranteed.
But Europe can still escape its vicious spirals if everyone does their part.
Europe’s Vision Deficit
PARIS – In the Western part of Europe – the part that former US Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld maliciously labeled “Old Europe” – almost every government is in deep political trouble. The United Kingdom’s new coalition government may be the exception – for now.
In the European Union’s big member states, the popularity ratings of leaders – Nicolas Sarkozy in France, Silvio Berlusconi in Italy, Angela Merkel in Germany, and José Luís Rodriguez Zapatero in Spain – hover around 25% or worse.
Whether it is conservatives like Sarkozy, Christian Democrats like Merkel, right-wing populists like Berlusconi, or socialists like Zapatero, political affiliation appears to make no difference. If you hold office in Europe nowadays, you are in trouble.
What has gone so wrong?
The economic crisis seems to be the most obvious explanation, but perhaps too obvious.
Two years ago, when shockwaves from the collapse of the US housing bubble crashed onto European shores, these political leaders reacted with apparent vigor, making themselves rather popular for a while.
Paradoxically, the early stages of the financial crisis appeared to favor conservative and pro-market leaders – who seemed to be in a better position to save the economy – more than socialists.
Today, this is no longer the case.
Socialism is on the rise again across Europe, at least in opinion polls. And right-wing populism has become an electoral force to be reckoned with in France, Belgium, and the Netherlands.
Economic stagnation has come to appear endless.
Jobs are scarce, and the future looks bleak everywhere.
The Greek crisis has cast a pall over the entire eurozone.
The common currency is now looked at with suspicion.
On the fringes of public opinion, some people are even muttering suggestions that their countries should revert to their ancient national currencies – which of course would only bring disaster in the form of an even more confusing state of affairs, as EU countries are indebted in euros. To quit the eurozone would only increase their level of indebtedness.
What makes this desolate economic landscape even gloomier is the striking inability of European leaders to explain what has happened and is happening to their citizens.
Indeed, I believe that it is here that the seminal reason for their plunging poll ratings lies.
Europe’s leaders seem to lead nowhere, because they have no vision on which to draw.
Consider the euro: no head of state or government has so far been able to present a coherent defense of the eurozone to counter the pervasive unease that now exists towards the common currency.
Or public spending: all European leaders adamantly want to reduce government spending. But these same leaders, including that supposedly stern mistress of the budget Angela Merkel, were arguing less than two years ago that public spending would provide a “Keynesian” way out of the crisis.
Why such a turnaround?
The European public has discovered that the 2008-2009 fiscal stimulus programs, which were aimed at forestalling an even greater crisis, generated more debts than jobs.
Politicians, however, hate to confess past errors.
Thus, they appear unable to explain their new rationale for the spending cuts that they are now announcing.
Europe’s leaders make things worse when they prove unable to connect isolated “reforms” – say, a lower public deficit – with any comprehensive vision of the economy.
A good example is Sarkozy’s effort to raise France’s retirement age from 60 to 62.
Trade unions are up in arms, which, after all, is their duty.
The population at large just does not understand what links raising the retirement age with the crisis.
The truth that politicians (David Cameron’s UK government excluded, at least for now) are reluctant to admit is that Western Europe’s current morass is distinct from the global US-made downturn.
Old Europe has entered into a severe and intractable crisis of the welfare state as ordinary Europeans have come to know it.
The generous retirement pensions, unemployment compensation, health coverage, and all kinds of social programs that make Western Europe a comfortable place to live were established when Europe’s economy and population were growing fast.
Now, after one generation of economic and demographic stagnation, the welfare state can be financed only by issuing more public debt. Financial markets, awakened by the global crisis, will no longer support today’s Potemkin-like situation, in which welfare benefits have become a façade propped up by deficits.
Political leadership at such a moment demands a Churchillian accent.
It needs to be explained why the euro remains the best protection there is against inflation, the most dangerous social ill of all; why government stimulus will not work and never actually has delivered sustained growth; and why a new equilibrium between welfare and economic dynamism – based on less public debt and more private investment – must be established.
Such a discourse, if clearly articulated, would be understood and could be endorsed by many, if not by all.
At the very least, it would bring a sense of coherence to the actions of politicians, and those opposed to this search for a new European equilibrium – mostly Marxists and populists – would need to compete with a new vision of their own.
Would such an articulate vision make Europe’s leaders more popular?
Maybe, and maybe not, but they would almost certainly appear more legitimate, even in the eye of their adversaries.
Europe’s Vision Free Leadership
LONDON – The selection of Herman van Rompuy as President of the European Union’s Council of Ministers, and of Lady Catherine Ashton as the EU’s foreign policy chief, surely underlines the extent to which member states are in the driver’s seat in the EU.
They manage its institutions in their own interest. The EU is no super-state striding bravely into a bright new dawn.
French President Nicolas Sarkozy will not have to compete for the global limelight with any Brussels supremos.
Germany will not be challenged to break out of its increasing introversion, no longer obliged to demonstrate its democratic post-war credentials by embracing the European cause at every turn.
Britain can rest easy that its world role will remain the aspiring Jeeves of the White House.
The best that could come from the appointment of Europe’s two new low-profile leaders is that it leads to better and more coherent management of the EU’s business.
Van Rompuy will be able to offer a longer view than that of a six-month national presidency. Lady Ashton should be able to tie together the political and resource arms of Europe’s external policies.
But it is not yet clear, whatever the Lisbon Treaty says, that Ashton has full control of either the EU external budget or of appointments to the new diplomatic service.
She has a difficult hand to play, and can expect her elbow to be nudged regularly by EU Commission President José Manuel Barroso, who was the big winner in the carve-up of jobs.
But foreign ministers will be deeply suspicious if they think that the Commission is taking over foreign policy.
Past experience suggests that there are five guidelines to follow if we want a more effective European presence on the world stage whenever foreign and security policy are at the top of the agenda.
First, we should dare to believe that what most suits Europe’s interests might also be best for our relationship with our closest ally, the United States.
We should, for example, want to prevent the militarization of nuclear energy in Iran precisely because of our concern as Europeans, not because we are allies of the US.
Second, our rhetoric about our role as America’s international partners for peace should not stray too far from reality.
True, we tend to align ourselves these days more with Venus than Mars, something for which the rest of the world should be deeply grateful. But we take this a little too far.
It is not just that Europe does not spend enough on hard power, but that what it does spend – about €200 billion – is spent badly.
The EU needs common defense procurement and harmonization to acquire the helicopters, transport aircraft, battlefield communications equipment, and surveillance drones that are necessary for twenty-first-century operations.
For reasons of history, morality, and security, Africa should be regarded as a particular European responsibility.
We should deploy our aid, diplomacy, and peace-keeping capacity to support sustainable development, good governance, and regional collaboration on the continent.
Third, where Europe has a serious internal policy, it is easier to establish a more serious external policy.
The best example of this is energy policy and Russia, which wants a sphere of influence around its borders.
Dealing with Russia has probably been the biggest failure in the attempt to make European foreign policy.
To formulate such a policy requires us to frame a single energy policy.
Lady Ashton will need to be firm in dealing with Russia and with member states who subordinate Europe to the commercial interests of their national energy companies.
Fourth, European external policy is most effective the nearer it is to home.
We are at our best in our own neighborhood – and at our worst, too.
The greatest success of Europe’s external policy has been EU enlargement.
This promoted and consolidated regime change without the use of weapons, thereby stabilizing the European continent.
The job is not complete.
The prospect of EU membership is at the heart of EU policy in the western Balkans, where we are starting to show (for example in Bosnia-Herzegovina) a dangerous disinclination to apply tough conditionality.
We are committed to Ukraine’s “European vocation,” but not to its EU membership.
Spot the difference!
We undertook more than four decades ago to negotiate Turkish membership once that country became fully democratic with an open economy and respect for human rights and the rule of law.
For Europe to turn down Turkey would be tantamount to writing ourselves out of any serious script in global affairs.
We would be rejecting a country that is an important regional power, a significant NATO member, and a crucial energy hub.
We would stand accused of burning, rather than building, bridges to the Islamic world.
Unfortunately, van Rompuy, an author and poet, has spoken out against Turkish membership in far cruder terms than one would expect from a gentle haiku writer.
My final guideline for policy is that Europe is not and will not become a superpower or super-state.
Unlike the US, we do not matter everywhere.
We do not require a policy on every problem and every place.
But where the problem affects much else, and where the region is close to home, we should have a policy that consists of more than waiting to agree with whatever America decides that its policy should be, as, for example, in the Middle East.
The present “no war-no peace” lull in the Middle East is not sustainable; nor is a one-state solution either possible or desirable.
So what can we do to nudge things forward in a region where America is again engaged but not respected, and where Europe is neither?
At the very least, we could set out our own policy, beginning with an effort to end the fragmentation of Palestine and Palestinians between the West Bank, Gaza, and East Jerusalem.
Does it matter if Europe is not on the same page as the US?
Frankly, no.
Two weeks ago, when Obama had to choose between a meeting of ASEAN or the celebrations in Berlin marking the 20th anniversary of the fall of the Wall, he chose to go to Asia.
Will Europe do enough to change his mind the next time there is such a choice?
As things stand, we are in danger of making Europe politically irrelevant, a successful customs union with a Swissified foreign policy and a group of fractious, vision-free leaders.
Europe’s Vital French Connection
PARIS – In the debates raging over the future of the European Union and the eurozone, Germany always takes center stage.
It has the largest economy, accounting for 28% of eurozone GDP and 25% of the eurozone’s population.
It is running a current-account surplus that is now larger than China’s – indeed, the largest in the world in absolute value.
And, while weighted majorities can overrule it on some issues, everyone acknowledges that little can be done in the eurozone unless Germany agrees.
But the emphasis on Germany, though justified, should not lead to an underestimation of France’s critical role.
France not only accounts for roughly 22% of eurozone GDP and 20% of its population – behind only Germany – but also has the healthiest demography in the eurozone, whereas the German population is projected to decline over the next decade.
At the same time, France’s critical role reflects more than its size.
Indeed, in terms of influencing outcomes in Europe, France is as important as Germany, for three reasons.
First, France is an indispensable link between southern and northern Europe at a time of growing economic and financial division between creditors and debtors (a fissure that has begun to assume a cultural dimension).
An active France can play a bridging role, leveraging its strong relationship with Germany (a friendship that is a pillar of the EU) and its proximity and cultural affinities to the Mediterranean.
France is “southern” in its current-account deficit, but “northern” in its borrowing costs (slightly above Germany’s), owing partly to inflows of capital fleeing the south, as well as to modest but positive economic growth.
Moreover, there is no perceived “re-denomination” risk affecting French assets, given markets’ confidence that France will retain the euro.
So, while France faces huge economic challenges, its northern and southern features permit it to play a proactive role in the European project’s survival.
French President François Hollande has already given a rather successful preview of this role, meeting German Chancellor Angela Merkel in Berlin on his first day in office, and, a month later, participating in a high-profile meeting with the Italian and Spanish prime ministers in Rome.
Indeed, he took the lead in adding a “growth pact” to the “stability pact” that had been negotiated under Merkel’s leadership.
Second, France, under its new center-left government, must demonstrate that the “European model” of a market economy coupled with strong social solidarity can be reformed and strengthened, rather than abandoned – not just in Europe’s more pragmatic north, but also in its more ideological south.
French Socialists will not renounce their traditional commitments; nor should they.
But they now have the opportunity to contribute to the European model’s renewal.
Under Hollande, France’s Socialists favor achieving that renewal through a process of social dialogue that convinces rather than imposes, that focuses both on revenue measures and on boosting government efficiency, and that may adopt some of northern Europe’s more successful “flexicurity” policies, which combine greater labor-market flexibility with strong social protection.
The reforms should also introduce much greater individual choice, permitting solutions to retirement, education, health, and lifestyle issues that can be more easily tailored to citizens’ specific circumstances and needs.
The government of Hollande and Prime Minister Jean-Marc Ayrault has strong majorities at all executive and legislative levels, giving it a rare opportunity to act.
If it can renew the European model at home, it will be able to project that success much more widely, particularly in southern Europe, in turn reinforcing confidence and belief in the EU, particularly among the young generation.
The French center-left must lead in conceiving a vision for Europe in which solidarity and equity reinforce long-term economic strength.
Finally, along with the United Kingdom among European countries, France retains more of a global role than Germany has yet acquired.
While the United Nations Security Council is outdated in its structure, it still plays a crucial legitimizing role; and France, not Germany, is a member.
In many other international organizations as well, France punches above its weight.
Similarly, while France exports much less than Germany outside the EU, many large French enterprises rival Germany’s in global reach and technical know-how.
And French is still a global language.
In other words, France not only is a link between Europe’s north and south, but also contributes substantially to linking Europe to the rest of the world.
Europe needs a renewed vision and effective policies to realize that vision.
France’s Socialist-Green government can play a critical unifying role as Europeans confront their biggest challenge in decades.
Its success will be highly consequential – not least for the political debate that will inform the outcome of Germany’s elections in 2013.
Europe’s Winners and Losers
BERLIN –&nbsp;Rarely is a high-flying country brought back down to earth in a single night, but that is precisely what happened to Germany recently.
In both football (soccer) and politics, the country had come to embody an unseemly mixture of arrogance and denial.
It thought itself the measure of all things European, in terms of both the European championship and the European Union. In both cases, it was deceiving itself.
The same night that Germany was thrashed by the Italians in the championship’s semi-finals, German Chancellor Angela Merkel ran up against the limits of her own powers at the eurozone leaders’ summit in Brussels.
Germany’s political course since the beginning of the euro crisis two years ago had left it isolated, and she was no match for an alliance of Italy, Spain, and France.
Indeed, she had no choice but to concede and agree to far-reaching changes to the EU’s new fiscal compact that will ease refinancing of the crisis countries and their banks.
The German dogma of “no payments without counter-performance and control” was thus off the table, and the bargain struck in the early hours of the morning was exactly the opposite of what she had wanted.
The fiscal compact had been reduced to a shambles even before Germany’s parliament, the Bundestag, approved it later that day.
In terms of addressing the eurozone financial crisis, however, the agreement reached in Brussels was anything but a breakthrough, because it never transcended the logic of narrow crisis management.
It offers no strategy for overcoming the crisis in the south of Europe, which means that the threat to the eurozone has not been removed.
Politically, however, the agreement amounts to a small revolution, because it has shifted the balance of power within the eurozone: Germany is strong, but not strong enough to get away with isolating itself completely from Europe’s other major players.
Decisions that go against Germany are possible.
There was patent gloating about the German defeat everywhere, only thinly disguised behind strained expressions of solidarity.
The full extent of the political damage that Germany’s bailout policy for the eurozone, with its austerity, mass unemployment, and economic depression, has caused in southern Europe remains to be seen.
If Merkel had wanted the agreement reached in Brussels, the outcome would have marked the beginning of a fundamental revision of the eurozone’s crisis policy – and thus an expression of successful statesmanship.
Instead, it is a full-blown defeat for Germany, linked to its firm denial that German policy has sharply reduced the country’s influence in the EU.
Yet it clearly has: German influence within the European Central Bank has declined significantly; the German finance minister will not become head of the Eurogroup; and now we have the Brussels disaster!
But Germany’s defeat, however widely celebrated, holds much cause for concern.
First, not everything that Germany is arguing is wrong: the urgent need for medium-term fiscal consolidation and structural reforms to increase the crisis countries’ competitiveness will not go away.
Equally important, however, is the reduction of economic imbalances and European policy coordination to enable growth.
Second, political paranoia is rising on the German right: everybody supposedly just wants Germany’s money; our Anglo-Saxon partners' real aim is to weaken us; and the financial markets will not rest until Germany has invested all of its wealth and has thus endangered its economic success.
Germany is being “betrayed to foreigners” by the opposition, and “good” productive capital is once again being opposed to “bad” speculative capital.
In the opinion pages of some German newspapers, anti-capitalism is returning in a new form, which entails nothing less than a renunciation of Europe and even of the West.
Of course, while the German right threatens to become more nationalistic, history will not repeat itself, because today’s Germany has changed, and so has its political environment.
Still, an increasingly Euro-skeptic Germany in the heart of the EU could, given its great economic clout, seriously endanger the European integration process.
And, while that would jeopardize Germany’s own interests, practical political action is not always rational, particularly in times of serious crisis.
The same, incidentally, applies to France, except that the French, unlike the Germans, find it difficult to transfer political sovereignty, whereas for us Germans, it is all about the money.
Both of these mental/political blocks are threatening the European project in equal measure.
Indeed, if the result of the recent summit means that France and Germany will henceforth each forge alliances against the other, while hiding behind verbal expressions of solidarity, we might just as well forget about Europe.
Without a functioning Franco-German axis, the European project cannot succeed.
Both sides will have to decide whether or not they want Europe –&nbsp;that is, full economic and political integration.
Economically, they must choose either joint liability and a transfer union or monetary re-nationalization.
Politically, the choice is whether to empower a common government and parliament or return to full sovereignty.
What we know for certain is that, just as one cannot be a little pregnant, the existing hybrid is not sustainable.
Last November, Volker Kauder, the majority leader in the Bundestag, bragged that “suddenly Europe is speaking German.”
He was wrong.
Just as Spain (not Germany) remains the benchmark in European football, so Europe speaks broken English at best.
From the standpoint of safeguarding the European project, that is all for the better.
Europe’s New Year’s Irresolution
BERLIN – Will the eurozone crisis end in 2013, or will it drag on throughout the year, and perhaps even deteriorate anew?
This is likely to be not only the crucial question for the European Union’s further development, but also a key issue affecting the performance of the global economy.
While the EU clearly needs internal reforms, two external political factors are central to its prospects this year.
The first is America’s self-imposed fiscal cliff, which, if not avoided, could throw the United States into recession, with massive repercussions for the world economy, and thus for Europe.
Second, a hot war in the Persian Gulf, in which Israel and/or the US confronts Iran over its nuclear program, would result in a sharp rise in global energy prices.
Either scenario would greatly aggravate Europe’s crisis: soaring oil costs or another US recession would harm even the strong northern European economies, to say nothing of the already-depressed countries in Europe’s south.
But these developments have not come about as part of a strategy.
Had there been no crisis, German Chancellor Angela Merkel and other national leaders in the EU would never have been prepared to take these steps.
And this is not likely to change in 2013.
Even today, with the eurozone’s essential players apparently convinced that they are out of the woods, national narrow-mindedness is experiencing a revival in the EU, and the desire for change seems to be slackening.
In particular, Merkel wants to be re-elected in 2013, and appears content to leave Europe for later.
Unfortunately, with the election set for September, that means that three-quarters of the year will be wasted.
And, because another Merkel-led coalition seems to be more likely (at least from today’s vantage point) than a real change in government, post-election Germany, absent renewed pressure from the crisis, will remain wedded to the politics of small or tiny steps, leaving Europe treading water.
As a result, developments in southern European will remain a key factor determining Europe’s course in 2013.
The depression will continue, dimming prospects for economic growth throughout the EU and the eurozone.
The gap between the rich north and the crisis-ridden south will widen, highlighting their contradictory interests and thus exacerbating Europe’s tendency toward separation, primarily between the north and the south, but also between the eurozone and the rest of the EU.
The European Central Bank will serve as the eurozone’s center of power even more than it does today, because it is the monetary union’s only institution that can actually act.
Though the ECB has absolutely nothing in common with the old Deutsche Bundesbank, the German public has not recognized this.
But the fact that the ECB’s power is only a technocratic substitute for the eurozone’s missing democratic political institutions will remain a growing problem in 2013.
This is also true, more generally, of German dominance of the EU.
Should it continue without new institutional regulations that mutualize its role within the eurozone, 2013 will be a year of further disintegration.
It will also be a year of destiny for France, whose government is keenly aware that, without painful reforms, the country might be doomed; the only question that remains is whether it can implement them.
The answer will determine not only President François Hollande’s political future, but also the future of the EU, because, without a strong German-French tandem, Europe’s crisis cannot be overcome.
Meanwhile, Europe’s negative political trends are reinforced by uncertainty in Britain about whether to remain in the EU, Italy’s upcoming general election, and aggressive nationalism in many member states.
Given this, Europe’s condition is quite obviously far from being stabilized, despite some leading Europeans’ recent statements suggesting otherwise.
Europe in 2013 will continue to need the pressure from the crisis in order to find a way to overcome it once and for all.
Regardless of electoral outcomes in important EU member states, Europeans will remain unable to expect much from their political leaders, because opposition forces generally have little more to offer than the incumbents do.
We should wish Europe a successful year, but it would be foolish to bet on it.
Europe’s Year of Indecision
NEW YORK – The dire economic situation in which most of the rich world found itself in 2011 was not merely the result of impersonal economic forces, but was largely created by the policies pursued, or not pursued, by world leaders.
Indeed, the remarkable unanimity that prevailed in the first phase of the financial crisis that began in 2008, and which culminated in the $1 trillion rescue package put together for the London G-20 meeting in April 2009, dissipated long ago. Now, bureaucratic infighting and misconceptions are rampant.
Worse still, policy disagreements are playing out more or less along national lines.
The center of fiscal conservatism is Germany, while Anglo-Saxon countries are still drawn to John Maynard Keynes.
This division is complicating matters enormously, because close international cooperation is needed to correct the global imbalances that remain at the root of the crisis.
Doubts about sovereign debt in Europe have revolved around the euro to such an extent that some now question whether the single currency can survive.
But the euro was an incomplete currency from the outset.
The Maastricht Treaty established a monetary union without a political union – a common central bank, but no common treasury.
Its architects were aware of this deficiency, but other flaws in their design became apparent only after the crash of 2008.
The euro was built on the assumption that markets correct their own excesses, and that imbalances arise only in the public sector.
As it happened, some of the largest imbalances that fueled the current crisis arose in the private sector – and the euro’s introduction was indirectly responsible.
In particular, sovereign debt in the eurozone was deemed riskless: banks had only to hold minimal reserves against member countries’ bonds, which the European Central Bank accepted on equal terms at its discount window.
Member countries could borrow at practically the same interest rate as Germany, and banks were happy to earn a few extra pennies by loading up their balance sheets with the government debt of the eurozone’s weaker economies.
For example, European banks hold more than a €1 trillion ($1.3 trillion) of Spanish debt, with German and French banks holding more than half of that sum.
Instead of the convergence prescribed by the Maastricht Treaty, the radical narrowing of interest-rate differentials generated divergences in economic performance.
Countries like Spain, Greece, and Ireland developed real-estate bubbles, grew faster, and developed trade deficits with the rest of the eurozone, while Germany – weighed down by the costs of reunification – reined in its labor costs, became more competitive and developed a chronic trade surplus.
The convergence of interest rates was broken when a newly elected government in Greece revealed that the deficit incurred by the previous government was much larger than had been reported.
European authorities were slow to react, because member countries held radically different views.
Germany, traumatized by runaway inflation in the 1920’s, and its dreadful political consequences, adamantly opposed any bailout.
Moreover, it was heading into an election cycle, which increased the rigidity of its position.
With German leaders insisting on charging penalty rates for providing assistance, the crisis festered – and the rescue costs continued to grow.
Indeed, as eurozone members’ inability to print their own money effectively relegated them to the status of less-developed countries that must borrow in a foreign currency, risk premiums widened accordingly.
The authorities, seeing no solution, kicked the can down the road – an approach that usually works, because problems become easier to solve when markets calm down.
But, in this case, the crisis kept growing bigger, and the authorities ran out of road when Germany’s Constitutional Court&nbsp;ruled out additional guarantees beyond the European Financial Stability Facility (EFSF) without the consent of the Bundestag.
At the European Union’s December 9 summit in Brussels, the eurozone countries agreed to establish a closer fiscal union.
But, by the time this decision was taken, it was no longer sufficient to bring the financial crisis under control.
The measures introduced by the ECB went a long way toward relieving banks’ liquidity problems, but nothing was done to reduce the large risk premiums on government bonds.
Because the premiums are intimately interconnected with the banks’ capital deficiencies, half a solution is not good enough.
Unless the sovereign debt of the rest of the eurozone is successively ring-fenced, a Greek default could cause a meltdown of the global financial system.
Even barring such a nightmare scenario in 2012, the summit sowed the seeds of future conflicts – over the emergence of a “two-speed” Europe and the false economic doctrine guiding the eurozone’s proposed fiscal pact.
That doctrine, by imposing austerity in a period of rising unemployment, threatens to push the eurozone into a vicious deflationary debt spiral from which it will be difficult to escape.
Europe on the Sidelines
MUNICH – The liberal international order that has helped stabilize the world since the end of the Cold War is under strain.
A revanchist Russia, chaos in the Middle East, and simmering tensions in the South China Sea are all symptoms of a system that is beginning to fray.
The drivers of instability are many.
They include a shift in economic power from the West to the East, the weakening of formal institutions, and widespread disaffection in Western democracies.
But, above all, two key developments that have been eroding the liberal international order: the United States’ withdrawal from global leadership and Europe’s prolonged crisis.
Recently, there have been signs that the US is beginning to reassert itself.
After six years of “leading from behind” and drawing meaningless red lines, US President Barack Obama has started to seek out innovative, flexible arrangements – diplomatic and military – to respond to global threats.
In 2015, the Obama administration was instrumental in bringing about the Paris climate agreement and a deal to rein in Iran’s nuclear program.
And, last week, US Defense Secretary Ashton Carter unveiled a proposed military budget for 2017 that signaled plans for a muscular global stance.
The request included funding for naval operations in Asia, a restocking of the military arsenal depleted in the fight against the Islamic State, and a commitment to technological innovation.
The proposal’s centerpiece, however, was the quadrupling of US spending in Europe to “support our NATO allies in the face of Russia’s aggression.”
Many in Europe might regard Carter’s announcement as cause for relief.
After years of handwringing over Obama’s strategic “pivot” to Asia, even as Russia was stirring up trouble in Ukraine, Europe is once again a strategic focus for the US.
But the deeper message is far less encouraging.
The US is acting because its European partners have not.
This divergence is troubling.
American engagement is necessary to provide momentum, but it is Europe’s weight that has served as the critical mass required to move the world’s liberal order in a positive direction.
From the perspective of the European Union, the latest US security bailout raises the possibility that after more than two decades of growing prominence, Europe will lose its agenda-setting power.
In 2011, after NATO’s operation in Libya, which fully revealed the limits of Europe’s military capacity, then-US Defense Secretary Robert Gates visited Brussels.
His message was stark: “If current trends in the decline of European defense capabilities are not halted and reversed, future US political leaders – those for whom the Cold War was not the formative experience that it was for me – may not consider the return on America’s investment in NATO worth the cost.”
In the years since, Russia has annexed Crimea and destabilized eastern Ukraine.
Instability in the Middle East has sparked a large-scale migration crisis.
Terrorism has reemerged as an important threat.
And yet, for all the talk of streamlining and strengthening Europe’s defense capabilities, little of significance has been accomplished.
America’s change in calculus is not the result of Europe getting its act together; it reflects the recognition that the threat posed by Russia cannot be left unchecked.
This point was driven home by a recent report by the Rand Corporation showing how vulnerable NATO’s Baltic partners – Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania – would be to a Russian assault.
As persistently low energy prices put the Kremlin under increasing pressure, there is a growing risk that Russian President Vladimir Putin could fan the flames of nationalism by lashing out once again.
On its surface, America’s decision to confront Russia recalls previous occasions when Europe proved unable to respond to challenges in its neighborhood – most memorably in Bosnia in the 1990s.
But the current situation is more dangerous still; it is reminiscent of the Cold War, when Europe was an object and not an actor in geopolitics.
The continent risks once again becoming the chessboard on which the US and the Kremlin play for advantage.
In 2001, the US accounted for one-fifth of the world’s economic output.
Today, it accounts for less than one sixth of the global total.
No matter how committed and innovative American leadership remains, the US by itself can no longer guarantee the liberal international order.
It needs allies in the effort, and the EU, still the world’s largest economy despite years of stagnation, would make a perfect candidate – if only it would pull itself together.
During the twentieth century, Europe was America’s partner of first resort.
Now, when it is needed once again, the EU is slipping toward the sidelines.
Unless its leaders change course, the painful unraveling of the liberal world order will continue.
The Government the Eurozone Deserves
ATHENS – Will Greece’s troubles destroy Europe’s currency union, or reveal how it should be saved?
The recent controversial bailout deal – likened by some to the 1919 Versailles Treaty, with Greece in the role of Germany – offers the latest twist in the eurozone’s existential saga.
The deal has caused a split in Syriza, Greece’s leftist governing party; opened a rift between Germany’s Chancellor Angela Merkel and her uncompromisingly tough finance minister, Wolfgang Schäuble; and spurred an effort by France to reassert itself within the Franco-German axis that has always been the “motor” of European integration.
Meanwhile, many of North America’s Keynesian economists, such as Nobel laureates Paul Krugman and Joseph Stiglitz, sympathize with Greece’s anti-austerity stance.
Other economists, mainly in Europe, argue that Germany must assume a political role befitting its economic preeminence and must accept sovereignty-sharing (and burden-sharing) arrangements to ensure the monetary union’s cohesion and sustainability.
Humiliating a small country and rendering it a virtual protectorate does not serve Europe’s long-term interest.
Yet this is what is at stake.
Greece signed the deal after facing an explicit invitation from Schäuble to leave the eurozone – supposedly temporarily – and adopt a new currency.
Germany’s stance marked the first open challenge by a leading European power to the notion that the monetary union is irrevocable.
As the French, instinctively sympathetic to the anti-austerity argument and conscious of their increasingly junior role in the Franco-German partnership, were quick to notice, the German stance also signaled a potential shift from a “European Germany” to a “German Europe.”
It hardly helped that the negotiations between Greece and its creditors produced a growing mistrust in the competence and intentions of Syriza.
Devious and erratic negotiating tactics, coupled with secret schemes to prepare – as part of a “Plan B” – for an exit from the euro, undermined the government’s trustworthiness, leading even Paul Krugman to admit: “I may have overestimated the competence of the Greek government.”
Yet, however complicated the blame game, some lessons can be drawn to guide future policy.
When fiscal misbehavior by Greece, a country representing no more than 2% of the eurozone’s GDP, poses serious dangers for the survival of the currency union, something is clearly amiss.
But does the remedy lie in tougher measures – such as heavier penalties or even eviction – to enforce the eurozone’s rules, or do the rules need to be adjusted to accommodate members’ varying circumstances?
So far, enforcement has failed, owing to flaws in the eurozone’s foundations.
First, fiscal and external-account balances are to be kept in check in order to ensure financial stability and sustain the common currency.
Second, removing imbalances is the responsibility of national governments within the context of a rescue regime arranged by supranational authorities – the European Commission and the European Central Bank – in cooperation with the European Council, which in turn represents national governments.
The Greek saga shows that this system cannot control destabilizing imbalances quickly enough to ward off major crises.
Imbalances are not solely the result of irresponsible policies.
They may reflect deeper weaknesses in economic structures, such as a lack of competitiveness or institutional shortcomings.
If Germany insists on national responsibility, it may find that enforcing the rules will have to be ever harsher, eventually leading to such social and political upheaval that the entire euro-edifice collapses.
The alternative is to embrace a “transfer union” that ensures a better balance between solidarity and responsibility.
The United States embodies such a solution, ensuring an integrated pattern of development throughout the country.
The eurozone must strengthen its fiscal structures enough to respond to overall economic conditions while taking into account the differing circumstances of each member country.
These stronger structures should permit limited resource transfers among eurozone countries, either to carry out countercyclical policy or to supplement investment spending, particularly in economic and social infrastructure.
But this must inevitably involve the creation of a separate eurozone budget, transferring competences from national to supranational authorities.
Common taxation and Eurobonds should form part of the new fiscal structure, and the European Stability Mechanism should include a debt redemption fund large enough to resolve sovereign-debt crises.
At the same time, the banking union, established by the EU in the wake of the 2007-2008 global financial crisis, should be strengthened by enlarging the capital base of the Single Resolution Fund and establishing a common deposit guarantee scheme.
All of this presupposes that the powers of the EU’s supranational institutions, the European Parliament and the European Commission, will be significantly augmented.
The Commission should become a proper government, with a popularly elected president.
A European finance ministry should be created, and its head should preside over the Eurogroup (which convenes the finance ministers of eurozone member states).
A special Assembly of the European Parliament, comprising the eurozone members, should have powers – on the model of a national parliament – to legislate and control the executive.
These proposals will provoke plenty of criticism – and not just from Euroskeptics.
But a move toward fiscal and political integration is the price that Europe – beginning with the eurozone – must pay to maintain its unity and global relevance.
The alternative is inconsistent (if not arbitrary) enforcement of the current rules, inducing divisiveness among member states and eventual fragmentation.
Europe’s Brush with Debt
MUNICH – French Prime Minister Manuel Valls and his Italian counterpart, Matteo Renzi, have declared – or at least insinuated – that they will not comply with the fiscal compact to which all of the eurozone’s member countries agreed in 2012; instead, they intend to run up fresh debts.
Their stance highlights a fundamental flaw in the structure of the European Monetary Union – one that Europe’s leaders must recognize and address before it is too late.
The fiscal compact – formally the Treaty on Stability, Coordination, and Governance in the Economic and Monetary Union – was the quid pro quo for Germany to approve the European Stability Mechanism (ESM), which was essentially a collective bailout package.
The compact sets a strict ceiling for a country’s structural budget deficit and stipulates that public-debt ratios in excess of 60% of GDP must be reduced yearly by one-twentieth of the difference between the current ratio and the target.
Yet France’s debt/GDP ratio will rise to 96% by the end of this year, from 91% in 2012, while Italy’s will reach 135%, up from 127% in 2012.
The effective renunciation of the fiscal compact by Valls and Renzi suggests that these ratios will rise even further in the coming years.
In this context, eurozone leaders must ask themselves tough questions about the sustainability of the current system for managing debt in the EMU.
They should begin by considering the two possible models for ensuring stability and debt sustainability in a monetary union: the mutualization model and the liability model.
Europe has so far stuck to the mutualization model, in which individual states’ debts are underwritten by a common central bank or fiscal bailout system, ensuring security for investors and largely eliminating interest-rate spreads among countries, regardless of their level of indebtedness.
In order to prevent the artificial reduction of interest rates from encouraging countries to borrow excessively, political debt brakes are instituted.
In the eurozone, mutualization was realized through generous ESM bailouts and some €1 trillion ($1.27 trillion) worth of TARGET2 credit from national printing presses for the crisis-stricken countries.
Moreover, the European Central Bank pledged to protect these countries from default free of charge through its “outright monetary transactions” (OMT) scheme – that is, by promising to purchase their sovereign debt on secondary markets – which functions roughly as Eurobonds would.
The supposed hardening of the debt ceiling in 2012 adhered to this model.
The alternative – the liability model – requires that each state take responsibility for its own debts, with its creditors bearing the costs of a default.
Faced with that risk, creditors demand higher interest rates from the outset or refuse to grant additional credit, thereby imposing a measure of discipline on debtors.
The best example of the liability model is the United States.
When US states like California, Illinois, or Minnesota get into fiscal trouble, no one expects the other states or the federal government to bail them out, let alone that the Federal Reserve will guarantee or purchase their bonds.
Indeed, the Fed, unlike the ECB, does not buy any bonds from individual states; investors must bear the costs of any state insolvency.
In 1975, New York had to pledge its future tax revenues to its creditors in order to remain solvent.
Of course, the US was not always so strict.
Shortly after its founding, it tried debt mutualization, with Alexander Hamilton, America’s first Treasury secretary, describing the scheme in 1791 as the “cement” for a new American federation.
But, as it turned out, the mutualization model – used again in 1813 during the second war against the British – fueled a credit bubble, which collapsed in 1837 and thrust nine of the 29 US states and territories into bankruptcy.
The unresolved debt problem exacerbated tensions over the slavery issue, which triggered the Civil War in 1861.
In this sense, as the historian Harold James has noted, mutualization turned out to be dynamite, not cement, for the new US federation.
Only after the Civil War did the US decide to operate the federation according to the liability model – an approach that has underpinned stability and limited individual states’ debt levels ever since.
For Europe’s leaders, the withdrawal by France and Italy from the fiscal compact should serve as a clear sign that the mutualization model is not working for the eurozone, either.
Following the Fed’s example, the ECB should abolish its OMT program – which, according to Germany’s Constitutional Court, does not comply with EU treaty law anyway.
Furthermore, the ECB should reintroduce the requirement that TARGET2 debts be repaid with gold, as occurred in the US before 1975 to settle balances among the districts of the Federal Reserve System.
Perhaps even the fiscal compact itself should be reconsidered.
Such measures would serve notice to investors that they cannot hope to be saved by the printing press in times of crisis, and would thus compel them to demand higher interest rates or deter them from granting credit in the first place.
This would lead to greater discipline among the eurozone’s indebted countries and save Europe from a debt avalanche that could ultimately drive currently solvent states into bankruptcy and destroy the European integration project.
Emerging Europe’s Deleveraging Dilemma
LONDON – Serbia’s Tigar Corporation, a privatized automobile tire and tube maker, was a poster child for corporate makeovers in transition economies.
Then eurozone deleveraging kicked in, and now the child in the poster is in serious trouble.
When Tigar sold its tire division to France’s Michelin, it invested the entire proceeds in new businesses.
Perhaps capital expenditures were overly ambitious, but they triggered rapid export growth, and more than 2,000 jobs were created in the small town of Pirot to manufacture boots for European fishermen and New York City firemen, as well as technical rubber products.
Expansion was, for lack of other options, financed largely through short-term loans.
Many banks in Serbia and other transition countries in Europe rely heavily on funding from their eurozone parent institutions.
But, since the onset of the global financial crisis, eurozone-based banks’ subsidiaries in emerging Europe have been reducing their exposure to the region.
In 2009-2010, the European Bank Coordination Initiative – known informally as the “Vienna Initiative” – helped to avert a systemic crisis in developing Europe by stopping foreign-owned parent banks from staging a catastrophic stampede to the exits.
But, in the second half of 2011, the eurozone-based parent banks that dominate emerging Europe’s banking sector came under renewed pressure to deleverage.
Many are now radically changing their business models to reduce risk.
Over the last year, funding corresponding to 4% of the region’s GDP – and, in some countries, as much as 15% of GDP – has been withdrawn.
Bank subsidiaries will increasingly have to finance local lending with local deposits and other local funding.
Without disputing the need for some deleveraging, a new incarnation of the Vienna Initiative – Vienna 2.0 – seeks to make the process orderly.
After all, excessive and chaotic deleveraging by lenders to emerging Europe – and the ensuing credit crunch – would destabilize this economically and institutionally fragile region.
For Tigar, deleveraging has meant that banks that had pursued its business only a couple of years ago have suddenly cut lending – even though the company never missed a debt payment.
Previous loans came due, while cash-flow needs grew.
Despite its good operating margins, growing markets, and prime international clients, the company experienced a drop in liquidity, requiring serious balance-sheet restructuring.
Tigar will make it; but many promising companies that lack its solid financial footing will not.
Of course, after several years of unfettered credit expansion, some retrenchment was necessary and desirable, and Tigar probably overextended itself.
But several factors – most of them unrelated to the region – are pressuring banks to pursue faster-than-optimal deleveraging.
For starters, the Basel III package of global banking reforms and the European Union’s corresponding Capital Requirements Directive IV rule create disincentives for cross-border financing.
To be sure, they will help to prevent banks from using instruments resembling collateralized debt obligations (which banks use to repackage individual loans for placement on secondary markets) to reduce their exposure.
But the new regulation also seriously penalizes subsidiary financing in new EU member and accession countries.
Indeed, in many countries, bank guarantees can be issued only on the basis of local subsidiary equity, without support from the parent’s balance sheet.
Furthermore, collateral – especially real-estate assets – will continue to be downgraded.
Poor 2012 corporate financial results will further undermine credit ratings.
Fewer and fewer companies will meet basic risk criteria.
While governments might offer attractive liquidity facilities, banks will be unable to on-lend the funds.