For example, there are still too many barriers to agricultural trade between the North and the South.
And guess which country leads the opposition to any significant opening up of European agriculture.
Step forward, France, and take a bow.
Second, however slow we have been in opening up a real Mediterranean market, the barriers to freer trade between Arab League countries are just as great.
Third, it was excellent that in Paris Sarkozy began the process of bringing Syria in out of the diplomatic cold.
We must also hope that his attempts to act as a peace-broker between West Bank Palestinians and Israel are blessed with success.
But the truth is that Europe, for all the gallant efforts of Javier Solana, has been absent from serious politics in the Middle East.
We have not dared to cross America.
A largely non-existent European policy toward the region has been dictated by the absentee monopolists of policy in Washington.
Europe should get more seriously involved, even at the risk of occasionally irritating America, which may be less likely to happen once the Bush administration is history.
For a start, we should recognize that there will be no political settlement in Palestine without including Hamas.
What would incredibly have been former British Prime Minister Tony Blair’s first visit to Gaza in his first year of peace-making had to be canceled recently because of security concerns.
Enough said.
Finally, Europe has to decide how serious it is about all the admirable stuff in the Barcelona Process on pluralism, civil society, the rule of law, and democracy.
Is Europe serious that a shared concept of human rights should be one of the foundations of our Mediterranean partnership?
If so, what are we in Europe proposing to do about it?
If this is just blah-blah, better not say it.
We discredit ourselves and important principles when we say things that we do not mean.
Two Cheers for the Rhineland Model
Not so long ago, Germans and other Continental Europeans pointed to America's "working poor," as well as to the sorry state of public services in Britain, as defects that supposedly reflected the inevitable price Anglo-Saxon countries must pay for their ruthless form of capitalism.
Europeans (Germans in particular), on the other hand, enjoyed the "Rhineland model": a market economy that harnesses economic success to the cause of social justice.
So when Chancellor Gerhard Schröder, early in his first term, signed the so-called Blair-Schröder paper, which pledged agreement with British Prime Minister Tony Blair on liberalizing reforms, he made certain that it was published in London and played down in Berlin.
Similarly, the European Union's Lisbon agenda of economic liberalization was never really taken seriously in Germany, France, or most other countries on the Continent.
How things have changed in the last five years!
Today, few people - if any - refer to the Rhineland model with such satisfaction.
As things stand now, the German economy lags behind most others in Europe, and almost all European economies trail Britain and the United States.
Unemployment is high and growing, as German companies move production to low-wage countries in Eastern Europe or Asia.
In Germany, "capitalism unmodified" has begun its reign.
Profitable companies are closed if their returns fall below international standards.
Managers' salaries - including bonuses for failed or departing directors - have reached new highs.
If all this leads people to conclude that social justice is being sacrificed to profits, cuts in public expenditure harden that conclusion even more.
Social entitlements are being reduced, while individual contributions to cover the cost of health care, pensions, education, and basic welfare programs rise - not just in the Rhineland and neighboring länder, but in other countries that follow a similar model.
One reason is straightforward and increasingly widely understood.
The old system of social justice, the welfare state, was based on assumptions which no longer hold true. Some may never have been viable.
For example, the Rhineland model used many measures of social policy that had built-in growth trends that were bound to make them unaffordable.
This is true for health care.
In addition, demographic changes reduced the number of contributors while increasing the demand for services.
Unsurprisingly, high payroll taxes strained the capacity of working people and mounting non-wage labor costs eroded companies' international competitiveness.
For a while, borrowing hid the extent of the problem; but today the extent of the burden that the accumulated debt that resulted from this borrowing is placing on future generations - a grave injustice in its own right - is clear.
Thus, the Rhineland model's once-robust institutions of social justice were bound to be squeezed. But the capitalism that formed the Rhineland model's other component also changed, and here it is not wrong to blame globalization.
Companies formed international links in order to remain competitive.
Many of these links were with British or American companies, which led to a profound change in business culture.
The old notion that large companies are responsible for their employees' welfare from cradle to grave - providing not only wages and bonuses, but sports facilities, cheap holidays, and generous retirement benefits - fell into desuetude.
Overseas owners were less than understanding of the German custom of paying a thirteenth monthly salary at Christmas.
Beyond business culture, there is the fact that manufacturing, until recently the major source of strength of the German and other European economies, has begun to emigrate in a big way.
Soon not only our refrigerators and television sets, but even our cars and machine tools, will come largely from China.
There is no obvious substitute for such industries at home.
Does this mean the end of the Rhineland model?
In the first instance, it does mean that reforms are necessary.
People have become weary of the word reform, because for most it means a reduction in entitlements and living standards.
Still, constructing a welfare state fit for new economic conditions is a task that must be undertaken.
This will be a welfare state based on a new balance of solidarity and individual effort.
It may mean that after a decades-long economic miracle, people must accept a modest reduction in their standard of living.
The more difficult task will be to transform traditional economies into truly modern ones.
No one has yet managed this process, not even the Anglo Saxons.
A truly modern economy will be a service economy that combines high-productivity knowledge activities with indispensable personal service jobs.
Such economies need not follow the same blueprint.
It is possible - indeed, likely - that modern service-based economies will look very different in the Rhineland, Southeast England, Lombardy, and the Île-de-France.
Such diversity may include varying degrees of social justice, if people choose to pay more or less for that purpose.
So there is no reason for despair in the Rhineland - or for gloating by the enemies of its economic model.
Even in an increasingly globalized economy, diversity will continue to be the hallmark.
The New “Two Chinas” Question
NEW YORK – To anyone over the age of 60 who follows world affairs, the term “two Chinas” recalls the post-1949 competition for diplomatic recognition waged by mainland (“Red”) China and Taiwan, or, more formally, the People’s Republic of China and the Republic of China.
By the early 1970s, just about every country fell in line with the People’s Republic’s demand that it alone be recognized as the legitimate sovereign government of China.
The mainland was simply too large and too important economically and strategically to alienate.
Today, a new, but very different, “two Chinas” question is emerging.
It centers on whether China is best understood as a strong country, with a promising future despite some short-term difficulties, or as a country facing serious structural problems and uncertain long-term prospects.
In short, two very different Chinas can now be glimpsed.
But which one will prevail?
Until recently, there was little reason to ask such a question.
China’s economy was growing at an astounding average annual rate of 10% or higher for more than three decades.
China had overtaken Japan as the world’s second largest economy.
Hundreds of millions of Chinese had entered the middle class.
China’s model of authoritarian efficiency seemed attractive to many other developing countries, particularly in the wake of the 2008 global financial crisis, which began in the United States and thus seemed to discredit American-style liberal capitalism.
But the question of China’s future has become unavoidable.
Officially, economic growth has slowed to near 7%; but many believe the real number is below 5%.
The slowdown should come as no surprise; all developing economies experience something similar as they grow and mature.
Nonetheless, the speed and degree of change have caught the authorities off guard, and have stoked official fears that growth will fall short of the rate needed for the country to modernize as planned.
The government’s alarm at the sharper-than-expected economic slowdown was reflected in its heavy-handed intervention in July to freeze stock markets in the midst of a dramatic price correction.
That move was followed this month by a surprise devaluation of the renminbi, which suggests that the shift away from export-led growth is not working as hoped.
Meanwhile, President Xi Jinping’s anti-corruption campaign increasingly looks like a strategy to consolidate power, rather than an effort to reform China’s state for the benefit of its economy and society.
Corruption is pervasive, and Xi’s campaign remains broadly popular.
But the wave of prosecutions that Xi has unleashed is discouraging Chinese officials from making decisions, owing to their fear that they could face criminal charges in the future.
As a result of these developments, one hears much less of late about the Chinese model and more about the Chinese reality.
Aside from slowing growth, that reality includes severe environmental damage, one result of decades of rapid, coal-fueled industrialization.
According to one estimate, air pollution is killing 1.6 million Chinese per year.
China’s aging population, an unintended consequence of its draconian one-child policy, poses another threat to long-term prosperity.
With the dependency ratio – the proportion of children and pensioners relative to working-age men and women – set to rise rapidly in the coming years, economic growth will remain subdued, while health-care and pension costs will increasingly strain government budgets.
What is increasingly apparent is that China’s leaders want the economic growth that capitalism produces, but without the downturns that come with it.
They want the innovation that an open society generates, but without the intellectual freedom that defines it.
Something has to give.
Some observers, fearing a rising China, will breathe a sigh of relief at its current difficulties.
But that may prove to be a shortsighted reaction.
A slow-growth China would undermine the global economic recovery.
It would be a less-willing partner in tackling global challenges such as climate change.
Most dangerous of all, a struggling China could be tempted to turn to foreign adventurism to placate a public frustrated by slower economic growth and an absence of political freedom.
Indeed, there are some signs that the authorities are doing just this in the South China Sea.
Nationalism could become the primary source of legitimacy for a ruling party that can no longer point to a rapidly rising standard of living.
The US and others will need to push back to ensure that China does not act on such a temptation.
But these countries would be equally wise to signal to China that it is welcome to take its place among the world’s leading countries if it acts responsibly and according to the rules set for all.
But the bigger policy choices will be China’s to make.
The government will need to find the right balance between government interests and individual rights, between economic growth and environmental stewardship, and between the role of markets and that of the state.
The choices China faces are as difficult as they are unavoidable.
Major social unrest cannot be ruled out.
The one certainty is that the next three decades will not mirror the last three.
Two Decades from Warsaw
WARSAW – “Poland – ten years, Hungary – ten months, East Germany – ten weeks, Czechoslovakia – ten days.”
So chirped many in Prague in November 1989, reflecting the pride and the joy of the Velvet Revolution, but also the sustained effort that was needed to end communism, whose demise began in Warsaw the previous February.
Indeed, communism’s breakdown began ten years earlier in Poland, during Pope John Paul II’s first pilgrimage to his homeland, a visit that shook communist rule to its foundation.
Within a year, Polish workers were striking for the right to establish independent trade unions, staging two weeks of sit-ins at state-owned factories to achieve their goal.
Karl Marx would have been proud of them, but it was the Pope’s portrait that hung on the gate of Gdansk’s Lenin Shipyard during the strike.
The Solidarity union that was born in 1980 broke the Communist Party‘s monopoly on power.
The movement united ten million people: workers and professors, peasants and students, priests and freethinkers among them – all of civil society.
This infant democracy was harshly interrupted when martial law was imposed in December 1981, with Solidarity outlawed and dissidents arrested.
But this totalitarian blitzkrieg could not last.
Democracy did not die; it merely went underground.
For the next seven years, Solidarity fought for re-legalization, building the biggest underground network of resistance Europe had seen since Hitler’s war.
But this was non-violent resistance. Its main weapon was the language of freedom.
In the mid-1980’s, there were about 1,000 independent, uncensored journals in Poland. They represented a full range of ideas and editorial styles – from factory leaflets and bulletins to intellectual magazines.
Hundreds of books prohibited by Communist censors (for example, Gunther Grass’s The Tin Drum ) came to light.
Solidarity’s leader, Lech Wałęsa, did not surrender in prison and retained his national esteem.
With the economy in steep decline, Poland’s rulers began to seek to stabilize the political system and reestablish relations with the West.
In 1986, the government released political prisoners – a precondition for talks with the opposition.
But it took the Communists two more years to realize that they could not introduce economic reform without Solidarity’s assent.
So talks began.
The reason they were possible at all was that the opposition’s goal was not the violent overthrow of party rule. Instead, its democratic goals were to be fulfilled by a compromise with the authorities.
Wałęsa and his closest advisers – Bronisław Geremek and Tadeusz Mazowiecki – pushed this moderate policy, demanding liberation while recognizing the political reality of Soviet domination.
Two waves of strikes in 1988 forced General Jaruzelski’s government to negotiate with Solidarity, which, after a few months of hedging, was legalized.
The “Roundtable” talks to change the political system could begin.
The haggling continued from February until April 1989.
The main issues were legalization of the opposition, partially free elections, and creating the office of president to replace the Communist Party chief.        
The Communists were guaranteed a majority in parliament.
While the election to the newly created Senate was entirely free, the opposition could compete for only one-third of the seats in the Sejm (the lower house).
But the key point was that the party’s monopoly on power was jettisoned.
Solidarity gained the opportunity to create independent media and a grassroots political organization.
Finally, the Communists agreed that the elections to be held in four years would be entirely free.
The road to democracy was open.
But the dictatorship’s end came sooner then anyone expected.
In June 1989, the opposition won the parliamentary election in a landslide. It was impossible to form a government without its participation.
Jaruzelski was elected president, but he had to accept the new division of power.
The decisive political maneuver – building a coalition with allies of Communists – was carried out by Lech Wałęsa.
A Solidarity representative, Tadeusz Mazowiecki, became prime minister.
In September 1989, Poland had the first government ever led by democratic parties in the Soviet bloc.
It was a revolution, but with a difference: the political system changed without a body count.
This was due, above all, to Solidarity’s prudent policy.
But it was civic activity - resistance movements, strikes, and other manifestations of social support – that buttressed Solidarity.
Mikhail Gorbachev was important; his non-intervention policy toward Eastern Europe meant that Soviet tanks would not annul the changes, as they had done with the Prague Spring.
The Polish Communists did not intend to build democracy; their plan was to absorb moderate opposition groups into a partially modified political system.
Handing over power to Solidarity was the last thing they had in mind. Yet the Roundtable compromise turned out to be good even for them, as communist “reformers” began to build new careers in business and politics (one, Aleksander Kwaśniewski, became Poland’s second democratically elected president).
The Roundtable also provided the Communists with a sense of safety that diminished their fear of democratic change. A hangman’s noose did not await them.
This was an important sign for Poland’s neighbors in the Soviet bloc, which took its example to heart.
In a few months, talks between Communist bosses and their democratic opponents (often in the form of a roundtable) paved the way to free elections and new democratic governments in Budapest, Prague, East Berlin, and Sofia.
By 1989’s end, the post-Yalta Europe was free.
Since then, the symbol of the great revolution of 1989 has been the fall of the Berlin Wall.
But the Roundtable talks in Warsaw 20 years ago this month is where the Iron Curtain began to be dismantled.
Two Funerals and Our Freedom
MOSCOW – My great-grandfather, Nikita Khrushchev, has been on my mind recently.
I suppose it was the 50th anniversary of the so-called “kitchen debate” which he held with Richard Nixon that first triggered my memories.
But the funeral last week in Budapest of General Béla Király, who commanded the Hungarian Revolution’s freedom fighters in 1956, and this week’s funeral in Warsaw of the philosopher Leszek Kolakowski, whose break with Stalinism that year inspired many intellectuals (in Poland and elsewhere) to abandon communism, made me reconsider my grandfather’s legacy.
The year 1956 was the best of times and the worst of times for Khrushchev.
His “secret speech” that year laid bare the monumentality of Stalin’s crimes.
Soon, the gulag was virtually emptied; a political thaw began, spurring whispers of freedom that could not be contained.
In Poland and Hungary, in particular, an underground tide burst forth demanding change.
Hungary, of course, had its short and glorious revolution.
That first war among socialist states shattered the myth of inviolable “fraternal” bonds between the Soviet Union and the captive nations of Eastern Europe.
But Khrushchev never envisioned the breakup of the Soviet empire as part of his thaw.
So the Red Army invaded Hungary – on a scale larger than the Allies’ D-Day invasion of Europe in 1944.
Béla Király, released from a sentence of life in prison (one of the four death sentences he received from the communists having been commuted) was offered the job of commander of the Hungarian National Guard and the defense of Budapest.
His task was to knock the rag-tag freedom fighters into an army, but there wasn’t time to stop the Soviet advance.
So, after a week of heroism he and a few thousand of his men crossed the border into Austria and exile.
Over the years, a mutual friend often tried to introduce me to General Király, but, to my regret, that meeting never happened.
Any man who would frame the four death sentences he had received (one signed by Khrushchev, another by Yuri Andropov, the Soviet ambassador in Budapest in 1956) and hang them in his drawing room has the sort of quirky humor I relish.
And from what I know of the man and his history, particularly his work in Hungary after 1989, I can only wish that my great-grandfather could have met him.
Certainly, Király would not have hesitated to meet the man who ordered the invasion.
After all, when he learned that one of the Russian generals who had led the invasion was still alive in 2006, Király invited him to Budapest to join the 50th anniversary celebrations.
When General Yevgeni Malashenko declined in fear that he might be arrested, the 94-year-old Király flew to Moscow, where he spent a long weekend reminiscing and going to a banya for retired Red Army generals.
Kolakowski, on the other hand, was someone I knew.
We frequently met at conferences, where it was always a delight to hear him speak Russian – a Russian that had the accent and elegance of Tolstoi and Pushkin, not the degraded Russian bark of Vladimir Putin.
Like Király, in 1956, Kolakowski turned against the Communist party he had once joined in the hope, formed in the charnel house that the Nazis had wrought in Poland, that it would build a better world.
He tried to humanize it and undo the cruelty of Stalinist orthodoxy, but never doubted that the Leninist system was the way of the future.
Király, who subscribed to the old codes of military honor (he would be named a Righteous Gentile at Yad Vashem, Israel’s Holocaust memorial, for the hundreds of Jews he saved by keeping them with his army during WWII), saw that very system as the enemy of his country and its liberty.
But today, Khrushchev is remembered mostly for his contribution to the demise of Stalinism – and, via Mikhail Gorbachev, whose hero he was, ultimately for helping to bring about communism’s demise.
Király and Kolakowski became voices of moderation and reconciliation in the Hungary and Poland that emerged out of communism’s darkness at noon.
Király will be remembered not merely as a warrior, but as a humanist, the conciliator who called for no reprisals after 1989, and a liberal model for many Hungarians.
Kolakowski, in upholding the sanctity of truth in the empire of the lie, connected the new democratic Poland to the old Poland of intellect and culture.
Király, Kolakowski, and Khrushchev: each in his own way is a symbol of today’s new and uniting Europe, a Europe of rapprochement and forgiveness among erstwhile opponents.
Two Models for Europe
MUNICH – Interest rates for public debt within the eurozone have spread once again, just as they did before the introduction of the euro.
Balance-of-payment disparities are steadily increasing.
The sovereign-debt crisis is eating its way from the periphery to the core, and the exodus of capital is accelerating.
Since the summer, €300 billion, in net terms, may well have fled from Italy and France.
The printing presses at the Banque de France and the Banca d’Italia are working overtime to make up for the outflow of money.
But this only furthers the exodus, because creating more money prevents interest rates from rising to a point at which capital would find it attractive to stay.
If Europe had the same rules as the United States, where the Federal Reserve’s regional banks have to pay the Fed for any special money creation with securities collateralized in gold, they would not create this much supplementary money, and capital flight would be limited.
Instead, local printing of money is essentially aiding and abetting the exodus.
If the eurozone does not want to embrace capital controls, it has only two alternatives: make the local printing of money more difficult, or offer investment guarantees in countries that markets view as insecure.
The first option is the American way, which also demands that the buyers bear the risks inherent in public or private securities.
The taxpayer is not called upon, even in extreme cases, and states can go bankrupt.
The second option is the socialist way.
Investment guarantees will lead, via issuance of Eurobonds, to socialization of the risks inherent in public debt.
Because all the member states provide one another with free credit guarantees, interest rates for government securities can no longer differ in accordance with creditworthiness or likelihood of repayment.
The less sound a country is, the lower its effective expected interest rate.
The socialist way follows necessarily from the free access to the printing press that has so far characterized the eurozone.
As long as banks – and thus governments, which sell their debt to the banks – can draw cheap credit up to any amount from the European System of Central Banks, Europe will remain volatile.
The exodus of capital will continue, and enormous compensation claims of the European core’s central banks, particularly the German Bundesbank and the Dutch central bank, will pile up.
In Germany, these compensation claims amount to half of the country’s entire net foreign wealth, or €500 billion ($653 billion).
Since these claims would probably be lost should the euro collapse, the political pressure to give way finally to Eurobonds is becoming overwhelming.
But German acquiescence would be a disastrous result for Europe.
The European Financial Stability Facility in Luxemburg would become a socialist planning agency, organizing flows of public capital in Europe and thwarting markets’ allocative function.
The consequence would be reduced growth, owing to a misallocation of scarce capital, and economic stagnation in the core areas.
Matters are made no better by controlling credit flows via a fiscal government, which is what the eurozone countries have now decided they want.
As long as the debtors co-determine the rules, more capital will flow under such an arrangement than markets would permit.
That distortion will become apparent even within the countries that benefit from the additional credit, because Eurobonds will, for the time being, provide security only for government debt.
Private debtors will continue to have difficulties finding capital, so the state will expand relative to the private sector.
The ECB’s founding chief economist, Otmar Issing, has referred to this as a road to serfdom.
But it is not a smooth road, because it threatens resistance by the capital-exporting countries’ taxpayers and trade unions against the outflow of capital.
In Germany, in particular, enormous resistance will build up if the country – via the introduction of Eurobonds – is driven back into the crisis that it underwent as a result of the interest-rate convergence that followed the introduction of the euro.
Only the American alternative is viable.
Short- and long-term interest-rate spreads are determined by the economy’s creditworthiness, and whoever wants low interest rates has to provide real collateral.
The American route does not necessarily imply a heavy-handed approach vis-à-vis the crisis countries.
It can be combined with a system of measured, limited help in the sense of partial coverage of investors against a country’s insolvency.
This model, contemplated by the European Economic Advisory Group at CESifo, would retain the disciplinary effects of interest-rate spreads while capping them in order to limit panicked extremes in the capital markets.
It offers the last chance to avoid debt socialism.
Europe’s Two-Speed Future
PARIS – For three years, the euro crisis has threatened not only to unravel the eurozone, but to bring down the entire European Union with it.
Although the pressure from financial markets has moderated, for now, a long-term resolution to the crisis remains an existential priority for the EU.
In today’s highly competitive global economy, European countries’ relatively small size, aging populations, and excessive indebtedness, combined with a lack of energy resources and insufficient investment in research and development, mean that their high living standards and generous social-welfare states are in jeopardy.
Individually, they cannot compete with emerging markets; they need a strong EU to face the challenges posed by globalization.
But the eurozone’s architecture – in which monetary policy is centralized, but budgetary and economic policies are left up to individual governments – is not viable in the long term.
Although Europe’s leaders have made some progress on institutional reform, the measures taken so far will not lead to real convergence of economic and budgetary policies, or to genuine economic union.
As a result, they will fail to reassure financial markets.
Given that treaty change is politically unfeasible, establishing a “two-speed Europe” – in which a core group of countries pursues deeper integration more quickly than the rest – is the EU’s best option for reaching the level of cooperation needed to escape the crisis intact.
This can be accomplished in two ways.
The first option would be to progress de facto toward a two-speed EU without establishing further legal commitments.
Eurozone countries, together with others willing to join the euro in the future (the “eurozone plus”), could simply decide to use the legal means already available to increase cooperation.
Ideally, this cooperation would take place within the EU’s institutional framework.
If all eurozone members participated, Article 136 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the EU could be used to support their action.The scope of this provision – which says that, “the [European] Council shall…adopt measures specific to [euro] Member States,” and that “only [euro] Member States…shall take part in the vote” – is wide.
In addition, Article 138 would allow unified representation of the eurozone in the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank.
The group could then extend cooperation to three other policy areas:
·&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160; Minimal harmonization of tax laws (such as a common basis for assessing corporate taxation) and social policy (such as further liberalization of national labor markets to encourage labor mobility);
·&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160; Common policy measures on immigration, linked to labor-market needs;
·&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160; Closer judicial cooperation – again aimed at encouraging mobility – in civil matters with cross-border implications, specifically concerning contracts and family law.
The group could also take some measures outside the EU framework.
Indeed, if all eurozone countries did not participate, such outside cooperation would be crucial, given that Articles 136 and 138 would no longer apply.
This could include measures to strengthen the European Stability Mechanism and the Euro Plus Pact (designed to enhance economic policy coordination among member states), de facto cooperation within the Bretton Woods institutions, and voluntary approximation of national laws in certain areas.
Participating countries would have to decide whether to commit to a common set of policies, or to reserve the right to opt in on a case-by-case basis.
Cooperation on matters related to the EU’s Economic and Monetary Union (discipline and solidarity) should be obligatory.
The involvement of most, or all, current and future eurozone countries would enhance the group’s coherence, making it easier to win public support for cooperation in other areas.
Pursuing this option would require that the decision-making process be legitimate.
In the Council, as in all cases of “enhanced cooperation,” only participating members have the right to vote.
In the European Parliament, by contrast, all 27 EU members participate in the decision-making process, even concerning measures that will affect only the 23 “eurozone plus” countries (the 17 eurozone members and the six that have agreed to the Euro Plus Pact) – a method that could pose a political problem.
In any case, national parliaments should become involved in order to enhance the legitimacy of decisions.
The second option would imply an international agreement, in addition to the EU treaties, which would legally bind participating countries, enabling them to commit to establishing a genuine economic union, and to define the organs and rules that will govern their cooperation.
Such a treaty would take time to be negotiated, ratified, and implemented.
But a clear, precise announcement of the decision to pursue it, together with a bold European Central Bank policy in line with its recently announced bond-purchasing program, might be enough to convince both financial markets and EU citizens that a lasting solution is within sight.
The eurozone’s path to genuine economic union will be fraught with political and institutional challenges – from determining substantive areas of cooperation to protecting the rights and interests of all EU countries and safeguarding the unity of both the internal market and foreign relations.
But navigating that path is the EU’s only option.
Two Wrongs Don’t Make a Right at the IMF and World Bank
One has go back to the “Year of Three Popes” (1978) to find a succession drama as strange as what has been happening at the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank, the two pillars of the global financial system.
Two months ago, Bank President Paul Wolfowitz resigned amidst an extraordinary staff mutiny and governance debacle.
Now, his counterpart at the International Monetary Fund, the former Spanish Finance Minister Rodrigo Rato, has shocked major stakeholders by announcing that he, too, will leave in October.
To lose one international lending institution head is misfortune, to lose two looks like carelessness (my apologies to Oscar Wilde).
Coming on the tenth year anniversary of the Asian financial crisis, the caldron in which today’s ultra-liquid capital markets were forged, conspiracy theories abound.
Frankly, sticking to the public record, the two resignations seem like night and day.
When Wolfowitz was finally pushed out after a bruising battle, Bank staff were beside themselves with joy.
By contrast, most IMF staff seem genuinely depressed by Rato’s departure.
Wolfowitz’s pre-Bank claim to fame was his role as an architect of the Iraq war, arguably one of the greatest strategic debacles since Napoleon’s invasion of Russia.
Rato, by contrast, was Spain’s finance minister during the country’s best economic era since the sixteenth century.
Under Wolfowitz, the World Bank failed to introduce any serious governance reforms to reflect the rising economic power of Asia.
Under Rato, the IMF at least took some modest steps towards giving China and other rapidly emerging markets more say in running the place.
At the same time as Rato pushed reluctant European nations to yield some of their power in the Fund, he introduced reforms that clarified and strengthened the Fund’s role in managing exchange rates.
Indeed, a week before Rato’s resignation announcement, the Fund asserted that it had the right to censure countries whose intervention policies threaten to undermine global economic stability.
The Fund’s policy change drew the ire of Chinese officials, who have been intervening on a biblical scale to hold down the value of their currency, the Yuan.
When the Fund gets the big boys to complain by saying perfectly sensible things, it must be doing something right.
True, the Fund has been notably soft on the United States of late, downplaying the continuing vulnerabilities posed by the gaping US current account and trade deficits.
One imagines this compelling theme will return soon enough.
Although there are vast differences surrounding the departure of the IMF and Bank heads, there are some worrisome similarities.
First, there is every sign that the Europeans will use Rato’s sudden announcement as an excuse to avoid a serious debate about relinquishing their privilege of always appointing the Fund’s head True the US was able to essentially blackmail the world into choosing yet another American to replace Wolfowitz, by balking at efforts to push him out peaceably.
But the Europeans have no such leverage at the Fund, where Rato has elected to go out under his own steam.
There is ample time between now and October for the IMF to install an open and fair selection process that will lead to the best person being chosen, regardless of nationality.
Central banks around the world have been enormously successful by choosing technocrats and people with proven knowledge and experience to head their institutions, rather than accepting purely political appointments.
On merit, some of the obvious candidates for the Fund job, such as Brazilian Arminio Fraga, and Egyptian-born Mohamed El-Erian, are not European.
A second similarity is that both institutions face deep existential crises.
In today’s world of deep and liquid global financial markets, the main lending instruments of the IMF and and the Bank are largely unnecessary and redundant.
Absent serious reform, both are on tract to go into deep hibernation as the Bank for International Settlements did for forty years prior to its recent resurgence.
The BIS, founded in 1930 to help manage German reparation payments and to coordinate activities among central banks, served as little more than repository for gold reserves in the years following World War II.
As central banks have gained status in recent years, and thanks to imaginative leadership, the BIS has reawakened and taken on a number of important roles, including setting international regulatory standards for global banking.
While it is encouraging to know that a hibernating IMF and World Bank may some day reawaken, it would be far better to see them invigorated now.
A more globalized world needs global financial institutions, but ones that focus on coordination, supervision and technical advice, not redundant lending mechanisms.
Before any real change can place, both institutions require fundamental governance changes.
The puzzling circumstances of the IMF head’s sudden departure announcement do not justify a business as usual approach to his replacement.
Nor does the closed-door succession process at the Bank, where the US continued its sixty year lock on the Presidency, justify continuing European monopolization of the Fund job.
Two wrongs do not make a right.
Kuantum Kebahagiaan (A Quantum of Happiness)
DUBAI – Saya merasa senang bisa ikut merayakan Hari Bahagia Sedunia (International Day of Happiness) tahun ini.
Tapi jujur saja, fokus saya terletak pada 364 hari lainnya.
Bagaimanapun juga tugas pokok saya adalah mengupayakan terciptanya kebahagiaan untuk semua.
Sejumlah inisiatif dan upaya di seluruh dunia telah dijalankan untuk bergeser dari PDB dan data tentang sekolah atau jumlah tempat tidur di rumah sakit ketika mengukur keberhasilan negara dalam tata kelola dan pembangunan.
Di negara yang telah menghabiskan lima dekade terakhir membangun ekonomi dari kondisi diam, pemerintah yang saya layani sekarang tahu persis bahwa angka-angka tersebut, meskipun menunjukkan bahwa pertumbuhan terus meningkat, tidak menceritakan gambaran yang utuh.
Pada tahun 2011, PBB menyerukan agar negara-negara anggota lebih menekankan kebahagiaan dan kesejahteraan dalam upaya mewujudkan dan mengukur pembangunan sosial dan ekonomi.
Sejak saat itu, banyak negara mulai menyadari bahwa menempatkan kebahagiaan sebagai inti tujuan tata kelola pemerintahan adalah tindakan yang masuk akal.
Di Uni Emirat Arab (UEA), kami mengakui, sama seperti negara-negara lain, bahwa kita memerlukan tolak ukur implementasi tata kelola yang betul-betul menunjukkan apa yang dimaksud dengan kesuksesan.
Pertanyaannya bukan apakah kita memberikan pelayanan yang memadai dan kebijakan ekonomi yang layak bagi warga, tapi justru apakah kita membuat warga merasa bahagia.
Tentu saja kebahagiaan membutuhkan pemenuhan dua hal di atas, namun ini juga berarti melampaui statistika untuk memahami bahwa kita adalah individu yang memiliki harapan, ketakutan, dan aspirasi.
Kami di UEA memperlakukan isu kebahagiaan ini dengan serius dan kami mulai mencurahkan perhatian pada setiap tindakan dalam pemerintahan, termasuk upaya-upaya mendorong sektor swasta untuk menghargai kebahagiaan dalam operasionalnya sehari-hari.
Tindakan ini termasuk perumusan strategi, program, dan kebijakan nasional untuk meningkatkan kebahagiaan dan kemudian mengukur pencapaiannya secara berkelanjutan.
Tapi apa sebetulnya indikator yang kita sebut “kebahagiaan” ini?
Kebahagiaan bukan suatu momen suka ria yang fana atau konstan, tapi suatu kondisi yang melebihi kepuasan, yaitu sukacita yang senantiasa bertambah.
Kebahagiaan adalah mengetahui bahwa anda dan keluarga anda aman; bahwa ada kesempatan yang terbuka bagi anda dan anak-anak anda; dan bahwa anda bisa mengandalkan adanya kepedulian, martabat, dan keadilan di dalam masyarakat.
Kebahagiaan bukanlah sesuatu yang dianugerahi oleh Sang Pencipta; kita harus berusaha mencapainya.
Namun menurut saya, peran kami sebagai pemerintah adalah menciptakan kondisi yang memungkinkan kebahagiaan dan sikap positif akan kehidupan bisa tumbuh berkembang.
Kemunduran atau frustrasi dalam kehidupan seseorang tidak selalu mengakibatkan berkurangnya kebahagiaan, sebab ini tergantung pada bagaimana anda – dan orang yang membantu anda – menyikapi tantangan tersebut.
Sehingga kebahagiaan juga mencakup komitmen membantu orang lain, serta bertanggung jawab atas keputusan anda sendiri dan bersikap optimis dan konstruktif.
Selama sepuluh tahun bekerja di pemerintahan, saya pribadi belum pernah menemui situasi apapun yang tidak dapat diselesaikan dengan senyuman, sedikit pertimbangan, dan sentuhan positif.
Kebahagiaan adalah satu hal yang saya anggap serius dan yakini dengan sungguh-sungguh.
Kebahagiaan tidak bisa diperintahkan, didesak, atau dipaksakan. Kebahagiaan harus digencarkan dan dipupuk.
Hal ini memerlukan perubahan pola pikir, dengan fokus mencari hasil yang konstruktif, yang harus terjadi baik secara individual maupun kolektif.
Lalu bagaimana kami di UEA akan menyikapinya?
Kita masih di tahap awal, saya pun baru menjabat selama satu bulan.
Kami sudah memiliki rencana 100 hari dan tugas yang jelas.
Kami telah menetapkan pedoman perumusan kebijakan bagi lembaga pemerintah dan mulai membuat struktur koordinasi antar lembaga dan merancang pendekatan-pendekatan terbaru tentang layanan dan penyediaannya.
Kami juga tengah mengembangkan tolak ukur dan instrumen penilaian untuk merumuskan dan memantau indikator kinerja yang dapat digunakan untuk mengukur kebahagiaan.
Selain upaya-upaya untuk menempatkan promosi kebahagiaan ke dalam inti agenda nasional, kita perlu mendorong sektor swasta untuk turut berpartisipasi.
Di salah satu pasar tenaga kerja yang paling beragam di dunia – di UEA terdapat penduduk yang berasal dari 200 negara – kita harus menjamin bahwa selain mengikuti kerangka hukum dan peraturan yang tepat, para pengusaha di negara kita harus bertidak berdasarkan motivasi enlightened self-interest.
Sama halnya dengan PDB yang tidak menjadi satu-satunya tolak ukur untuk menentukan keberhasilan suatu negara, profit semata tidak menentukan kesuksesan suatu perusahaan.
Dalam konteks sosial yang saling berkaitan, di dunia dimana opini, berita, dan informasi bergerak dengan kecepatan cahaya, kebahagiaan adalah keunggulan kompetitif yang wajib sifatnya bagi citra perusahaan.
Kita hidup di kawasan yang sulit.
Timur Tengah biasanya tidak diasosiasikan dengan kebahagiaan; kadang berita buruk mengenai kawasan kita cenderung meredam berita bagusnya.
Namun kita masih memiliki hasrat dan semangat berjuang agar kita dan orang-orang tercinta bisa tumbuh dan menjadi yang terbaik.
Semangat itu ada di dalam diri kita dan dengan memupuk dan menguatkannya kita bisa menciptakan perdamaian, keamanan, toleransi, optimisme, dan rasa hormat.  Kita bisa bekerja sama untuk menciptakan lingkungan dimana seluruh warga bisa berkembang dan berusaha mencapai potensi mereka sepenuhnya.
Kita akan menjadi bagian dari komunitas yang terbentuk dari hasrat untuk berbagi kebahagiaan yang berkualitas.
The End of Work as We Know It
PARIS – In 1983, the American economist and Nobel laureate Wassily Leontief made what was then a startling prediction.
Machines, he said, are likely to replace human labor much in the same way that the tractor replaced the horse.
Today, with some 200 million people worldwide out of work – 30 million more than in 2008 – Leontief’s words no longer seem as outlandish as they once did.
Indeed, there can be little doubt that technology is in the process of completely transforming the global labor market.
To be sure, predictions like Leontief’s leave many economists skeptical, and for good reason.
Historically, increases in productivity have rarely destroyed jobs.
Each time that machines yielded gains in efficiency (including when tractors took over from horses), old jobs disappeared, but new jobs were created.
Furthermore, economists are number crunchers, and recent data show a slowdown – rather than an acceleration – in productivity gains.
When it comes to the actual number of jobs available, there are reasons to question the doomsayers’ dire predictions.
Yet there are also reasons to think that the nature of work is changing.
To begin with, as noted by the MIT economist David Autor, advances in the automation of labor transform some jobs more than others.
Workers carrying out routine tasks like data processing are increasingly likely to be replaced by machines; but those pursuing more creative endeavors are more likely to experience increases in productivity.
Meanwhile, workers providing in-person services might not see their jobs change much at all.
In other words, robots might put an accountant out of work, boost a surgeon’s productivity, and leave a hairdresser’s job unaltered.
The resulting upheavals in the structure of the workforce can be at least as important as the actual number of jobs that are affected.
Economists call the most likely outcome of this phenomenon “the polarization of employment.”
Automation creates service jobs at the bottom end of the wage scale and raises the quantity and profitability of jobs at its top end.
But the middle of the labor market becomes hollowed out.
This type of polarization has been going on in the United States for decades, and it is taking place in Europe too – with important consequences for society.
Since the end of World War II, the middle class has provided the backbone of democracy, civil engagement, and stability; those who did not belong to the middle class could realistically aspire to join it, or even believe that they were part of it, when that was not the case.
As changes in the job market break down the middle class, a new era of class rivalry could be unleashed (if it has not been already).
In addition to the changes being wrought by automation, the job market is being transformed by digital platforms like Uber that facilitate exchanges between consumers and individual suppliers of services.
A customer calling an Uber driver is purchasing not one service, but two: one from the company (the connection to a driver whose quality is assured through customer ratings) and the other from the driver (transport from one location to another).
Uber and other digital platforms are redefining the interaction among consumers, workers, and employers.
They are also making the celebrated firm of the industrial age – an essential institution, which allowed for specialization and saved on transactions costs – redundant.
Unlike at a firm, Uber’s relationship with its drivers does not rely on a traditional employment contract.
Instead, the company’s software acts as a mediator between the driver and the consumer, in exchange for a fee.
This seemingly small change could have far-reaching consequences.
Rather than being regulated by a contract, the value of labor is being subjected to the same market forces buffeting any other commodity, as services vary in price depending on supply and demand. Labor becomes marked to market.
Other, less disruptive changes, such as the rise of human capital, could also be mentioned.
An increasing number of young graduates shun seemingly attractive jobs in major companies, preferring to earn much less working for start-ups or creative industries.
While this can be explained partly by the appeal of the corresponding lifestyle, it may also be a way to increase their overall lifetime income.
Instead of renting their set of skills and competences for a pre-set price, these young graduates prefer to maximize the lifetime income stream they may derive from their human capital.
Again, such behavior undermines the employment contract as a basic social institution and makes a number of its associated features, such as annual income taxation, suboptimal.
Whatever we think of the new arrangements, we are unlikely to be able to stop them.
Some might be tempted to resist – witness the recent clashes between taxi and Uber drivers in Paris and the lawsuits against the company in many countries.
Uber’s arrangement may be fraudulent according to the existing legal framework, but that framework will eventually change.
The transformative impacts of technology will ultimately make themselves felt.
Rather than try to stop the unstoppable, we should think about how to put this new reality at the service of our values and welfare.
In addition to rethinking institutions and practices predicated on traditional employment contracts – such as social security contributions – we will need to begin to invent new institutions that harness this technology-driven transformation for our collective benefit.
The backbone of tomorrow’s societies, after all, will be built not by robots or digital platforms, but by their citizens.
Is Uber a Threat to Democracy?
AIX-EN-PROVENCE – Every July, economists, business leaders, NGOs, and politicians from around the world gather in Aix-en-Provence, France, for the three-day Rencontres Économiques forum, organized by the Cercle des Économistes.
This year’s forum focused on the changing nature of work.
The timing of the meeting, which coincided with a heated debate in France about the innovative ride-sharing service Uber, could not have been more apt.
The forum’s theme was undoubtedly selected partly in response to fears that technological advances will lead to widespread unemployment, as machines become advanced enough to replace humans in performing an increasing number of tasks.
As MIT’s Andrew McAfee pointed out, historically, technological revolutions have “eventually led to more, if different, jobs”; but, with machines becoming increasingly intelligent, “this time may be different.”
Given this possibility, McAfee suggests, we may need to re-build our societies so that, as intelligent machines increase productivity, the declining demand for human work has welfare-enhancing outcomes like higher (and more equitably distributed) incomes and more leisure time.
He is not alone: John Maynard Keynes predicted this possibility 85 years ago.
Uber, which enables people to connect with available drivers through a smartphone app, is precisely the kind of disruptive company that is driving the shift.
Taxi drivers in France and around the world are particularly incensed about UberPOP (called UberX outside Europe), a no-frills service.
Uber has since withdrawn UberPOP from France, at least temporarily – though not before two of its top managers were arrested for ignoring the government’s injunction to suspend UberPOP.
But the kind of innovation that Uber exemplifies will not be stopped so easily.
Uber’s software, in a sense, does the job of thousands of Walrasian auctioneers acting locally in space and time, leading to almost perfect price discrimination.
Airlines have long employed such price discrimination, offering multiple prices for the same distance flown, depending on date and time.
But Uber price setting is unique in its immediacy, which it has achieved by taking full advantage of modern communications technology.
In terms of work, Uber creates more jobs than it destroys.
This leads to a clear increase in efficiency and provides overall income gains.
Even if losers were fully compensated, the sum of the gains – shared by the firm, its mostly part-time workers, and its customers – would far outweigh the losses.
Nevertheless, there are real problems that must be addressed.
For starters, there are the losers: traditional taxi drivers, who often have had to pay large license fees and thus cannot compete with Uber’s low prices.
While this problem always arises when disruptive new technologies appear, innovation and adoption are occurring faster than ever.
Taxi drivers are being asked to adjust in a matter of days, rather than years, leaving democratic systems little time to determine how much compensation they should receive, and how it should be distributed.
Another problem is regulation.
Taxis produce not only income tax, but also value-added or sales taxes.
But the UberPOP software, at least so far, has made it impossible to collect value-added tax.
To level the playing field, local or national authorities should require the company to integrate tax-collection software into its app.
The fact that UberPOP drivers, unlike taxi drivers, do not cover passenger insurance also amounts to unfair competition, and must be remedied.
Moreover, in France, taxi drivers must undergo regular health and professional tests, to which UberPOP drivers are not subject.
Like all Uber drivers, they are “monitored” by users, who evaluate them through the app after each ride.
This may be a useful innovation; but it is not really a valid replacement for, say, an eye exam.
The final problem with innovative companies like Uber is that the financial returns overwhelmingly accrue to the company’s leadership, rather than to the service providers.
Whether or not that is justified, such companies’ contribution to rising income inequality – and thus to regulatory capture, media bias, and disproportionate influence in elections – cannot be ignored.
Uber is just one example of disruptive innovation that brings huge increases in efficiency, as well as real social and regulatory challenges, a point that French Economy Minister Emmanuel Macron emphasized in his speech at Rencontres Économiques.
And, in fact, Uber is one of the less problematic innovations, because it is a net job creator; the rise of computers capable of replacing call-center workers, by contrast, is resulting in large net job losses.
In a democratic system, the challenges that such disruptive technologies bring must be confronted in a way that ensures fairness, without impeding progress.
The creative destruction of the so-called “second machine age” cannot and should not be stopped.
But to think that markets alone can manage its transformative impact is pure folly – a fact that the recent global economic crisis, which was rooted in unbridled financial innovation, made clear.
What is needed now are new social and regulatory policies, often global in nature, that embody a new social contract for the twenty-first century.
Uganda’s Smart Protectionism
KAMPALA – On a balmy afternoon, I met Dr. Gilbert Bukenya at his home on the shores of Lake Victoria, where we talked about the future of farming in Uganda.
“By farming smarter,” he said, “Ugandans not only can grow more, they can earn more money.”
Working smarter is no empty slogan; it is the key to modernizing African agriculture.
An advocate of food self-sufficiency for Uganda, Bukenya wants Ugandans to eat more homegrown rice, thereby boosting local farmers and rice millers while freeing hard cash for higher uses.
Bukenya has long promoted a new strain of African rice that grows in uplands (as opposed to wetland paddies) and requires less water.
Embracing the new rice is part of the working-smarter formula.
Once rice output began to expand, Bukenya and other Ugandan politicians played another smart card: they lobbied successfully for a 75% duty on foreign rice, which stimulated rice production further.
Rice output has risen by two and a half times since 2004, according to the Ministry of Trade, to 180,000 metric tons, while consumption of imported rice fell by half from 2004 to 2005 alone.
Uganda’s importers, seeing the shift, have invested in new mills in the country, expanding employment and creating competition for farmers’ output, improving prices.
New mills, meanwhile, lowered the cost of bringing domestic rice to market, so that consumers now still pay about the same for rice as they always have.
And Uganda is poised to start exporting rice within East Africa and beyond.
“It’s a very important crop for raising income and commercializing agriculture,” says Nelson Gagawala Wambuzi, Minister of State for Trade.
Uganda’s success in expanding rice production is especially interesting given that the people of sub-Saharan Africa spend nearly $2 billion a year on rice grown outside of Africa.
The amount of spending on rice alone by Africans equals the combined national budgets of Ghana and Senegal.
As more Africans move to cities, they acquire a taste for rice, which is easy to store and can be cooked quickly.
But such spending on imported rice is a scandal, because, with the help of wise policies, African farmers could grow much more rice, perhaps enough to eliminate virtually all imports.
Much of the rice grown in Pakistan, Vietnam, and especially America is stimulated by subsidies, and then dumped into African markets at low prices – sometimes below the cost of production.
These rice exporters, including the US, also maintain stiff import duties, thereby protecting domestic farmers from global competition.
African governments sharply reduced or eliminated duties on imported rice in the 1990’s, urged on by the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund, and influential free-market economists.
The assumption was that rich countries would reciprocate by curtailing subsidies to their farmers.
But they haven’t.
In response, a few African countries have raised duties on rice, violating a key tenet of neo-liberal trade philosophy.
But rice duties are working in Uganda – and in Nigeria, where rice output is also soaring and the value of imported rice is declining – and policymakers rightly believe that they must be maintained.
The big exporters, such as the US and Vietnam, continue to supply massive subsidies to their rice farmers.
Without protection, African farmers would once again be harmed by imports.
Indeed, African governments might wish to look selectively at other crops.
They need to rely on a mix of economic tools, including farm protectionism, aimed at helping indigenous producers. 
Virtually every successful Asian economy was built on selective trade barriers – and in China and India, the world’s two fastest growing economies, such barriers remain in place.
Even Korea and Japan maintain massive duties on imported rice simply to protect the livelihoods of their own rice farmers.
Uganda and other African countries need to be careful that protectionism doesn’t become a cover for inefficiency or corruption.
And selective protectionism is of course no panacea for Africa, even when such policies effectively aid local producers.
But economic self-reliance is a worthy goal for most African countries, and Uganda’s experience suggests the potential of an approach long denigrated by the international community.
For too long, African governments have listened to the siren song of free trade – and have suffered from too much openness, not too little.
With the US and the European Union unwilling to slash their farm subsidies, Uganda’s rice experiment deserves wider attention, if only because it shows that Africans aren’t merely passive victims of international economic forces.
They are fighting back and, at least in the rice fields of Uganda, they are winning.
David Cameron’s Europe
STOCKHOLM – The next 18-24 months are likely to decide the shape of Europe for decades to come, and the United Kingdom has now started the clock on that process.
Reelected with a resounding – and entirely unexpected – majority in the House of Commons, Prime Minister David Cameron must now use his increased mandate to set out an EU reform package that is attractive to all member states.
In recent years, the tail has tended to wag the dog in the UK, with Cameron kowtowing to the fanatically anti-European wing of his Conservative Party, if only to hold the pro-withdrawal UK Independence Party at bay.
But now that his own authority has been strengthened significantly by his victory, with the UKIP emerging as the election’s biggest loser, he can now step forward as the pragmatic but committed European that he truly is.
In a series of speeches over recent years, Cameron has spoken about a European reform agenda centered on increasing the EU’s competitiveness and improving its institutions’ transparency.
In the wake of Russian revanchism and the mayhem spreading across the Middle East, were Cameron to speak today of the changes that Europe needs to make, I would hope that he would add his support for more effective common foreign and security policies.
If Cameron sets out such a reform agenda at the European Council in June and is prepared to listen as well as to talk, he could set in motion a process that benefits all of Europe.
Then, it will be primarily up to EU Council President Donald Tusk, under the Luxembourg, Netherlands, Slovakia, and Malta presidencies of the EU over the next two years, to move a reform package forward by early 2017.
This will be a process in which the EU’s 28 member states, rather than the European Commission, must be in command.
Only by appealing to and involving the EU’s national political institutions can EU reform succeed.
Next year should be a period of intense debate on a reform package that, when put together, will, it is hoped, be agreed by all of the EU’s members, because Cameron needs to hold his promised in-or-out referendum on the EU before the UK takes over the rotating presidency on July 1, 2017.
At the moment, opinion polls indicate that the UK electorate would vote for continued EU membership.
Then again, no opinion polls predicted that the general election would result in a majority Conservative government.
So no one should be under any illusion about the risks inherent in any British referendum on EU membership.
Of course, the EU is not powerless to influence the outcome.
The Union can do its part in the coming 18 months by demonstrating its ability to deliver not only a potent reform package, but also implement other key policies, such as the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership with the United States and the Digital Single Market.
Success in such areas, and the economic benefits they will bring, will make leaving the EU even more unattractive for the UK.
But a UK decision to leave, should it come to that, would initiate a painful and complicated process of negotiating an exit and agreeing on some sort of new relationship.
There would be no attractive options, and the result – regardless of how much goodwill both sides bring to the talks – would leave both the UK and the EU visibly diminished, not least on the world stage.
Moreover, it would be naive to expect that the rest of the EU could just go on as before.
On the contrary, British withdrawal would likely inspire similar moves in other countries, with the risk that the EU, already weakened, might begin to fragment.
And, given his current efforts to divide Europe, one can be sure that Russian President Vladimir Putin would do all that he can to encourage, and finance, such a split.
During this period, the EU would also have to address the ongoing challenges to its eastern neighbors, particularly Ukraine, posed by Putin’s revisionism, as well as the meltdown of much of its southern neighborhood in the Middle East and North Africa.
In this context, a weakened and fractured Europe – unable to confront threats stemming from its immediate environment – would be a more dangerous place to live.
Cameron’s remarkable victory should be viewed as an opportunity to launch a renewed and reformed EU in the next two years.
The UK’s European partners expect Cameron to frame the debate that must now begin if a truly stronger EU – one that can face up to its future and its future challenges – is to emerge.
But there is also the possibility of it all going terribly wrong.
In these dangerous times, the consequences of Europe’s disintegration must not be underestimated.
Leading, not Leaving, Europe
EDINBURGH – Can the United Kingdom ever reconcile itself to being part of Europe?
If recent British newspaper headlines about the June 23 referendum on continued European Union membership are any guide, the answer appears to be a decisive “no.”
Proponents of leaving the EU have campaigned on fear of runaway immigration and a cascade of purported dangers – whether delivered by boat or bomb – to the British way of life.
Their opponents, who want the UK to remain part of Europe, highlight another fear: the loss of jobs that are dependent on European trade.
The nonstop sloganeering around these platforms has exposed conflicting worldviews.
The rhetoric of the “Leave” supporters conjures up the spirit of Dunkirk in 1940 – a nation standing alone, impervious to invading armadas and armies, and always fiercely independent of Europe.
In theory, the “Remain” campaign stands for a different Britain: outward-looking, engaged, and internationally minded.
But the Conservative Party is bitterly divided on the issue, and many of its most prominent spokesmen have wilted under fire from a hostile Euroskeptic media.
As a result, they often seem to be advocating for a half-in, half-out relationship with Europe – for a Britain that is semi-detached, rather than fully engaged.
A positive, principled, and progressive case for British membership in the EU has yet to be made.
Positive arguments are the sharpest arrows in the quiver of those who want Britain to remain in Europe.
Meeting the needs and aspirations of the British people in the twenty-first century requires us to let go of the past, acknowledge that the present is defined by globalization, and recognize that the future is filled with opportunity.
Our increased interdependence suggests the need for greater international cooperation and coordination, and that is precisely what the EU offers.
Because “Leave” voters view globalization as a liability, they look for protection and insulation, demanding that “control” be brought back home.
One recent, but not necessarily representative, poll found that 43% of those certain to vote favored bringing control back to the UK by leaving the EU – even if they were to become financially worse off as a result.
Only 23% did not.
A casual observer could be forgiven for thinking that forging a post-referendum national consensus on a European future is impossible.
But there is a way forward.
We must start by recognizing that in an increasingly integrated and interdependent world, each country needs to strike the right balance between the national autonomy that it desires and the international cooperation that it requires.
Britain should not have to choose between two absolutes: total autonomy, which would undervalue the need to cooperate with our nearest neighbors, and complete integration into a European superstate, which would fail to recognize the continuing importance of national identities and decision-making.
Issue by issue, there is a way forward that will make both Britain and Europe more competitive, democratic, and accountable.
If we can show that opportunity, fairness, safety, and security can be enhanced in Europe – and that we can be a proud leader of the EU’s reform agenda – a British consensus might begin to emerge.
Take the economy.