China’s Bad Dream
LONDON – Since his first address as China’s president last year, Xi Jinping has been espousing the so-called “Chinese Dream” of national rejuvenation and individual self-improvement.
But the imperative of addressing the unprecedented amount of debt that China has accumulated in recent years is testing Xi’s resolve – and his government is blinking.
The Chinese government’s uncertain ability – or willingness – to rein in debt is apparent in its contradictory commitment to implement major structural reforms while maintaining 7.5% annual GDP growth.
Given that China owes much of its recent growth to debt-financed investment – often in projects like infrastructure and housing, meant to support the Chinese Dream – any effort to get credit growth under control is likely to cause a hard landing.
This prospect is already prompting the authorities to delay critical reforms.
To be sure, China’s debt/GDP ratio, reaching 250% this month, remains significantly lower than that of most developed economies.
The problem is that China’s stock of private credit would normally be associated with a per capita GDP of around $25,000 – almost four times the country’s current level.
There are strong parallels between China’s current predicament and the investment boom that Japan experienced in the 1980s.
Like China today, Japan had a high personal savings rate, which enabled investors to rely heavily on traditional, domestically financed bank loans.
Moreover, deep financial linkages among sectors amplified the potential fallout of financial risk.
And Japan’s external position was strong, just as China’s is now.
Another similarity is the accumulation of debt within the corporate sector.
Corporate leverage in China rose from 2.4 times equity in 2007 to 3.5 times last year – well above American and European levels.
Nearly half of this debt matures within one year, even though much of it is being used to finance multi-year infrastructure projects.
Making matters worse, much of the new credit has originated in the shadow-banking sector at high interest rates, causing borrowers’ repayment capacity to become overstretched.
One in five listed corporations carries gross leverage of more than eight times equity and earns less than two times interest coverage, weakening considerably these companies’ resilience to growth shocks.
To be sure, China’s situation is more extreme than Japan’s.
At its peak, Japanese investment stood at 33% of GDP, compared to 47% in China.
This is a substantial difference, especially considering that China’s per capita GDP amounts to only 19% of Japan’s at its highest level, and that its debt has already reached 60% of Japan’s.
Moreover, the accumulation of debt in China – 71 percentage points of GDP over the last five years – has been far sharper than in Japan, where the debt level grew by only 16 percentage points over the five-year period before its bust.
That is all the more reason to believe that Japan’s experience can provide important insight into the risks that China faces.
After Japan’s bubble burst, annual GDP growth, which averaged 5.8% in the four years preceding the bust, plummeted to 0.9% for the next four years.
With bad debt left to fester on banks’ balance sheets, growth vanished and deflation set in.
While private debt as a share of GDP stabilized, public debt increased by 50% in the five years after the bust.
The collapse of China’s credit bubble would likely cause annual GDP growth to drop to 1-2%, on average, for the subsequent four years, assuming a 2% annual decline in capital expenditure and a still-respectable consumption-growth rate of 3-5%.
Consolidated public-sector debt would rise to 100% of GDP.
This is a relatively modest prediction.
Without automatic stabilizers or a strong financial-stability framework underpinned by deposit insurance, coping with the downside risks of the potentially destabilizing financial reforms that the government is pursuing will be difficult enough; a credit shock could prove disastrous.
China’s debt tipping point is to be found in its massive real-estate bubble.
According to the investment bank UBS, new urban housing supply has far exceeded marginal underlying demand from urban population growth.
Indeed, almost half of the formal increase is not an increase at all, but merely recognition of rural workers who have been living and working in cities for some time.
The impact of a sharp decline in real-estate prices would be far-reaching.
After all, property collateral is the bedrock of the Chinese financial system, with estimates of banks’ direct and indirect exposure to real estate ranging from 66% to 89% of GDP.
Complicating matters further is the government’s lack of options for stabilizing property markets.
In fact, a key part of the problem is that China’s response to cyclical weakness always entails more housing construction.
China’s lack of automatic stabilizers places the tension between reform objectives and growth imperatives in sharp relief.
The only way for the government to shore up growth in the short run is to pursue more debt-driven stimulus, as it did earlier this year.
But this will also cause China’s debt burden to continue to grow, with bad debt increasingly crowding out good credit.
If China’s leaders continue to choose debt-fueled growth over reform, they will only delay, and possibly prolong, the inevitable slowdown.
That would turn Xi’s Chinese Dream into a more elusive prospect.
Gene Pool Rules
CLEVELAND – For thousands of years, humans have used genetic engineering to control the evolution of plants and animals.
So it is inevitable that we will use it to shape our own evolution.
Our efforts so far have been modest: online dating services are beginning to match subscribers on the basis of their genetic compatibility; parents increasingly screen embryos and fetuses, allowing only those with the healthiest genes to be born; geneticists are only slowly improving their ability to manipulate DNA directly; and no one is trying to make germline changes in humans that will be passed on to succeeding generations.
Full-scale human evolutionary engineering is still far off, but, at some point in the future, it may well become routine.
The challenge for humanity is twofold: to survive long enough to reach that point, and to cause the least amount of harm while getting there.
Those most immediately at risk are children, who are in danger of having their genetic material manipulated in damaging ways.
The harm can be physical (stillbirths, deformities, and genetic disorders); but, even genetic engineering that is technically successful can cause psychosocial harm to children, who may be shunned by peers for being odd-looking or merely “different.”
On a societal level, genetic engineering that only the wealthy can afford would threaten social cohesion by ruling out equality of opportunity.
Genetic haves and have-nots could form separate castes, with reproductive isolation possibly producing physical changes that would make inter-caste procreation impossible.
Ultimately, this could lead to the emergence of distinct human species.
Given that no human species other than our own survives (Homo floresiensis disappeared about 18,000 years ago), the prospects for harmonious coexistence among future human species are not reassuring.
In the worst case, the human genetic lineage itself could be wiped out by inter-species conflict.
Even without speciation, the same outcome could occur through a loss of genetic diversity: If everyone selected the same traits for their offspring, their descendants would be incapable of surviving a sudden, unexpected environmental challenge.
Geneticists often express skepticism about such predictions.
For example, a reviewer of my recent book, writing in Science, pointed out how little impact “a few genetically engineered individuals” will have on the human gene pool.
But, while it is true that a genetic-engineering catastrophe will not overtake the entire human species anytime soon, existing genetic-engineering technologies already can harm individual children: witness the increase in premature births and low birth weights associated with in vitro fertilization.
And reproductive decisions that reflect a cultural preference for boys are beginning to produce social problems in countries like China and India.
Simply put, in the absence of unknown and unforeseeable technical impediments, human evolutionary engineering is likely to become sufficiently widespread in the future to pose species-wide threats.
So, while it may not be necessary to employ measures now to prevent harm in the future, it makes sense to identify which measures might be needed, together with the changes in social norms and behaviors that might be required to implement them.
Many of the risks from evolutionary engineering are triggered by bad parental decision-making.
Eager to give their children social advantages, parents may make reproductive decisions based on faulty or incomplete genetic information, or seek genetic alteration of their offspring before adequate safety testing has been carried out.
Determining when it is permissible to interfere with parental choices is challenging, given the deference that parents typically receive.
Most countries have laws aimed at protecting children from abuse and neglect.
But legislation to safeguard children’s welfare does not adequately address harms produced or set in motion before birth, or establish which types of evolutionary engineering are acceptable.
Most of the reproductive decisions parents make cannot be carried out without the aid of professionals such as physicians, so it might be necessary to regulate professional behavior as well.
While some of the infrastructure, such as licensure laws for physicians, is already in place, additional steps may be needed, such as heightened regulation of infertility clinics, where many genetic-engineering interventions will take place.
Furthermore, rules must be established for assessing the safety and effectiveness of new technologies with respect both to immediate recipients and their descendants.
Some forms of evolutionary engineering that do not directly harm individuals, and therefore would not be subject to such regulations, such as decisions by all parents to make the same genetic changes in their offspring, could threaten the survival of the human lineage.
Public-health systems could respond to this concern.
Yet, in view of past efforts by officials to employ genetics to improve public health – most notably, the early-twentieth-century eugenics movement, with its appalling forced sterilization campaigns – it is important to ensure that such power is wielded judiciously and on the basis of sound science.
Finally, if too few members of society enjoy too great a genetic advantage, social cohesion and democratic institutions could be threatened even in the absence of any direct physical harm.
If the genetic engineering that we allow is to benefit our descendants, it must be as widely available as possible.
Genetic Property Rights on Trial
LONDON – In early February 2010, a United States federal district court in New York began deciding a landmark case as to whether individuals have a “right to know” about how their own genomes can dictate their future health.
The case, American Civil Liberties Union v. Myriad Genetics , may have a tremendous impact on medicine and science.
The questions on which the case turns are whether genetic patents help or hamper research, and whether patients should have to pay a license fee to a biotechnology corporation to be tested for predisposition to disease.
One of the plaintiffs is Lisbeth Ceriani, a 43-year-old woman with breast cancer whose doctors recommended that she be tested for two genetic mutations involved in some hereditary forms of the disease.
Myriad Genetics, the sole test provider in the US – it holds a patent on the genes themselves , not just on the diagnostic test – did not accept her insurance, and Ceriani could not afford to pay for the test.
So she remained ignorant, as did her physicians – with possible ramifications for her clinical care.
Five other plaintiffs – along with major medical bodies – tell similar stories.
Those who oppose genetic patents claim that they also deny US constitutional rights, making this the first time a genetic patent has been challenged on human rights grounds.
As so often happens in biotechnology, what looks at first like an abstruse technical issue raises many questions that cut to the core of our humanity.
One human gene out of approximately every five is now the subject of a patent, the majority of which are held by private firms.
This case concerns two such genes, BRCA1 and BRCA2.
Women with the “wrong” version of these genes have a heightened risk of developing breast cancer (up to 85%, against the normal 12%, although the genes account for only a minority of breast cancers).
These women also run a greater risk of ovarian cancer.
Myriad Genetics also has tried to pursue patent rights in Europe, but there its claims have been largely rejected.
Although the gene’s function in causing breast and ovarian cancer was uncovered by Cancer Research UK in 1995, Myriad, along with nearly 30 other defendants, argues that the patent is a necessary reward for its research costs.
In fact, without patent protections, the firm and its allies claim, medical research would shudder to a halt.
But, whatever the merits of the claim that genetic patents benefit research and treatment, that is a practical, rather than a legal, argument.
In order to gain legal “standing” to sue Myriad Genetics, critics of genetic patents – including the American Medical Association, the American Society of Human Genetics, and the American Civil Liberties Union – had to find an issue that could be adjudicated on a constitutional basis.
Their innovative strategy is to draw on the First Amendment, which protects freedoms such as speech and religion, to argue that patents restrict patients’ freedom of access to information that might enable us to take action to protect our health.
That is a clever argument, but is it really the source of people’s profound disquiet about genetic patenting?
In talking about similar issues raised in my recent book Body Shopping , I have heard many shocked reactions to the growing commodification of human tissue, but none more generally shared than this one: how can you take out a patent on life?
Is a genetic variant a “product of nature” or a “discovery”?
While the plaintiffs assert that “genes are identified, not invented,” the defendants claim that the basis of patent law is precisely the opposite.
Their argument is that what is patented is not the gene as it occurs in our bodies, but rather a sort of “cloned” version produced in the laboratory.
Rather than a “patent on life,” the companies say, they are patenting something more like a chemical.
If that is true, how can Ceriani rightfully be kept in the dark about what form the gene takes in her body?
This is not just a problem for people who think – wrongly, in legal terms – that they own their bodies, as most people do.
With a few limited and recent exceptions, there is no such thing as property in tissue once it has left your body.
We know that from such cases as that of John Moore, who tried unsuccessfully to claim property rights in a valuable cell line developed from his immune cells.
But what about a gene that has not left my body?
Don’t I somehow still “own” it?
Don’t I have rights of control over my own body?
How can a commercial firm not only deny me the right to know my own genetic profile unless I pay their fee for the diagnostic test, which might be fair enough, but also to prevent any other firm from offering me a similar test unless those firms pay it a license fee?
Proprietary rights for commercial firms over the most basic element of an individual’s genetic identity should not be enforceable.
We do not have to believe in genetic determinism to find that argument compelling.
The Age of Epigenetics
LONDON – Fifty-one years ago, James Watson, Maurice Wilkins, and Francis Crick were awarded the Nobel Prize in Medicine for their discovery of DNA’s structure – a breakthrough that heralded the age of the gene.
Since then, the field of genetics has advanced significantly, particularly as a result of the global Human Genome Project, which in 2003 identified all of the roughly 23,000 genes and three billion chemical base pairs in human DNA in order to screen for many rare diseases.
But, despite evidence that most diseases have a clear genetic component, only a fraction of the genes that explain them have been found.
And scientists in the field remain puzzled by the fact that most identical twins (who share 100% of their genes) do not die from the same diseases.
As a result, many in the scientific community are beginning to predict a decline in the role of the gene in pinpointing the root causes of diseases.
It is too soon to discount genetics, however, because the science of “epigenetics” – the study of mechanisms for turning genes on and off, thus changing the way a cell develops without altering the genetic code – is gaining traction.
Indeed, the 2012 Nobel Prize in Medicine was awarded to John Gurdon and Shinya Yamanaka for revolutionizing scientists’ understanding of how cells develop by reprogramming DNA and cells without altering their genetic structure.
In 1962, Gurdon’s finding that almost any cell in the body contains the complete DNA code enabled him to create a tadpole by cloning an adult frog.
More than four decades later, in 2006, Yamanaka discovered a way to trick complex adult cells in mice into regressing to their immature state, forming stem cells.
Before this, stem cells – which can potentially be reprogrammed to develop into replacements for lost or damaged tissue – could be taken only from early-stage embryos, a practice that fueled ethical controversy.
The true promise of epigenetics has become apparent only in the last few years, as scientists’ ability to assess the epigenetic mechanisms in DNA – which can now be measured at roughly 30 million points across the human genome – has dramatically improved.
Epigenetics can potentially be used to explain the root causes of many diseases that scientists have so far struggled to understand, from asthma to allergies to autism.
Consider lung cancer.
Six decades ago, when most men smoked, British doctors linked smoking to lung cancer, making it the first disease to be causally linked to smoking.
(In fact, lung cancer kills one in ten smokers.)
But the incidence of certain kinds of lung cancer continues to rise – particularly in women – making it one of the most prolific killers worldwide, despite the general decline of smoking over the last 30 years.
Indeed, nowadays, many lung cancer patients have no history of smoking.
These “blameless” patients seem to develop a different kind of lung cancer from those who report a history of smoking – one that is more responsive to new medications and has better, albeit still poor, outcomes.
Epigenetic processes that cause key anti-cancer genes, such as the tumor suppressor P16, to be switched off could explain the increased prevalence of lung cancer.
A recent study showed that a few years of smoking can have this effect, making smokers more susceptible to a variety of cancers.
My team and I recently studied 36 pairs of identical twins, of which only one twin had breast cancer.
These “genetic clones” had a few crucial differences.
In the twin who developed the breast cancer, several hundred genes had been switched off.
In a few genes, this had occurred five years before diagnosis.
Such findings unlock the possibility of a diagnostic test well before the disease manifests itself, and of developing drugs that prevent – or even reverse – the cancer’s development.
Moreover, animal studies have shown that changes in stress or diet can alter the behavior and genes of future generations.
As a result, it is likely that epigenetic changes can be inherited.
For example, smoking could have caused epigenetic changes in a grandparent’s DNA, effectively switching off certain anti-cancer genes.
The genes would then be passed down to descendants in this switched-off state.
Thus, the toxins that people ingest may not be the only relevant factor should cancer strike; the toxins that their parents or grandparents ingested could also be to blame.
Physical experiments revealing such trans-generational effects are impossible to conduct on humans, so historical or observational data must be used.
One study of children in Bristol showed differences in growth depending on whether their grandfathers had smoked before the age of 11.
Their bodies probably reacted defensively, adapting in the short term by changing the genes for the next few generations, or until the “danger” had passed, a so-called “soft inheritance” running in parallel to slower-acting evolutionary forces.
Fortunately, these epigenetic changes are potentially reversible.
Four epigenetic leukemia drugs, which aim to switch the natural protective genes back on, are now on the market in the United States.
More than 40 other epigenetic drugs are being developed, not only for cancer, but also for obesity and even dementia.
In the future, regular epigenetic health check-ups could become standard practice.
More than 50 years on, genes remain crucial to understanding complex diseases – especially given scientists’ ever-improving ability to alter them.
The age of the gene is far from over; it has simply progressed into the age of epigenetics.
Harnessing the Genomics Revolution
CAMBRIDGE – Just 13 years after the successful completion of the Human Genome Project, the power of genomics applications to spur innovation is already becoming apparent.
Indeed, though the genomics revolution is just getting underway, it is becoming a transformative agent in the global economy – one that promises to bring far-reaching social and environmental benefits.
In the United States alone, the $3.8 billion in public funds invested in the Human Genome Project has already generated close to $1 trillion in economic returns and more than 300,000 jobs.
According to the OECD, genomics will become a central component of many economic sectors, including health care, the environment, agriculture, animal health, biotechnology, alternative energy, forensics, justice, and security.
With the pace of innovation continuing to accelerate, this prediction will likely be fulfilled even sooner than anticipated.
The area where genomics-driven innovations have attracted the most attention is health.
Rapid progress toward truly “personalized medicine” is occurring, with patients’ DNA profiles being translated into more individualized, predictive, and preventive medical care.
Already, studies to identify genes associated with common diseases – including some that represent significant health, economic, and social burdens, such as cancer, diabetes, cardiovascular disease, and obesity – are beginning to enable doctors to use patient DNA information to inform clinical care.
And researchers are identifying genetic variations that influence the effects of drugs, allowing safer and more effective administration of medication to manage pain and treat some cancers, as well as cardiovascular and psychiatric diseases.
Taking these developments a step further, the Precision Medicine Initiative, launched in the US last year, is pursuing innovative trials of targeted drugs for adult and pediatric cancers, introducing customized combination therapies, and honing its understanding of drug resistance.
In the longer term, the project aims to create a research cohort of more than a million volunteers whose shared genetic data, biological samples, and lifestyle information will form the foundation for precision medicine in a large number of human diseases.
But health care is far from the only area influenced by the genomics-driven revolution.
There have been game-changing developments in other fields as well, many with proven potential to help address global challenges, such as ensuring food security and safeguarding the environment in the face of a rapidly growing global population, expected to reach 9.6 billion in 35 years.
Selection of high-value traits using genomics is giving farmers, and the food industry in general, the tools to produce more and better foods.
Rice crops in Southeast Asia, for example, can now be flood-resistant.
Beef, dairy, and swine herds produce higher output.
The burgeoning fishery and aquaculture sector is benefiting from species with better yields and greater resistance to disease and stress.
Moreover, by providing detailed information on biodiversity and the interactions within ecosystems, genomics is driving the development of innovative environmental-protection strategies.
Forests are a prime example.
By broadening our understanding of commercially valuable traits, such as insect resistance, wood quality, growth rates, and adaptation to climate change, genomics has helped to improve the sustainability of tree breeding and forest management.
Canadian and Chinese researchers are also using genomic analysis of the microbial communities living in hydrocarbon deposits to develop new bioprocesses that will make oil and gas extraction greener, by enhancing resource recovery, reducing water and energy use, and minimizing greenhouse-gas emissions.
The promise of genomics is seemingly limitless.
But if that promise is to be fulfilled, major challenges must be overcome.
In health care, in particular, we need to continue generating solid evidence of the value of moving personalized medicine into routine practice.
Furthermore, rigorous economic analyses are needed to guide policies on health-care coverage and reimbursement.
Above all, important questions surrounding patient privacy, technology access, reporting of incidental findings, discrimination, and counseling must be answered, so that thoughtful and forward-looking public policies can be devised.
To this end, mechanisms to ensure broad public discussion and participation must be strengthened.
Even at this early stage, it is clear that genomics is set to transform science and technology and sustain a wave of far-reaching innovation.
Now is the time for countries and regions to embrace genomics research and technologies, and to start translating them into effective solutions to major global, regional, and local challenges.
The Geography of Elections
PARIS – In many countries, where you live tends to be an accurate predictor of what or whom you are voting for.
This was most evident in the maps of the electoral geography of voting for “Leave” and “Remain” in the United Kingdom’s June referendum on European Union membership.
A similar pattern can be found in the distribution of votes in the 2012 US presidential election or in French support for Marine Le Pen’s National Front in the 2015 regional elections.
It is very likely to be found in the United States’ upcoming presidential election.
Many citizens live in places where a large share of their neighbors vote the same way they do.
This voting geography is indicative of a deep economic, social, and educational divide.
Affluent cities, where university graduates concentrate, tend to vote for internationally-minded, often center-left candidates, while lower middle-class and working-class districts tend to vote for trade-adverse candidates, often from the nationalist right.
It is no accident that mayors from the center-left govern New York, London, Paris, and Berlin, whereas smaller, struggling cities tend to prefer hard-right politicians.
Regional or local voting patterns are as old as democracy.
What is new is a growing correlation of spatial, social, and political polarization that is turning fellow citizens into near-strangers.
As Enrico Moretti of the University of California at Berkeley emphasized in his book The New Geography of Jobs, the salience of this new divide is unmistakable: university graduates account for half of the total population in the most affluent US metropolitan areas, but are four times less numerous in worse-off areas.
Economic shocks tend to exacerbate this political divide.
Those who happen to live and work in traditional manufacturing districts caught in the turmoil of globalization are multiple losers: their jobs, their housing wealth, and the fortunes of their children and relatives are all highly correlated.
In fascinating new research, MIT’s David Autor and his co-authors have explored the political consequences.
They find that US districts where the economy was severely hit by Chinese exports have responded by replacing moderate representatives with more radical politicians – either from the left or the right.
Globalization, therefore, has resulted in both economic and political polarization.
For too long, governments have neglected this divide.
Some put faith in trickle-down economics, others in a monetary-policy-driven revival of growth and employment, and still others in fiscal redistribution.
But these solutions have delivered little respite.
Evidence speaks against the naive hope that prosperity will eventually reach all areas.
Modern economic development relies heavily on interactions, which in turn require a high density of firms, skills, and innovators.
It puts a premium on agglomeration, which is why larger cities tend to thrive, while smaller cities struggle.
Once an area has started losing skills and firms, there is little hope that the trend will naturally reverse.
Being without a job can quickly become the new normal.
Aggregate demand expansion hardly alleviates the pain.
Even if it remains true that a rising tide lifts all boats, it does not do so in an even way.
For those who feel left out, stronger national growth often means even more prosperity and dynamism in the better-off cities, and little, if any, gain for themselves – hence a sharper, even more unbearable divide.
Growth itself has become divisive.
And whereas fiscal transfers help counter inequality and fight poverty, they do little to repair the social fabric.
Furthermore, their long-term sustainability is increasingly in doubt.
In her inaugural address, British Prime Minister Theresa May committed herself to a “unionist” approach to the country’s economic and social woes.
US presidential candidates have also rediscovered the strength of the demand for national and social cohesion.
Similar concerns will no doubt be raised in the coming French presidential campaign.
Yet, if the ends are clear, politicians are often clueless about the means.
In the US presidential campaign, trade protection is fashionable again.
But, while import restrictions may alleviate the pain of some manufacturing districts, they will not prevent companies from relocating where growth opportunities are the strongest.
They will not protect workers from technological change.
And they will not recreate yesterday’s development patterns.
Most prominently in the UK, but elsewhere as well, economic migration is increasingly being called into question.
But here, too, while restricting the entry of Eastern European workers may alleviate wage competition or stem the rise in housing prices, it will not change the relative fate of small and big cities.
Rather than claiming the opposite, politicians should acknowledge that there are no quick fixes to the uneven geography of modern economic development.
Inconvenient as it may be, the rise of the metropolis is a fact – one that should not be resisted, because it is not a zero-sum game.
Big cities do yield aggregate economic benefits.
What public policy must do is ensure that economic agglomeration does not threaten equality of opportunity.
Governments cannot decide where companies locate; but it is their responsibility to ensure that, although where you live affects your income, where you were born does not determine your future.
In other words, public policy has a major responsibility in limiting the correlation between geography and social mobility.
As Raj Chetty of Stanford and others have shown, this is far from being the case in the US, and similar patterns can be observed in other countries.
Infrastructure can help.
Efficient transportation, quality health services, and broadband Internet access can help smaller cities attract investment in sectors that do not rely on agglomeration effects.
Back-office services, for example, may have an advantage in being located where office space and housing are cheap.
Finally, there is a case for limiting the selfishness of better-off areas.
The distribution of competences between national and subnational levels, as well as the structure of taxation, was defined in a very different environment.
To mitigate the geo-economic divide, they may have to be rethought fundamentally.
The Global Economy Confronts Four Geopolitical Risks
CAMBRIDGE – The end of the year is a good time to consider the risks that lie ahead of us.
There are of course important economic risks, including the mispricing of assets caused by a decade of ultra-low interest rates, the shifts in demand caused by the Chinese economy’s changing structure, and European economies’ persistent weakness.
But the main longer-term risks are geopolitical, stemming from four sources: Russia, China, the Middle East, and cyberspace.
Although the Soviet Union no longer exists, Russia remains a formidable nuclear power, with the ability to project force anywhere in the world.
Russia is also economically weak because of its dependence on oil revenue at a time when prices are down dramatically.
President Vladimir Putin has already warned Russians that they face austerity, because the government will no longer be able to afford the transfer benefits that it provided in recent years.
The geopolitical danger arises from Putin’s growing reliance on military action abroad – in Ukraine and now in Syria – to maintain his popularity at home, using the domestic media (now almost entirely under Kremlin control) to extol Russia’s global importance.
Russia also uses its gas exports to Western Europe and Turkey as an economic weapon, although Turkey’s recent decision to source gas from Israel shows the limits of this strategy.
As Putin responds to this and other challenges, Russia will remain a source of substantial uncertainty for the rest of the world.
China is still a poor country, with per capita GDP at roughly a quarter of the US level (on the basis of purchasing power parity).
But, because its population is four times larger, its total GDP is equal to America’s (in PPP terms).
And it is total GDP that determines a country’s ability to spend on military power, to provide a strategically significant market for other countries’ exports, and to offer aid to other parts of the world.
China is doing all of these things on a scale commensurate with its GDP.
Looking ahead, even with the more moderate growth rates projected for the future, China’s GDP will grow more rapidly than that of the US or Europe.
China is now expanding its strategic reach.
It is asserting maritime claims in the East and South China Seas that conflict with claims by other countries in the region (including Japan, the Philippines, and Vietnam).
In particular, China is relying on the so-called “nine-dash line” (originally created by Taiwan in 1947) to justify its claim to most of the South China Sea, where it has created artificial islands and asserted sovereignty over their surrounding waters.
The US characterizes China’s policy as “anti-access area denial”: an effort to keep the US Navy far from the Chinese mainland and therefore from the coasts of America’s allies in the region.
China also is expanding its geopolitical influence through initiatives like the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank, aid programs in Africa, and its “One Belt, One Road” plan to establish maritime and territorial links through the Indian Ocean and Central Asia, extending all the way to Europe.
The current Chinese political leadership wants a peaceful and cooperative relationship with the US and other Western countries.
But, looking to the future, the challenge for the US and its allies will be to deter future generations of Chinese leaders from adopting policies that threaten the West.
In the Middle East, much of the world’s focus has been on the threat posed by ISIS to civilian populations everywhere – including Europe and the United States.
But the bigger issue in the region is the conflict between Shia and Sunni Muslims, a divide that has persisted for more than a thousand years.
For most of that time, and in most places, the Shia have faced discrimination – and often lethal violence – at the hands of Sunnis.
Thus, Saudi Arabia and other Sunni-ruled Gulf states view Iran, the region’s Shia power, as their strategic nemesis.
Saudi Arabia, in particular, fears that Iran wants to settle old scores and attempt to shift custodianship of Islam’s holy sites in Mecca and Medina to Shia control.
A conflict between Saudi Arabia and Iran would also be a fight over the vast oil riches of the Arabia Peninsula and the enormous financial wealth of small Sunni states like Kuwait and Qatar.
The final source of risk, cyberspace, may soon overshadow all the rest, because borders and armies cannot limit it.
The threats include denial-of-service attacks on banks and other institutions; unauthorized access to personal records from banks, insurance companies, and government agencies; and industrial espionage.
Indeed, widespread theft of technology from US companies led to a recent agreement between China and the US that neither government will assist in stealing technology to benefit its country’s firms.
These are important issues, but not nearly as serious as the threat that malware poses to critical infrastructure – electricity grids, air traffic systems, oil pipelines, water supplies, financial platforms, and so on.
Recent cases of malware use have been attributed to China, Iran, Russia, and North Korea.
But states need not be involved at all: Individuals and non-state actors could deploy malware simply by hiring the needed talent in the international underground marketplace.
Cyber weapons are relatively cheap (and thus widely accessible) and capable of reaching anywhere in the world.
They are the future weapons of choice for attacking or blackmailing an adversary.
And we still lack the ability to block such attacks or to identify unambiguously their sources.
These four sources of risk constitute an unusually serious set of geopolitical challenges.
By highlighting them, I don’t mean to downplay the importance of other issues – US monetary policy, weak commodity prices, debt crises, and the like – that are likely to affect the global economy in the year ahead.
What’s special about the threats emanating from Russia, China, the Middle East, and cyberspace is that they will persist and threaten our economic future for years to come.
Last Man Standing
LONDON – Much of modern geopolitics seems to be following the plot from Game of Thrones, with many countries under so much political and economic stress that their only hope is that their rivals collapse before they do.
So their governments cling to power while exploiting rivals’ internal weaknesses.
Russian President Vladimir Putin is the prime example.
His recent campaigns in Syria and Ukraine may look like the actions of a geopolitical buccaneer.
But the root of his adventurism is domestic weakness.
Russia’s annexation of Crimea, for example, was in large part an attempt to provide Putin’s regime with renewed legitimacy following a winter of discontent, during which demonstrators took to the streets to protest his return to the presidency.
Rival powers – most notably the United States and the European Union – have introduced sanctions in the hope of widening cracks in the Russian elite, exploiting the fact that Putin has not diversified his economy away from oil and gas.
Putin, in turn, is hoping that Russia’s economy stays afloat long enough for Ukraine to collapse.
To hasten that process, the Kremlin has left no lever of destabilization unpulled: It has launched military incursions, manipulated Ukraine’s politics, used energy blackmail, and engaged in information warfare.
Putin believes that the EU suffers from the same flaws as the former Soviet Union, regarding it as a utopian, multinational project that will crumble under the weight of its contradictions.
Here, too, the Kremlin has done its best to help the process along, by supporting far-right parties throughout the EU.
Putin seems to be hoping that if the United Kingdom votes for “Brexit” and the National Front’s Marine Le Pen is elected President of France, the EU will lose its ability to maintain the sanctions.
He hasn’t stopped with Europe.
After Turkish forces shot down a Russian warplane near its border with Syria in November, Putin adopted a series of measures designed to destabilize Turkey from within.
He imposed economic sanctions, spread rumors of corruption in President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan’s inner circle, invited the leader of a Kurdish party to Moscow, and allegedly sent arms to the militant Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK).
The political scientist Ivan Krastev believes that “Putin seems to have dug in for a long-term policy of sapping Turkey’s economy and undermining Erdoğan politically.”
Elsewhere in the Middle East, Saudi Arabia’s monarchy and Iran’s theocracy are in a race for survival.
The Iranian economy is a wreck after years of international sanctions, and the government has not yet managed to take advantage of the nuclear deal it struck with the US to rebuild it.
But it has managed to rally public support by posing as a leader of the world’s Shia Muslims and undermining Saudi Arabia in Iraq, Syria, Bahrain, and Yemen.
Predicting the collapse of the House of Saud has become a mainstay of Middle East commentary.
But Saudi Arabia is betting that it can keep oil prices low enough for long enough to destabilize Iran and put the US shale-energy industry out of business.
“The party is in disarray, because the rules it has established to limit internecine political warfare have collapsed…. Middle-class acquiescence is beginning to erode because of environmental degradation, poor services, inequality, and corruption.”
China’s rulers, for their part, are betting that they can survive a sharp economic slowdown and that the country will outgrow the US, changing the balance of power in Asia.
One reason for President Xi Jinping’s optimism is the dire state of US politics.
For years, Congress has been gridlocked on domestic reforms, and now the world is contemplating the consequences of a victory by Donald Trump in November’s presidential election.
Chinese nationalists hope that the decline of America’s relative power in East Asia will cause it to pull back, as it has from other regions, including the Middle East and Europe.
An article published last month in China’s People’s Daily speculated that a Trump administration would snub key Asian allies such as Japan and South Korea, allowing China to become the dominant military power in the Pacific.
Even if Hillary Clinton wins the election, they think that the American public has lost its appetite for internationalism and that the country will turn its back on free trade and foreign intervention.
Trying to undercut a rival – even at the risk of harming oneself – is a familiar tactic in the world of business, where firms engage in price wars, hoping their competitors will go bust first and exit the industry.
But it has been less common in geopolitics.
In his 1992 book The End of History and the Last Man, Francis Fukuyama argued that the world had reached the end of socioeconomic development.
Liberal democracy, he concluded, was the “last man,” the end point of this development.
He could not have been more wrong.
Today, the world’s great powers are no longer claiming to be the last man; all they can do is hope to be the last man standing.
Angela Merkel’s Pyrrhic Victory
BUDAPEST – As far as Germany is concerned, the drama of the euro crisis is over.
The subject was barely discussed in the country’s recent election campaign.
Chancellor Angela Merkel did what was necessary to ensure the euro’s survival, and she did so at the least possible cost to Germany – a feat that earned her the support of pro-European Germans as well as those who trust her to protect German interests.
Not surprisingly, she won re-election resoundingly.
But it was a Pyrrhic victory.
The eurozone status quo is neither tolerable nor stable.
Mainstream economists would call it an inferior equilibrium; I call it a nightmare – one that is inflicting tremendous pain and suffering that could be easily avoided if the misconceptions and taboos that sustain it were dispelled. The problem is that the debtor countries feel all the pain, while the creditors impose the misconceptions and taboos.
One example is Eurobonds, which Merkel has declared taboo.
Yet they are the obvious solution to the root cause of the euro crisis, which is that joining the euro exposed member countries’ government bonds to the risk of default.
Normally, developed countries never default, because they can always print money.
But, by ceding that authority to an independent central bank, the eurozone’s members put themselves in the position of a developing country that has borrowed in foreign currency.
Neither the authorities nor the markets recognized this prior to the crisis, attesting to the fallibility of both.
When the euro was introduced, the authorities actually declared member states’ government bonds to be riskless.
Commercial banks could hold them without setting aside any capital reserves, and the European Central Bank (ECB) accepted them on equal terms at its discount window.
This created a perverse incentive for commercial banks to buy the weaker governments’ debt in order to earn what eventually became just a few basis points, as interest-rate differentials converged to practically zero.
But interest-rate convergence caused economic divergence.
The weaker countries enjoyed real-estate, consumption, and investment booms, while Germany, weighed down by the fiscal burden of reunification, had to adopt austerity and implement structural reforms.
That was the origin of the euro crisis, but it was not recognized at the time – and is not properly understood even today.
Converting all outstanding government bonds – with the exception of Greece’s – into Eurobonds would be by far the best remedy.
It would require no transfer payments, because each country would remain responsible for servicing its own debt.
And it would impose stricter market discipline on debtor countries than they currently face, because they could issue Eurobonds only to refinance maturing ones; any additional borrowing would have to be in their own name, and markets would impose penalty rates for excessive borrowing.
Yet Eurobonds would substantially reduce the heavily indebted countries’ borrowing costs and go a long way to reestablishing a level playing field in the eurozone.
Germany’s credit rating would not be endangered, because Eurobonds would compare favorably with bonds issued by other major countries.
Eurobonds would not cure disparities in competitiveness; eurozone countries would still need to undertake their own structural reforms.
But they would remedy the euro’s main design flaw.
All the alternatives are inferior: they either involve transfer payments, perpetuate an uneven playing field, or both.
And yet, owing to Merkel’s opposition, Eurobonds cannot even be considered.
Greece, too, is a victim of its creditors’ misconceptions and taboos.
Everyone knows that it can never pay back its debt, most of which is held by the official sector: the ECB, eurozone member states, or the International Monetary Fund.
After undergoing a lot of pain and suffering, Greece is close to posting a primary budget surplus.
If the official sector could forgo repayment as long as Greece meets the conditions imposed by the Troika (the ECB, the European Commission, and the IMF), private capital would return and the economy could recover rapidly.
I can testify from personal experience that investors would flock to Greece once the debt overhang was removed.
But the official sector cannot write down its debt, because that would violate a number of taboos, particularly for the ECB.
Germany would do well to remember that it has benefited from debt write-downs three times in its history.
The Dawes Plan of 1924 sought to stagger Germany’s reparations payments for World War I. The Young Plan of 1929 reduced the sum that Germany owed in reparations and gave the country much more time to pay.
The post-World War II Marshall Plan provided debt relief as well.
French insistence on harsh reparations payments after World War I clearly prepared the ground for the rise of Hitler.
The rise of Greece’s neo-fascist Golden Dawn is a similar phenomenon.
These two examples justify my description of the euro crisis as a nightmare.
Only Germany can end it, because, as the country with the highest credit rating and largest and strongest economy by far, it is in charge.
Germany, mindful of its recent history, does not want to be cast in the role of a hegemonic power; the current situation is not the result of some evil German plot.
Still, Germany cannot escape the responsibilities and liabilities that go with that role.
It must learn to act as a benign hegemon.
Doing so would earn Germany the lasting gratitude of the countries that are currently subordinated to it, just as the Marshall Plan earned the United States the lasting gratitude of Europe.
Failure to seize this moment would, I believe, lead to the disintegration and eventual collapse of the European Union.
Of course, many countries have lived through nightmares and survived.
But the EU is not a country; it is an incomplete association of sovereign states that will not survive a decade or more of stagnation.
That is not in Germany’s interest, and it would leave Europeans worse off than they were when they embarked on the EU project.
Making a U-turn is never easy for political leaders, but elections do provide an opportunity for a policy change.
The best way to make one would be for Merkel’s next government to appoint an independent expert commission to evaluate the alternatives, without regard to the prevailing taboos.
George W. Bush and America\u0027s Neglected Hemisphere
When the NATO Allies gather in Istanbul, much of the talk will concern the divisions between America and Europe over Iraq.
But Europe is not alone in its estrangement from the United States under President George W. Bush's leadership.
Among the vast list of unforeseen consequences springing from the US fiasco in Iraq is the vital fact that, across Latin America, anti-Americanism is on the rise and is rapidly generating myriad grim effects on the region's politics.
The parallel with Europe does not end there.
Before the Bush administration, various American presidents worked hard to change the US relationship with Latin America from one of hegemon and dominated states to something like the relations that exist with the European allies.
All of that is now gravely at risk - a dangerous turn of events.
Complete estrangement from the US in Latin America will not only harm hemispheric relations, but may discredit broader ideas that are closely associated with the US.
Many of these pernicious side effects can already be perceived.
The first, and deepest, consequence consists in plummeting prestige of and respect for the US and the Bush administration in Latin American public opinion.
This was not the case at the beginning of Bush's term as president.
On the contrary, many capitals south of the Rio Grande had high expectations for the team that moved into the White House in 2001.
After all, during his first nine months in office, Bush declared that he would devote tremendous attention to the hemisphere, and his actions seemed to back up his rhetoric.
He visited Mexico before any other country, renewed Temporary Protection Status for Central American immigrants, maintained President Bill Clinton's waiver of certain trade restrictions on countries and companies doing business with Cuba, and gave new impetus to the negotiations to create a Free Trade Area of the Americas.
Iraq changed all of this.
The invasion, the absence of any weapons of mass destruction or any link between Saddam Hussein and Al Qaeda, the pictures of Iraqi civilian casualties, and the subsequent scenes of humiliating mistreatment or torture of Iraqi prisoners and detainees have all contributed to a wide, deep, and probably lasting collapse of sympathy for the US in the region.
This can be measured in public opinion polls, in newspaper editorials, congressional resolutions, summit declarations, and street demonstrations.
A second effect follows directly from the first.
At least rhetorically speaking, government parties or leaders with a strong anti-US tilt are gaining ground, from Mexico City's Mayor Andrés Manuel López Obrador to the Frente Amplio party in Uruguay, from Schaddick Handal in the old FMLN in El Salvador to Evo Morales in Bolivia, not to mention governments like Hugo Chávez's in Venezuela and Nestor Kirchner's in Argentina.
These anti-US forces are not all necessarily left wing; they are, however, stridently critical of the US. In all likelihood, they will become more vociferous and vituperative before they mellow, because public opinion seems to be rewarding stances and tones such as theirs.
America's friends in Latin America are feeling the fire of this anti-American wrath.
They are finding themselves forced to shift their own rhetoric and attitude in order to dampen their defense of policies viewed as pro-American or US-inspired, and to stiffen their resistance to Washington's demands and desires.
In many cases, American demands and desires are contrary to Latin interests, and should be resisted.
But in other cases, opposition to America's preferences is wrought by public sentiment and goes against the instincts of leaders who know better.
The Bush's administration has brought all of this upon itself.
It could have either avoided a monumental mistake, as Iraq has now proved to be, or it could have brought the United Nations on board from the outset, ensuring that military action, and the subsequent occupation and reconstruction of the country, would have broad multilateral support.
At worst, the Bush administration could have acted alone, but with sufficient force, skill, and diligence - and with the appropriate and imperative respect for human rights and international law - to get the job done quickly.
Instead, the Bush administration, for reasons that are increasingly perplexing, went at it alone.
Moreover, it did so without an endgame strategy, and with a level of force so "underwhelming" that it made the outrageous behavior at the Abu Ghraib prison almost inevitable.
By so doing, Bush's team left America's friends in Latin America - no less than in Europe and elsewhere - in a hapless situation: rightly unable and unwilling to support the US march of folly, and understandably reluctant to poison hemispheric relations in general with the type of strident criticism that local public opinion demands.
Europe’s Middle East Mission
LONDON – America’s gradual withdrawal from the Middle East puts increasing pressure on Europe to help foster peace in the region.
With complex and heated wars threatening to bring about the collapse of states like Syria and Iraq, and the long-simmering conflict between Israel and Palestine seemingly as far from resolution as ever, it is almost easier to ask what Europe should avoid than what it should do.
The starting point must be a simple, fundamental principle: Europe should not take sides.
Allowing preconceptions or emotional reactions to overshadow facts could make the situation much more dangerous.
Consider sectarian struggle between Sunni and Shia Muslims – now the prime mover of events in the Middle East.
Fueled by religious rhetoric and a bloody history, the conflict engenders a degree of passion and irrationality that is difficult to moderate.
As has been said: “Where the fires of faith are burning, the goddess of reason tiptoes silently out of the room.”
Likewise, when it comes to the Israel-Palestine conflict, Europe must recognize that both sides are hypersensitive.
If they are faced with criticism that they deem unfair, they will resort to the kind of truculence and bitterness that has long thwarted efforts to reach an agreement.
At least two-thirds of Israelis, recognizing the benefits that lasting peace would bring to the region, would prefer a two-state solution.
But the same majority fears that the Palestinians – with the split leadership of a relatively moderate Fatah under Palestinian Authority President Mahmoud Abbas and a Gaza administration under the implacable, terror-supporting leadership of Hamas – are not ready for a conventional peace and good neighborly relations. 
Making matters worse, concessions on either side appear to leave no impression on the other.
On the contrary, they are usually met with lethal provocations that push any agreement even further away.
Palestine’s response to Israel’s release in December of 26 political prisoners – the third batch from a total of 104 detainees that Israeli Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu pledged to release when the peace talks were revived last summer – is a case in point.
Many of the prisoners had committed heinous acts of terror.
For example, Juma Ibrahim Juma Adam and Mahmoud Salam Saliman Abu Karbish firebombed a civilian bus, killing a pregnant woman, three of her preschool-age children, and the Israeli soldier who tried to save them.
Yet Abbas received them upon their release, praising them as heroes of the Palestinian people and examples for Palestinian youth.
In this fragile context, EU threats to halt business with Israeli companies present in the country’s West Bank settlements are problematic, as are academic and scientific boycotts against Israel.
Indeed, such moves would be dangerously close to favoring Palestine – a sure-fire way to turn Israel against cooperation.
Of course, given the role that the continual expansion of Israeli settlements in occupied Palestine has played in hampering progress toward peace, it merits a more thorough and sober examination by all relevant parties – especially Israel.
This requires, first and foremost, an understanding of the issue’s scale.
During previous rounds of negotiations, the Palestinian Authority agreed, in principle, to exchange up to 1.9% of West Bank land for Israeli territory.
This means that Israel would be able to annex some settlements adjacent to its border, while giving up only a small share of its land – an exchange to which it should be open when serious negotiations are underway.
The good news is that Tzipi Livni, Israel’s main negotiator, recently stated that Israel would not claim isolated settlements on Arab land.
Through all of this, Europe must present itself as an unbiased mediator.
If negotiators on both sides view it as a credible broker of a lasting and balanced agreement, they may be more receptive to each other’s concessions.
The same is true of religious conflicts throughout the Middle East.
Instead of getting sucked into historical enmities and impassioned disputes, Europe must be resolved to fight implacably against all forms of jihadism, while consistently supporting progress toward conflict resolution.
This does not apply only to diplomats; the European media also have a critical role to play.
New and traditional outlets alike must ensure that they portray the facts accurately and dispassionately, in order to foster a constructive, fair-minded discussion.
Those directly involved in the Middle East’s myriad conflicts do not need any help generating heat.
Georgia on Europe’s Mind
The era in which Europe could rely on America to wage war, make peace, and establish democracy in its own backyard is over.
With European Union enlargement, and as the recent Russian gas crisis demonstrated, that backyard now includes not just Ukraine, but Georgia as well.
Indeed, as in Ukraine, Georgia is undergoing a test of democracy that Europe cannot afford to ignore.
Georgia was the first post-Soviet country to stage a “color revolution,” and thus to demonstrate, with dignity and maturity, its people’s choice for democracy and European values.
The European Union flags that have flown on all Georgian public buildings since then signal a natural attachment, as old as the history of a country that, for the ancient Greeks, was an integral part of the world as it was then known.
Prometheus, Medea, the Amazons and, in neighboring Armenia, Noah’s Ark – the Europe of our myths starts here.
With its history, culture, and traditions – including its critical, independent, and even rebellious spirit within the former Soviet Union – Georgia would seem to be an ideal candidate for successful democratization.
So it is all the more worrisome that democratization there is foundering.
Everything seemed to have started well enough.
Political reforms, privatization, anti-corruption measures, a search for new leaders untainted by compromise with the former regime, and implementation of a pro-European foreign policy met no resistance.
But the totalitarian mindset has since resurfaced in leaders who, with their claim to represent the will of the majority, appropriate more and more power.
Like the ancient Greeks’ Hydra, Georgia’s political elite never ceases to die and be reborn.
The same people and governing methods that the “Rose Revolution” of November 2003 sought to defeat have reemerged at the center of power by using their personal networks, which extend outside Georgia’s borders, as well as their tremendous wealth and finely honed skills at political scheming and manipulation.
This bears little in common with the essence of democracy, which consists not merely in ballot boxes, but in the separation of powers.
The government meddles in the affairs of the parliament, which in turn seeks to micro-manage the government – including, in my case, the nomination of ambassadors and their daily routines!
Finally, and more seriously, the judiciary is not yet independent, undermining the rule of law and thus deterring badly needed private investment.
Georgia’s democracy exists in its head, but not yet in its body: citizens still spurn politics as a dirty pursuit, abandoning the ground to those who should have been retired long ago.
But the hope of democracy remains strongly rooted in Georgia’s people, civic organizations, and media.
Now is the time for Europe to ensure that this hope is not extinguished.
The US has already done as much as it can to support political stability in Georgia since independence.
To be sure, stability was not always identified with democracy during the rule of Eduard Shevardnadze, the former Soviet Union foreign minister who was ousted as our president by the Rose Revolution.
But Americans invested generously in the survival of democratic ideas and leaders.
Although the foundation backed by the financier George Soros did not fabricate the Rose Revolution, as Russian nationalists claim, it certainly nurtured, encouraged, and supported democracy’s preconditions.
But, to help consolidate its democracy, Georgia now requires support of a different nature, which Europe is better equipped to offer.
Russia, while never renouncing its imperial dreams and instruments of domination, was nonetheless coming to terms with the inevitability of democracy, at least on its margins.
But this hesitant acceptance of a certain normality in its relations with its neighbors has always been vulnerable to a sudden eruption of Russia’s famously irrational “derzhava” – an aggressive ethos that glorifies the state and asserts its strength by pouncing on weakness.
This is the key to understanding the recent Russian gas crisis.
Just as surely, any sign of a retreat from democracy in Georgia and other post-Soviet states will merely fuel Russia’s neo-imperial ambitions.
It is Europe’s responsibility to convince Russia that there is no hope of a return to the past.
Europe must assume this role not only to ensure the future independence of its energy supply, but also to demonstrate that European values of freedom, democracy, and justice between peoples have real force.
To succeed, Europe must equip itself with the necessary instruments: a large semi-public foundation to promote Europe and support political reform, a university to train future executives of nascent democracies, a police force, and an army of judges and magistrates to breathe life into the models that we want to emulate.
Above all, Europe needs conviction.
If Europe today cannot convince itself that it has a vital interest in its neighbors’ future, who will believe in Europe tomorrow?
The DNA of German Foreign Policy
BERLIN – The harsh reality of the past year has created unprecedented challenges for Germany and its foreign policy.
The crisis in Ukraine spiraled out of control, with Russia's annexation of Crimea, followed by military escalation in the eastern Donbas region, calling into question the post-1945 European order.
And, though the measures agreed in Minsk earlier this month offer an opportunity to enter into a political process, other crises – for example, the Ebola epidemic in West Africa and the advance of ISIS – have presented new, urgent challenges.
Whether Germany should assume greater responsibility for seeking to resolve such issues is a hotly debated question, both inside and outside the country.
During a year-long “Review 2014," experts, officials, and the wider public discussed challenges, priorities, and instruments of German foreign policy, and tried to define Germany's role in the world.
At the end of the day, outcomes are always concrete.
In some areas, we have been successful over the last year; in others, we can and want to do better.
Germany is widely appreciated for its commitment to promoting peaceful conflict resolution, the rule of law, and a sustainable economic model.
Yet it is abundantly clear from the Review that our partners expect a more active – and even more robust – German foreign policy in the future.
Expectations are high – perhaps too high at times.
So it is up to Germany's people to answer the difficult questions: Where do our interests lie?
How far do our responsibilities extend?
What, in short, is the “DNA" of German foreign policy?
The basic tenets of Germany's foreign policy – close partnership with France within a united Europe and a strong transatlantic alliance in terms of both security and economic cooperation – have withstood the test of time, and will remain a cornerstone of our approach.
But now we must address three key challenges: crisis management, the changing global order, and our position within Europe.
For starters, we must face the fact that globalization has made crises the rule, not the exception.
Though globalization and digitization are driving rapid economic growth, they are also putting pressure on governments worldwide to meet citizens' rising expectations – even as they constrain in unprecedented ways governments' ability to act.
In our globalized world, many people feel a growing desire for the clear answers and timeless validity offered by straightforward and clear-cut identities.
When these identities take the form of nationalism or rigidly defined religious or ethnic categories, the consequence, all too often, is brutal and unrestrained violence, whether through terrorism or civil war.
In confronting crises, German foreign policy must strengthen its focus on reconciliation, mediation, and prevention – or risk being left with no other option but damage control.
Germany is willing to do more in this area internationally.
We want to act sooner, more decisively, and in a more substantial manner – not just when crises become acute, but also by focusing on conflict prevention and post-conflict management.
This requires that we hone our tools and develop new ones, ranging from early-warning mechanisms to enhanced means of international cooperation.
We will review how we can help the United Nations more significantly in safeguarding and building peace.
We must address, with restraint and prudence – rather than with a reflexive “nein" – the difficult question of whether military means are necessary to safeguard political solutions.
We do not know when and where the next crisis will erupt, but we do know that it will – and that we must be better prepared when it does.
But foreign policy must not focus exclusively on crises.
It must also prepare for future scenarios.
And, because Germany is connected to the rest of the world like few other countries, a commitment to a just, peaceful, and resilient international order is a fundamental interest of our foreign policy.
That means adjusting to the long-term changes in the existing order's parameters – changes that have been wrought, above all, by China's rapid rise.
As the tectonic plates of world politics shift, Germany must be more precise in defining its own contributions to maintaining existing structures of international order and establishing new ones.
We must think more deeply about ways to safeguard valuable public goods: the seas, space, and the Internet.
As a result, we must strike the right balance between reinforcing indispensable structures and organizations like the UN and developing new norms and institutional means of minimizing long-term risks.
The key challenge is to develop a proactive foreign policy that invests in order, international institutions, and the intelligent strengthening of international law.
Then there is Europe, which remains the foundation of Germany's foreign policy.
But here, too, new challenges require new answers.
Above all, we must prevent a strategic dilemma in which Germany felt forced to decide between its competitiveness in a globalized world and European integration.
Europe should benefit from Germany's strength, just as we benefit from Europe's.
As Europe's largest economy, we must invest in integration.
That is the source of our strength.
At the same time, we must withstand the temptations that come with Germany's current stature.
In very different ways, the US, Russia, and China are offering Germany a privileged relationship.
But, though we want to maintain and strengthen bilateral ties with important partner countries, when it comes to shaping global development, Germany is capable of acting effectively only within a solid European framework.