The dilution of Glass-Steagall, and its ultimate repeal in 1999, allowed banks to engage in so-called “proprietary trading” – enabling them to use depositors’ savings to trade for their own account, mainly in risky mortgage-backed securities.
But the Obama administration must go further than prohibiting proprietary trading by commercial banks and do two further things.
First, capital requirements should be tripled – not just in the US, but across the G-20 – so that banks hold at least 20-25% of assets in core capital.
That way, shareholders rather than regulators would play the leading role in making banks behave sensibly.
Second, if banks are “too big to fail,” they must be shrunk, so that taxpayers do not need to bail them out every time a crisis erupts.
In the US context, the Riegle-Neal Interstate Banking Act of 1994, which set a size cap so that no bank can have more than 10% of retail deposits, needs to be amended.
We need to update and enforce this sensible general notion and set a limit on how big any bank can become relative to the overall economy.
Obama is right to get tough with the six largest US banks – including JP Morgan Chase, Goldman Sachs, Citigroup, and Bank of America ­– which now have total assets worth more than 60% of GDP.
This is an unprecedented degree of financial concentration.
As Teddy Roosevelt pointed out more than 100 years ago, concentrated economic power tends to take over political power, which runs counter to the democratic tradition.
We have now learned that it also runs counter to sound economic policy.
Oil Currency Hypocrisy
CAMBRIDGE – Does it make sense for United States Treasury Secretary Hank Paulson to be touring the Middle East supporting the region’s hard dollar exchange-rate pegs, while the Bush administration simultaneously blasts Asian countries for not letting their currencies appreciate faster against the dollar?
Unfortunately, this blatant inconsistency stems from the US’s continuing economic and financial vulnerability rather than reflecting any compelling economic logic.
Instead of promoting dollar pegs, as Paulson is, the US should be supporting the International Monetary Fund’s behind-the-scenes efforts to promote de-linking of oil currencies and the dollar.
Perhaps the Bush administration worries that if oil countries abandoned the dollar standard, today’s dollar weakness would turn into a rout.
But the US should be far more worried about promoting faster adjustment of its still-gaping trade deficit, which in many ways lies at the root of the recent sub-prime mortgage crisis.
The administration’s multi-pronged effort to postpone pain to US consumers, including super easy monetary and fiscal policy, only risks a greater crisis in the not-too-distant future.
It is not at all hard to imagine the whole strategy boomeranging in early 2009, soon after the next US president takes office.
Of course, a strengthening of the oil currencies (including not only the Gulf States, but also other Middle East countries and Russia) would not turn around the US trade balance overnight.
But oil countries do account for a large share of the world’s trade surpluses, and a weaker dollar would help promote US exports to some degree, even in the short run.
More importantly, it is imperative for US policies to be consistent across regions.
How can the US Treasury, on the one hand, periodically flirt with labeling China a “currency manipulator” and, on the other hand, condone a similar strategy in oil-exporting countries?
Of course, one can imagine other reasons for US supplication to the oil states.
Perhaps the administration worries that it cannot simultaneously beg for lower dollar oil prices and help promote a weaker dollar.
But, contrary to popular opinion, the two actually have little to do with each other.
Oil prices are set in a world market, and depend mainly on the quantities demanded and supplied by different regions, not the currency of payment.
It is not at all clear that the dollar price of oil would evolve any differently if the euro, rather than the dollar, were the reference currency.
Secretary Paulson has emphasized that the US is “open for business” from sovereign wealth funds.
One can hope that his confidence is justified.
There is no cause for the US to place any significant new restrictions on sovereign investments in the US beyond those that it already has on trade.
Besides, the US needs these investments to help re-capitalize its badly weakened financial system.
However, even if we can agree on keeping the US open to sovereign wealth fund investments, that is no reason for promoting exchange-rate policies that exacerbate the very trade imbalances that are driving the whole sovereign wealth fund phenomenon in the first place.
Then again, perhaps the Bush administration is worried that if the oil currencies strengthen too much against the dollar, it will start becoming too expensive for the US to scale up its military operations in the Middle East.
This, too, is wrong-headed.
If a cheaper dollar leads to an invasion of US exports to the Middle East and rising living standards in the region, all parties will be far better served.
What about the interests of the oil countries themselves?
Are they right to fear potentially catastrophic results from abandoning the dollar?
As with China, these concerns are overblown.
Even with the prevalence of dollar indexation across the region, exchange-rate appreciation would still help promote cheaper imports and higher living standards.
Moreover, as public confidence in the de-linked oil currencies increases over time, dollar indexation of private contracts will diminish, and currency movements will have a greater impact on overall prices.
More immediately, inflation across the oil states is soaring today, with CPI inflation in the Middle East averaging more than 6% after years of relative stability.
If this inflation is allowed to continue and deepen, it is likely to have effects easily as pernicious as the exchange-rate appreciation the region’s leaders are striving so hard to avoid.
Perhaps the most important positive effect of exchange-rate appreciation would be to help promote the development of domestically-oriented industries such as health care, education, and banking, thereby alleviating some of the region’s mass underemployment.
To be sure, there are important differences between the oil exporters and the Asian economies.
With world energy prices at record highs, it makes sense for oil economies to run surpluses, thereby saving for when oil supplies eventually peter out.
But flexible exchange rates are still the right way for the region to develop a more balanced economic and financial base.
As for the US, it makes little sense to support dollar currency pegs in any large emerging market, at least until its trade balance normalizes.  This is no time for oil currency hypocrisy.
Oil in the Gulf, Then and Now
VIENNA – On April 20, an explosion on Deepwater Horizon, a British Petroleum (BP)- operated oil rig in the Gulf of Mexico, led to the most publicized oil spill in decades.
Another blowout in the same waters 31 years ago, farther south on the Mexican side of the Gulf, turned into the largest peacetime oil spill ever.
The platform where that accident happened, called Ixtoc 1, was operated by Pemex, the state-owned Mexican oil company.
The two accidents and the spills they caused have a number of similar features, although marine oil spills in general have profoundly changed in character in the three decades between the two events.
Oil tankers used to be responsible for the bulk of oil that was spilled.
Tank-washing gave rise to a huge number of small spills, and tanker accidents such as those involving the Torrey Canyon, Exxon Valdez, Metula, and St. Peter resulted in huge, concentrated spills.
Blowouts were not infrequent, but most occurred on land or in shallow water, and most could be stopped relatively easily.
The ban on tank-washing, technical features such as double hulls and sectioning of tanks, introduction of one-way sea lanes and, most important, the use of Global Positioning Systems, have greatly reduced the amount of oil entering the sea from tankers.
Meanwhile, the technology used at drilling and production platforms has developed tremendously, but the challenges regarding depth, weather, and sediment structure have grown even more, as easy-to-exploit oil fields have been exhausted.
Blowouts have become the most troublesome type of oil spills, and in deep water they tend to continue for a considerable time because of the difficulties faced in containing them.
After the explosions at Deepwater Horizon and Ixtoc, oil and gas under high pressure entered the water at the seabed.
This resulted in a three-phase emulsion of oil, gas, and water that also contained sand and dirt particles.
The properties of this oil emulsion differ from normal crude oil.
Some part of it will float on the surface, but parts may also form plumes at different depths in the water mass.
Standard aerial or satellite imaging techniques to measure the quantity of oil spilled do not work well.
In the Ixtoc case, using such methods, Pemex (wanting to keep the loss figure low) estimated the spill to amount to a little under a half-million tons.
A United Nations expert group that I led put the figure significantly higher.
Similarly, whereas BP has been using a release figure of 800 tons per day From Deepwater Horizon, estimates by independent experts are many times higher.
Pemex tried to put a device called a “sombrero” over the Ixtoc leak to collect the oil at the ocean floor, but the plan failed because the structure could not be kept in place.
Formation of methane hydrate was noted, but was not decisive.
In the case of Deepwater Horizon, a huge dome could be put in place, despite the greater depth, thanks to deployment of modern unmanned underwater vehicles, robots, and positioning tools, but the formation of methane hydrates clogged the device and rendered it useless.
In both cases, efforts were made to burn off the oil from the ocean’s surface.
But, as the 1967 Torrey Canyon experience showed – the stranded tanker was bombed with napalm – oil on water doesn’t burn well, and the emulsified oil called “chocolate mousse” hardly burned at all.
Whether or not to “disperse” oil has been a key strategic question since combating spills began in earnest in the 1960’s.
The answer depends on whether the priority for protection is birds and beaches, or other forms of marine life such as fish, shrimps, and mollusks.
If it’s birds and beaches, disperse; if it’s fisheries, don’t.
The decision has an obvious public-relations dimension.
Oil-contaminated birds and beaches make appalling pictures, whereas dead fish and shrimp larvae go unnoticed by cameras.
The damage caused by the Ixtoc spill was huge.
Beaches, mostly in Mexico but to some extent also in the United States, were hit, and birds succumbed in large numbers, despite the dispersion efforts.
Because of the dispersion, shrimp, squid, and some fish populations suffered, with fisheries hit even harder.
Where the concentrations of un-weathered oil components are highest, water-breathing organisms die.
In a much larger area, they become tainted and rendered useless as food products.
In an even larger area – and for a much longer time – consumers reject the products.
After Ixtoc, the blow to the Mexican fisheries became a blessing in disguise.
The dramatic reduction in fishing pressure allowed the devastated populations to recover, and five years later one had to look carefully to spot either remaining oil or damaged populations.
The high temperatures of the Gulf of Mexico helped, as recovery proceeds much faster in warm waters than in cold.
It took nine months to cap the Ixtoc well.
Drilling a release well finally did the job of stopping the flow of oil.
Deepwater Horizon is still spewing oil into the Gulf of Mexico, even though BP has succeeded in inserting a smaller pipe into the main leakage to suck off part of the flow.
It is far too early to assess the ecological damage and economic losses to fisheries and tourism from the Deepwater Horizon spill.
It is a safe bet that shrimp and squid populations will suffer, as they did in the Ixtoc case, but so is a close-to-complete recovery within a limited number of years.
Hikmah di Balik Rendahnya Harga Minyak bagi Negara-negara Teluk
BEIRUT – Pada bulan Juni 2014, satu barel minyak Brent – acuan utama yang digunakan dalam pasar minyak internasional – dijual dengan harga $115.
Sekarang, dua tahun setelahnya, harga per barel adalah $45, bahkan lebih rendah.
Tentu tidak mengejutkan bahwa akhirnya kebobrokan ini menimbulkan guncangan besar bagi Arab Saudi dan negara lain di kawasan Teluk yang dipimpin oleh sheikh, ketika 85% pendapatan mereka diperoleh melalui dependensi atas minyak.
Mereka perlu menyadari bahwa berbeda dengan penurunan harga minyak di masa lampau, kejadian ini bukan sekedar peralihan, melainkan kondisi permanen.
Situasi normal baru (a new normal) yang menimpa sektor minyak menunjukkan realita baru.
Pertumbuhan ekonomi Cina – serta permintaan atas minyak – akan berkurang; efisiensi energi secara global akan meningkat, terutama karena komitmen yang dibuat pada konferensi perubahan iklim di Paris bulan Desember lalu; dan inovasi terobosan di bidang minyak dan gas shale, serta sumber-sumber energi terbarukan, menjadikan keduanya jauh lebih kompetitif.
Dengan bangkitnya Iran, Libya, dan Irak sebagai pengekspor minyak terbesar, rendahnya harga minyak menjadi sesuatu yang tidak dapat dihindari dan tahan lama.
Arab Saudi dan negara-negara Teluk lainnya tidak boleh menyia-nyiakan krisis ini. mereka harus mengambil kesempatan emas ini untuk menjalankan reformasi perekonomian yang komprehensif.
Tujuannya haruslah merancang model pembangunan terbaru yang membebaskan negara dari ketergantungan terhadap hidrokarbon.
Cadangan fiskal dari pendapatan minyak yang lalu bisa memberikan bantuan jangka pendek bagi enam negara anggota Gulf Cooperation Council (Dewan Kerja Sama Negara-negara Teluk) atau GCC.
Namun mereka harus memanfaatkan periode singkat tersebut untuk melaksanakan perubahan-perubahan struktural yang penting dalam mewujudkan pertumbuhan ekonomi yang berkelanjutan, stabilitas makro ekonomi, dan eksploitasi cadangan minyak dan gas yang tepat dan wajar.
Perubahan yang dimaksud adalah diversifikasi ekonomi yang dapat dicapai dengan mengurangi struktur pemerintah dan menghilangkan hambatan-hambatan ibarat jalan buntu yang dihadapi sektor swasta.
Reformasi radikal terhadap sistem Kafala, yakni sistem yang mensyaratkan pengawasan dan pengaturan  buruh migran, akan menghilangkan hambatan utama dalam mobilitas tenaga kerja.
Namun pemerintah harus menetapkan kerangka hukum dan perundang-undangan yang diperlukan dalam kemitraan publik-swasta atau KPS (public-private partnership).
Sayangnya, hanya Kuwait dan Dubai yang telah mengabulkan KPS, sementara Arab Saudi berencana memprivatisasi sejumlah bandara (Jeddah dan Dammam).
Privatisasi dan KPS di bidang infrastruktur, energi, kesehatan, pendidikan, transportasi, dan logistik dapat menarik investasi dalam dan luar negeri secara besar-besaran.
Sama halnya dengan peraturan yang mengesahkan kepemilikan penuh sebuah badan usaha oleh warga negara asing dan perlindungan yang sesuai terhadap hak kebendaan – bisa menghasilkan manfaat tambahan yang menarik ekspatriat untuk menabung dan investasi di suatu negara.
Zona perdagangan bebas di Dubai adalah bukti kesuksesan yang dicapai berkat liberalisasi dan penghapusan hambatan-hambatan dalam hal kepemilikan dan manajemen asing.
Reformasi fiskal juga harus diprioritaskan.
Belanja negara dan subsidi yang berlebihan berjumlah hingga 8% dari PDB non-minyak (5% dari total PDB) di negara-negara GCC.
Subsidi energi – satu hal yang sangat mengakar di dalam perekonomian GCC – mengganggu pola konsumsi dan produksi; melemahkan upaya pemerintah dalam diversifikasi ekonomi; dan menambah kerentanan pada harga minyak dan energi dunia yang sudah bergejolak ini.
Penghapusan subsidi tidak hanya akan merangsang investasi pada efisiensi energi dan tenaga surya, tapi juga menciptakan keuntungan besar bagi lingkungan hidup dan kesehatan masyarakat.
Demikian juga, jika pemerintah di kawasan Teluk menghendaki layanan publik dan utilitas yang efisien dan bertarif wajar – termasuk air, listrik, dan transportasi – perlu ditetapkan ruang fiskal untuk mendorong penciptaan lapangan kerja berikut rencana-rencana yang menghubungkan pendidikan dan kesempatan kerja.
Daripada menyalurkan belanja negara untuk crowd out sektor swasta, lebih baik belanja pembangunan dipakai untuk “crowd in” sektor swasta.
Keharusan lainnya adalah diversifikasi pendapatan negara.
Rezim perpajakan yang berlaku sekarang di negara-negara Teluk tidak sesuai dengan peruntukannya, memiliki keterbatasan dalam mempengaruhi perilaku sektor swasta, dan mengesampingkan kebijakan fiskal bersifat counter-cyclical.
Dari tahun 2012 hingga 2016, rata-rata penerimaan pajak dari non-minyak hanya 1,6% PDB.
Sebagai permulaan, negara-negara GCC tengah menyiapkan rezim perpajakan baru yang akan diberlakukan awal tahun 2018, termasuk pajak pertambahan nilai, pajak korporasi, pajak properti, dan pajak atas bahan bakar, tembakau, dan alkohol.
Dengan tarif 5%, PPN dapat meningkatkan penerimaan sebanyak 1,5-2% PDB.
Tapi jika memang bisa, mengapa tidak diperluas lagi?
Pajak karbon sebesar $0,52 per liter dapat menghasilkan tambahan $50 miliar per tahun bagi Arab Saudi dan menurunkan estimasi defisit anggaran tahun ini sebanyak $90 miliar.
Langkah berikutnya, negara-negara GCC harus menerbitkan surat utang dan sukuk (obligasi Syariah) untuk membiayai defisit anggaran serta proyek-proyek pembangunan dan investasi pada infrastruktur.
Kelompok negara ini memiliki sedikit surat utang negara dan bisa bertahan di tengah defisit anggaran yang moderat tanpa membahayakan kelangsungan fiskal.
Akan tetapi, perbaikan pasar keuangan akan memberdayakan sektor swasta dalam memanfaatkan sumber daya keuangan yang melimpah milik negara-negara GCC yang diinvestasikan di luar kawasan Teluk.
Pada akhirnya, GCC harus mengutamakan fleksibilitas lebih pada nilai tukar dan kemandirian moneter.
Biasanya, pemerintah di kawasan Teluk mengejar kebijakan-kebijakan ekspansif di tengah economic boom dan mengurangi belanja di masa downturn.
Penetapan nilai tukar yang dipatok pada dolar AS telah memperburuk pola pro-cyclical.
Meskipun patokan ini (pegging currency) memberikan kredibilitas pada mata uang, kebijakan ini juga mencegah depresiasi dan gagal mencerminkan perubahan-perubahan struktural mendasar pada perekonomian dan keterkaitan finansial di negara-negara GCC selama 30 tahun terakhir – terutama pergeseran dari Amerika Serikat dan Eropa menuju Cina dan Asia.
Sebaiknya, negara-negara ini mematok mata uangnya pada suatu keranjang (basket currency) terdiri atas dolar AS, euro, yen, dan renminbi.
Jika keranjang ini juga termasuk minyak, mata uang GCC dapat mengalami depresiasi sejalan dengan penurunan harga – dan menguat jika harga sudah pulih.
Intinya disini adalah diversifikasi ekonomi – sering dibicarakan namun belum diterapkan – wajib bagi negara-negara pengekspor minyak di kawasan Teluk.
Meskipun terdengar klise, kebutuhan ini menjadi penggerak perubahan.
GCC sepatutnya mewujudkannya.
Cheap Oil for Change
WASHINGTON, DC – The recent decline in oil prices is likely to have a major, largely positive impact on the global economy – even greater than most observers seem to recognize.
Indeed, if governments take advantage of lower oil prices today to implement critical energy-policy reforms, the benefits may improve structural features of their economies tomorrow.
A key reason why the price decline’s impact has so far been underestimated is that nobody knows how long it will last.
And, indeed, past price movements provide little guidance in this regard.
When prices plunged in 2008, they shot back up almost faster than experts could say “new normal”; after the 1986-1987 drop, prices remained low for a decade and a half.
This time, the price trajectory is likely to be determined by a new player in the energy game: shale oil.
The marginal cost of shale-oil production (the expense of continuing to pump an existing well) varies from $55 to $70 per barrel.
Add a $5 profit margin, and the oil-supply curve now has a long, near-horizontal segment in the range of about $60-75 per barrel.
Regardless of demand, this will be the natural nesting range for the price of oil – call it the “shale shelf” – and will likely remain in place for a protracted period.
This provides some insight into OPEC’s decision last November not to curtail supply.
Saudi Arabia correctly reasoned that cutting output would not boost prices, but simply concede space for new players to step in and grab market share.
Of course, this pattern could be disrupted, if, say, a war or major conflict in an oil-exporting region constrained supply enough to cause prices to spike beyond the shale shelf.
But, in the absence of a major unexpected shock, oil companies will remain under pressure to continue selling oil, even at low prices, as they struggle to service the large debts they incurred on investments when oil prices were high.
This pressure is precisely what drove oil prices so low in December and January.
Given this, it is reasonable to expect the oil supply to remain plentiful, and prices to remain moderate, through 2016 – a trend that will boost global growth by an estimated 0.5 percentage points over this period.
The impact will be especially large for countries like India and Indonesia, where the bill for oil imports amounts to as much as 7.5% of GDP.
In fact, India’s current account, which has been in deficit for years, is likely to record a surplus this year.
This creates a unique opportunity for energy-policy reform.
In far too many countries, fuel is heavily subsidized, straining government budgets and encouraging wasteful consumption.
Low oil prices offer an ideal opening to reduce subsidies, thereby releasing funds that governments can spend on basic services and social-welfare programs that advance poverty reduction.
But advising countries simply to lower subsidies is often meaningless.
In countries where the government dictates gas prices – like India and Indonesia did until recently (and, to some extent, continue to do) – lower market prices would reduce the subsidy automatically.
That is why holding down subsidies is inadequate for such countries.
The goal should be to shift from a fixed-price system, with occasional government-decreed adjustments, to a market-based price regime, in which the government makes a credible pledge not to limit prices, with the exception of pre-defined extreme circumstances.
While such a move would have a negligible effect on prices now, it would provide countries with a huge advantage during future oil-price fluctuations, because consumers and retail suppliers would no longer be cut off from price signals.
Amid all of this good news, two serious concerns stand out.
In the short run, declining oil prices create grave challenges for those who, having invested in expanding production when prices were high, now face large costs and failing businesses.
More problematic, lower oil prices encourage excessive consumption – the long-term environmental impact of which will be compounded by the weakening incentive to invest in alternative energy sources.
Oil Dictator Dominos
LONDON – Price movements as large and rapid as those that have upended oil markets since June 2014 are sure to cause pain to some and benefit others.
Though the pain tends to capture the most attention, the benefit is just as important – if not more so.
The 70% drop in the price of a barrel of crude represents a colossal transfer of $3 trillion in annual income from oil producers to oil consumers.
As a result, while sliding equity markets and a further decline in oil (and other commodity) prices have sparked much talk of another global recession, dire predictions are likely to prove overly gloomy and misdirected.
To be sure, the dramatic drop in the price of oil will produce winners and losers. But the biggest dangers will be political, not economic.
The shift in fortunes can perhaps best be seen on the boarding passes of International Monetary Fund officials.
Rather than going to Athens, they are now heading for Baku.
Indeed, Central Asia’s oil-producing dictatorships, including Azerbaijan, have been among the countries hardest hit by the drop in prices – especially because, as ex-Soviet states, they remain heavily dependent on trade with Russia, another oil producer.
The biggest beneficiaries of the price slump will be the highly indebted, oil-importing countries of the eurozone: Greece, Italy, and Spain (Germany, too, is likely to benefit).
Their export markets in emerging economies will suffer, damping hopes of a trade-led recovery, but that negative effect stands to be more than offset by the windfall from a big drop in energy costs.
Growth in the eurozone will be based on the resulting increase in domestic demand, rather than exports.
The United States and the United Kingdom are simultaneously energy producers and importers, so the impact on their economics is likely to be more complicated.
In 2013 and 2014, energy firms dominated business investment, and cutbacks in the sector will translate into lost jobs and dropping demand for the manufacturers and service companies supplying the industry.
On the other hand, consumer spending in both countries stands to rise.
While US consumers have so far saved a large proportion of the windfall they have received through cheaper gasoline prices, the gains for households are starting to translate into higher levels of spending.
Economists are likely to spend months puzzling over why the effect of low oil prices has proved slow to emerge in the consumption statistics.
But, ultimately, emerge they will, as they have every time such a large fall has occurred.
The more important question is one for political scientists: Which governments will collapse this year, and with what consequences?
It is no coincidence that the last emerging-markets crisis, in 1997-1998, was also associated with a dramatic fall in oil prices.
In that case, the two biggest victims were a dictator in Indonesia and a fragile democrat in Russia.
In May 1998, nine months after the beginning of East Asia’s financial crisis, Indonesian President Suharto resigned after 31 years in office.
A few months later, Russia defaulted on its sovereign debt as its currency collapsed.
On December 31, 1999, President Boris Yeltsin resigned, leaving the country in the hands of his recently appointed prime minister, Vladimir Putin.
In attempting to predict which governments might face a similar fate this time, the basic criteria – in addition to the oil slump’s financial impact – are resilience and flexibility.
Does a regime have the financial reserves with which to cushion the shock and buy time to adjust?
Does a country have a robust banking system?
Can its political system contain growing popular frustration or channel it through existing institutions?
Oil-dependent regimes that fail to meet these criteria are in trouble.
This analytical framework yields surprising insights.
As much as pundits like to predict the collapse of the Saudi Arabian monarchy, they are likely to be disappointed once again.
The country is the world’s lowest-cost oil producer; and, though its political rigidity is beyond question, it is showing economic flexibility by cutting its budget and introducing wide-ranging reforms.
Russia, however, for all its bluster, may prove less fortunate.
Its political robustness is not matched by financial and economic resilience.
Putin will try to mask the pain, but at some point it is likely to become debilitating.
The potential victims are many, with worrying implications for geopolitical stability worldwide.
Venezuela has been in financial crisis since long before the oil crunch, and Nigeria is looking a lot like Russia in 1998 – a fragile democracy facing a currency crisis.
As to who might become the next Suharto in the coming months, my best guess is one or more of the Central Asian oil autocrats in Azerbaijan, Kazakhstan, and Turkmenistan.
In any case, this year promises to be interesting – and harrowing, if you happen to be a dictator clinging to power in an oil-exporting country.
A New Ceiling for Oil Prices
LONDON – If one number determines the fate of the world economy, it is the price of a barrel of oil.
Every global recession since 1970 has been preceded by at least a doubling of the oil price, and every time the oil price has fallen by half and stayed down for six months or so, a major acceleration of global growth has followed.
Having fallen from $100 to $50, the oil price is now hovering at exactly this critical level.
So should we expect $50 to be the floor or the ceiling of the new trading range for oil?
Most analysts still see $50 as a floor – or even a springboard, because positioning in the futures market suggests expectations of a fairly quick rebound to $70 or $80.
But economics and history suggest that today’s price should be viewed as a probable ceiling for a much lower trading range, which may stretch all the way down toward $20.
To see why, first consider the ideological irony at the heart of today’s energy economics.
The oil market has always been marked by a struggle between monopoly and competition.
But what most Western commentators refuse to acknowledge is that the champion of competition nowadays is Saudi Arabia, while the freedom-loving oilmen of Texas are praying for OPEC to reassert its monopoly power.
Now let’s turn to history – specifically, the history of inflation-adjusted oil prices since 1974, when OPEC first emerged.
That history reveals two distinct pricing regimes.
From 1974 to 1985, the US benchmark oil price fluctuated between $50 and $120 in today’s money.
From 1986 to 2004, it ranged from $20 to $50 (apart from two brief aberrations after the 1990 invasion of Kuwait and the 1998 Russian devaluation).
Finally, from 2005 until 2014, oil again traded in the 1974-1985 range of roughly $50 to $120, apart from two very brief spikes during the 2008-09 financial crisis.
In other words, the trading range of the past ten years was similar to that of OPEC’s first decade, whereas the 19 years from 1986 to 2004 represented a totally different regime.
It seems plausible that the difference between these two regimes can be explained by the breakdown of OPEC power in 1985, owing to North Sea and Alaskan oil development, causing a shift from monopolistic to competitive pricing.
This period ended in 2005, when surging Chinese demand temporarily created a global oil shortage, allowing OPEC’s price “discipline” to be restored.
This record points to $50 as a possible demarcation line between the monopolistic and competitive regimes.
And the economics of competitive markets versus monopoly pricing suggests why $50 will be a ceiling, not a floor.
In a competitive market, prices should equal marginal costs.
Simply put, the price will reflect the costs that an efficient supplier must recoup in producing the last barrel of oil required to meet global demand.
In a monopoly price regime, by contrast, the monopolist can choose a price well above marginal costs and then restrict production to ensure that supply does not exceed demand (which it otherwise would because of the artificially high price).
Until last summer, oil operated under a monopoly price regime, because Saudi Arabia became a “swing producer,” restricting supply whenever it exceeded demand.
But this regime created powerful incentives for other oil producers, especially in the US and Canada, to expand output sharply.
Despite facing much higher production costs, North American producers of shale oil and gas could make big profits, thanks to the Saudi price guarantee.
The Saudis, however, could maintain high prices only by reducing their own output to make room in the global market for ever-increasing US production.
By last autumn, Saudi leaders apparently decided that this was a losing strategy – and they were right.
Its logical conclusion would have been America’s emergence as the world’s top oil producer, while Saudi Arabia faded into insignificance, not only as an oil exporter but also perhaps as a country that the US felt obliged to defend.
The Middle East’s oil potentates are now determined to reverse this loss of status, as their recent behavior in OPEC makes clear.
But the only way for OPEC to restore, or even preserve, its market share is by pushing prices down to the point that US producers drastically reduce their output to balance global supply and demand.
In short, the Saudis must stop being a “swing producer” and instead force US frackers into this role.
Any economics textbook would recommend exactly this outcome.
Shale oil is expensive to extract and should therefore remain in the ground until all of the world’s low-cost conventional oilfields are pumping at maximum output.
Moreover, shale production can be cheaply turned on and off.
Competitive market conditions would therefore dictate that Saudi Arabia and other low-cost producers always operate at full capacity, while US frackers would experience the boom-bust cycles typical of commodity markets, shutting down when global demand is weak or new low-cost supplies come onstream from Iraq, Libya, Iran, or Russia, and ramping up production only during global booms when oil demand is at a peak.
Under this competitive logic, the marginal cost of US shale oil would become a ceiling for global oil prices, whereas the costs of relatively remote and marginal conventional oilfields in OPEC and Russia would set a floor.
As it happens, estimates of shale-oil production costs are mostly around $50, while marginal conventional oilfields generally break even at around $20.
Thus, the trading range in the brave new world of competitive oil should be roughly $20 to $50.
The Geopolitical Impact of Cheap Oil
CAMBRIDGE – The price of oil has fallen more than 25% in the past five months, to less than $80 a barrel.
If the price remains at this level, it will have important implications – some good, some bad – for many countries around the world.
If it falls further, as seems likely, the geopolitical consequences on some oil-producing countries could be dramatic.
The price of oil at any time depends on market participants’ expectations about future supply and demand.
The role of expectations makes the oil market very different from most others.
In the market for fresh vegetables, for example, prices must balance the supply and demand for the current harvest.
By contrast, oil producers and others in the industry can keep supply off the market if they think that its price will rise later, or they can put extra supply on the market if they think the price will fall.
Oil companies around the world keep supply off the market by reducing the amount of oil that they take out of the ground.
Oil producers can also restrict supply by holding oil inventory in tankers at sea or in other storage facilities.
Conversely, producers can put more oil on the market by increasing production or by running down their inventories.
The market expectations reflected in today’s price reflect lower future demand and increased future supply.
Lower demand reflects both the current weakness of economic activity, particularly in Europe and China, and, more important, the longer-term changes in technology, which will increase cars’ fuel efficiency and induce the use of solar power and other non-oil energy sources.
The increase in the future potential supply of oil reflects new output produced by fracking, the development of Canada’s tar sands, and Mexico’s recent decision to allow foreign oil companies to develop the country’s energy sources.
These changes in demand and supply suggest that the future price of oil will be lower than industry participants expected until just a few months ago.
Some of the recent changes in expected future demand and supply could have been anticipated earlier.
But there is no way to know when attitudes and expectations will change.
The historic volatility of oil prices reflects these psychological shifts as well as changes in objective reality.
Today’s oil price is also linked to anticipated future interest rates.
More specifically, oil producers have an investment choice: They can increase production now, selling the additional oil at today’s price and investing the proceeds at the existing long-term interest rate, or they can leave the oil in the ground as an investment.
A low rate of interest encourages producers to leave oil in the ground.
When the current abnormally low interest rates on long-term bonds rise over the next few years, it will become more attractive for producers to increase the supply of oil and invest the resulting income at the higher rate.
Unless expectations about the fundamentals of future supply and demand change, the rise in the interest rate will cause oil prices to fall further.
The low price of oil is good news for the United States economy, because it implies higher real incomes for American consumers.
Within the US, the lower price is transferring real income from oil producers to households, which raises short-term demand because households spend a higher proportion of their incomes than oil firms do.
For the same reason, the lower price also gives a boost to aggregate demand in Europe, Asia, and other oil-importing regions.
The big losers from falling oil prices include several countries that are not friends of the US and its allies, such as Venezuela, Iran, and Russia.
These countries are heavily dependent on their oil revenue to support their governments’ spending – especially massive transfer programs.
Even at $75 or $80 a barrel, these governments will have a difficult time financing the populist programs that they need to maintain public support.
Although Saudi Arabia and several of the Gulf states are also major oil exporters, they differ from other producers in two important ways.
First, their cost of extracting oil is extremely low, which means that they will be able to produce profitably at the current price – or even at a much lower price.
Second, their enormous financial reserves allow them to finance their domestic and international activities for an extended period of time, as they seek to transform their economies to reduce their dependence on oil revenue.
A further decline in the price of oil could have major geopolitical repercussions.
A price of $60 a barrel would create severe problems for Russia in particular.
President Vladimir Putin would no longer be able to maintain the transfer programs that currently sustain his popular support.
There would be similar consequences in Iran and Venezuela.
It is not clear whether these countries’ current regimes could survive a substantial and sustained future decline in oil prices.
By contrast, it is obvious that oil-importing countries would benefit greatly – as they already are.
Oil Prices and Global Growth
CAMBRIDGE – One of the biggest economic surprises of 2015 is that the stunning drop in global oil prices did not deliver a bigger boost to global growth.
Despite the collapse in prices, from over $115 per barrel in June 2014 to $45 at the end of November 2015, most macroeconomic models suggest that the impact on global growth has been less than expected – perhaps 0.5% of global GDP.
The good news is that this welcome but modest effect on growth probably will not die out in 2016.
The bad news is that low prices will place even greater strains on the main oil-exporting countries.
The recent decline in oil prices is on par with the supply-driven drop in 1985-1986, when OPEC members (read: Saudi Arabia) decided to reverse supply cuts to regain market share.
It is also comparable to the demand-driven collapse in 2008-2009, following the global financial crisis.
To the extent that demand factors drive an oil-price drop, one would not expect a major positive impact; the oil price is more of an automatic stabilizer than an exogenous force driving the global economy.
Supply shocks, on the other hand, ought to have a significant positive impact.
Although parsing the 2014-2015 oil-price shock is not as straightforward as in the two previous episodes, the driving forces seem to be roughly evenly split between demand and supply factors.
Certainly, a slowing China that is rebalancing toward domestic consumption has put a damper on all global commodity prices, with metal indices also falling sharply in 2015.
(Gold prices, for example, at $1,050 per ounce at the end of November, are far off their peak of nearly $1,890 in September 2011, and copper prices have fallen almost as much since 2011.)
New sources of oil supply, however, have been at least as important.
Thanks to the shale-energy revolution, American oil production has risen from five million barrels per day in 2008 to 9.3 million barrels in 2015, a supply boom that has so far persisted, despite the price collapse.
Anticipation of post-sanctions Iranian oil production has also affected markets.
A decline in oil prices is to some extent a zero-sum game, with producers losing and consumers gaining.
The usual thinking is that lower prices stimulate global demand, because consumers are likely to spend most of the windfall, whereas producers typically adjust by cutting back savings.
In 2015, though, this behavioral difference has been less pronounced than usual.
One reason is that emerging-market energy importers have a much larger global economic footprint than they did in the 1980s, and their approach to oil markets is much more interventionist than in the advanced countries.
Countries such as India and China stabilize retail energy markets through government-financed subsidies to keep price down for consumers.
The costs of these subsidies had become quite massive as oil prices peaked, and many countries were already looking hard for ways to cut back.
Thus, as oil prices have fallen, emerging-market governments have taken advantage of the opportunity to reduce the fiscal subsidies.
At the same time, many oil exporters are being forced to scale back expenditure plans in the face of sharply falling revenues.
Even Saudi Arabia, despite its vast oil and financial reserves, has come under strain, owing to a rapidly rising population and higher military spending associated with conflicts in the Middle East.
The muted effect of oil prices on global growth should not have come as a complete surprise.
Academic research has been pointing in this direction for a long time.
Oil is now thought to be less of an independent driver of business cycles than was previously believed. Also restraining growth is a sharp decline in energy-related investment.
After years of rapid growth, global investment in oil production and exploration has fallen by $150 billion dollars in 2015.
Eventually, this will feed back into prices, but only slowly and gradually: Futures markets have oil prices rising to $60 per barrel only by 2020.
The good news for 2016 is that most macroeconomic models suggest that the impact of lower oil prices on growth tends to stretch out for a couple years.
Thus, low prices should continue to support growth, even if emerging-market importers continue to use the savings to cut subsidies.
For oil producers, though, the risks are rising.
Only a couple – notably governance-challenged Venezuela – are in outright collapse; but many are teetering on the brink of recession.
Countries with floating exchange rates, including Colombia, Mexico, and Russia, have managed to adjust so far, despite facing significantly tighter fiscal constraints (though Russia’s situation remains especially vulnerable if low oil prices endure).
By contrast, countries with rigid exchange-rate regimes are being tested more severely.
Saudi Arabia’s long-standing peg to the dollar, once apparently invulnerable, has come under enormous pressure in recent weeks.
In short, oil prices were not quite as consequential for global growth in 2015 as seemed likely at the beginning of the year.
And strong reserve positions and relatively conservative macroeconomic policies have enabled most major producers to weather enormous fiscal stress so far, without falling into crisis.
But next year could be different, and not in a good way – especially for producers.
Oil’s Upward March
IRVING, TEXAS – When OPEC members met in Vienna recently, the Saudis failed to control the meeting, OPEC’s production ceiling remained unchanged, and member countries are setting their own output levels.
But talk of an OPEC breakup is premature.
After all, it has survived major wars, numerous diplomatic disputes, and two major market collapses.
In fact, the secret to OPEC’s survival is its weakness, not its strength.
Friction or no friction, OPEC has been, and will always be, irrelevant to market forces on the ground.
OPEC has never had market power, but Saudi Arabia has, and Saudi market power has always been assigned, mistakenly, to OPEC.
The Saudis did not like the recent meeting.
They decided to go it alone.
Can they deliver?
The answer is no.
The recent move by the 28-member International Energy Agency to release oil from strategic reserves proves this point.
The global oil market has become a large sea that generates its own storms, which guarantee that the sea will continue to grow.
Looking at recent history, one can identify four factors that will continue to drive oil prices higher unless a major earthquake brings the market to its knees.
The first factor is the relationship between oil prices and economic growth in the oil-producing countries.
Higher prices fuel higher growth in these countries, which, accompanied by a population boom, leads to higher domestic energy consumption.
That, in turn, reduces oil exports, driving up prices further.
Only a major recession could break this cycle; otherwise, we are headed for an energy crisis.
Of course, prices cannot continue to rise indefinitely – the price increase will ration demand.
The increase in energy demand has already led to power shortages in the oil-producing countries, which are expected to reduce exports this summer.
More crude oil will be burned in power plants, more diesel will be burned in private generators, and more gasoline will be burned in SUVs from Riyadh to Kuwait City during blackouts in which the only place to keep cool will be in a moving car.
Second, there is the relationship between oil prices and the need for income diversification in the oil-producing countries.
As oil prices rise, these countries’ dependence on the oil sector increases, despite all efforts to diversify their economies.
To combat the impact of such dependence, they spend oil revenues on other sectors, leaving the oil sector with little investment.
As global oil demand increases, there is not enough capacity to meet it – a cycle that will continue until demand collapses.
The rhetoric of energy independence in the oil-consuming countries makes the situation even worse: the oil-producing countries are building energy-intensive industries to guarantee a market for their oil once consuming nations wean themselves of imported oil.
They intend to export oil embedded in other products, such as petrochemicals, plastic, aluminum, etc.
And they can build such plants in faster than the oil-consuming countries can establish alternatives to oil imports, exacerbating future shortages.
Again, higher prices will ration global oil demand, but only after a period of economic pain in some regions around the world.
The third factor is the vicious circle of oil prices and the value of the US dollar.
Higher oil prices increase America’s trade deficits, which in turn lower the value of the dollar. Owing to the inverse relationship between oil prices and the dollar, the weaker dollar increases oil prices, which increases the trade deficit further, putting more downward pressure on the dollar.
Oil prices will continue to rise until demand collapses.
Statistical evidence suggests that this relationship will weaken once the real-estate market recovers, but this remains a long-run prospect.
Finally, there is the relationship between oil prices and fiscal and monetary policies in the oil-consuming countries.
To combat the effect of high oil prices, consuming countries adopt expansionary economic policies, lowering interest rates and increasing government spending.
This enables continued economic growth with high oil prices.
But continued growth increases demand for oil, sending prices even higher. The alternative to monetary and fiscal expansion is recession, at which point oil prices would stop rising.
Given the current turmoil in the Middle East, the loss of Libyan and Yemeni oil, and increasing energy demand in the oil-producing countries, any increase in Saudi oil exports, if any, would have a limited impact on the market.
Oil production does not matter; exports do, which means that announcements of increases in oil output are irrelevant for prices.
Indeed, regardless of what OPEC or its members decide, the vicious cycles described here will support oil prices around the world probably in the range of $70-$90 per barrel.
That said, OPEC members and oil-consuming countries policymakers alike should not forget that nothing cures high prices like high prices.
Old Europe, Young World
As the EU reaches its 50th birthday, many Europeans are entering middle age with it.
They are also becoming aware of the potential of demographic change to make Europe’s next half-century very different from the previous one.
The EU’s first 50 years were characterized by a growing population and a high proportion of working-age people relative to children and the elderly.
The post-war “baby boom” generation drove a period of sustained economic growth that strengthened Europe’s standing in the world and led to dramatic improvements in its citizens’ quality of life.
The EU’s next five decades, on the other hand, will see the baby boomers moving into retirement, leaving a shrunken labor force with the heavy burden of supporting their elders’ health care and pension needs.
Thirty-six per cent of Europeans will be aged 60 or over by 2050, and, despite increasing life expectancy, continued low fertility will mean the continent’s population will begin to dwindle by 2020.
Although Europe is unlikely to become poorer as a consequence of this demographic shift, it may experience a prolonged period of slower growth.
All else being equal, per capita incomes and productivity in countries with high proportions of elderly people tend to grow more slowly than in younger countries.
Europe’s economic strength relative to the rest of the world may therefore diminish, perhaps sharply.
Just as Europe’s population is aging and will be shrinking, that of much of the developing world is young and growing.
By 2050 the population of the 50 least developed countries is projected to double, and while the ratio of working-age to non-working-age people in Europe will fall to around 1.4, in the developing world it will be considerably higher.
Countries in most developing regions, such as Latin America, North Africa, the Middle East, and much of Asia, may be able to absorb their armies of potential workers into productive employment and benefit appreciably from the ensuing economic boost.
(Indeed, this “miracle” has already occurred in East Asia.)
As a result, these regions’ share of the global economy would increase.
Other regions, however, are likely to be unable to provide productive employment.
Swollen cohorts of young, underemployed people may cause an increase in crime and civil unrest.
Political instability, war, and terrorism could result, with dire effects both at home and abroad, including in Europe.
Sub-Saharan Africa’s demographic prospects look particularly bleak, as mushrooming populations of young people move into labor markets that cannot accommodate them.
Migration from Africa and other developing regions to Europe is already increasing; as populations in poor countries grow, the number of would-be migrants will multiply.
These migration pressures present a potential solution to Europe’s labor-market problem.
Europe needs working-age people to reduce the burden of a burgeoning elderly population, so relaxing immigration restrictions could help.
But this might bring with it social problems, as Europeans resist an influx of foreigners, owing to fears about jobs, security, or cultural differences.
Opening the door to migrants would have to be a gradual and controlled process, with determined efforts made to convince Europeans of its benefits.
Moreover, given the massive increase in migration that would be needed to offset the impact of population aging in Europe, this would be only a partial solution at best.
But Europe can take other steps to redress or adapt to the looming demographic imbalance.
Many countries in the region already have policies aimed at increasing the birth rate.
Tax benefits and monthly allowances for couples with children and reduced support for contraception are among the most common means of encouraging increased fertility.
In many EU countries, a much higher percentage of men than women are in the labor force.
Measures aimed at enabling mothers to work, such as state-funded childcare and more flexible working hours, create incentives for childrearing while expanding the labor force.
However, the effects of such measures are unlikely to be felt soon, so policies will also need to be directed at those already in the labor force, to encourage them to save more for retirement, and at those on the point of leaving it.
Existing pension systems often penalize people who wish to work beyond the official retirement age, and age discrimination impedes many who are capable of working into their sixties and seventies.
More flexible pension arrangements, legal reforms, and media and education campaigns aimed at shifting employers’ perceptions of older workers will allow individuals to keep working for longer.
Encouraging lifelong learning will help people adapt their skills and knowledge to the demands of a changing economy.
And with higher life expectancy, raising the retirement age is a further sensible way to address the negative effects of an aging population.
A combination of these and other measures would help Europe to sustain its high living standards in the coming decades.
Recognition of the growing power of regions with more favorable demographic structures, for example, will encourage political and economic alliances that help the EU preserve its own global status.
Likewise, efforts to help developing countries create jobs and improve quality of life will reduce irregular migration and help avert its social costs.
Population change happens slowly, but its effects can be forecast early.
If EU countries are to overcome the demographic challenges of the next half-century, they should not delay in preparing for them.
Old Left Versus New Left in Latin America
There are two ways to interpret Latin America’s recent election results.
First, and most obviously, the supposed turn to the left is running out of steam, fast.
In recent weeks, the hyper-nationalist Ollanta Humala, a clone of Venezuelan President Hugo Chávez, was defeated in Peru, the conservative Alvaro Uribe won a landslide victory in Colombia, with 62% of the vote, and Andrés Manuel López Obrador has fallen behind in Mexico’s July 2 presidential election.
All of these isolated developments seemingly contradict the leftward trend in Latin America.
But there is another way of looking at these events.
Yes, President Uribe won re-election, but the big surprise in Colombia was the end of the two-party system that had dominated the country for decades, and the emergence of the left-wing Polo Democrático as the second largest political force in the nation.
Similarly, while Alan García won in Peru, he does not come from a hard-left party that has finally seen the light (like Lula da Silva in Brazil, Michelle Bachelet in Chile, and Tabaré Vázquez in Uruguay).
His APRA party, founded by Victor Raúl Haya de la Torre in the 1920’s, is one of the region’s oldest and most anachronistic populist organizations.
Like Chávez in Venezuela, Kirchner in Argentina, Evo Morales in Bolivia, and López Obrador in Mexico, President García belongs to the unreconstructed left that springs from the great Latin American populist tradition.
He may have learned many lessons from his disastrous presidency in the 1980’s, but he is much closer to the wrong left than to the right one.
In Mexico, López Obrador has both begun picking up in the polls in recent days, and showing his true colors, promising the stars and the moon to the Mexican electorate.
For example, Saõ Paulo, Brazil’s industrial powerhouse, now depends for most of its energy on Bolivian natural gas.
As a result, Petrobras, the Brazilian energy company, has invested huge sums in Bolivia in everything from exploration to pipelines.
Now, with the election of Evo Morales, the main source of Petrobras’s natural gas has suddenly been nationalized.
Indeed, domestic royalties on Bolivian gas production are being increased by more than 50%, and the price charged to Bolivia’s foreign clients may well be doubled.
Contracts are being respected only in the breach, and technicians and lawyers from PDVESA, the Venezuelan oil giant, are auditing Petrobras installations in Bolivia.
Lula wants to be nice to Morales, but he can’t be nice to his expropriating neighbor and at the same time keep the industrialists and consumers of Saõ Paulo happy.
On the other hand, Chávez’s unabashed meddling in the Peruvian elections may have so alienated Alan García that he actually becomes a European-style social democrat, and López Obrador may deliver on his promises to respect NAFTA, adhere to macro-economic orthodoxy, and pursue good relations with the US.
But the cleavage between the two lefts in Latin America is steadily deepening.
This is inevitable, because that rupture is being fueled by the simple acknowledgement that responsible governments must place national interests ahead of nostalgia, grandstanding rhetoric, and strident ideology.
Trading Away Human Rights
NEW YORK – Trade negotiators in Singapore recently failed to finalize a deal on the long-awaited Trans-Pacific Partnership; they will soon have another chance to complete what would be the world’s largest regional free-trade agreement.
But, given serious concerns that the TPP will fail to consider important human-rights implications, that is no cause for celebration.
The TPP talks involve the United States, Canada, and ten other Pacific Rim countries with a combined annual output of around $26 trillion, or about 40% of global GDP.
Their economic clout is matched by their ambitions; the talks go beyond traditional trade issues, which account for only five of the 29 proposed chapters, and consider a wide range of investment and regulatory issues that will affect many millions of people – and not always positively.
Whether trade liberalization generally helps or harms the most vulnerable is a complex question.
But that theoretical debate should not prevent us from carrying out a thorough human-rights impact assessment on the terms of the deal currently on the table.
Such an assessment should be conducted before the TPP negotiations reach any final agreement on the relevant issues, and it should not overlook how the terms are implemented in practice.
Unfortunately, TPP member states have not only failed to do this; they have also excluded independent organizations from the assessment process by refusing to provide access to draft texts.
An outside view is especially important when a free-trade and investment agreement is, as the Nobel laureate economist Joseph Stiglitz has noted, more of a “managed trade regime that puts corporate interests first.”
Indeed, the TPP’s emphasis on regulatory policies suggests that business interests will trump human rights.
While some proposals (against shark-finning, for example) would benefit certain advocacy groups, many more items are likely to cause widespread hardship.
Leaked drafts of intellectual-property proposals show an obstinate US effort to require patent protections for plants and animals, thus going beyond the World Trade Organization’s Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights.
The US stance could further restrict farmers’ access to productive resources, thus affecting the right to food.
And such proposals would limit governments’ options when addressing wider food-related human-rights issues.
This clash of interests contravenes basic principles of international law, namely that countries’ trade deals must not conflict with their obligations under human-rights treaties.
That is why a human-rights impact assessment must be conducted – and necessary additional safeguards added – before any TPP deal is signed.
An assessment would also galvanize public debate on the issues being discussed.
Although trade negotiations require discretion to avoid political grandstanding by participants, the secrecy that currently surrounds the TPP talks is preventing important human-rights arguments from being aired.
That entitlement to be heard – especially on a subject with such far-reaching significance – is also fundamental.
Transparency and inclusiveness should be prerequisites of any deal.
In fact, a human-rights impact assessment would not be difficult to conduct: guiding principles presented to the United Nations Human Rights Council in 2011 explain how to do it.
The matter is urgent.
As the current round of TPP negotiations winds down, the opportunity for an open and rigorous impact assessment is diminishing.
Yet, even at this late stage, the negotiating countries could still commission a follow-up assessment that could be linked to reporting requirements.
The delay in reaching a final agreement should be viewed as a last chance to correct potentially profound injustices.
It is the bare minimum that must be expected of negotiators.
If they truly want the TPP to be a model for the twenty-first-century global economy, as they claim, then they should show real leadership.
The TPP negotiators should consider the rights of everyone affected by the deal and act in the public interest, not just the special interests of the economic players that stand to benefit the most.
The Right to Eat
NEW YORK – Food systems have gone global.
The average North American meal now travels 2,400 kilometers (1,491 miles) from field to plate.
As the food-supply chain has been transformed, efforts to ensure that it is accessible to all have intensified, with the “right to food” serving as an important driver of bottom-up change.
In September, India adopted a landmark law on food security, guaranteeing five kilograms of subsidized wheat, rice, and other foodstuffs monthly for two-thirds of the population, and enhancing support for pregnant women, schoolchildren, and the elderly.
Though there are undoubtedly numerous holes in the system, treating access to food as a legal entitlement is an important step in the right direction.
Such progress, which extends far beyond India, follows a decade of global activism that has challenged the logic of existing food systems like never before.
Since the Universal Declaration of Human Rights was adopted in 1948, political rights like freedom of speech have been widely claimed, while the right to food has been largely neglected.
To be sure, since the declaration was signed, a plethora of tools has been introduced in the effort to combat hunger.
Some countries have opened their markets to imports; others have closed them.
Many became dependent on food aid, while some acted on the conviction that eradicating hunger is merely a matter of fostering GDP growth.
But such efforts have had limited success.
Meanwhile, the most powerful institutional tool has been neglected.
Unlike the top-down, technical solutions that policymakers have usually favored, a solution based on the concept of food as an entitlement, not a privilege, would involve – and empower – multiple actors.
Such an approach would be centered on upholding the right of all people to produce or gain access to food.
This approach has clearly found an audience in India, where millions of people live in hunger and poverty, even as the country’s net wealth grows.
Over the last decade, a right-to-food movement has taken root in the country, putting pressure on policymakers and approaching the problem from legal and political angles.
In 2001, a lawsuit brought by public-interest NGOs resulted in the Indian Supreme Court recognizing the right to food as an aspect of the constitutionally protected “right to life.”
The court ruled that a series of social programs should be expanded, in order to provide a basic nutritional floor for all.
This activated a virtuous circle; by strengthening the social movements rallying around the right to food, the Supreme Court’s decision enabled them to ratchet up pressure on state governments to build an effective food-security apparatus.
The recent law is a milestone in this process, but by no means the end point.
In a country characterized by massive regional wealth disparities and deep-rooted poverty, the road to eradicating hunger is sure to be long and difficult.
The key to ensuring continued progress is to establish accountability.
In this sense, the social audits used by India’s Right to Food Campaign to assess compliance with court-mandated policies, such as the delivery of school meals, will be essential in the coming years.
Peasant farmers, parliamentarians, civil-society groups, and institutional actors have come together in similar ways elsewhere – including in Brazil, South Africa, and Mexico – to demand legal protections against hunger.
Right-to-food framework legislation has been adopted in Argentina, Guatemala, Ecuador, Brazil, Venezuela, Colombia, Nicaragua, and Honduras.
This has often led to the kind of participatory approach to policymaking that empowers the poor and enables lasting inroads against hunger to be made.
In Brazil, for example, civil-society representatives comprise two-thirds of the National Council on Food and Nutrition Security, and thus have the opportunity to influence policymaking at the highest level.
In Mexico – where the right to food was constitutionally recognized in 2011 – an inter-ministerial commission includes 19 government departments and institutions.
It is no coincidence that these countries now boast bold social programs that are dramatically reducing hunger among the poorest groups.
Clearly, courts have made a signal contribution to the fight against hunger, by upholding and making fully operational the right to food.
In 2012, South Africa’s High Court ordered a revision of fisheries legislation to protect the livelihoods of small-scale fishers.
In Nigeria, Argentina, and Nepal, the right to food has recently been invoked on behalf of regions and population groups – including indigenous peoples – whose access to food was threatened.
Breakthrough crops, fertilizer subsidies, and aid campaigns may grab the headlines, but it is the right-to-food movement that holds the greatest promise for ending hunger.
The good news is that its power is only just being realized.
With a truly global right-to-food movement now emerging, the best is yet to come.
Ollanta Humala’s Limited Options
BUENOS AIRES – The big question in Latin America today is this: Will Peru’s newly elected president, Ollanta Humala, orient his country toward Venezuela’s Hugo Chávez and his radical allies?
Or will he choose the path taken by Brazil’s former president Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva and the region’s other moderate politicians?
Humala’s own ambiguous words offer little guidance.
So the direction in which he intends to lead must be read from his actions, and these are unlikely to be definitive in the short term.
Peru’s domestic and international situation, however, will frame his main decisions.
Humala is no novice politician rising to victory on charm and luck.
In the presidential election of June 2006, he received 45.5 % of the vote – not enough to defeat Alan García, but sufficient to show how deeply he had tapped into the hopes and trust of many Peruvians.
At that time, populism seemed an unstoppable force in Latin America.
Fueled by an oil boom and vast social spending, Chávez was flying high, blessed and supported by the aging but still active Fidel Castro.
Across the región, Chávez’s influence was strong.
His backing was a decisive influence in the election of Bolivia’s President Evo Morales in 2006, and the following year he supported Daniel Ortega in Nicaragua and Rafael Correa in Ecuador, though his impact on their victories is hotly debated.
In 2006, Humala praised Chavez’s policies as a sign of a new era in Latin America.
But, in the recent presidential campaign, he suggested that his policies would resemble those of Lula, not Chávez.