The final key risk facing the world concerns currency.
Since the global economic crisis, the expansionary monetary policies that advanced-economy central banks have pursued have caused large-scale, volatile capital flows across emerging-economy borders, generating significant instability for these countries and fueling accusations of “currency wars.”
The extra-territorial use of regulatory and tax powers – particularly by the US, which has the added advantage of issuing the world’s preeminent reserve currency – is reinforcing the view that currencies can be wielded as weapons.
For example, the US has effectively balkanized global banking by requiring all foreign banks operating there to become subsidiary companies and requiring international banks with US-dollar clearing accounts to comply fully with US tax, regulatory, and even, to some degree, foreign policy (for example, refraining from trading with US enemies).
Hefty fines imposed by US regulators for breaching the rules – notably, the recent $8.9 billion settlement by BNP Paribas – are already causing European banks to re-think their compliance costs and the profitability of operating in the US.
Meanwhile, American courts have forced Argentina into another national default.
But perhaps the strongest message is being sent via targeted sanctions on Russia’s oil, finance, defense, and technology industries, as well as on Russian officials.
With this approach, the US and its allies are sending a clear message to anyone who may disagree with US policy: avoid using the dollar and dollar-denominated bank accounts.
Some financial activity has already been driven into the shadows, reflected in the use of Bitcoin and other currencies that are beyond the reach of US regulators.
A recent example of the disaffected seeking an alternative to US leadership is the establishment of a New Development Bank and a contingent reserve arrangement by the BRICS (Brazil, Russia, India, China, and South Africa).
The problem for the US is that, in this case, the disaffected are five of the world’s major emerging economies, wielding combined resources that exceed those of the Bretton Wood institutions.
It is highly unlikely that BRICS bank transactions will be denominated in US dollars.
In a recent speech, US President Barack Obama declared that the question is not whether the US will lead, but how it will lead.
But, as creed, clan, culture, climate, and currency cause the world to become increasingly alienated from the US-centric international order, such declarations may be excessively optimistic.
Indeed, in the coming CLASS war, no one seems quite sure whom to follow.
Kermit’s Bankers
HONG KONG – Sesame Street’s Kermit the Frog once lamented that “it’s not easy bein’ green.”
Today, this sentiment is surprisingly relevant to the global economy – only it is becoming green that is the problem.
Last September, the Intergovernmental Panel for Climate Change warned that if the world sticks with “business as usual,” global temperatures may rise more than 4°C – far beyond the 2°C increase that has been deemed “safe.”
This prompted UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon to challenge political, economic, and financial leaders in January to intensify their efforts to achieve a new global agreement on climate change by 2015.
But, as important as high-level deals are, they will amount to little unless they are backed by considerable investment in areas like smart grids, energy storage, and renewables.
Indeed, the International Energy Agency estimates that nearly $1 trillion worth of investment will be needed annually between now and 2050 to put the world economy on a more sustainable path.
While that may seem like a lot of money, it is the equivalent of only 1% of global GDP, and less than 0.3% of global financial assets.
Moreover, since 2007, major central banks have proved that they can augment their balance sheets by more than $1 trillion annually, without triggering inflation.
In other words, the world can afford the transition toward a green economy.
Nonetheless, last year, green investment amounted to only $254 billion – implying an annual shortfall of nearly $750 billion.
To bridge the gap, advanced-country governments are leveraging their limited public funds to catalyze private-sector investment.
At the same time, developing countries are rapidly increasing their contributions to green finance, with domestic clean-energy financing in non-OECD countries having surpassed OECD-country levels in 2008.
But the problem remains that the current structure of markets impedes their ability to adjust to climate change.
What is really needed is not money, but the political will to correct market failure by bringing about fundamental shifts in the metrics, institutions, and policies that govern how investors evaluate economic activities.
A green project is bankable only if it provides a clear view of its real costs and benefits.
The return on private capital (profit and loss) plus the return on “social” capital must be positive.
The current GDP metric ignores the negative externalities of fossil-fuel-based private activities, leading to overwhelming pollution and gross wastage of non-renewable natural resources.
Without full cost accounting, some of the worst activities will continue to be immensely profitable.
A successful transition to a green economy will require a new set of metrics.
The good news is that some governments have already moved to establish a shadow cost for CO2 emissions.
In the US, the “social cost” of carbon was raised from $24 to $37 per ton emitted.
Publicizing fine-particulate (so-called PM2.5) levels was critical to mobilizing widespread Chinese public support for addressing air pollution.
Similar metrics are now needed to measure other forms of natural capital destruction, such as deforestation, marine-reef bleaching, wastewater discharge, and soil degradation.
Once these metrics are established, they must be incorporated into international accounting standards for private and public financial statements.
Some companies are already releasing annual reports with full details on their activities’ social and environmental impact, and will eventually move toward fully integrated reporting.
But bringing about real change will require more than moral suasion.
Policymakers must take advantage of the full range of tools available to them, including legislation, reporting guidelines, taxes, incentives, and public education about the costs of inaction.
Financial regulators in emerging economies like Bangladesh and China have already taken a step in the right direction, introducing rules to promote financial inclusion.
China’s green credit banking guidelines call upon financial institutions to consider the environmental risks in their loan portfolios.
Finally, there needs to be an honest discussion on the merits – and limits – of current monetary policy and financial regulation.
Central-bank subsidies like quantitative easing and near-zero interest rates should have increased the supply of low-cost financing for green projects.
Instead, they have boosted the profits of ever-larger financial institutions, leaving credit to small and medium-size enterprises and long-term projects severely constrained.
The irony is that regulations aimed at strengthening financial stability tend to reward short-termism (higher liquidity), adding risk-weights and costs to long-term projects – that is, most green investments.
Regulators must recognize that if the real economy is unsustainable, no amount of bank reforms will protect people’s livelihoods, let alone the financial system.
Adding a green-investment requirement of just 0.5% would be sufficient to cover the annual financing gap.
The global financial crisis occurred because we ignored externalities – shadow prices and institutions – allowing instability and inequality to proliferate.
Building a more stable, sustainable future requires getting policies, prices, and incentives right.
It will not be easy, as Kermit said, but the risk is that if we do not act, we get boiled before we become green.
King Coal’s Climate Challenge
WASHINGTON, DC – Coal is emerging as a major topic of conversation at the United Nations climate-change negotiations currently taking place in Warsaw – and rightly so.
Indeed, it is a discussion that the world needs to have.
The latest findings of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change conclude that we are quickly using up our carbon “budget” – the amount of carbon that we can afford to emit while still having a good chance of limiting global warming to 2º Celsius.
According to the IPCC, keeping the global temperature increase from pre-industrial levels below this threshold – the recognized tipping point beyond which climate change is likely to get seriously out of control – requires that the world emit only about 1,000 gigatonnes of carbon (GtC).
More than half of this amount was already emitted by 2011.
Unless we shift away from carbon-intensive behavior, the remaining budget will run out in roughly three decades.
When it comes to tolerable CO2 emissions, coal is the budget buster.
Just this week, a group of 27 prominent scientists, representing all major continents, issued a joint statement that explains that burning all known fossil-fuel reserves would produce about 3,800 gigatonnes of CO2, or 1,053 GtC, with coal alone accounting for more than half.
Simply put, if the world burns its known coal reserves using current technologies, it is likely to push global temperature rise far beyond 2ºC.
Many governments and financial institutions recognize this.
In recent months, the World Bank, the European Investment Bank, and the United States Export-Import Bank have introduced policies that restrict financing of new coal-fired power plants unless they can capture and store their CO2 emissions.
Five Nordic countries have joined the US Treasury in ending public financing of new coal-fired power plants overseas, and others may soon follow suit.
And this fall, the US Environmental Protection Agency proposed emissions standards for new power plants that would rule out conventional coal power – an important step that would cut carbon pollution and drive innovation.
Likewise, China, concerned about the serious health costs linked to burning coal, is prohibiting new coal capacity in three coastal provinces under its newly adopted action plan on air pollution.
The Chinese authorities have also introduced policies to reduce the proportion of coal in the country’s overall energy mix.
Against this backdrop, the World Coal Association (WCA) is meeting this week, also in Warsaw – in fact, just across the river from where negotiators are trying to forge the building blocks of a global climate agreement by 2015.
The WCA is calling for the use of “high-efficiency, low-emissions coal-combustion technologies” to lower greenhouse-gas emissions from coal-fired power plants around the world.
But this approach would still consume too much of the CO2 budget.
Even the most modern and advanced conventional coal-fired power plants emit over 15 times more CO2 per unit of electricity than renewable energy systems, and more than twice the amount of efficient gas-fired power stations.
And yet coal power is still going strong globally.
The World Resources Institute estimates that there are close to 1,200 proposed coal-fired power projects around the world, with a total installed capacity of more than 1,400 gigawatts.
If built, the world would commit a large share of the remaining carbon budget to high-carbon infrastructure with a lifespan of 40-50 years.
According to the International Energy Agency, the current trend in coal use is in line with a scenario that would lead to a 6ºC temperature rise.
This is a future that would radically and irreversibly change life on earth as we know it.
This is why the OECD Secretary General has suggested that it is time for a moratorium on the construction of conventional coal-fired power plants.
Governments have far more cost-effective electricity-generation technologies at their disposal.
Renewable energies like solar and wind are already competitive with fossil fuels in many parts of the world, and they can be scaled up rapidly.
Moreover, most economic models do not account for the externalities related to coal and carbon pollution.
For example, a recent report by Trucost estimates that coal-fired power generation worldwide may be responsible for around $1 trillion of damage due to climate change and air pollution.
Many coal-fired power plants would be uncompetitive if they were required to internalize these costs.
Of course, coal continues to offer millions of people a reliable source of electricity – and the transition to low-carbon technologies will not happen overnight.
We need to expand access to these technologies rapidly, while helping people whose livelihoods depend on the coal industry.
While we need to be passionate about climate change, we must also be pragmatic about how we address it.
But so must the coal industry.
Participants at the WCA meeting this week should commit to additional measures that will help ensure that emissions are kept within safe limits.
A moratorium on conventional coal plants would be a smart place to start.
That would help to show the world that the coal industry truly understands the scientific implications of current energy-use patterns, and that it is willing to assume more responsibility for combating climate change.
We need people on both sides of the Vistula River to do their part to build a fair and ambitious universal climate agreement by 2015.
Let’s roll up our sleeves together and plot a viable pathway to a safe and effective low-carbon economy.
An Earthquake in Chinese Politics?
BEIJING – Now that the aftershocks from the great Sichuan earthquake appear to have dissipated, it is time to ask what shocks, if any, the earthquake delivered to China’s political system.
Has the quake given birth to some new, positive political force that will accelerate reform?
It has happened before.
After all, dramatic political changes – the fall of the “Gang of Four” and Deng Xiaoping’s consolidation as China’s supreme leader – did follow shortly after the devastating Tangshan earthquake in 1976.
Given the sharp contrast between Premier Wen Jiabao’s caring attitude during the earthquake and President Hu Jintao’s mediocre political performance, some people could not help but imagine that the earthquake may have tipped the balance at the Communist Party’s highest levels, pushing the liberal forces represented by Wen to the center of power.
But this is naive.
Unlike 30 years ago, no strong force for political reform now exists in China’s vast bureaucratic system.
Back then, Mao’s Cultural Revolution had forced large numbers of his revolutionary comrades onto a reformist path.
In today’s China, the overwhelming majority of bureaucrats like the status quo and have enough resources to protect themselves.
Although Wen has won popular support through his tireless efforts for earthquake victims, he remains isolated in official circles.
And, although Hu can barely hide his mediocrity, the bureaucrats are unconcerned.
After all, they don’t want someone controlling them who is both able and serious.
But the Sichuan earthquake was not completely irrelevant to China’s political progress.
Wen, who had been bogged down by the bureaucracy, had been seeking to counter it by expanding the media’s openness and transparency.
He had sought to take advantage of the Beijing Olympics to give the foreign media unprecedented freedom, but the bureaucrats succeeded in reversing his decision.
The earthquake gave Wen an unexpected second opportunity.
He used television and his outstanding performance to prove that modern media and information tools can curb China’s bureaucracy.
This precedent will not be easy to roll back, and will have a far-reaching positive influence on China’s political progress.
The earthquake, together with the media transparency that accompanied it, has made the bureaucrats more accountable.
Thousands of people, including nearly 10,000 school children, whose parents will not be easily placated, lost their lives.
Millions of dispossessed people must be re-housed in a process that will last for several years.
Bureaucrats must not be allowed to spend the huge donations collected and state relief funds allotted in an arbitrary manner.
As a result, a new political culture conducive to accountability may have a realistic opportunity to grow.
But this does not mean that someone will emerge from the Party with the courage and ability to assume bold political leadership.
In fact, I believe that China’s future leaders, are more likely to come from China’s burgeoning, but still limited, civil society than from the bureaucracy.
One source of China’s future political leadership could well be its growing NGO sector.
Although the Party uses various means to suppress their development, the Sichuan earthquake demonstrated that it has failed to eliminate NGOs as a social force.
The quake gave them an opportunity to be seen, and an unprecedented number of people had a chance to perceive this nascent civil society as a positive force that serves their own interests.
There is an even greater silent force which may produce a new generation of political leaders: the rapidly growing army of Christian believers, now estimated at 20 million.
With a population of 1.3 billion, China has no lack of people with leadership potential, and I believe that more and more of this talent is situated outside the Party bureaucracy in NGOs, startup enterprises, philanthropy, and even missionary work.
In today’s mostly closed environment, they mostly lack awareness of their political skills and vision.
A more open and transparent public environment will help awaken their sense of political mission.
Yet we are left to ask: when will the time for major political change come?
Wen Jiabao wrote recently in Sichuan that “more hardship will arouse the country,” evidently believing that the Chinese may still need to suffer further in order to realize political progress.
That may be true, but I also believe that a new generation of political leaders can grow up in a more open information environment.
And, in any coming showdown, we must hope that all leaders will refuse to use innocent people’s lives as bargaining chips.
An Economic Agenda for Italy
MILAN – At the end of this month, Italian voters will choose their next government, from which they expect jobs and a more level economic playing field – and from which Italy’s European partners expect structural reforms and fiscal probity.
What should the new government’s economic-policy agenda be?
The new government’s biggest challenge will be to implement reforms that enable Italy’s economic performance to catch up to that of its neighbors after years of bad policies and neglect.
This requires increased investment in innovation and human capital.
From 1992 to 2011, labor productivity grew at an average annual rate of 0.9%, the lowest in the OECD.
Doing so would raise per capita income by 1% annually through 2030.
At the same time, fiscal adjustment remains essential to Italy’s short- and long-term stability.
According to the International Monetary Fund, the budget deficit is declining, and the primary surplus (net revenues minus interest payments) is growing.
Italy’s new leadership must sustain this progress.
Despite positive developments, the road ahead is bumpy.
Navigating it will require Italy to retain its credibility with other European Union member states and international investors.
The new prime minister will need to persuade Germany, financial markets, and the European Council that Italy is a reliable partner.
The ability to refinance government debt and keep costs down is essential to strengthening public finances and boosting GDP growth.
Furthermore, attracting more direct investment is crucial, given that capital inflows, while recovering, remain 30% below their pre-crisis level; with outflows exceeding inflows, Italy has become a net capital exporter.
“Selling” Italy in Europe should entail more than photo opportunities with other leaders in Brussels and the occasional road show to financial institutions in London.
Italy’s leaders should engage actively in commercial diplomacy, using the country’s embassies and trade agencies to promote Italy globally, while working to build strong bilateral relations with other EU members, particularly southern countries like Spain.
At the same time, the new leaders need to “sell” Europe in Italy, where Euro-skepticism is rampant.
According to the Pew Research Global Attitudes Project, only 30% of Italians view the euro positively.
In the country’s wealthier north, where average per capita income, at €30,000 ($40,500), approaches that of Germany, people are questioning the rationale of EU membership.
The costs are evident, they argue, but what are the benefits?
Meanwhile, fears of structural decline pervade the country.
The crisis has lasted for a long time, and people are tired.
Unemployment has risen to a record 11.2%, with 35% of young people jobless.
And the tax burden, which has exceeded 40% of GDP since 1990, now stands at almost 43% of GDP.
A Scandinavian level of taxes would be bearable if public services did not remain inferior to those offered in Scandinavia.
For example, per capita health-care spending in Sweden, Denmark, and Finland exceeds $3,000, compared to only $2,300 in Italy, where households must contribute roughly 20% of total health-care spending.
Moreover, Italy spends around 4.5% of GDP on education, while the Scandinavian countries spend more than 6% of GDP.
As a result, Italian students’ scores in the Program for International Student Assessment are significantly lower than those of their counterparts in many other OECD countries.
Italy’s new government will have to display leadership and vision to guide the economy toward stable growth, avert a race to the bottom, and stem growing social tension.
Most important, economic renewal depends on the next government’s willingness and ability to address the institutional weaknesses that have made concerted action increasingly urgent.
An Energy Tax for Europe
George W. Bush’s disastrous war in Iraq has put Europe in a bind.
The United States long has been Europe’s protector.
Now, because of a war it wanted no part of, Europe finds its security undermined.
Chaos in Iraq has empowered Iran – a much more dangerous country for Europe than Iraq ever was.
And, with America bogged down in Iraq, Russian President Vladimir Putin has resurrected Soviet-style bullying tactics.
Would Russia otherwise have dared to threaten to re-direct its nuclear missiles at European cities?
Not only has Bush destroyed Iran’s most formidable enemy and bogged down US troops in a hopeless cause; he also has enriched energy-abundant Iran and Russia by pursuing a war that has dramatically raised energy prices.
High crude oil prices make it easier for Iran to build nuclear weapons and for Russia to use energy blackmail to threaten Europe.
But Europe can fight back.
By imposing a stiff tax on energy consumption, Europeans would reduce both consumption of energy and its price in world markets, in turn cutting the flow of funds to Russia and Iran.
Because crude oil is priced in US dollars, and the dollar has depreciated against the euro, European consumers have gotten off relatively easy from rising energy prices.
So an energy tax roughly equal to the euro’s 33% appreciation in recent years would be about right.
Europeans might be forgiven for thinking that the Americans, who pumped up oil prices in the first place with their military misadventure in Iraq, should be the ones who “pump it down” with an energy tax.
But, with a “Texas oil man” in the White House, it won’t happen.
Perhaps after 2008, the politics in America will change in favor of an energy tax, but such a tax is needed now.
Besides, given the strength of environmentalism in Europe, the issue is tailor-made for Europeans to take the lead.
Moreover, Europeans do not narrowly equate national security with military spending.
They know that confiscating the checkbooks of Russia and Iran would probably make the world a lot safer than building another submarine or aircraft carrier.
Indeed, an energy tax would not only effectively counter the argument that Europeans are “free riders” when it comes to defense; it would be tantamount to defense leadership.
Still, with the amount of real resources transferred to their governments already high, Europeans might balk at a further increase.
That is why the energy tax must be imposed as a tax substitution, with income or payroll taxes simultaneously reduced to keep real resource transfers to government at a constant level.
This would increase economic growth as well as strengthen national security.
Critics who worry about the cost of the energy tax have not thought about tax substitutions.
They also do not seem to realize that an energy tax is a much cheaper way for Europe to protect itself from Iran and Russia than alternative means, such as a defense buildup.
Europe currently lacks military muscle because it made a decision a half-century ago to be protected by the US and devote the saved resources to building up its welfare state.
This strategy – which worked well for decades – always carried the risk that at some point America’s resources might be tied up elsewhere, leaving Europe under-protected.
That risk materialized with the Iraq war.
But Europeans are showing little taste for increased defense spending, Iraq or no Iraq.
Even France’s new president, Nicolas Sarkozy – thought by many to be a pro-American foreign policy hawk – is backing away from his campaign promise to maintain defense spending at 2% of GDP.
In a recent speech to the French defense industry, Sarkozy conspicuously failed to repeat the pledge, instead warning that he soon might cut France’s defense budget.
According to a respected defense industry publication, Sarkozy changed his mind after his party’s smaller-than-anticipated victory in June’s parliamentary election.
The reason Europeans are reluctant to increase defense spending is expense.
Cutting welfare spending – where the big money is – would be painful.
Solemn promises made over the years would have to be broken (people would not get the social services that they paid for with a lifetime of high taxes), lives would be shortened (less money for hospitals and nursing homes), and overall hardship increased.
Even economic growth will not prevent a tradeoff between defense and welfare spending for Europeans.
Fifty years of defense dependence on the US has created a powerful “peace industry” in Europe whose primary business is to fight defense spending tooth and nail.
They will want to protect all social spending, regardless of the consequences for foreign policy.
A counterweight to the “peace crowd” may be new migrants from Eastern Europe, for whom cuts in social services would break no promises, and for whom job availability and wage levels are more important.
But it will take some time before the new migrants gain decisive political influence, and the problems of Iran and Russia for Europe require immediate attention.
In short, Europeans will not allow Bush’s Iraq war to become a war on their welfare state.
What makes the energy imposed as a tax substitution tax particularly attractive as a defense measure is that it leaves the welfare state intact while making Europe safer, greener, and richer.
Why wait?
A New Anti-Semitism
These are violent times.
Some believe that we are experiencing a new kind of conflict: “culture wars,” such as those between Sunni and Shiite Muslims or tribal groups in Africa and Asia, or indeed Islamists and Westerners.
However, the deeper reasons for some of these conflicts may well be more traditional.
Belonging to a particular cultural group is merely a pretext for battles between the winners and losers of globalization.
Ruthless leaders mobilize disoriented followers.
Particularly the losers, often represented by young men with no future to look forward to, can be induced to take even suicidal action against the alleged enemy.
Perhaps one should not be surprised that at such a time, the oldest of our ugly ­– indeed, deadly – resentments, anti-Semitism, is re-emerging from the shadows.
Its comeback takes the classical form of attacks on individuals, like the recent killing of a young Jew in France, or of disfiguring symbolic places, like cemeteries and synagogues.
But there is also a more general sense of hostility to all things Jewish.
One would have thought that anti-Semitism died forever with the Holocaust; but it did not.
There are those who deny that the Holocaust ever took place, or that it did in its all-too-well-documented manner.
The deniers range from second-rate historians like David Irving to apparently popular politicians like Iran’s recently elected president, Mahmoud Ahmadinejad.
The evidence of what Nazi Germany did is so powerful that those who deny it can probably be dealt with even without putting them in prison and thereby drawing more attention to them than they deserve.
The more worrisome source of anti-Semitism is different and justifies speaking of a new anti-Semitism.
It has to do with Israel.
To be sure, America is the first name in anti-Western resentment.
But its second name is Israel, the only successful modern country in the Middle East, which is also highly militarized, an occupying power, and ruthless in defense of its interests.
It is difficult to exaggerate the strange sentiment in the West which one might call Palestine romanticism.
Intellectuals like the late Edward Said gave voice to it, but it has many followers in the United States and Europe.
Palestine romanticism glorifies the Palestinians as the victims of Israel’s rule, points to the treatment of Israeli Palestinians as at best second-class citizens, and cites the many incidents of oppression in the occupied territories, including the effects of Israel’s “security fence.”
Implicitly or explicitly, people take the side of the victims, contribute by sending money to them, declare even suicide bombers legitimate, and move ever further away from support for and defense of Israel.
Of course, it is true that in theory one can oppose Israel’s policies without being anti-Semitic.
After all, there are enough critics of Israel’s policies among Israelis.
Yet the distinction has become more and more difficult to maintain.
Jews outside Israel feel that they have to defend – right or wrong – the country that, after all, is their ultimate hope of security.
This makes their friends hesitate to speak up for fear of being painted into not just an anti-Israel, but also an anti-Semitic corner.
The defensiveness of Jews and the uneasy silence of their friends mean that the stage of public debate is open for those who actually are anti-Semitic, though they confine themselves to anti-Israel language.
Anti-Semitism is disgusting in whatever form it arises.
This is true also for other kinds of group hatred, but the Holocaust makes anti-Semitism unique, because it is an emotion complicit in the near annihilation of an entire people.
The new anti-Semitism, however, cannot be fought successfully by education and argument in the rest of the world alone.
It is linked to Israel.
If one belongs to a generation that regarded Israel as one of the great achievements of the twentieth century, and admired the way in which the country provided a proud home for the persecuted and downtrodden, one is particularly concerned that it may now be at risk.
A New Asian Security Constellation
NEW DELHI – Leading members of the governments of India and South Korea recently met to begin a new “strategic partnership.”
They are not alone in doing so, for across Asia, a new security architecture is being constructed, seemingly piecemeal.
How Asia’s geopolitical landscape will evolve over the coming decades is not easy to foresee.
But it is apparent that an increasingly assertive China is unwittingly reinforcing America’s role in Asia, restoring US primacy as the implicit guarantor of security and stability in the region.
There are at least four possible Asian security scenarios for the years and decades ahead.
The first is the rise of a Sino-centric Asia.
China seeks a multipolar world but a unipolar Asia.
By contrast, the US desires a unipolar world but a multipolar Asia.
A second scenario is that the US remains Asia’s principal security anchor, with or without a third possibility: the emergence of a constellation of Asian states with common interests working together to ensure that Asia is not unipolar.
Finally, Asia could come to be characterized by several resurgent powers, including Japan, India, Vietnam, Indonesia, and a reunified Korea.
Of the four scenarios, the first has caused the greatest unease.
China’s neighbors are increasingly anxious about its growing power and assertiveness.
While China’s rulers aspire to shape a Sino-centric Asia, their efforts to intimidate smaller neighbors hardly make China a credible candidate for Asian leadership.
After all, genuine leadership cannot come from raw power, but only from other states’ consent or tacit acceptance.
If leadership could be built on brute force, schoolyard bullies would be class presidents.
In any event, China’s power may be vast and rapidly growing, but it lacks the ability to compel.
In other words, China does not have the capability to rout any rival militarily, let alone enforce its will on Asia.
That fact has, however, done little to allay fears in the region.
With its defense spending having grown almost twice as fast as its GDP, China is now beginning to take the gloves off, confident that it has acquired the necessary muscle.
For example, China now includes the South China Sea in its “core” national interests, on a par with Taiwan and Tibet, in order to stake a virtually exclusive claim to military operations there.
China also has increasingly questioned India’s sovereignty over Arunachal Pradesh, the northeastern Indian state that China’s rulers call “Southern Tibet” and claim largely as their own.
Indian defense officials have reported a rising number of Chinese military incursions across the 4,057-kilometer Himalayan border.
As China seeks to translate its economic clout into major geopolitical advantages in Asia, a country that once boasted of “having friends everywhere” finds that its growing power may be inspiring awe, but that its actions are spurring new concerns and fears.
Which states will accept China as Asia’s leader?
Six decades of ruthless repression has failed to win China acceptance even in Tibet and Xinjiang, as the Tibetan and Uighur revolts of 2008 and 2009 attested.
Leadership entails more than the possession of enormous economic and military power. It demands the power of ideas that can galvanize others.
Such power also serves as the moral veneer to the assertiveness often involved in the pursuit of any particular cause or interest.
The US and its allies won the Cold War, for example, not so much by military means as by spreading the ideas of political freedom and market capitalism to other regions.
In the words of the strategic analyst Stanley A. Weiss, this “helped suck the lifeblood out of communism’s global appeal,” making it incapable of meeting the widespread yearning for a better and more open life.
China has shown itself adept at assertively promoting its national interests and playing classical balance-of-power geopolitics. But, in order to displace the US and assume the mantle of leadership in Asia, China must do more than pursue its own interests or contain potential rivals.
Most fundamentally, what does China represent in terms of values and ideas?
In the absence of an answer to that question, China’s overly assertive policies have proven a diplomatic boon for the US in strengthening and expanding American security arrangements in Asia.
South Korea has tightened its military alliance with the US, Japan has backed away from a move to get the US to move its Marine airbase out of Okinawa, and India, Vietnam, Indonesia, and the Philippines, among others, have drawn closer to the US.
In terms of power-projection force capabilities or the range of military bases and security allies in Asia, no power or combination of powers is likely to match the US in the next quarter-century.
But, while America’s continued central role in Asia is safe, the long-term viability of its security arrangements boils down to the credibility of its security assurances to allies and partners.
America’s readiness to stand by them when the game gets rough will determine the strength and size of its security-alliance system in Asia in the years ahead.
The third and fourth scenarios can unfold even if the US remains the principal security anchor for Asia.
A number of Asian countries have already started building mutually beneficial security cooperation on a bilateral basis, thereby laying the groundwork for a potential web of interlocking strategic partnerships.
A constellation of Asian states linked by strategic cooperation, in fact, has become critical to help institute power stability in the region.
A New Bargain for UN Reform
The United Nations is torn apart by internal tensions.
No sooner was the controversy over the creation of a Human Rights Council satisfactorily resolved than a new battle has erupted.
The United States is pressing for administrative reforms and threatening to cut off funding if the reforms are not forthcoming.
The Secretary General has submitted a reasonable reform plan, but a majority of UN member states, acting together as the so-called G-77, are balking, because they regard it as another step in reducing the authority of the General Assembly relative to the Security Council.
In particular, they object to the plan’s proposal to give increased powers and responsibilities to the Secretary General, whose selection is effectively in the hands of the Security Council’s five permanent members, which wield veto power.
Many UN members, believing that power within the UN has been shifting from the General Assembly, resist giving up what they regard as its last vestige: control over the budget through the work of the Assembly’s Fifth Committee.
In practice, the Fifth Committee has exercised the kind of micro-management over personnel and expenditure that ought to be exercised by the Secretary General if the UN is to operate effectively and to have a staff which is up to the challenges facing the organization.
This is the basis of America’s insistence on administrative reforms.
There is an urgent need to find a way out of this impasse.
Failure of the current proposal would mean an effective end to all efforts to reform the UN, with disastrous consequences for people across the world who depend on the aid provided by the UN Development Program, the security provided by the UN’s numerous peacekeeping operations, or the myriad other services rendered by UN agencies.
For example, failure of management reform would fuel demands by the US Congress to withhold America’s contributions to the UN budget – a policy that would greatly undermine America’s own interests, such as the planned expansion of the mission to stop genocide in Darfur.
The path to a satisfactory resolution is clear: give the General Assembly a greater role in the selection of the Secretary General so that members would be delegating powers to an authority of their own choosing.
This solution would not only permit the much-needed administrative reforms to be implemented; it would also bring clarity and transparency to a process that is in great need of improvement.
After all, the UN Charter provides that “the Secretary-General shall be appointed by the General Assembly upon the recommendation of the Security Council.”
The original concept was that the two bodies would reach a consensus on a candidate.
In practice, however, the five permanent members now agree on a candidate, and their decision is rubber-stamped first by the Security Council and then by the General Assembly.
Real discussions about a new Secretary General are currently being conducted in secrecy among the permanent five, adding to the frustration of other UN members, including large powers that have been seeking without success to enlarge the Security Council.
To achieve the reforms of the budget process that it wants, the US will need to lead the way in persuading the other permanent members of the Council to give the General Assembly a greater role in the process.
This might be done in several ways.
The Security Council might agree to recommend several candidates from which the General Assembly would select one.
Alternatively, the General Assembly might propose several candidates to the Security Council, from which the Council would choose one to refer back to the Assembly for approval.
Either way, the selection process would benefit from greater transparency.
For example, the General Assembly should hold public hearings in which candidates are interviewed, thereby greatly enhancing the stature of the candidate who is eventually selected.
Such proposals, if accepted, would help resolve the current dispute to everyone’s satisfaction.
Indeed, they could make the UN stronger than it has ever been.
A New Dawn for Chinese Journalism?
A remarkable incident has emboldened Chinese journalists.
Earlier this year, the government suspended publication of the newspaper Bing Dian Weekly , provoking unprecedented open protest, which received extensive media coverage worldwide.
Even more surprisingly, the government, under the pressure of public opinion, has allowed Bing Dian to resume publication.
The editor-in-chief and deputy editor-in-chief were sacked, but the open questioning of the legitimacy of the government’s authority to regulate journalism is bound to have a profound impact.
Foreign observers are prone to associate the Bing Dian incident with other recent crackdowns on China’s mass media, and to conclude that Chinese journalism freedom is hopeless under the present autocratic regulation.
Undeniably, there has been no significant change in the government’s system of journalism’s regulation since China adopted its “open door” policy almost 30 years ago.
On the contrary, it has become more rigorous and covert.
But I still have faith that subtle changes are occurring.
A prerequisite of effective control of the media is that the controlled accept the controller’s ideology.
After 1949, the Communist Party cultivated a stable of “theoretical experts” and other ideological servants to write lengthy articles propagating “Marxism and Mao Zedong Thought.”
But nowadays, such writers are hard to find, and their work is received by readers with mockery and sarcasm.
In fact, the Central Propaganda Department’s ideological control can be maintained only through internal notices and telephone calls, which are widely scorned.
More importantly, even the regulators themselves have ceased to believe in obsolete and rigid doctrines.
I recently met an official working for a provincial Department of Propaganda and was impressed by his bold and straightforward comments on current affairs.
In private conversation, one might even take him for a liberal – one of a new breed of young and well-educated propaganda officials with an increasingly higher threshold of political sensitivity.
For their part, producers of news have long since ceased to believe that news is propaganda.
I started my career with
Indeed, Western works are taught as “models for writing” to journalism students in China’s universities.
This is a crucial change, and it is the fundamental reason for an increasing number of genuine news items and commentaries in China’s media today.
Market pressure has also been important in pushing Chinese media to embrace change.
Contrary to foreign perceptions, only a handful of Chinese media – for example,
To be sure, political information remains rigorously controlled, which puts a premium on “harmless” recreational, entertainment, and sports information – the reporting of which is basically free.
This has resulted, in the short run, in an embrace of low journalistic standards.
But many metropolitan newspapers that once thrived on infotainment have seen their circulation fall in recent years.
Sooner or later, readers will start to buy newspapers that can truly inform them and give voice to their opinions.
In fact, it is these tabloids, responding to market pressure, that have started to take on responsibility as public watchdogs.
On many occasions in recent years, they have been the first to break sensitive news.
As a result, mainstream media are being marginalized, and the previously marginalized media are becoming mainstream.
Thus, even without any change in the current system of regulation, extensive coverage of disasters, judicial abuses, and citizens’ pursuit of their statutory rights, along with the questioning of policies from public perspectives, is now common.
For example, reporting by the
Such progress is slow and full of frustrations, for it reflects the incremental evolution of the system.
But it is nonetheless real progress, indicating the growing influence of the Chinese media and pointing to China’s becoming a country of “free expression”.
According to an old Chinese saying, “a just cause enjoys abundant support, while an unjust cause finds scant support.”
A “just cause” resides in people’s hearts.
Without the hearts of news producers – or, increasingly, of censors – the seemingly formidable edifice of journalistic regulation will, sooner or later, collapse like the Berlin Wall.
A New Deal for Fragile States
PARIS – Today, roughly one-quarter of the world’s population lives in conflict-affected and fragile states.
Despite vast sums of money spent aiding such states over the last 50 years, armed conflict and violence continue to blight the lives of millions of people around the world.
International and national partners must radically change the way they engage such states.
I experienced firsthand the need for a new approach in 2004 in Sri Lanka.
Within the first two months of the devastating tsunami that struck that December, close to 50 heads of state and foreign ministers visited the island.
Each came with their own programs, their own civil-society organizations, and their own television crews.
Few came with any deep understanding of the dynamics of the political conflict between militant Tamils and the Sri Lankan state.
Big mistakes were made, fueling further violence.
Our major challenge today is to move away from the model of partnership according to which priorities, policies, and funding needs are determined in donor capitals and development partners’ headquarters.
Conflict-affected states need to be able to determine their own destinies.
We should establish models of post-conflict transition like the one advocated by the g7+, a group of eighteen fragile states.
The model is simple: Countries assess their own situation, using tools that they develop and that are appropriate to the context, in order to formulate a vision and a plan to consolidate peace and achieve prosperity.
This may sound like pie in the sky, but we have already tasted it in Africa, where Sierra Leone’s Agenda for Prosperity 2013-2017 and the Liberia Vision 2030 exemplify the potential of such programs.
Progress on meeting national priorities such as peace consolidation, expanding access to justice, or increasing security is monitored locally.
Using local systems and capacities, it turns out, can strengthen them.
The “New Deal for Engagement in Fragile States,” which builds on a series of international commitments regarding aid and development, and was endorsed at the at the Fourth High-Level Forum on Aid Effectiveness in Busan, South Korea in 2011, proposes just such a model.
It enshrines what matters most in building peaceful states and societies: commitments – the Peace- and State-building Goals – to improve how national and international partners engage in conflict-affected and fragile contexts.
The New Deal recognizes what the history of peace-building teaches us: national leadership and ownership of agendas are key to achieving visible and sustainable results.
As Kosti Manibe Ngai, South Sudan’s finance minister, has put it, “Nothing about us without us.”
In many conversations with South Sudan’s president, Salva Kiir, we have discussed setting out a short list of clear priorities for the new state.
But such goals are meaningful only if a fragile state’s partners are ready to accept the lead from a capital like Juba rather than from their own headquarters.
More than 40 countries and institutions have endorsed the New Deal way of working, committing themselves to building better partnerships – and to investing the required resources and political capital.
This is why the New Deal model is innovative; it creates political support around issues that need to be addressed if countries are to make the transition from conflict and fragility to peace and stability.
Supporting inclusive political dialogue and ensuring that conflict is resolved through peaceful means are the highest priorities, as are security, access to justice, and a dynamic private sector that generates sufficient job opportunities.
Moreover, many fragile states are rich in natural resources, and must establish transparent resource management – aimed at curbing corruption and controlling illicit flows of money and goods – in order to raise the revenues needed to deliver services.
A focus on these processes would ensure that fragile states take the lead and the responsibility.
As partners, we must accept this national leadership.
After Haiti’s catastrophic earthquake in 2010, the country was dubbed “the republic of NGOs.”
Unable to create conditions in which Haitians themselves could take the lead in rebuilding their country, Haiti’s external partners undermined the establishment of a functioning internal governance system.
So, how can we translate our commitments and priorities into better lives for people who are affected by conflict and fragility?
OECD countries need to lead by example and meet the commitments that they have made.
Our partners, through groupings like the g7+, must continue to demand the changes in policies and practices that have been promised.
We also must plan to change for the long term.
As the Millennium Development Goals’ 2015 end date approaches, promotion of peace, security, and non-violent conflict resolution continues to be vitally important, and must be fully integrated into any future development agenda.
Recently, the members of the International Dialogue on Peacebuilding and Statebuilding, the high-level political forum that produced the New Deal, met in Washington, DC, to assess our progress in changing how we work and in implementing the New Deal commitments.
They agreed to the Washington Communiqué, which urges development partners, g7+ countries, and civil-society organizations to intensify their efforts to use the New Deal to deliver concrete results on the ground, and calls for a post-2015 development agenda that recognizes the universal importance of peace- and state-building.
Ultimately, our progress depends on the resolve of everyone to transform the lives of the 1.5 billion people whose lives are marred by violence, conflict, and insecurity.
A New Deal for the Lisbon Strategy
Whatever happened to the European Union’s Lisbon Strategy?
Not only is the public almost entirely ignorant of the EU’s policy agenda for boosting competitiveness, economic growth, and employment, but this ignorance extends to many intellectuals, academics, CEO’s, and even some MP’s.
For example, in all of the debates on the EU’s constitutional treaty, neither its supporters nor its opponents have so much as mentioned the Lisbon Strategy.
It is little wonder, then, that Euroskepticism – in France, the Netherlands, and elsewhere – is on the rise.
Despite the success and popularity of programs like ERASMUS, citizens don’t perceive the EU’s contribution to superior education or training.
Indeed, the last Eurobarometer survey on the Lisbon Strategy found that the European public sees little relation between EU policies and economic competitiveness.
Of course, some laboratories receive EU grants, but without recognizing a specific European mission in research policies.
Europe is generally considered more a constraint than as a plan, more as an instrument than a vision nourished by a clear and credible idea.
The essential responsibility for this state of affairs lies with Europe’s ruling class and policymakers.
As a recent assessment by former Dutch prime minister Wim Kok pointed out, the EU’s member states generally have not made the Lisbon Strategy a high priority, and they balk at giving the EU the means to pursue more ambitious policies to offset this neglect.
It is difficult to ask citizens to be enthusiastic about aims that their leaders ignore.
At bottom, the problem is one of legitimacy.
The main targets – jobs, growth, and research – are considered legitimate from the standpoint of fairness when described in general terms.
But the concrete policies needed to realize this aim are not, since reforming the welfare state and labor markets means more competition, which scares many citizens.
Legitimacy is even more problematic regarding recognition, which implies a feeling of community and attachment.
When we are faced with conflicting choices – burden-sharing through taxation, the organization of the public sector, the status of public employees, etc. – the member states are considered to be the only bodies entitled to decide.
In short, when the EU brings subsidies, it receives congratulations; but when it pushes for unpopular reforms, it becomes the scapegoat for political, social, and economic failures.
From an economic point of view, the Lisbon Strategy’s aim is to transform Europe into a power able to compete on equal terms with the US today and the great Asian countries.
But this aim does not appear to be creating a European identity, as the euro has.
Within many states, “power” isn’t politically correct.
Above all, there is no linkage between national power and European power.
If we want Europe to be more legitimate, we must explain how to tie these two dimensions of power.
Aside from ignorance of the Lisbon Strategy among the public and inaction on long-term reforms among the member states, a second problem concerns the lack of acceptance of the virtues of competition – the most effective way to ensure quality, innovation, and low prices for consumers.
Competition also puts an end to rent seeking and protection of traditional corporate advantages.
Of course, we must limit the scope of competition: there is no reason, for example, to extend it to taxation.
Similarly, while competition will improve the quality of research and education, this does not imply reduced public funding, a lower priority for basic research, or the elimination of scholarships.
Perhaps most importantly, competition is a powerful means to restore democracy and modernize political institutions by compelling policymakers to ensure transparency and accountability.
Elites must give up their privileges, and regulations on corporate governance must limit collusion between managers and civil servants or politicians.
We must explain to citizens Europe’s contribution to public ethics, and the democratic virtues of fair competition in economic, political, and social life.
Consider one of the main purposes of the Lisbon Strategy: the organization of research and higher education.
It is impossible to change radically the way scholars and research workers are appointed in most member states, and to revise completely the criteria for funding of faculties and laboratories. But the EU can overcome national impediments by developing exemplary universities and research centers that would be properly European, serving as an incentive to quality and reform at the national level.
Emulation through excellence is the motor of competitiveness.
A good place to start is an idea supported by French Socialist leader Dominique Strauss-Kahn, who has proposed that 0.25% of Europe’s GDP be dedicated to research and used to create a European Agency for Research.
Moreover, Europe must build up tools for strategic analysis, assessment, and forecasting to provoke and nourish public debate.
Such think tanks at the European level must remain free and independent, but leaders must learn to pay attention to and integrate their recommendations into the policy-making process.
In many matters pertaining to the Lisbon Strategy, the EU cannot avoid member states’ concerns.
But as the states won’t be able to do everything alone and won’t renounce maintaining political control, we must be able to link the Union’s policies and those of specific states.
Otherwise, the Lisbon Strategy could merely empower an inefficient bureaucracy, rather than boosting the EU’s democratic legitimacy.
In short, the Lisbon Strategy could lead Europe to become a real power in the coming decades, or it could fuel further growth of Euroskepticism.
A New Democratic Agenda for Russia
MOSCOW – When Russian President Dmitri Medvedev delivered his annual address to the Federal Assembly I was struck by the fact that his speech seemed to be meant for an advanced, prosperous country, not the real Russia of today.
Russia will hold a presidential election in 2012.
What happens in 2011 will, in my opinion, be even more important than the election itself.
Indeed, the evolution of Russian society could transform Russian politics, despite those domestic opponents who deny change or those who unqualifiedly classify Russia as “incorrigibly authoritarian.”
But, in order for that to happen, a new agenda for Russia must be developed this year.
A decade ago, defense of Russia’s territorial integrity and restoration of governability topped the list of priorities.
People supported a president, Vladimir Putin, who was devoted to this “stabilization” agenda.
We may debate the means by which it was pursued, and how successfully, but Russia’s “existential” challenges were largely overcome.
But progress on stabilization only highlighted Russia’s unresolved problems, which the global financial crisis exacerbated, but did not cause.
After all, Russia’s resource-based, de-industrializing, expenditure-driven economy is the result of purely domestic choices.
Nor was it the crisis that gave rise to corruption, which affects officialdom at all levels, or that caused Russia to lose its democratic dynamic.
We Russians rode along on oil and gas, forgetting that these resources will not last forever.
But, even with favorable world market conditions, we did not manage to solve the problem of poverty, in which millions of Russians still live.
I am convinced that Russia’s troubles all come down to politics.
We need a democratic, competitive environment, initiative at all levels, an active civil society, and real public control.
Only under such conditions will difficult problems lend themselves to solution.
But, starting in 2005-2006, the authorities implemented measures that made responsiveness to acute problems practically impossible.
The decisions to appoint, rather than elect, regional governors, to introduce party-list voting, to raise the electoral threshold for parties to enter the Duma, and to repeal the minimum-turnout requirement – all accompanied by rampant manipulation of elections and the mass media – created a political system closed to feedback from society.
Not surprisingly, the political elite became self-absorbed and served only its own narrow interests.
This summer, with wildfires raging outside Moscow, the elite’s isolation took on a menacing nature.
But something else happened: society became more demanding, recognizing its own interests and knowing how to express them.
Although the traditions of self-organization in Russian society are neither deep nor strong, real movement in this direction became visible for all to see.
Activists from public movements, journalists, ecologists, businessmen, and ordinary people who had suffered the tyranny and corruption of public officials began to join in.
The authorities have recognized this, at least to some degree.
Medvedev's decision to suspend construction of a highway through the Khimki forest near Moscow in the face of widespread civic protest was important.
For many months, Moscow and federal authorities ignored the highway’s opponents, so Medvedev’s decision was a signal: contempt for the people is inadmissible.
Yet right after that, the bureaucracy tried to turn the public hearings – called to give people and civil institutions a voice in solving such problems – into an empty formality.
So the struggle between democratic and anti-democratic tendencies is becoming acute.
If the anti-democratic tendencies win out, all that we have accomplished in previous years will be jeopardized – including stability itself.
This threat evidently motivated Medvedev to speak out in November: “It is no secret,” Medvedev wrote in his blog, “that, as of a certain period, symptoms of stagnation have begun to appear in our political life, and the threat of turning stability into a factor of stagnation has appeared.”
The president’s statement was unexpected.
Medvedev’s assessment attested to his understanding that Russia’s problems are rooted in its politics – in the degradation of the ruling party, in the absence of a real opposition, and in the lack of respect for the rights of political minorities.
I welcome Medvedev’s emphasis on social concerns and his anti-bureaucratic rhetoric.
But his statements are only a first step toward formulating a new Russian agenda, the first point of which must be a renewal and acceleration of movement toward real and effective democracy.
It is vital that Russians believe that Medvedev’s words reflect his priorities, and that he is prepared to fight for them.
Among these priorities, one of the most important is education.
We have approached the point when the constitutional requirement of universal, free education may become a fiction.
People are asking: How is it that, after World War II, the state had enough money to provide free education, whereas today’s Russian state does not?
Society also demands effective mechanisms for combating corruption, which is turning into a serious political problem, precisely because it has widened the gap between the people and the authorities.
Indeed, today’s elite cannot or will not solve the problem.
Only a serious presidential initiative, supported by civil society and brave new political forces, can do the job.
The new agenda must also include a strong economic component.
Patching up holes in the budget and individual initiatives are not enough to ensure economic renewal.
Russia needs a breakthrough toward an up-to-date, knowledge-based, and ecologically sustainable economy.
Here, I see a direct connection with the problem of education.
I am convinced that Medvedev must become the leader in the process of formulating the new Russian agenda, and he must act in the coming year.
Society will support him.
A New Era for Islamic Science?
For a few hundred years, when science and mathematics were enjoying a period of great invention, one region of the world stood out.
Masters of these disciplines were revered there, medicine advanced quickly, and the average person was curious about how nature worked.
Not surprisingly, this region was globally respected.
In the other half of the known planet, scientists were punished, even killed.
Mathematics was outlawed as irreligious and alien, and was later made subservient to religion.
The standard of living was low.
The prosperous region was the Islamic Middle East, while an ignorant Europe remained poor.
Both regions were religiously governed (historians differ about the role and natures of the religions in this context), but science flourished only in one of them.
Now, of course the roles of the Islamic Middle East and the West are reversed.
Since World War II, the United States has been the world’s undisputed leader in science.
Throughout this period, the brightest students were drawn away from their native lands, attracted by superior research universities and opportunities.
Until recently, more than half of all mathematics, science, and engineering graduate students in the US were foreign-born.
Many of these talents stayed after graduation, and both industry and government took advantage of this.
Meanwhile, Islamic cultures entered a historical phase in which science was equated with Western influence and eschewed.
Even in countries where oil revenues could fuel a significant amount of research, Arab rulers did not encourage such investment, with the result that their societies have not prospered as much as they might have.
Recently, a desire for greater political respect has spurred Islamic nations to invest in technology, which is most visible in Pakistani and Iranian nuclear ambitions.
But while such weapons carry political weight, the science behind them is mundane and old.
More meaningful is the respect that comes from incubating insights, rather than the products of past discoveries.
Imagine the influence that would be generated by a Pakistani institute that was the world leader in cancer research.
Would the political rhetoric shift if researchers in Oman discovered a key to suppressing AIDS?
This is one unclaimed opportunity.
But another exists, and not just for Islamic societies.
The US has made profound missteps recently.
“Matters of faith” have been substituted for science across government, from the president down.
Top researchers have had their reports changed by political operatives when the facts contradicted official belief.
Encouraged by a religiously influenced administration, school systems are shifting their focus from science to “values.”
Since the terrorist attacks of September 2001, entry visas are fewer and more difficult to obtain, stanching the flow of young talent into US universities.
Major scientific organizations have protested, without result.
At the same time, tax laws have been revised to make investors wealthier in the near term, discouraging long-term investment in research.
Building a knowledge-based economy using oil wealth is clearly possible.
For example, Texas, like most southern US states, was once economically poor and declining.
Although it had oil revenue, the flow of dollars into an economy, by itself, does not boost prosperity as much as one might think.
So Texas decided to devote its oil money to an educational endowment.