For the first time, the number of deaths caused by cervical cancer every year is poised to outstrip the total caused by childbirth.
The trend partly reflects the success of efforts to reduce maternal deaths.
Since 1990, the number of women dying as a result of childbirth has been nearly halved, to 289,000 per year.
Over the same period, however, annual deaths from cervical cancer have increased by almost 40%, to 266,000.
Even as better standards of care continue to cut maternal mortality, cervical cancer deaths are expected to rise further.
By 2035, the disease is expected to cause 416,000 women to die slowly and painfully every year – virtually all of them in developing countries (mostly Sub-Saharan Africa and South Asia).
The tragedy is that these deaths are almost entirely preventable.
Human papillomavirus (HPV) vaccines, coupled with screening and treatment, could prevent the vast majority of cervical cancer cases.
But almost 90% of the women who die from cervical cancer are in developing countries, where, for too many of them, screening services are unavailable, and treatment even less so.
As former Additional Secretary at the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare in India, the country with the largest number of cervical cancer deaths in the world, I have seen the impact of the disease with my own eyes.
What is particularly devastating is how it also quashes hope.
Women with HIV, for example, are particularly prone to the disease.
Yet, with better treatments for HIV becoming available, women are now surviving HIV only to die from cervical cancer.
In 2010, the total global cost of cervical cancer was estimated to be around $2.7 billion per year.
By 2030, this is expected to increase to $4.7 billion, unless we do something about it now.
Vaccines, fortunately, are becoming increasingly available.
Safe and effective HPV vaccines have been on the market since 2006, protecting against HPV types 16 and 18, which cause 70% of all cervical cancer cases.
Newly approved vaccines provide even greater protection.
In wealthy countries, HPV vaccines are often priced at more than $100 per dose.
But Gavi, the Vaccine Alliance, has worked with manufacturers to reduce prices in developing countries.
Recently, we secured a record-low price for HPV vaccines of $4.50 a dose, opening the door for millions of the poorest girls to be vaccinated in 27 countries.
By 2020, we estimate that Gavi will have helped over 30 million girls in more than 40 developing countries receive vaccinations against HPV.
The economic benefits of vaccines are substantial.
It takes time and significant investment to set up effective screening and treatment services.
And, given that even high-income countries struggle to meet the cost of cancer treatments, prevention is clearly a far more efficient option.
Moreover, cervical cancer strikes women during their most economically productive years, when their contribution to society and the economy is greatest.
The disease does not just destroy lives; it also impoverishes families and undermines economic growth.
A recommendation last year by the World Health Organization’s Strategic Advisory Group of Experts on Immunization promises to boost vaccines’ cost-effectiveness further, by calling for just two doses of the HPV vaccine, rather than the three doses previously thought to be required.
This will not only reduce the overall cost of vaccine procurement and delivery; it will also make it easier for health-care workers and the girls themselves.
A study published by WHO and the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine in June predicts that vaccinating 58 million girls in 179 countries would prevent 690,000 cases of cervical cancer and 420,000 deaths from the disease.
Unfortunately, the study also found that of the 33 countries where HPV vaccines are most likely to have the greatest effect in preventing cancer, 26 had not yet introduced the vaccine.
There is much work to be done.
We should congratulate ourselves for nearly halving the maternal death rate since 1990. But we must keep the threat of cervical cancer firmly in our sights.
It is imperative to act now to ensure that every girl has access to HPV vaccines and a healthy future free from cervical cancer, no matter where she lives.
The Poverty Line’s Battle Lines
WASHINGTON, DC – For a long time, as a college professor and then as the chief economic adviser to the Indian government, I was a happy user of the World Bank’s data on global poverty, tracking trends and analyzing cross-country patterns.
I seldom paused to think about how those numbers were computed.
Then, three years ago, I joined the World Bank as its Chief Economist.
It was like a customer, happily ordering dinner in a favorite restaurant, suddenly being asked to go into the kitchen and prepare the meal.
Being in the business of measuring poverty is a challenge for the World Bank.
If poverty declines, critics accuse us of trying to showcase our success.
If it rises, they say we are ensuring that we stay in business.
And if it stays the same, they accuse us of trying to avoid these two charges.
Fortunately, there is something liberating in knowing that you will be criticized for any outcome.
Still, as our team set about defining the global poverty line this year (and thus the incidence of poverty), I was acutely aware of the note of caution from Angus Deaton, this year’s Nobel laureate in economics: “I am not sure it is wise for the World Bank to commit itself so much to this project.”
I could see his point: This year’s poverty calculation was particularly momentous.
In 2011, new purchasing power parities (or PPPs, which essentially estimate how much $1 dollar buys in different countries) had been computed, and the data became available in 2014.
This was one reason to take stock of how we would adjust the global poverty line, estimate new poverty numbers, and publish them in our Global Monitoring Report, which was released in October.
A second reason is that the UN has included the eradication of chronic poverty in its new Sustainable Development Goals.
This means that our decision on where to draw the poverty line probably will influence not just the World Bank’s mission but also the development agenda of the UN and all countries around the world.
Clearly, as we crunched the numbers, we had a special, and daunting, responsibility to fulfill.
Our first task was to see how the global poverty line had been determined earlier.
In 2005, when the previous round of purchasing power parities was estimated, the method used was to take the national poverty lines of the 15 poorest countries, compute their average, and treat that as the global line.
This led to a global poverty line of $1.25.
The idea was that a poor person was anyone whose PPP-adjusted daily consumption fell short of $1.25.
The validity of this method has been questioned – and I have had my own reservations.
But where the line is drawn in the initial year is in some sense not that important.
Because there is no unique definition of poverty, what matters is to draw a line at some reasonable place and then hold the line constant in real (inflation-adjusted) terms so that we can track the performance of the world and individual countries over time.
Some critics argue that the 2005 poverty line of $1.25 was too low.
But what should alarm them is that in 2011, some 14.5% of the world’s population – one in every seven people – lived below it.
Given that we are already committed to the goal of ending extreme, chronic poverty by 2030, our first decision was to hold the yardstick for measuring poverty constant.
Since there had been inflation between the two rounds of the PPP computation, in 2005 and 2011, we would obviously have to raise the nominal poverty line to keep the real line constant.
However, doing this for the world as a whole is far from easy.
Which countries’ inflation should we use?
In short, by keeping to one decimal place, all three methods led to $1.9.
And that is the line we adopted.
We will not always have the good fortune to be able to use different methods and still arrive at virtually the same line.
Furthermore, poverty can and should be measured by many metrics other than money: life expectancy, educational attainment, health, and various other measures of human “functionings and capabilities” (as Amartya Sen calls them) are all important.
To tackle these problems in the future and broaden the World Bank’s poverty research, we have established the 24-member Commission on Global Poverty – chaired by Sir Tony Atkinson of the London School of Economics and Nuffield College, Oxford – which will submit its report next spring.
Measuring poverty attracts attention from both politicians and academic researchers – and we had an ample amount of both.
We were attentive to the politics of poverty, but we resisted political lobbying.
We took account of the suggestions of researchers, but we used our judgment.
One researcher was adamant that the poverty line should be $1.9149.
I decided that those last three digits were a bit excessive.
Change Africa from Within
ROME – A severe food crisis currently threatens southern Sudan.
In East Africa, where millions of people already are dependent on food aid, a sharp rise in the cost of staple crops looms.
These are just the latest sources of concern in a turbulent period that began two years ago when food shortages hit many countries in Africa and Asia due to a worldwide spike in prices.
Higher food prices meant that poor people, already struggling to meet basic human needs, were pushed deeper into poverty.
On its heels came the global financial crisis, which also hit the poorest the hardest. 
Agriculture is the main employer, job creator, and export in most developing countries.
Historically, agriculture has driven economic performance in many countries, generating growth that has been shown to be at least twice as effective in reducing poverty as growth in other sectors.
Investment in agricultural and rural development is therefore vital to food security and sustainable economic development.
Indeed, the vast majority of today’s developed countries grew from strong agricultural foundations, where surplus production generated wealth and prosperity.
This is what is happening today in Vietnam, and it is the path that China and India took on their way to becoming engines of economic growth.
Poverty is predominantly rural.
Globally, three-quarters of people living in extreme poverty are in rural areas and depend on agriculture and related activities for their livelihoods.
About 380 million women, children, and men in sub-Saharan Africa live on less than $1.25 a day.
Many are malnourished or hungry.
But, with some 80 million small farms in sub-Saharan Africa producing 80% of agricultural goods, smallholder farmers have a key role to play in resolving the financial and food crises and unleashing Africa’s potential to feed itself.
In order to lift people out of poverty and ensure food security, a sustained effort is needed to develop Africa’s agriculture and the associated infrastructure – notably roads, telecommunication, and energy – needed to unleash agricultural potential.
Strengthening agriculture is one of the best investments any African country can make.
Members of the African Union recognized this in 2003 in Maputo, Mozambique, pledging to increase spending on agriculture to at least 10% of national budgets.
Although eight countries have met or surpassed that target, the continent as a whole has not.
But reaching this target is not enough.
Governments must create the right policy environment to allow for appropriate investments in research and development to enhance productivity and increase production.
Investment in agriculture in Africa must focus on creating a dynamic smallholder sector.
A vibrant rural sector generates local demand for locally produced goods and services.
In turn, this can spur sustainable non-farm employment growth in services, agro-processing, and small-scale manufacturing.
This is crucial for rural employment, without which poor rural young people will be driven away from their communities in search of work in the cities.
Agriculture, predominantly on a small scale, accounts for about 30% of sub-Saharan Africa’s GDP and at least 40% of export value.
In a number of small countries in Africa, agriculture plays an even greater role, representing 80% or more of export earnings.
The potential in these numbers will remain untapped unless African countries put the right policies in place to help agriculture to develop and flourish.
But transformation of African agriculture will not happen until the private sector is fully engaged in agricultural production, processing, and marketing.
Governments must become more investor-friendly to attract greater private-sector interest.
More broadly, African countries need to put their political and economic houses in order.
They must continue to deepen the foundations of democracy and ensure the political stability that is so critical to economic growth.
It is also crucial that they continue to improve their systems to create an enabling environment for dynamic rural growth to transform subsistence farmers into entrepreneurs.
Given their central role not only as mothers and caregivers, but also as farmers, rural women hold the key to food security.
That is why any nation that does not provide opportunities for women will not reach its full potential.
Significant progress must be made in Africa to advance both women’s empowerment and their status in society – particularly with regard to land and credit.
Finally, although investment in development assistance is key to supporting Africa’s advancement, nations will ultimately have to take responsibility for their own development.
No nation, no people, ever experienced growth that sprang solely from external support.
So Africa’s development must be made in Africa, by Africans, for Africans.
Every tree, every plant, must be fully rooted in its own soil to flourish.
Change cannot be imposed from outside, it must be cultivated from within.
Waking from the Middle East Nightmare
MADRID – The Middle East is caught in a seemingly endless spiral of instability.
The possibility of military intervention in Syria, together with the deteriorating situation in Egypt since the army’s coup, has placed the region on a razor’s edge.
Moreover, despite the changes in Iran since its presidential election in June, international negotiations over its nuclear ambitions remain a dead letter.
Paradoxes abound, as the United States’s traditional Middle East allies (Saudi Arabia, Israel, Turkey, Egypt, and the Gulf states) have taken opposing – and sometimes seemingly contradictory –&#160;positions on the region’s key conflicts.
And, in all of today’s hotspots, the assertion of interests by neighboring or nearby countries has complicated matters further.
Saudi Arabia, fearing severe domestic consequences from the Muslim Brotherhood’s empowerment in Egypt, does not want to see an Islamist movement legitimized democratically.
So it has taken a consistently harsh position against the Brotherhood, despite the latter being more moderate than the Saudis’ own brand of Islam.
Israel, for its part, is exerting pressure in two ways.
First, it is supporting the Egyptian coup and international recognition of the military regime, thereby ensuring – it hopes – greater stability along the Sinai border.
Second, it is making progress in its negotiations with the Palestinians dependent on events in Egypt and elsewhere in the region, such as Iran.
US Secretary of State John Kerry has invested considerable political capital in the revival of peace negotiations, and Israel can use that to its advantage as well.
The civil war in Syria, meanwhile, has inflamed the Sunni-Shia fault line that traverses the entire region, and that defines, for example, the rivalry between Saudi Arabia and Iran.
In fact, while Saudi Arabia opposes elected Islamists in Egypt, it supports insurgent Islamists in Syria, owing entirely to Iran’s support for Syrian President Bashar al-Assad’s regime.
The Egyptian coup has already proved to have been a mistake.
The military seems to be reverting to the governing methods – and even the feared security institutions – of former President Hosni Mubarak’s 30-year rule.
Even Mubarak himself has now been released from prison.
The army’s repression of the Muslim Brotherhood is more a question of competition for power than of religion.
As the only organized force in the country that could seriously challenge the military, the Brotherhood is the greatest threat that the Army faces, as demonstrated by Mohamed Morsi’s victory in the election that made him president a year before he was overthrown.
And, on top of it all, the problem posed by Iran’s nuclear program remains unresolved.
That may not be surprising, given the violence and turmoil elsewhere in the region.
But, since Iran’s new president, Hassan Rouhani, took office at the beginning of August, the West, to put it bluntly, has not demonstrated sufficient will to explore possible openings.
That is a grave mistake, because progress in the negotiations with Iran over its nuclear program would create a more propitious climate for resolving the region’s other problems.
Moreover, the negotiations will now be under the jurisdiction of Iran’s presidential administration, which gives Rouhani greater room for maneuver.
The new foreign minister, Mohammad Javad Zarif, is well known and respected by the leaders of all of the countries participating in the negotiations, and he will assume important responsibilities in any talks that take place.
While caution is certainly in order, the importance of Rouhani’s election must be recognized.
If a window of opportunity has opened, the West should do everything possible to take advantage of it.
Rouhani, it should be remembered, won a surprising victory in an election with roughly 75% voter turnout, despite expectations of widespread apathy.
Rouhani mobilized Iranians by offering a clear program for economic renewal, which hinges on Iran’s engagement with the international community – and thus on progress in nuclear negotiations.
Since taking office, Rouhani has responded quickly to the Iranian public’s demands.
His cabinet, in terms of its members’ positions on economic reform and international relations, is one that few observers believed he would be capable of assembling.
Thus, two important steps have been taken: one by the people of Iran, who have shown that they understand the challenges they face, and the other by their new president, who has assembled the best team available to undertake an enormously difficult program.
There is an expression in Iran that applies to the international community: “You can wake only someone who is sleeping, not someone who is pretending to be asleep.”
Whether Iran’s international interlocutors act on the importance of Rouhani’s election is a matter of choice, not of ignorance.
In a Middle East so full of uncertainty, a more predictable Iran – one that behaves like a regionally important state, not a destabilizing Shia movement whose ambitions exceed what international law permits – would be in everyone’s interest.
There can be no path from the Middle East’s agony without the participation, commitment, and determination of all parties.
The Rowhani Front
WASHINGTON, DC – On June 17, at his first press conference as Iran’s President-elect, Hassan Rowhani broke little new ground in the Islamic Republic’s relations with the West.
On nuclear policy, he said that the “era of suspension is over”: Iran will not accept the suspension of uranium enrichment in upcoming negotiations but will seek to make its nuclear activities more transparent in order to build international confidence.
Moreover, Iran would welcome direct negotiations with the United States if&#160;the US stopped attempting to meddle in Iran’s internal affairs and abandoned its “bullying attitude.”
None of these statements is new.
Does that mean that the world should not expect meaningful change in Iran’s official behavior following Rowhani’s victory?
The general impression before the election was that Iran’s Supreme Leader, Ayatollah Ali Hosseini Khamenei, supported either Saeed Jalili or Mohammad Baqer Qalibaf.&#160;In recent years, Jalili has been the leading Iranian representative in international negotiations over the country’s nuclear program.
That made him the main target of criticism by Rowhani and another candidate, Ali Akbar Velayati, Khamenei’s adviser on international affairs.
According to Rowhani and Velayati, while Iran in recent years has increased the number of centrifuges in use in its nuclear research program, the cost has been an economically devastating array of international sanctions.
Rowhani promised to sustain progress on the nuclear program while adopting stronger and wiser diplomatic measures to prevent the imposition of new sanctions and pave the way for lifting the existing ones.
Jalili had not been a high-profile figure within the country.
For the first time, average Iranians saw him at public events and in the media, discussing not only nuclear policy, but also his ultra-conservative policy agenda for women, youth, and cultural issues.
He ended up appearing even more radical on these topics than outgoing President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad.
As for Qalibaf, the mayor of Tehran, he proudly confessed that he was directly involved in the violent crackdown on student protesters in 2003.
Indeed, he described sitting on the back of a motorcycle with a stick to command police forces to suppress the massive demonstrations.
Rowhani used this against him very effectively.
Conservatives tried to convince their candidates to unite behind a single figure, but weaker candidates did not drop out in favor of a unity candidate.
In particular, there is strong evidence that the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC) split into two major factions, with one supporting Jalili and the other backing Qalibaf.
For example, Qassem Suleimani, the commander of the Quds Force, a branch of the IRGC, endorsed Qalibaf, who he hoped would receive Khamenei’s full support.
The infighting among conservatives and within the IRGC increased in the last few days before the election.
And, with Rowhani’s surprising first-round victory – and Khamenei’s refusal to endorse either candidate – both IRGC factions lost.
Khamenei was probably wise to step aside and let popular opinion prevail.
Had either Jalili or Qalibaf been elected, the tension within the IRGC might have worsened, becoming difficult for Khamenei to control.
And, by remaining on the sidelines, Khamenei may have been seeking to show the IRGC that there are limits to its power.
Though well connected to the military and security community, Rowhani was clearly considered an outsider.
Indeed, he was not a political figure until now, serving in the military during the Islamic Republic’s first decade and spending the last two mostly in the Supreme National Security Council.
When Ahmadinejad came to power, Rowhani lost his position as the Council’s secretary, but became Khamenei’s personal representative to it – a post that he has held until now.
Whether Khamenei seriously planned for Rowhani’s victory, or simply calculated that the cost of preventing it would be too high, Rowhani can serve Khamenei’s agenda at least as well as any other candidate.
Rowhani’s victory created the impression of a democratic process and relieved the popular anger that has accumulated during the last eight years, especially since the rigged presidential election in 2009.
Indeed, his triumph exposed a rift among Iran’s democratic forces, which were divided over whether to participate in the election, and rendered irrelevant the Green Movement born in 2009.
Rowhani’s efforts to portray Iran’s foreign policy in a democratic light are less convincing.
For example, his call for Syrian President Bashar al-Assad to remain in power until the scheduled 2014 elections is risible, given that Assad typically “wins” Syria’s presidential elections by Soviet-like margins, with more than 95% of the popular vote.
More important for the regime, Rowhani’s victory has bought Iran time on the nuclear issue.
Not only is there less chance of new sanctions, but Rowhani’s electoral legitimacy may well force the P5+1 (the five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council plus Germany) to offer Iran better terms in any nuclear deal.
But Khamenei will face two main challenges related to nuclear policy in the next four years.
First, Rowhani’s victory has delegitimized the policy of resistance that Jalili championed.
Iran’s government can no longer claim that the nuclear program is a national cause with broad support.
Rowhani’s supporters want a better economy and integration into the international community more than they want nuclear glory.
Second, even if Khamenei hands the nuclear portfolio to Rowhani (which is not certain, given that he retained it under Ahmadinejad), the new president must come to terms with the IRGC, whose support – at least tacit – is necessary for any nuclear deal.
To date, Iran’s nuclear program and regional policies have been run by the IRGC and the country’s hard-liners.
They did not win the election, but they have not gone away.
Changing Climate Change
The 10 warmest years on record have all occurred since 1990, and 2005 is likely to be the warmest ever.
This year, we’ve gotten a taste of the many kinds of dangers that lie ahead: more extreme hurricanes, massive droughts, forest fires, spreading infectious diseases, and floods.
The climate is changing, and more is yet to come.
The world’s governments will meet in Montreal at the end of November to plot the next steps, including specific measures that the world could adopt if the Bush administration abandoned its willful neglect of this critical issue.
Climate change is equated with “global warming,” but much more than warming is involved.
The rising concentration of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases is leading to more extreme storms, higher-intensity hurricanes, rising ocean levels, melting glaciers and ice sheets, droughts, floods and other climate changes.
Even the chemistry of the land and ocean is changing, with the ocean becoming more acidic – thus threatening coral reefs – as a result of higher carbon dioxide.
The specific patterns of change are not known precisely, but the risks of continuing on our current global course are widely appreciated.
Yet the United States has refused to sign the Kyoto Protocol, which does little to change the long-term course of events on the planet, since it calls for only small steps up to the year 2012.
Under the terms of the UN treaty on climate change, the signatories – virtually the whole world - are to gather each year to discuss the treaty’s implementation.
The conference in Montreal - the 11th such meeting - should look beyond 2012, so that the world gets onto a safe and sustainable long-term climate path.
The actions that are needed are difficult to introduce, because they go to the heart of the world’s use of energy, particularly its use of fossil fuels (coal, oil, and gas), which, when burned, release carbon dioxide – the key source of rising greenhouse gases – into the atmosphere.
Yet the world economy depends on fossil fuels, and developing countries will need to use more, not less, of them as their economies grow.
Even if the world runs out of oil and gas in the coming years, coal will prove to be plentiful, and solid coal can be converted at relatively low cost to liquid fuels for automobiles and other uses.
Unfortunately, clean, renewable energy sources that do not emit carbon dioxide, such as wind power and geothermal power, are not yet sufficient.
Solar power can be produced on the required scale but is too expensive under current technologies.
Nuclear power is relatively cheap, and could be plentiful, but poses huge dangers for increased proliferation of nuclear-weapons materials.
So: fossil fuels are plentiful, but harmful; renewable sources like wind are good for the climate but not plentiful.
Solar power is plentiful but not cheap.
Nuclear power is plentiful but not safe.
Improved technologies can offer a way out of this bind, but only if we think and act ahead.
There are two main kinds of technologies that look most promising.
The first is energy conservation through more fuel-efficient vehicles.
New hybrid automobiles, pioneered by Toyota, use both gasoline and electric power to boost gasoline efficiency by approximately two-fold.
A massive changeover to more fuel-efficient vehicles would make a big difference, especially as the numbers of vehicles on the road soars in China, India, and other developing countries.
The second big technology that could make a major difference is called “carbon capture and storage.”
The idea is to “capture” the carbon dioxide that is emitted in power plants and other big factories when fossil fuels are burned, thereby preventing it from entering the atmosphere.
The captured carbon is then pumped into underground storage sites such as empty oil fields and other suitable locations.
All of the key aspects of the technology – capturing the carbon dioxide, putting it into pipelines for shipment, and then depositing it underground – have already been demonstrated, but they have not yet been tried, and proven, on a large scale.
There is strong evidence, however, that it would not cost the world huge amounts to undertake large-scale carbon capture and storage.
The problem is timing.
The changeover of the world’s vehicles to hybrid and other efficient technologies will take decades, not years.
So will the changeover of power plants to carbon capture and storage.
If we procrastinate, the dangers posed by climate change will confront us as we talk, debate, and plan.
The world needs to start acting soon - very soon - if it is to head off the major threats.
All major regions of the world will need to be involved.
Today’s developing countries are not yet major emitters of carbon dioxide, but with economic growth they will become so.
Therefore, all countries, both developed and developing, need to do their part, with rich countries helping poor countries cover the financial costs of adjustment.
Plenty of carbon dioxide will be emitted into the atmosphere as the world’s climate negotiators fly to and from the Montreal meeting.
Let’s press our governments to make real progress when they meet; otherwise they will merely be adding to the problem.
Mengendalikan Arah Revolusi Energi
RIYADH/LONDON – Selama beberapa dekade, lanskap energi internasional relatif stabil, negara-negara penghasil seperti Arab Saudi, Iran, dan Aljazair menjual minyak dan gas kepada konsumen di Amerika Serikat dan Eropa.
Akan tetapi dalam beberapa tahun ke depan, kemungkinan besar medan energi ini tidak akan dapat dikenali, seiring dengan adanya perubahan-perubahan besar pada teknologi, ekonomi, dan geopolitik yang mengubah hubungan komersial di seluruh dunia.
Yang kita butuhkan adalah struktur tata kelola baru yang beroperasi di luar hubungan bilateral yang kuno antara produsen dan konsumen.
Dalam dunia yang berkembang pesat perlu adanya manajemen yang penuh kehati-hatian terhadap hubungan keterkaitan dan beragam (interlocking).
Hanya forum internasional yang inklusif, dimana pertukaran dan perdebatan ide-ide kompleks dapat dilakukan, yang bisa memenuhi fungsi untuk menggerakkan era baru dalam penggunaan, produksi, dan konsumsi energi.
Perubahan yang sedang berlangsung ini sangat bermakna.
Di banyak negara-negara pengekspor minyak, konsumsi domestik meningkat tajam.
Secara historis, negara-negara tersebut memperlakukan energi sebagai sumber daya murah.
Kini, mereka secara bertahap mengambil tindakan untuk menghapuskan subsisi, mengikuti harga pasar, dan meningkatkan efisiensi – jenis kebijakan yang biasanya diasosiasikan dengan negara-negara pengimpor minyak.
BP memperkirakan di Timur Tengah, dengan cadangan bahan bakar fosil yang melimpah, konsumsi energi primer akan meningkat 77% pada tahun 2035.
Di saat yang sama, beberapa importir lama menjajaki sumber-sumber energi baru dan menjadi produsen, sehingga mengubah arah aliran energi.
Revolusi energi shale di Amerika Serikat mungkin adalah contoh paling terkenal atas terjadinya pergeseran ini, namun bukan satu-satunya.
Industri energi terbarukan yang berkembang pesat merupakan faktor lain yang mengganggu hubungan kuno antara produsen dan konsumen.
Pada semester pertama tahun 2014, 13% listrik di Jerman berasal dari tenaga angin.
Denmark, negara yang pada tahun 1970an hampir sepenuhnya bergantung pada impor energi, kini menjadi satu-satunya pengekspor energi (net energy exporter) di Uni Eropa, menghasilkan lebih dari 100% kebutuhan listriknya dari tenaga angin.
Sementara itu, kemajuan dalam efisiensi energi juga mengurangi permintaan ekspor dari negara-negara produsen yang lama.
Bangunan-bangunan efisiensi tinggi umumnya dapat dengan mudah dipanaskan dengan daya listrik terbarukan yang diproduksi secara lokal dan disuplai air panas dari pengumpul panas surya.
Pemberlakuan standar Near Zero Energy Buildings bagi gedung-gedung baru di Uni Eropa ditetapkan untuk mengurangi secara drastis kebergantungan pada gas untuk pemanas.
Risikonya adalah perubahan-perubahan yang cepat ini akan menyatu dengan geopolitik yang tidak stabil untuk memicu kemunduran dari pasar energi global.
Jika negara-negara mulai mendefinisikan keamanan energi sebagai kemandirian energi dan berupaya memenuhi seluruh kebutuhannya sendiri, dampaknya ialah kelebihan kapasitas yang mahal, tingginya distorsi harga, kemajuan teknologi yang lamban, dan pertumbuhan ekonomi yang lemah.
Dengan kebutuhan untuk menjaga kepercayaan di sektor energi yang kompetitif, bermuatan politik, dan sering tak terduga kini menjadi lebih besar dan lebih sulit dari sebelumnya untuk dipenuhi, sebuah forum internasional yang ditujukan untuk menangani masalah dan meredakan ketegangan bisa menjadi alat yang ampuh.
Tetapi forum tersebut harus memiliki fokus yang tepat.
Misalnya, forum tidak boleh bertujuan untuk menghasilkan keputusan-keputusan yang mengikat secara hukum.
Banyak badan, seperti Organisasi Perdagangan Dunia (World Trade Organization), Piagam Energi (Energy Charter), dan Komunitas Energi (Energy Community), telah melakukan pekerjaan yang sangat baik dalam hal perumusan aturan atau penegakan kepatuhan di sektor energi.
Selain itu, meskipun badan tersebut harus bersifat inklusif, tidak perlu memiliki ambisi global; karena tidak praktis untuk berupaya melibatkan semua orang.
Selain itu, walaupun para pendirinya harus peka dan berhati-hati agar badan ini tidak dipimpin atau didominasi oleh satu negara atau satu blok negara-negara, tidak ada salahnya jika dimulai dengan sekelompok kecil, hanya beberapa negara, sebelum akhirnya diperluas.
Memang benar bahwa Komisi Eropa (European Commission), yang tengah berupaya menciptakan kesatuan energi, memiliki posisi yang tepat untuk memulai dialog terbuka dengan negara-negara di luar Uni Eropa tentang kebijakan energi jangka panjang.
Uni Eropa merupakan importir energi terbesar di dunia dan sangat tepat untuk terlibat dalam diskusi mengenai strategi energinya dengan eksportir-eksportir terbesar dunia.
Seiring dengan Uni Eropa merevisi baik kebijakan energi maupun kebijakan luar negerinya, Uni Eropa sebaiknya tidak melewatkan kesempatan untuk mengintegrasikan dialog kebijakan energi terbuka ke dalam rencananya.
Dalam konteks ini, salah satu kelemahan umum dari Komisi ini – bahwa kebijakan luar negeri dan energi biasanya diputuskan oleh masing-masing negara anggota – bisa menjadi keuntungan penting.
Komisi akan dilihat sebagai fasilitator diskusi, bukan pemimpin atau pemain dominan.
Dengan adanya forum yang tepat untuk meluruskan perbedaan pendapat, lanskap energi yang berubah dengan cepat bisa menjadi sumber kemakmuran baru.
Namun sebaliknya, dunia akan berisiko mengalami kesalahpahaman dan perselisihan yang mungkin berasal dari kebijakan energi dan berdampak pada hubungan internasional dan keamanan.
Charisma We Can Believe In
CAMBRIDGE – A leadership transition is scheduled in two major autocracies in 2012. Neither is likely to be a surprise.
Xi Jinping is set to replace Hu Jintao as President in China, and, in Russia, Vladimir Putin has announced that he will reclaim the presidency from Dmitri Medvedev.
Among the world’s democracies, political outcomes this year are less predictable.
Nicolas Sarkozy faces a difficult presidential re-election campaign in France, as does Barack Obama in the United States.
In the 2008 US presidential election, the press told us that Obama won because he had “charisma” – the special power to inspire fascination and loyalty.
If so, how can his re-election be uncertain just four years later?
Can a leader lose his or her charisma?
Does charisma originate in the individual, in that person’s followers, or in the situation?
Academic research points to all three.
Charisma proves surprisingly hard to identify in advance.
A recent survey concluded that “relatively little” is known about who charismatic leaders are.
Dick Morris, an American political consultant, reports that in his experience, “charisma is the most elusive of political traits, because it doesn’t exist in reality; only in our perception once a candidate has made it by hard work and good issues.”
Similarly, the business press has described many a CEO as “charismatic” when things are going well, only to withdraw the label when profits fall.
Political scientists have tried to create charisma scales that would predict votes or presidential ratings, but they have not proven fruitful.
Among US presidents, John F. Kennedy is often described as charismatic, but obviously not for everyone, given that he failed to capture a majority of the popular vote, and his ratings varied during his presidency.
Kennedy’s successor, Lyndon Johnson, lamented that he lacked charisma.
That was true of his relations with the public, but Johnson could be magnetic – even overwhelming – in personal contacts.
One careful study of presidential rhetoric found that even such famous orators as Franklin Roosevelt and Ronald Reagan could not count on charisma to enact their programs.
Charisma is more easily identified after the fact.
In that sense, the concept is circular.
It is like the old Chinese concept of the “mandate of heaven”: emperors were said to rule because they had it, and when they were overthrown, it was because they had lost it.
But no one could predict when that would happen.
Similarly, success is often used to prove – after the fact – that a modern political leader has charisma. It is much harder to use charisma to predict who will be a successful leader.
Followers are more likely to attribute charisma to leaders when they feel a strong need for change, often in the context of a personal, organizational, or social crisis.
For example, the British public did not regard Winston Churchill as a charismatic leader in 1939, but, a year later, his vision, confidence, and communication skills gave him charisma, given Britons’ anxiety after the fall of France and the Dunkirk evacuation.
And then, in 1945, after the public’s focus had turned from winning the war to constructing a welfare state, Churchill was voted out of office.
His charisma did not predict defeat; the change in followers’ needs did.
In practice, charisma is a vague synonym for “personal magnetism.”
People vary in their ability to attract others, and their attraction depends partly on inherent traits, partly on learned skills, and partly on social context.
Some dimensions of personal attraction, such as appearance and non-verbal communication, can be tested.
Various studies show that people who are rated as attractive are treated more favorably than unattractive people.
One study finds that a handsome man enjoys an edge over an ugly rival that is worth 6-8% of the vote.
For women, the advantage is close to ten points.
Non-verbal signals account for a major part of human communications, and simple experiments have shown that some people communicate non-verbally better than others.
For example, a Princeton University study found that when people were shown images of two candidates in unfamiliar elections, they could predict the winners seven times out of ten.
A similar study at Harvard, in which people were shown 10-second silent video clips of 58 elections, found that viewers’ predictions explained 20% of the variation in the two-party vote – a more powerful variable than economic performance.
Ironically, the predictions became poorer when the sound was turned on.
In the 2008 election, Americans felt disillusioned by the Bush administration’s war in Iraq, and by the financial crisis that erupted two months before the vote.
Obama was an attractive young candidate who spoke well and projected a sense of hope for the future.
Clearly, this is one reason why Obama gained a reputation for charisma.
But part of his charisma was in the eyes of his followers.
People sometimes say of charisma that “we know it when we see it,” but we are also looking in a mirror.
As the economy worsened, unemployment rose, and Obama had to deal with the messy compromises of governing, the mirror became cloudier.
Charisma tells us something about a candidate, but it tells us even more about ourselves, the mood of our country, and the types of change we desire.
Hard economic times make it difficult to maintain charisma.
Obama faces the continuing challenges of unemployment and a recalcitrant Republican opposition, and Sarkozy must contend with similar problems.
When they are campaigning, however, their rhetoric will be freed from the need to compromise.
This year’s elections will be the true test of their charisma.
Charity in Hard Times
PRINCETON – As I tour the U.S. promoting my new book, The Life You Can Save: Acting Now to End World Poverty , I am often asked if this isn’t the wrong time to call on affluent people to increase their effort to end poverty in other countries.
I reply emphatically that it is not.
There is no doubt that the world economy is in trouble.
But if governments or individuals use this as an excuse to reduce assistance to the world’s poorest people, they would only multiply the seriousness of the problem for the world as a whole.
The financial crisis has been more damaging for the poor than it has been for the rich.
Without in any way minimizing the economic and psychological blow that people experience when they lose their jobs, the unemployed in affluent countries still have a safety net, in the form of social security payments, and usually free health care and free education for their children.
They also have sanitation and safe drinking water.
The poor in developing countries have none of these benefits, which proves fatal for an estimated 18 million of them each year.
That’s a higher annual death toll than during World War II, and it’s easier to prevent.
Of those who die from avoidable, poverty-related causes, nearly ten million, according to UNICEF, are children under five.
They die from diseases like measles, diarrhea, and malaria that are easy and inexpensive to treat or prevent.
We may feel the pain of falling back from a level of affluence to which we have grown accustomed, but most people in developed countries are still, by historical standards, extraordinarily well off.
Have you, in the past week, bought a bottle of water, a beer, or a coffee when tap water was available at no cost?
If you did, that’s a luxury that the world’s poorest billion people can’t afford, because they have to live for an entire day on what you spent on just one of those drinks.
One reason that we can afford to increase the amount of aid we give is that the amount we are giving now is insignificant in comparison to what we spend on other things.
The United States government, for example, spends about $22 billion on foreign aid, while Americans privately donate perhaps another $10 billion. 
Compared to the $787 billion stimulus package signed by President Barack Obama last month, that $32 billion is trivial.
It’s also less than $0.25 for every $100 that Americans earn.
Of course, some nations do better: Sweden, Norway, Denmark, The Netherlands, and Luxembourg all exceed the United Nations target of allocating the equivalent of 0.7% of gross national income in foreign aid.
But even $0.70 for every $100 is still not a lot with which to confront one of the great moral problems of our age.
If extreme poverty is allowed to increase, it will give rise to new problems, including new diseases that will spread from countries that cannot provide adequate health care to those that can.
Poverty will lead to more migrants seeking to move, whether legally or not, to rich nations.
When there is eventually an economic recovery, the global economy will be smaller than it would be if all the world’s people could take part in it.
Nor is the global financial crisis a justification for the world’s leaders failing to keep their word.
Nearly nine years ago, at the Millennium Development Summit in New York, the leaders of 180 countries, including all the major affluent nations, promised that by 2015 they would together achieve the Millennium Development Goals.
These goals include halving the proportion of the world’s people living in poverty and ensuring that children everywhere receive a full primary education.
Since that meeting in 2000, the commitments made by most nations have fallen short of what is required, and 2015 is now only six years away.
If we cut back on aid, we will fail to keep our promise, and poorer countries will learn, once again, that rich countries’ actions fall short of their inspiring rhetoric about reducing world poverty.
That is not a good basis for future cooperation between rich and poor countries on issues such as climate change.
Finally, if anything good comes out of this global financial crisis, it will be a reassessment of our basic values and priorities.
We need to recognize that what really matters isn’t buying more and more consumer goods, but family, friends, and knowing that we are doing something worthwhile with our lives.
Helping to reduce the appalling consequences of world poverty should be part of that reassessment.
Charlie Hebdo’s Rights and Wrongs
DAVOS – In the wake of the terrorist attack on the French satirical magazine Charlie Hebdo in Paris, declarations of “Je suis Charlie” have echoed worldwide.
And, indeed, Charlie Hebdo should be free to publish what it likes, without fear of violence, as long as it does not directly incite violence itself.
But does that mean that other news outlets and individuals should republish it?
To be sure, freedom of expression should almost never be repressed, a point that the United States Supreme Court Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes emphasized in a dissenting opinion in a case concerning the US Constitution’s guarantee of free speech.
“[W]e should be eternally vigilant against attempts to check the expression of opinions that we loathe and believe to be fraught with death,” he wrote, “unless they so imminently threaten immediate interference with the lawful and pressing purposes of the law that an immediate check is required to save the country.”
From this perspective, I would have marched with the millions who gathered in Paris, proclaiming “Je suis Charlie.”
And I fully understand the desire to purchase the subsequent issue of Charlie Hebdo, published – with bravery and determination – a week after the attack.
People not just in France, but around the world, want to show their solidarity with the victims and support the fundamental principle of free speech.
But supporting Charlie Hebdo’s right to express whatever message it chooses does not necessarily imply support for its portrayals of the Prophet Mohammed or a willingness to participate in their dissemination.
Support for the principle does not demand endorsement of the practice.
In the days after the attack, it became an act of solidarity to retweet the offending cartoons, rather than simply posting expressions of support.
The Lebanese blogger Gino Raidy wrote, “Please, publish the cartoons again, and again, and again.
Maybe with time, the murderous savages that kill for a drawing in the name of their god, will get it through their thick heads that they can never stop us, and every attempt to only fuels our cause more (sic).”
The passion in Raidy’s appeal is admirable, and the sentiment is understandable.
But the view that defending free speech imposes a duty to disseminate specific content is deeply problematic.
The decision to publish images or words that disrespect or defame others’ deeply held beliefs must be a personal one.
Each individual must be free to make that decision, which is why anti-blasphemy laws violate universal human rights.
The fundamental principle underlying freedom of expression is that speech must be answered with more speech, never with violence, imprisonment, or censorship.
Anti-blasphemy laws not only violate that principle; they can easily be abused as a tool of political power and impoverish their societies by imposing a code of rigid conformity.
But people can choose to avoid speech that others will hear as blasphemy.
Though I will defend the right of individuals to make racist statements, I would not make such statements myself or listen to a speaker making them.
After all, such views undermine many other important principles – namely, those needed to create and sustain an inclusive, tolerant, and peaceful society.
In the case of Charlie Hebdo,the question is whether depictions of the Prophet Muhammad are likely to foster the kinds of debate and behavior that are compatible with the coexistence of Muslims, Christians, Jews, other believers, and atheists in a society that upholds the freedom of worship and expression.
All human beings are entitled to hold something – a place, an idea, an image – sacred.
Desecrating a shrine, defacing a cross, or, in the US, burning a flag, is an aggressive and insulting act, one that causes real pain for believers.
It may incite a conversation, but it does so from a position of profound disrespect.
Charlie Hebdo, of course, used humor precisely to challenge sacred cows.
And its editors bravely and nobly stood by their convictions, even when their lives were threatened.
We should uphold their right to publish.
But to embrace the images they published as a statement of Enlightenment conviction weakens the values that are essential to a civilized society.
The new issue of Charlie Hebdo, which featured another image of the Prophet on its cover, sparked protest marches in Pakistan, Afghanistan, Kuwait, Lebanon, and Tunisia.
Commenting on the intensity of these protests, Iyad El-Baghdadi, a self-described “Islamic libertarian,” aptly tweeted: “Unapologetic hatred is going mainstream everywhere.
I worry for our world.”
Mobilizing mass demonstrations around whether you “are” or “are not” Charlie Hebdo invites demagoguery from extreme factions in all societies that gain from fueling sectarian conflict.
The easiest way to compound the tragedy in Paris would be to use the deaths of Charlie Hebdo’s editor, Stéphane Charbonnier, and 11 others to fan the flames of religious hatred.
Surely we can defend people’s right to express themselves without approving or endorsing their views.
In the case of Charlie Hebdo, the decision not to disseminate its cartoons can be driven not by fear, but by respect.
Uniting Against Extremism
LONDON – Governments worldwide are increasingly facing a fundamental question: how to deal with the causes of violent – often religiously motivated – extremism.
They are not short of advice – and from a wide range of sources.
A former Al Qaeda member, for example, recently stated that the UK authorities’ failure to explain properly why it had not intervened in Syria’s civil war risked radicalizing more Muslims.
Meanwhile, London Mayor Boris Johnson suggested removing children from radicalized parents.
Although such ideas have received a somewhat mixed reception, they are a welcome sign of much-needed public debate.
Most people accept the need for security services to respond to terror, particularly in the aftermath of an attack.
Achieving lasting change, however, requires addressing not just the consequences of extremism but also its root causes.
What can be done?
First, governments must start thinking about education as a security issue.
For example, while endlessly worrying about the existence of dangerous material online, we could do more to educate our youth in the critical thinking skills needed to dismiss such content.
This is a new challenge, and it will not be easy.
Before the digital revolution, young people met those from other countries and cultures in relatively restricted circumstances, such as on a holiday abroad or a school exchange program.
Today, however, they can interact with any number of people from anywhere in the world in a matter of seconds on their smart phones.
Many of these connections take place on un-moderated platforms that expose children to a wide variety of opinions, beliefs, and cultures – not all positive or safe.
Unfortunately, there are few sources of good advice to help young people navigate these dangers.
Most parents are barely able to keep up with the evolving technology, let alone oversee their children’s online conversations.
This means that it is up to our education systems to intervene early to help the connected generation interact safely in today’s digital world.
If we can teach children to recognize what they have in common with those from other cultures, we can also help them to resist the prejudices of those who seek to distort the truth and divide people.
The Tony Blair Faith Foundation’s schools program has made an important start in this respect.
It provides a moderated space in which 12-17 year olds worldwide can discuss challenging issues from a variety of perspectives, in a respectful and safe way.
Second, governments should support those groups that are already working on the ground and online to counter extremism.
One approach is to encourage “counter-narratives.”
In countries afflicted by religious conflict, such as Nigeria, this means helping religious leaders to develop strong inter-community relationships.
We know that when people of different religions work together for the good of the wider community, they come to understand one another in a way that helps them resist the call of extremists.
This type of sustained long-term work comes into its own when the worst happens.
For example, in response to attacks last year on a church in Peshawar, Pakistan, local Muslims formed human chains around churches, allowing them to hold services.
Such visible demonstrations of defiance in the face of violence strengthen ties between communities and can prevent the division that extremists try to generate.
The benefits of such inter-community spirit are evident in one of the world’s most diverse cities, London.
Last June’s arson attack on the Somali Bravanese Welfare Association’s center in the city’s Muswell Hill district (which followed the murder of British Army fusilier Lee Rigby by religious extremists) served only to unite its different communities.
London Citizens, a network of local civic institutions, organized Jewish assistance programs for Somali Muslims, including after-school events at Hendon School and Eden School.
Meanwhile, Finchley Reform Synagogue hosted a Ramadan festival, and Finchley United Synagogue hosted an Eid event.
These activities sent a powerful signal to extremists that their attempts to turn religious communities against each other had the opposite effect.
Third, it is essential to remove online extremist content promptly.
YouTube uses sophisticated technical procedures to ensure that the most inappropriate videos are swiftly taken down.
But this is only half the story: we also need to support and promote alternative, credible voices online to counter the extremist narrative.
Of course, this does not mean uploading videos of politicians in suits telling young men not to join the jihad in Syria.
Rather, it means identifying and backing those groups whose anti-extremist messages resonate with the intended audience.
Finally, in these tough economic times, we need to consider cost-effective ways to promote this work globally.
One future source of support for effective but under-resourced groups might be the recently established Global Fund for Community Engagement and Resilience, the first ever public-private global fund to support local, grass-roots efforts to counter extremism.
As the pace of globalization and technological change accelerates, extremists are finding ever more creative ways to spread their message.
Governments must respond in kind.
Latin America’s Tale of Two Crises
MEXICO CITY – If one were an irredeemable optimist, upcoming events in Venezuela and Colombia could be viewed as a harbinger of good things to come.
In Venezuela, the October 7 presidential election may put an end to Hugo Chávez’s 14 years in power, along with his systematic destruction of the economy, media clampdowns, and endless meddling in other countries’ affairs.
In Colombia, peace talks scheduled for October 8 in Norway between President Juan Manuel Santos’s government and the FARC guerrillas may bring an end to 40 years of war and bloodshed.
Unfortunately, neither of these outcomes is likely.
For starters, Chávez is a formidable campaigner, and he has at his disposal every available lever of state power, from the Electoral Council to PDVSA, the national oil company.
As skillful as Henrique Capriles Radonski, the opposition candidate, may be, the playing field is so uneven that he appears to stand little chance.
One example: Venezuela’s overall population has grown 14% over the past 13 years, but electoral rolls have jumped 53%; the new voters can be ghosts, Colombians, or several generations of chavista supporters already registered to vote, even before they are born.
Most polls give Chávez a significant advantage (of up to 15 percentage points), but nonetheless offer a glimmer of hope to the opposition.
Many of the more impartial polling firms, such as Luis Christiansen’s Consultores 21, Varianzas, and Keller, all show a surprisingly large proportion of undecided voters – those who do not answer or do not know for whom they will vote.
In highly polarized and politicized Venezuela, it is unlikely that upward of 20% of voters have yet to decide what they will do.
Consequently, some analysts suspect a “hidden opposition vote,” such as occurred in Nicaragua in 1990, when Violeta Chamorrro won the presidency, or in Mexico in 2000, when Vicente Fox emerged victorious.
According to this logic, the “undecided” are actually leaning toward Capriles, and if their number is larger than Chávez’s margin in the polls, the caudillo will lose.
That is not impossible, but it is unlikely, especially if Chávez can count on several percentage points of tampered votes before and after the polling booths close.
Despite the president’s illness, the enormous problems facing Venezuela, and fatigue after 13 years of chavismo, it is still Chávez’s election to lose.
The status quo will also likely persist in Colombia.
No one knows exactly when Santos decided to seek new negotiations with Latin America’s oldest – and one of its most vicious – guerrilla groups; nor do any but his closest aides know how many meetings have already taken place, where and when, or what happened.
But much evidence suggests that most of the process began some time ago, and was meant to be kept secret until broad agreement had been reached on most of the outstanding issues.
Santos probably wanted to have the talks viewed as a relatively unconditional surrender and disarmament by the “narco-guerrillas.”
He would have wanted to avoid the grandstanding and propaganda generally associated with public negotiations.
So the talks may have been revealed not because they had advanced sufficiently, but because someone wanted to sabotage them.
Who could that be?
The predictable suspect is former Colombian president Álvaro Uribe.
Although Santos was both Uribe’s defense minister and preferred successor, relations between the two have soured.
The bottom line is that Uribe thought Santos would do his bidding as president, and Santos is convinced that his (high but declining) popularity is of his own making, not borrowed from Uribe.
These strains express themselves on policy issues.
Uribe criticizes Santos – through up to 40 tweets per day to his more than one million followers – for repudiating his “democratic security” stance, for the growth of the “Bacrim” (petty-crime gangs), for appeasing Colombia’s two hostile neighbors, Venezuela and Ecuador, and for prosecuting some of his aides on corruption charges.
Santos says nothing, but replies in kind: making peace with Chávez and Ecuadorean President Rafael Correa, prosecuting human rights violations under Uribe, and arresting several of his allegedly corrupt officials.
And now, seemingly out of the blue, he has defied and even offended Uribe by undertaking negotiations with the despised FARC, after having delivered such devastating military blows to them that perhaps, this time around, the peace process will prosper.
One can see why Uribe would threaten to leak news about the negotiations, as well as why Santos would try to preempt the leaks by going public and having them take place in the open (the talks will begin in Oslo, but will be pursued in Havana).
The problem is that, although there are good examples of publicized – if not public – peace talks that have succeeded, there are more instances of failure or indefinite stalemate, owing to the pressure of working under the glare of the international spotlight.
As a fervent supporter of Santos’s human-rights efforts, of his call for a major debate on drug legalization, and of his attempt to end Colombia’s “Forty Years’ War,” I fear that Uribe has fatally wounded the peace process, and will prolong the country’s bloody and fruitless status quo indefinitely.
That is a great pity.
So, in this tale of two South American neighbors, unfortunately, little will change – unless, as so often happens, the unexpected suddenly becomes inevitable, in which case all bets are off.
Cheap Oil and Global Growth
LONDON – Violent swings in oil prices are destabilizing economies and financial markets worldwide.
When the oil price halved last year, from $110 to $55 a barrel, the cause was obvious: Saudi Arabia’s decision to increase its share of the global oil market by expanding production.
But what accounts for the further plunge in oil prices in the last few weeks – to lows last seen in the immediate aftermath of the 2008 global financial crisis – and how will it affect the world economy?
The standard explanation is weak Chinese demand, with the oil-price collapse widely regarded as a portent of recession, either in China or for the entire global economy.
But this is almost certainly wrong, even though it seems to be confirmed by the tight correlation between oil and equity markets, which have fallen to their lowest levels since 2009 not only in China, but also in Europe and most emerging economies.
The predictive significance of oil prices is indeed impressive, but only as a contrary indicator: Falling oil prices have never correctly predicted an economic downturn.
On all recent occasions when the price of oil was halved – 1982-1983, 1985-1986, 1992-1993, 1997-1998, and 2001-2002 – faster global growth followed.
Conversely, every global recession in the past 50 years has been preceded by a sharp increase in oil prices.
Most recently, the price of oil almost tripled, from $50 to $140, in the year leading up to the 2008 crash; it then plunged to $40 in the six months immediately before the economic recovery that started in April 2009.
An important corollary for commodity-producing developing countries is that industrial metal prices, which really are leading indicators of economic activity, may well increase after an oil-price collapse.
In 1986-87, for example, metal prices doubled a year after oil prices fell by half.
A powerful economic mechanism underlies the inverse correlation between oil prices and global growth.
Because the world burns 34 billion barrels of oil every year, a $10 fall in the price of oil shifts $340 billion from oil producers to consumers.
Thus, the $60 price decline since last August will redistribute more than $2 trillion annually to oil consumers, providing a bigger income boost than the combined US and Chinese fiscal stimulus in 2009.
But if growth is likely to accelerate next year in oil-consuming economies such as China, what explains plunging oil prices?
The answer lies not in China’s economy and oil demand, but in Middle East geopolitics and oil supply.
While Saudi production policies were clearly behind last year’s halving of the oil price, the latest plunge began on July 6, within days of the deal to lift international sanctions against Iran.
The Iran nuclear deal refuted the widespread but naive assumption that geopolitics can drive oil prices in only one direction.
Traders suddenly recalled that geopolitical events can increase oil supplies, not just reduce them – and that further geopolitics-driven supply boosts are likely in the years ahead.
Conditions in Libya, Russia, Venezuela, and Nigeria are already so bad that further damage to their oil output is hard to imagine.
On the contrary, with so many of the world’s most productive oil regions gripped by political chaos, any sign of stabilization can quickly boost supplies.
That is what happened in Iraq last year, and Iran is now taking this process to a higher level.
Once sanctions are lifted, Iran promises to double oil exports almost immediately to two million barrels daily, and then to double exports again by the end of the decade.
To do this, Iran would have to boost its total output (including domestic consumption) to six million barrels per day, roughly equal to its peak production in the 1970s.
Given the enormous advances in oil-extraction technology since the 1970s and the immense size of Iran’s reserves (the fourth-largest in the world, after Saudi Arabia, Russia, and Venezuela), restoring output to the levels of 40 years ago seems a modest objective.
To find buyers for all this extra oil, roughly equal to the extra output produced by the US shale revolution, Iran will have to compete fiercely not only with Saudi Arabia, but also with Iraq, Kazakhstan, Russia, and other low-cost producers.
All of these countries are also determined to restore their output to previous peak levels and should be able to pump more oil than they did in the 1970s and 1980s by exploiting new production technologies pioneered in the US.
In this newly competitive environment, oil will trade like any normal commodity, with the Saudi monopoly broken and North American production costs setting a long-term price ceiling of around $50 a barrel, for reasons I set out in January.
So, if you want to understand falling oil prices, forget about Chinese consumption and focus on Middle East production.
And if you want to understand the world economy, forget about stock markets and focus on the fact that cheap oil always boosts global growth.
The Chennai Warning
THIRUVANANTHAPURAM, INDIA – Even as world leaders were meeting in Paris to address climate change, the city of Chennai (formerly Madras), the capital of the southern Indian state of Tamil Nadu, reeled under the onslaught of the heaviest rainfall in 104 years.
The city, home to five million people, has virtually shut down, with roads flooded and nearly 5,000 homes under water.
More than 450 people have died.
Air and rail services have been suspended, power and phone lines have been disrupted, and hospital patients are succumbing as life-support equipment fails.