The first is that, beyond the many layers of depression and distrust in France, there is potential for a new and collective departure.
This would require, of course, less cynical political elites who can transcend their petty ambitions and divisions for the sake of the country.
The second lesson, even more obvious, is that reality cannot be changed with a simple public spectacle.
France is not Imperial Rome, where panem et circenses made a fundamental difference.
It is a weakened democracy mired in an economic and social crisis so deep that it verges on becoming an identity crisis.
The proof was provided by a third traditional event on Bastille Day, between the morning’s military parade and the evening’s music and fireworks: President François Hollande’s speech to the nation, which took the form of an interview with two prominent journalists.
He, too, was in a reassuring mood.
According to Hollande, the economic upturn – la reprise – had just started, and hope was around the corner.
His tone and message had changed.
He was no longer the “normal man” of his election campaign and tenure until now; instead, he tried to present himself, like his predecessor, Nicolas Sarkozy, as a superhero.
Of course, given his personality and low public-approval ratings, his address was the least convincing event of the day.
Who could have said with certainty that the economic upturn announced by Hollande was real rather than aspirational?
Beyond his message’s wishful thinking, the public’s reaction to the messenger was a mixture of disbelief and indifference.
Seeing the behavior of friends, all French, listening with me to Hollande, I was reminded of another moment.
It was December 31, 1989, and I was in the Soviet Union.
I had found myself in a restaurant in the old city of Suzdal, listening to President Mikhail Gorbachev’s “New Year wishes.”
I was moved: The man who symbolized glasnost and perestroika, who had allowed the peaceful emancipation of most of Eastern and Central Europe, was speaking.
But I was alone in paying attention to him.
The restaurant’s customers, like my French friends now, could not have cared less.
Their president had become background noise.
Has Hollande become, in this sense, a French Gorbachev?
For the left and the Greens, he is close to being a traitor.
These voters chose him a year ago not only because he was not Sarkozy, but because he incarnated the values of the true left, even if his centrist moderation seemed a bad omen.
Voters of the center or even the center-right are disappointed, too, by their president’s lack of charisma, if not sheer incompetence.
After a year of Hollande, France is witnessing a fundamental political revolution.
During the half-century of the Fifth Republic, a bipartisan system of left and right has traditionally prevailed.
But now France is becoming a country dominated by a “tripartite system” of more or less equal strength: the left, the right, and the extreme right.
If France wants to capitalize on the positive emotions of Bastille Day, it needs much more responsible elites, ready to unite in the fight against unemployment and its causes (lack of competitiveness and labor-market rigidity) and consequences (the rise of populist, non-republican forces).
What Bastille Day revealed, even briefly and superficially, is that the potential to unite France exists.
But doing so requires more than shallow promises.
A Kick-Off for Peace?
Yerevan – Armenian President Serzh Sargsyan’s recent invitation to Turkish President Abdullah Gul to visit Yerevan to watch a football match together was historic.
Given the two countries’ long-strained relations, this visit would have been remarkable at any time.
But coming as it does only one month after the alarming Russian-Georgian confrontation, it may offer real hope that tensions in the volatile Caucasus region can be eased.
Of course, ancient and difficult issues divide Armenia and Turkey.
But now is the moment for both countries to put the past aside in order to address their common security concerns.
In the new context set by the war in Georgia, the urgency of Turkey becoming a real bridge between the nations of the Caucasus is not lost on anyone.
This expectation is an inevitable consequence of Turkey’s geography and history.
Situated figuratively between modernity and tradition, secularism and Islam, and democracy and tyranny, Turkey also is an actual physical bridge between East and West.
For the peoples of the Caucasus, Turkey marks our path to Europe.
It is a NATO member, bordering the three Caucasus republics that have NATO Individual Partnership Action Programs.
It aspires to join the European Union, and would bring the EU to our three borders, even as we, too, aspire to join one day.
Indeed, Turkey has never missed an opportunity to present itself as a regional broker.
Immediately after the collapse of the Soviet Union, Turkey proposed the Black Sea Economic Cooperation.
This year, as the American-led effort to mediate a Middle East peace settlement began to falter, Turkey took up the job of mediator in both the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and the conflict between Syria and Israel.
Now, in the immediate wake of the Russia-Georgia crisis, Turkey’s leaders have stepped forward once again to take a leadership role in the Caucasus.
The world must fervently hope that the Turkish proposal for a Caucasus Stability and Cooperation Platform is more serious and sustained than previous similar efforts.
But, in order to succeed, Turkey must firmly pursue a pledge from all the region’s players to repudiate the use of force in settling their disputes.
If this pledge is adopted and respected, conflicts in the region will be viewed in a wholly different, more tolerant context, marking a historic breakthrough to peace.
In fact, why not take the idea of such a pact one step further?
We in this region can, and I believe should, call for a non-aligned Caucasus, free of security blocs and adversarial alliances.
After all, security alliances and guarantees only create dividing lines, with their attendant security challenges.
Our countries and peoples have, throughout history, lived under a common umbrella for far longer than we have been divided.
Today, we share a common vision of European integration, and it is in this broader context that our conflicts should be resolved.
French President Nicolas Sarkozy’s and German Chancellor Angela Merkel’s visits to Georgia and Russia proved that there is no substitute for Europe insofar as the Caucasus is concerned.
Only Europe can play the role of honest broker in the region’s atmosphere of suspicion and intolerance.
But, at the end of the day, we ourselves must be willing to work toward a region of peace and cooperation.
The Caucasus is too small a space for closed borders and explosive conflicts.
Although some of those tensions appear purely bilateral, the Georgian-Russian conflict demonstrates that there is no such thing anymore in this globalized world, and certainly not in this interconnected region.
In fact, real peace in the Caucasus requires two key strategic transformations.
One is a lesson from history: Russia’s strategic interests here cannot be ignored.
To believe and behave otherwise would lead to regional chaos.
The other lesson is that Turkey and Armenia cannot remain adversaries forever.
There must be normalization in our relations in order for the Caucasus to coalesce into a functional region.
Ironically, both Russia and the United States recognize that this is in their interest.
The Russians view normal relations between Turkey and Armenia as a way to minimize Georgia’s strategic role in the region.
The US views an opening to Turkey as a way to decrease Armenia’s real and imagined reliance on Russia.
Beyond the emotional impact of President Gul’s visit to Yerevan, real improvement in Turkish-Armenian relations requires opening the two countries’ closed border – the last in Europe.
Or, for a start, the existing railroad link between the two countries could be made operational.
If this does not happen within the coming weeks and months, then Turkey will have demonstrated that all this was just a show.
President Gul’s visit does mark a watershed – either as a failure to make history, or as the beginning of a new era.
Truth and Consequences
NEW YORK – The recent re-election of Colombia’s president, Juan Manuel Santos, brings hope to a country seeking to end a half-century of conflict.
But, as with so many peace processes, finding a balance between creating a stable accord and acknowledging the terrible injustices that occurred during the conflict can be difficult to achieve.
Many countries and communities, from Nepal to Northern Ireland, have grappled with legacies of ethnic, ideological, or religious division and violence, often with limited success.
This is frequently the case because the mechanisms established to cope with post-conflict reconciliation, truth, and justice, have proved inadequate.
In Bosnia and Herzegovina, the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) has made important contributions to truth seeking.
But victims complain that its procedures are slow and abstruse; and many Bosnian Serbs are convinced that the tribunal is selective and politically motivated.
An agreement between Nepal’s government and Maoist guerrillas to establish a truth commission and investigate the “disappeared” was delayed for seven years.
When legislators finally enacted the enabling legislation in May 2013, victims were dismayed to discover that the commission would be allowed to recommend amnesties for crimes against humanity, in contravention of international principles and United Nations guidelines.
In Northern Ireland, the Good Friday Agreement, justly acclaimed for staunching the bloodshed and starting reconciliation, has – to the great frustration of victims – run into political resistance over one integral element of the peace process: the establishment of mechanisms to clarify past crimes.
Peace negotiators understandably fear that criminal accountability for past crimes will threaten their side’s leaders and supporters.
Many have wrongly assumed – based on a misinterpretation of the South African experience – that truth commissions provide a “soft” alternative to justice.
As a result, they have willingly incorporated these mechanisms into peace agreements (conveniently ignoring the fact that the victims are forced to choose between seeking justice and learning the truth).
Predictably, as truth commissions have become established components of transitional justice, former fighters have become increasingly worried that their reputations and political credibility could be on the line should past crimes ever come to light.
Seeking the truth can be unsettling and painful for anyone, but it comes with serious consequences for those with reason to fear justice.
Indeed, conflict mediation and transitional justice rely on truth commissions as a fundamental building block of peace not because such commissions provide impunity for the worst crimes; on the contrary, they reinforce comprehensive rights-based policies and access to justice.
As a recent symposium, organized by the Kofi Annan Foundation and the International Center for Transitional Justice, concluded, truth commissions contribute most to peace by reasserting the rule of law, recognizing victims, and supporting institutional reform.
But, in order to succeed, these commissions must be effective, independent, and legitimate.
Half-measures will not do.
Truth commissions therefore should never be established as “box-ticking” exercises to assuage local public opinion or the international community, as witnessed in Nepal.
Even when broad mandates and functions are established with the best of intentions, truth commissions are often deprived of the necessary resources, leading to further frustration and disillusion.
Moreover, a commission should not be led or staffed by individuals of questionable integrity, thereby undermining the legitimacy of the process.
Above all, truth commissions must be adapted to a country’s particular circumstances.
As we have seen in Bosnia, Colombia, Nepal, Northern Ireland, and elsewhere, the nature of conflicts and how they are resolved differ widely; so should their respective commissions.
A “one-size-fits-all” solution ends up fitting no one.
It is vital that the details of each case of post-conflict transitional justice are understood and implemented.
It is all too easy for political leaders to ignore victims or suppress the truth in their quest for a peace deal.
But recognizing victims’ rights is an indispensable condition for lasting peace.
Human suffering and victims’ dignity are too powerful to be erased by others’ political pacts.
Eventually, the past demands its due: justice is not just an ideal; it is an investment in a better future.
Alan Greenspan on Trial
The release of Alan Greenspan’s ghostwritten memoirs The Age of Turbulence has elicited charges that he was not such a great central banker after all.
Stan Collender of National Journal sees the fingerprints of the White House on these attacks: Greenspan is harshly critical of George W. Bush’s administration, after all, and to attack the credibility of Republican ex-policymakers who are critical of Bush is standard counterpunching for it.
He says that he did not understand how the growth of non-standard mortgages had lured borrowers and investors into bearing dangerous risks.
He was, he now says, focusing on how fixed-rate mortgages are relatively bad deals for borrowers in times of low inflation, which was a mistake.
Greenspan also pleads guilty to a mistake in early 2001.
He thought that he was giving balanced testimony to Congress on government budget issues.
He testified that it is important to run surpluses to pay down the debt, but that surpluses must not be so large that the government winds up owning American industry.
He also testified that tax cuts are better than spending increases to keep surpluses from growing too large, but that uncertainty is enormous, so that any tax cuts should be canceled if they threatened to bring us back to an age of deficits.
Robert Rubin and Kent Conrad warned him that the press would not interpret his testimony as being balanced, and that Congress would interpret it as an excuse to abandon fiscal discipline.
They were right.
Greenspan also pleads guilty to misunderstanding the character of the Bush administration.
He thought that his old reality-based friends from the Ford administration were back in power.
He thought that he – and Treasury Secretary Paul O’Neill – could win the quiet “inside game” for sensible policy without resorting to an “outside game” that would make his reappointment in 2004 unlikely.
He was wrong.
But how serious are these policy-political crimes to which Greenspan now pleads guilty?
In my view, they are misdemeanors.
Against them you have to set what former Treasury Secretary Larry Summers calls Greenspan’s “golden glove” performance at avoiding and minimizing recessions during his years at the Fed.
The “felonies” of which Greenspan stands accused are the other two charges: that he should have done more to stop the stock market bubble of the late 1990’s, and that he should have done more to stop the housing bubble of the early 2000’s.
Here, Greenspan holds his ground, and pleads not guilty.
The only way, he says, for the Fed to have kept stock prices in reasonable equilibrium ranges in the late 1990’s would have been to raise interest rates so high that they hit the real economy on the head with a brick.
Interest rates high enough to curb stock market speculation would also have curbed construction and other forms of investment, raised unemployment, and sent the economy into recession.
To cause a significant current evil in order to avoid a possible future danger when our knowledge is limited and our judgments uncertain is, Greenspan believes, unwise.
In this, he is following a tradition of caution that extends from Edmund Burke to John Maynard Keynes.
Greenspan mounts a similar defense concerning the housing bubble.
High construction employment has been good for American workers in the past half-decade – a period that has not produced much good for them.
Higher interest rates to reduce the housing boom seem, even in retrospect, ill advised if the cost is mass unemployment.
And Greenspan eschews paternalism: he would not assume the role of a regulator telling people that they cannot buy a house even though a lender is willing to finance it.
But Greenspan would have served the country and the world better if he had been somewhat more paternalist in slowing the growth of non-standard adjustable-rate mortgages.
He would have served the country and the world better had he been less of a loyal Republican working the inside game of trying to convince Bush’s political advisors that good policy was important, and more of a nonpartisan steward of America’s long-term fiscal stability.
Of course, such a Greenspan would never have been re-appointed.
All in all, Greenspan served the United States and the world well through his stewardship of monetary policy, especially by what he did not do: trying to stop stock and housing speculation by halting the economy in its tracks.
A Lasting Poison
NEW YORK – Next year will mark the twentieth anniversary of the collapse of communism in Europe.
Liberated from the complexity of knowing too much about the cruel past, the young people of Eastern Europe’s post-communist generation seem uninterested in what their parents and grandparents endured.
Yet the recent revelation of the Czech writer Milan Kundera’s presumed complicity in the face of Stalinism is but the latest of the long half-life of a toxic past.
Other examples come to mind: the accusations of collaboration with the secret police raised against Lech Walesa, Romania’s public controversies surrounding Mircea Eliade’s fascist past, and the attacks on the alleged “Jewish monopoly of suffering” which equate the Holocaust with the Soviet Gulag.
Friedrich Nietzsche said that if you look in the eye of the Devil for too long, you risk becoming a devil yourself.
A Bolshevik anticommunism, similar in its dogmatism to communism itself, has from time to time run riot in parts of Eastern Europe.
In country after country, that Manichean mindset, with its oversimplifications and manipulations, was merely re-fashioned to serve the new people in power. 
Opportunism has had its share in this, of course.
In 1945, when the Red Army occupied Romania, the Communist Party had no more than 1,000 members; in 1989, it had almost four million.
One day after Nicolae Ceausescu’s execution, most of these people suddenly became fierce anticommunists and victims of the system they had served for decades.
Residual traces of totalitarian thinking can also be found in the hostility to former dissidents like Adam Michnik or Václav Havel, both of whom argued that the new democracies should not exploit resentments or seek revenge, as the totalitarian state did, but instead build a new national consensus to structure and empower a genuine civil society.
Former generals of the secret police and members of the Communist
But the case of Kundera appears different – though no less disturbing.
In 1950, Kundera, then a 20-year-old Communist, reportedly denounced to the criminal police as a Western spy a man he had never met – a friend of his friend’s girlfriend.
The man was later brutally interrogated in a former Gestapo torture facility and spent 14 years in prison.
Kundera’s name was contained in the investigating officer’s report, which was authenticated after a respected historian discovered it in a dusty Prague archive.
The reclusive Kundera, who immigrated to Paris in 1975, has declared that “it never happened.”
Moreover, Czechoslovakia’s fearsome secret police, who had every interest in silencing or compromising the famous dissident writer, never used the incident to blackmail or expose him.
Until more information is forthcoming, both from Kundera and from the authorities, the case will not be solved “beyond reasonable doubt.”
But
As far as we know, Kundera never was an informer before or after this incident, and we cannot ignore that he later freed himself from the compulsory totalitarian happiness that communism propagated.
Indeed, his case also serves as a reminder that the early 1950’s was the most brutal period of “proletarian dictatorship” in Eastern Europe – a period of great enthusiasm and terrible fear that poisoned the minds and souls of devoted believers, fierce opponents, and apathetic bystanders alike.
Moreover, Kundera’s case is hardly unique.
In 2006, the Nobel Prize-winning German author Günter Grass’s disclosed that, 60 years earlier, he was, as a teenager, a member of the Waffen-SS.
Similarly, a few years ago, the world was shocked to learn that famous Italian writer Ignazio Silone had, in his youth, collaborated with the fascist police.
Daily life under totalitarianism, be it communist or fascist, was routinely based on a deep duplicity whose effects are longstanding.
I don’t agree with those who say we should not be interested in the dark episodes in the life of a great writer.
Why not?
We should be interested not for prosecutorial purposes, but in order to gain a more profound understanding of a bloody, demagogical, and tyrannical Utopia – and of human weakness and vulnerability. We may even consider it a rewarding testament to an artist’s ability to overcome his past mistakes and still produce priceless work. 
But can we justifiably defend morally compromised artists and intellectuals on the basis of their work’s merit, yet condemn ordinary people for often less grave offenses?
An egregious example of this was the way followers of Romanian philosopher Constantin Noica defended his support for the fascist Iron Guard and his later collaboration with the Communists, while at the same time condemning even a generic cleaning woman for mopping the floors in the offices of the secret police.
Shouldn’t that cleaner’s drudgery to support her family, children, and her own survival be taken equally into account?
Life under totalitarianism was an extreme situation that requires us to apply special, nuanced rules to all the captives of that ordeal.
In order to understand that epoch, we have to know and carefully judge often ambiguous and overwhelming circumstances, never simplifying a multilayered daily reality for the sake of current political goals.
If nothing else, in order to forgive, we have to know what we are forgiving.
In Eastern Europe today, old and young alike stand to benefit from that lesson.
Moses wandered with his people in the desert for 40 years, until they had rid themselves of the poisonous slave mentality.
India’s Prohibition Hypocrisy
NEW DELHI – Last month, 18 people in the Gopalganj district of India’s Bihar state died after consuming illicit alcohol, highlighting – once again – the peculiar relationship between morality and tragedy in India.
The victims were poisoned because this April, in a fit of moralism, Bihar adopted a draconian law prohibiting the sale, possession, and consumption of alcohol.
It is far from the first such ban that has ended badly.
In a country where the national hero is the saintly Mahatma Gandhi, who considered alcohol an unmitigated evil, drinking has always carried a whiff of disrepute.
India’s constitution, in its non-enforceable Directive Principles, urges Indians to work toward prohibition, and the government does not serve alcohol even at state banquets and official receptions.
Four out of 29 Indian states (Bihar, Gujarat, Manipur, and Nagaland) and one union territory (Lakshadweep or the Laccadive Islands) are currently attempting to enforce total prohibition.
But maintaining a sweeping prohibition policy has long proved difficult in India.
In Manipur in 2002, the 1991 ban was lifted in five hill districts, where alcohol consumption is a centuries-old local tradition.
Lakshadweep makes an exception for an uninhabited island, where a tourist resort is allowed to operate a bar.
When I was a child, what was then Bombay excused anyone with a doctor’s note confirming alcoholism.
(Well-heeled executives tripped over themselves to be labeled alcoholics.)
The state that best illustrates the appeal and the pitfalls of such moralism is Kerala, which announced in 2014 that it was implementing a partial ban on the sale of alcohol, with the goal of achieving total prohibition in ten years.
It has been backsliding ever since.
A coastal state, Kerala has long been viewed as a tourist paradise – a reputation no doubt kept afloat on a sea of easily available libations.
Before the ban, Kerala held a somewhat dubious distinction: India’s highest per capita consumption of spirits.
But in India, where prohibition is popular among many segments of the electorate, politicians find it particularly difficult to resist the self-righteous urge to improve their fellow citizens.
So Kerala’s government introduced the ban.
And, at first, many approved.
The influential Christian churches applauded the move, as did the Christian-affiliated political parties.
Kerala’s Muslim leadership, including the then-ruling coalition’s ally, the Indian Union Muslim League, was equally vocal in its support.
Working-class women, tired of watching their laborer husbands blow their monthly wages on booze, also welcomed the decision, as did traditionalists, Gandhians, and other moralists, of which India has an abundance.
No public figure of any consequence in Kerala stood up to oppose the decision.
Any politician who might have been inclined to do so knew that they would be instantly tarred as a votary of evil alcohol, an agent of the “liquor mafia,” a bar-loving enemy of good, wholesome Gandhian values.
But there were good reasons to oppose the ban – reasons that had nothing to do with religion, morality, or alcoholism.
Excise duties on liquor account for 22% of the state revenues that sustain generous welfare programs in Kerala, which boasts the best social development indicators in India.
Another 26% of state revenues come from tourism, which would surely also take a hit.
Furthermore, much of Kerala’s economic viability depends on dynamic knowledge and services sectors.
Attracting talent and investment from abroad would become much more difficult if prohibition hampered the state’s quality of life.
(IT professionals in Bangalore, in the neighboring state Karnataka, flock to that city’s bars and pubs after long hours at work.)
Kerala’s leaders should have known that their state could not afford to do without widely available, heavily taxed liquor.
But they began to implement the policy anyway.
Almost immediately, 20,000 bar workers and distillery employees lost their jobs, in a state that already struggles with high unemployment.
Tourism operators were stung by cancelations, as would-be visitors decided to visit Sri Lanka or Goa instead; 50% of existing convention bookings were canceled.
And IT companies contemplating moving to clean, green, tech-friendly Kerala expressed concern about the prohibition policy.
It was not long before Kerala’s government decided that prohibition would apply only to hard alcohol, and closed bars could reopen as wine and beer parlors.
But that was not enough to save the government in June’s state election, which produced a new communist administration that, advocating education about the evils of alcohol instead of a ban, has promised to review the prohibition policy.
So Kerala is no longer hurtling toward disaster in the name of saving people from themselves.
But it never should have gone as far as it did, given experience with prohibition in other states, where falling revenues and rising crime (including smuggling, tax evasion, and illicit liquor production) forced its revocation.
Four states – Andhra Pradesh, Haryana, Mizoram, and Tamil Nadu – have repealed prohibition policies.
To be sure, not everyone loses out from a prohibition policy.
When Kerala first announced its plans, neighboring Tamil Nadu’s alcoholic beverages corporation, TASMAC, promptly declared its intention to open a string of new outlets along the states’ border, to cater to the demands of Keralite consumers.
In other words, excise duties from Kerala would now fill Tamil Nadu’s coffers.
Banning alcohol in India has been economically devastating.
Yet politicians continue to use the promise of prohibition to win votes.
When elections were called in Tamil Nadu early this year, its chief minister declared herself in favor of prohibition.
After the election was won, however, all such talk discreetly subsided.
My late father liked to say: “India is not only the world’s largest democracy; we are also the world’s largest hypocrisy.”
I suppose we can drink to that.
Leaders for a Leaderless World
PARIS – The newspaper commentaries that I write often have a dark perspective.
Sadly, this one will be no different.
But there are two pieces of good news that break through the gloom.
First, the global significance of US President Barack Obama’s reelection is clear: the world has escaped a disaster for international cooperation.
The US was on the verge of sinking into isolationist nationalism, reinforced, perhaps, by xenophobic sentiment.
Obama’s victory, despite America’s economic travails, clears the way for cooperation based on a sympathetic ear to others and on negotiations in which the US does not deny the legitimacy of a global public interest (as it has done, unfortunately, on the issue of climate change).
The other piece of good news concerns France, and thus is more “local,” but is crucially important nonetheless.
Like everywhere else in the developed world, the global crisis has hit the French economy hard, with output stagnating, unemployment rising, job insecurity mounting, government debt soaring, and the stock market at risk of crashing.
Manufacturing production has plummeted, the trade balance has deteriorated sharply, and corporate bankruptcies are increasingly frequent.
For six months, France has had new leadership – a new president, government, and parliament.
But President François Hollande and his government were strangely inactive after the elections, limiting themselves to reducing the impact of unfair budget cuts and taxation reforms implemented by the previous government of Nicolas Sarkozy.
Many began to wonder whether Hollande was aware of the scope of the crisis that the recent downturn might trigger.
In recent weeks, however, the government has introduced energetic and courageous measures to boost the competitiveness of French industries, including a huge €20 billion ($26 billion) tax break for businesses, to be financed by a hike in value-added tax, which means that the general public will pay for it.
The VAT increase will hurt, but there was no other way.
Awareness, boldness, and comprehensive policymaking have come as a relief to French investors, and have left them better positioned to face the crisis.
The French government’s new push to confront the country’s economic plight matters not only to France, but to Europe and the world as well.
After all, France is the eurozone’s second-largest economy, and the fifth-largest economy in the world.
And yet, despite these bright spots, international cooperation on issues ranging from regional conflicts to the protection of global public goods remains weak.
Antarctica, the only land in the world that is administered directly by the international community, is a recent case in point.
The Antarctic Treaty, negotiated in 1959, prohibits any and all military activities in Antarctica and forbids the establishment of any borders.
Three agreements – the Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Seals (1972), the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR, 1980), and the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (PEP, 1991), which prohibits any activity relating to mineral resources – have since been added to the treaty.
The Antarctic Treaty System includes three annual meetings: one deals with the supervision and management of the Treaty itself, and the other two concern the CCAMLR and the PEP.
In recent years, proposals have been considered that would establish marine reserves around the continent and end the risk of growing scarcity, or the outright disappearance, of a variety of species of fish and cetaceans.
The principle that international cooperation is required to protect fishery resources, which are dwindling everywhere, was adopted at the 2011 CCAMLR meeting.
At the 2012 CCAMLR meeting, which concluded at the beginning of November in Hobart, Australia, three proposals (from the US, New Zealand, and France/Australia) to establish marine reserves in three different areas were discussed.
They were compatible and would reinforce one another.
Yet the discussion foundered, and no decision was taken.
Russia and Ukraine – and, to a lesser extent, China – blocked efforts to reach an agreement.
This failure reflects the same dynamic at work in the breakdown of global climate-change conferences in recent years: a few cynical countries, whose cooperation is needed to save the planet, fuel the madness of those bent on destroying it.
That will not change until a new consciousness emerges worldwide to persuade states to support binding international law.
The US has now reelected a president who understands this.
France has a president who understands the need for bold, far-reaching actions as well.
Their active leadership, and that of others, is needed now more than ever to turn the tide.
Assured Mutual Dependence
LONDON – During the Cold War, the certainty of “mutually assured destruction” steered the nuclear arms race away from catastrophe: a would-be attacker would face immediate retaliation, inevitably ending in both sides’ annihilation.
Today, a very different race is taking place – a race for the earth’s vital resources, and it threatens to undermine stability in key regions of the world.
The growing dependence of countries on one another’s food, water, and energy requires that the global response to sustainability is taken to the highest political level.
Unlike the nuclear arms race of the twentieth century, the resource-security agenda is not linear.
Mutually assured destruction was explicitly acknowledged during the Cold War in statements from both sides.
In the race for resources that defines the twenty-first century, no actor is directly or indirectly threatening other players to curtail food or energy exports, but all bear the systemic risks.
Countries have become unavoidably interdependent, and climate change, water stress, and the loss of ecological resilience all increase the volatility of this mutual dependence.
In a world of limited and scarce resources, countries and companies will be forced to make decisions that affect one another’s security.
In order to navigate this interdependence, the Earth Security Index 2014, produced by the Earth Security Initiative, shows countries’ combined vulnerabilities that might increase the risk exposure of governments and companies, unless more strategic approaches and sustainable investments are put in place.
The ESI identifies four areas of mutual dependence that will likely shape global security in the coming decades:
·         Choke points.
Countries’ growing demand for energy, water, food, and land cannot be satisfied without incurring tradeoffs among limited available resources.
Choke points are reached when the available resources are insufficient to satisfy demand.
In China and India, for example, this means that in certain regions there may not be enough water in the short term to run coal-fired thermal power stations and irrigate large fields to grow crops.
In China, 60% of planned coal-fired power plants will be built in water-stressed regions.
·         Food.
The growing dependence of many countries on food, water, and energy imports creates new opportunities for trade and investment, but it also exposes countries to critical vulnerabilities.
Australia, for example, is a large coal exporter but imports most of its refined fuels and holds just three days of fuel stockpiles.
The challenges of mutual dependence are particularly acute with respect to food.
As the ESI shows, some countries – including Egypt, Peru, and the United Arab Emirates – are heavily dependent on cereal imports from a small number of suppliers.
Moreover, grain suppliers’ exposure to extreme weather may compromise their ability to sustain supplies, with knock-on effects for import-dependent countries.
In 2010, for example, Russia imposed an export ban on wheat, following a severe drought.
The resulting food-price increases are believed to have played a role in Egypt’s revolution.
·         Teleconnections.
Anticipating systemic ecological risks will be increasingly important for sectors such as reinsurance and infrastructure investments.
“Teleconnections” refer to weather events that are related to one another over large geographic distances.
They are well known to science but not properly discussed by the industries, investors, and governments whose security depends on environmental stability.
For example, tropical rainforests play a crucial function in maintaining stable weather and rainfall, acting as a “pump” that helps moisture travel between different regions.
Deforestation can thus have a destabilizing effect on weather patterns, amplifying the frequency and severity of extreme events such as floods and droughts.
The resulting liabilities to key industries and the financial sector are clear.
In Brazil, for example, deforestation in Amazonia has slowed significantly over the last five years, but Brazil has already lost more than 11 million hectares of rainforest; its exposure to extreme weather has also steadily risen, with floods causing $4.7 billion in losses in 2011 alone.
In some regions of India, for example, these issues are playing out in tandem.
Insecure land tenure acts as a disincentive for smallholder farmers to commit to productivity-enhancing investments; water extraction rates are depleting aquifers as a result of permissive policies; and food security remains out of reach for millions of people, despite rapid economic growth in urban areas.
Countries and companies will increasingly need to invest in sustainable land in order to hedge their resource risks.
In 2015, global frameworks are due to be agreed to address climate change, coordinate responses to natural disasters, and guide the world’s development agenda.
Some of these multilateral processes – in particular, those seeking an ambitious global climate agreement – appear to be moving in slow motion and against the grain of geopolitical interests.
In the past, the case for high-level nuclear governance was urgent and clear, but required processes for creating a common understanding of risks and opportunities across national borders.
Successful multilateral responses, like the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, continue to be supported by more flexible global platforms, such as the Nuclear Threat Initiative, based on relationships and trust established outside the box of formal multilateralism.
This year, as world leaders discuss the next generation of sustainability, development, and climate frameworks, they will need to put their security and mutual dependence at the heart of the responses.
Here, too, the world will need to create informal platforms that supplement traditional multilateralism.
In particular, the outdated divisions between rich and poor countries and their responsibilities must be revised.
As new powers like China, Brazil, India, and other G-20 economies bid to reform global governance systems, their vulnerability to resource security must invigorate these processes.
Only then will the world be on track to improve the security of all.
After Aleppo
DENVER – The end of the fighting in Aleppo will not end the Syrian war, despite the countrywide ceasefire that has just been agreed.
Nor will it ease the suffering of the city’s population, much of which has been displaced.
What the Aleppo siege will do is clinch Syria’s place in history as, to borrow former US Secretary of State Warren Christopher’s phrase, another “problem from hell.”
And, like other hellish recent regional conflicts, such as those in Bosnia (to which Christopher was referring) and Rwanda, future historians will emphasize a crucial feature of the Syria conflict: the spectacular diplomatic failures that enabled it to escalate.
Good diplomacy begins with a keen analysis of interests, both of the country in question and of relevant external powers.
It demands a careful assessment of how the pursuit of those interests will affect the regional and international order.
And it seeks ways to strengthen the capacity of regional or world powers to help solve problems.
Throughout this process, universally shared and consistently reinforced values – both critical in getting disparate actors to work together to resolve problems and challenges – must provide a moral compass and common ground for action.
The key is to ensure that values do not become weapons, deployed by one actor against another in a way that exacerbates tensions and undermines solutions.
Consider the 1990s Bosnian War – the result of unfinished business from the breakup of the Austrian and Ottoman empires and the creation of nation-states earlier in the twentieth century.
The conflict erupted in the immediate aftermath of the Cold War, at a moment when one set of international organizing principles had collapsed and a new set had not yet been created.
Partly as a result of this, the conflict was characterized by large-scale civilian carnage and human-rights violations.
But, as a test for the new world order, the Bosnian War ended up catalyzing change in the international community’s institutional structure (including the establishment of war crimes tribunals).
Could the nascent post-Cold War system handle the inchoate problems of the former Soviet Union?
Could NATO take on new roles and missions?
Could the West work with the new Russian Federation?
Could the transatlantic relationship weather the storm?
The answer to all of these questions turned out to be yes.
As a result, though the region continues to be beset by serious problems, the gates of hell have remained closed – as they have in Rwanda.
And yet, just 20 years later, it seems that the world’s collective memory of how to cooperate has failed.
To be sure, there was never a clear path to peace in Syria.
President Bashar al-Assad, whose forces now control all of Aleppo for the first time since 2012, is a brutal dictator who has waged war on his own people, including civilians, and has even used chemical weapons.
The temptation to seek regime change – a goal embraced by the United States and some European countries – was understandable.
Yet, in a display of spectacularly incompetent diplomacy, the US set about pursuing that goal without any serious effort to marshal international support, or even to take stock of other opinions or interests.
And make no mistake: there are a lot of (often conflicting) opinions and interests.
After all, Syria is strategically perched on the Mediterranean; shares borders with Israel, Jordan, Turkey, and Iraq; and, like Iraq, has its own restive Kurdish minority.
It is not the kind of country to which international and regional powers would be indifferent.
In fact, when Western powers called for regime change, other actors – including Iran, Russia, and Shia interests in neighboring Lebanon – objected.
Nonetheless, the US soldiered on with its own poorly formulated agenda, supplying weapons to virtually unknown combatants on the ground before properly vetting them.
That gave the Assad regime’s allies all the justification they needed to supply weapons of their own.
Some argue that, if the US had just provided more weapons sooner, Assad would not have had time to galvanize support and hold onto power.
But that neglects the strategic importance of Syria to so many external powers, as well as the fragmentation and unpredictability of the US-based combatants.
America’s real mistake was failing to engage with all sides, including Assad and the Sunni opposition, which it deemed sectarian.
(During the Bosnian War, by contrast, the US talked to rump Yugoslavia’s ruler, Slobodan Milošević.)
With that narrow-minded approach – reflected in the lack of any articulated vision for a post-war Syria – the US effectively handed the diplomatic reins over to Russia.
Now, the US is essentially playing the role of agitator, offering little more than displays of moral outrage and stale references to a stillborn Geneva process.
Reacting to the carnage in Aleppo, Samantha Power, the US ambassador to the United Nations, was reduced to demanding of Assad’s Russian ally, “Are you truly incapable of shame?”
Meanwhile, the conflict rages on, with severe spillover effects on US allies like the European Union.
As for Russia, it, too, is pursuing a version of diplomacy that utterly lacks inclusiveness.
It is working with Turkey (a NATO member that seems increasingly lost at sea) to bring the Syrian opposition and representatives of the Assad government together in Kazakhstan for a new series of peace talks, facilitated by the ceasefire, of which Russia and Turkey are guarantors.
Iran will be there.
But where are the Sunni Arab states?
More important, where is the US?
It is often observed that, every four years, the US does without a foreign policy.
This time, it seems to have gotten an early start.
A Less-is-More Growth Strategy for Africa
REYKJAVIK – If African countries were to adopt only one policy to boost economic growth and improve macroeconomic stability, they should reduce the number of currencies in circulation across the continent as quickly as possible. Doing so would most likely encourage trade, as happened in Europe with the arrival of the euro, and could help contain inflation – which is always good for growth – by imposing international discipline on monetary policy.
The African Union is now aiming at pooling all the continent’s currencies into a single currency by 2028.
In the meantime, several regional monetary unions are on the drawing board, in addition to the two monetary unions that already exist, one
The premier and oldest of these unions is composed of the fourteen countries that belong to the Economic and Monetary Community of Central Africa and the West African Economic and Monetary Union, which both use the CFA franc.
The second of these unions is composed of Lesotho, Namibia, Swaziland, and now Zimbabwe, all of which use the South African rand. Disregarding Zimbabwe, a recent and incomplete convert, the 18 countries of the two existing monetary unions have, as intended, benefited from lower inflation than much of the rest of Africa.
To see why, consider Nigeria. Before independence, Nigeria’s legal tender was the British pound.
The thinking behind the new arrangement was that an independent and flexible monetary policy would serve the nation‘s interest better than a fixed exchange rate that tied the naira to the pound.
But the naira’s introduction quickly put an end to parity with the British pound. Government expenditure exceeded federal revenue, despite rapidly rising foreign-exchange earnings from oil exports after 1970.
The federal government’s budget deficits were financed through foreign and domestic borrowing, and by printing money, which led to inflation and depreciation of the new currency. Today, it costs 220 naira to buy one British pound, which implies 15% annual average depreciation since 1973.
This depreciation would perhaps be justifiable had Nigeria managed to use easy money to narrow the gap between ordinary Nigerians’ standard of living and that of people living in Britain.
But that did not happen.
The purchasing power of national income per person in Nigeria is now 50% lower relative to Britain than in 1980.
In view of this experience, Nigeria now plans to abolish the naira in favor of joining a monetary union with four or five other West African countries (The Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, Sierra Leone, and perhaps Liberia).
But that planned monetary union, until recently envisaged to be launched in 2009, has now been put on ice.
Why? The smallest countries show no signs of fear of being swamped by Nigeria, by far the most populous country in the group (accounting for 155 million of the six countries’ 200 million people), especially as the new West African Central Bank is to be located in Accra, the capital of Ghana (24 million).
Others, though, may fear the dilution of their sovereignty when the new Central Bank of the
takes over some of the policymaking responsibilities of national central banks.
But that, of course, is the chief purpose of a monetary union.
When the West African Monetary Zone finally is established, the number of currencies in Africa will equal about half the number of countries.
And when the East African Community with its five members (Burundi, Kenya, Rwanda, Tanzania, and Uganda) re-emerges as scheduled, the number of currencies will be reduced by another four.
The belief that sovereign national currencies, by enabling independent and flexible monetary policies, are the best way to foster economic and social development – the vision of Nigeria’s post-colonial leaders – is gradually falling by the wayside.
Efficiency dictates the use of fewer and larger currencies (and foreign investors, understandably wary of weak and volatile currencies, demand it).
Indeed, the success of the European Union and of the euro since its launch in 1999 has made a strong impression in Africa.
Alexander Hamilton’s Eurozone Tour
PRINCETON – Europe’s debt crisis has piqued Europeans’ interest in American precedents for federal finance.
For many, Alexander Hamilton has become a contemporary hero.
Perhaps one day his face should appear on the €10 banknote.
Specifically, for European states groaning under unbearable debt burdens, Hamilton’s negotiation in 1790 of the new federal government’s assumption of the states’ large debts looks like a tempting model.
Indeed, after Thomas Sargent won the Nobel Prize in Economics last year, he cited it as a precedent in his acceptance speech.
Hamilton argued – against James Madison and Thomas Jefferson – that the debts accumulated by the states during the War of Independence should be assumed by the federation.
There were two sides to his case, one practical, the other philosophical.
Initially, the most appealing argument for his plan was that it would provide greater security to creditors, and thus reduce interest rates, from the 6% at which the states financed their debt to 4%. Hamilton emphasized the importance of a commitment to sound finance as a prerequisite to public economy.
“When the credit of a country is in any degree questionable,” he argued, “it never fails to give an extravagant premium upon all the loans it has occasion to make.”
While that logic certainly appeals to Europeans today, Hamilton insisted on a stronger reason for pursuing sound finance than merely the pursuit of expediency.
There is, he maintained, “an intimate connection between public virtue and public happiness.”
That virtue consisted in honoring commitments, and it would build solidarity in the new political community of the United States.
Indeed, public virtue made federal finance what he called “the powerful cement of our union.”
The condition for success in the American case was that the US raised its own revenue, with federally administered customs houses initially providing the bulk of its receipts.
The logic of a need for specific revenue applies also in modern Europe, where a reformed fiscal system might include common administration of value-added tax (with the additional benefit of eliminating a considerable amount of cross-border fraud).
In the American case, however, unity carried a price: a ceiling was imposed on Virginia’s exposure to the common debt.
Only this inducement to the most powerful state in the union persuaded Madison to drop his opposition to the proposal.
That compromise (which also led to the US capital’s relocation to the District of Columbia, on the border of Virginia and Maryland) may serve as a precedent for limiting Germany’s liabilities if Eurobonds, or some other debt-mutualization scheme, are introduced.
The US experiment in federalized finance was not immediately successful.
Two important components of Hamilton’s financial architecture were not realized, or were realized imperfectly.
He proposed a model of joint-stock banking on a national scale, which ran into immediate opposition (curiously, his proposal was much more influential in Canada).
Second, opponents eventually blocked his proposal for a national central bank.
The charter of the First Bank of the United States was allowed to lapse in 1811; a generation later, in 1836, President Andrew Jackson successfully opposed the charter of the Second Bank of the United States.
Nor did the Hamiltonian scheme of federal finance guarantee a peaceful commonwealth.
In fact, the fiscal union proved to be explosive rather than adhesive.
As international capital markets developed in the early nineteenth century, state governments borrowed on a large scale, quickly turning them from creditors into debtors.
A wave of state defaults followed in the late 1830’s.
A generation later, in the 1860’s, the Civil War between northern and southern states resulted in large part from a dispute about the character of financial burdens –amp at least from the South’s perspective.
Abraham Lincoln’s original proposal to end the immoral practice of slavery by compensating slave owners for manumission was unacceptably expensive, so the Union, according to the slave-holding Confederacy, was determined to expropriate the South.
The federal assumption of states’ debts by itself could not guarantee political order.
The Civil War revealed the centrality of a common foundation of morality to Hamilton’s approach to debt and public finance.
As a result, his approach foundered on the differences between the different states’ conception of morality.
Europeans today have latched onto the practical side of Hamilton’s argument – that is, the idea that debt mutualization might be a means to cheaper credit; but they have worked out neither the political institutions, nor the shared public virtue, that Hamilton deemed crucial.
The extended and politicized debate about debt restructuring has made a Hamiltonian solution more difficult, because the credit of the countries that would be party to it has become questionable.
An obvious starting point for a Hamiltonian Europe would be to set some standard limit for federalized national debt – perhaps the tarnished threshold of 60% of GDP that was mandated (without adequate enforcement) by the Maastricht convergence criteria, or perhaps a lower limit.
Debt exceeding that amount would be left to the responsibility of the member states.
Collective burden-sharing is in the long run the only non-catastrophic way out of Europe’s current crisis, but that requires a substantially greater degree of political accountability and control on a European level.
The lesson to be learned from Hamilton and the US is that the necessary institutions will not function without a greater degree of moral consensus as well.
How We Lose Our Marbles
ATHENS – George Clooney has reignited a longstanding debate after suggesting, in response to a Greek journalist’s question, that removing the Parthenon Marbles, known in Britain as the Elgin Marbles, from London’s British Museum and returning them to their ancient home in Athens would be “the right thing to do.”
In the early nineteenth century, the friezes and sculptures were removed from the Parthenon by Lord Elgin, Britain’s ambassador to the Ottoman Empire from 1799 to 1803.
Elgin sold them to the British government, which put them in the British Museum.
Greece wants them back.
The occasion for this latest round of historical jousting is the release of Clooney’s new film The Monuments Men, which details Allied efforts to rescue art works from the Nazis during World War II.
His comments infuriated London’s provocative mayor, Boris Johnson, himself a classics scholar and author, who shot back that Clooney’s position on the issue was similar to that of the Nazis portrayed in his film.
But the film is of less interest in this dispute than the identity of the characters involved.
Perhaps the most important question is this: Whom is the public inclined to believe – Clooney or Johnson (or perhaps the Nazis)?
Of course, one might ask why the people involved should matter at all; surely the facts of the case should speak for themselves.
And yet, on questions such as this – as with so many important political, social, economic, and cultural issues – what we come to believe is not based on the facts alone, if at all.
Sometimes we may indeed think deeply about the pros and cons of each argument, actively seeking information and data that would support one view over another; in other cases, however, we rely on a “quick and dirty” evaluation of the arguments, focusing not on evidence, but rather on an advocate’s expertise or popularity.
Social and cognitive psychologists have long understood these two basic processes in their study of “dual-process” models, which explain how we process information and eventually form an opinion.
We take the peripheral route to information processing when buying, say, a toaster on a whim, whereas we take the so-called central route – thoroughly considering technical, safety, and aesthetic features – when buying a car.
The systematic study of persuasion began during World War II, when the US Army recognized that fighting a nation mesmerized by Hitler would require bolstering troop motivation and rallying popular support for the war.
They sought help from Yale University psychologist Carl Hovland and his associates, who produced what has become a well-known model of persuasion, comprising three groups of variables related to the communicator, the audience, and the message.
Hovland drew upon ideas dating back to Aristotle’s Rhetoric, which argued that persuasiveness is built on the communicator’s ethical character, the audience’s emotional state, and the logic of the argument, the latter being the most powerful.
Psychological research has shown that any one of these three can be persuasive, depending on the speaker’s attractiveness or the audience’s predisposition.
For example, star-struck female film fans may be especially prone to believe any utterance from Hollywood’s most famous silver fox. Or, in the case of the Nazis, fear may predispose the audience to be persuaded.
But in most cases, when people are confronted with matters of great importance, they are more likely to use the so-called central route to information processing, and rightly so.
Issues of world cultural heritage, for example, deserve conscious, thoughtful deliberation of the facts.
Indeed, it is our duty, and the very basis of any successful civilization, that important decisions are made only after scrutinizing all relevant information and weighing the relative merits of every position.
Once that duty has been fulfilled, a logical person will understand that the Parthenon Marbles, long held by a former imperial power’s flagship museum, were violently severed from the rest of the Parthenon sculptures – an outrage against art and an unhealed scar inflicted by the British on the long-suffering Greek people.
At that point, only one conclusion is possible: The plundered Marbles must be reunited in their historical home and exhibited to the world as the ancient artists intended.
Persuaded?
Perhaps not – I am Greek, after all.
But do not take Clooney’s word for it, either (or Johnson’s).
Deciding the disposition of the world’s cultural patrimony is not like buying a toaster.
Peril and Promise in Algeria
MADRID – Five years after the start of the so-called Arab Spring, the hope that initially characterized those revolutions has largely been dashed.
In many cases, the revolutions have evolved into brutal and protracted internal conflicts, with no solution in sight.
Amid all of this strife, the international community has paid little attention to countries like Algeria, where the revolutionary spirit was stifled while still incipient.
But Algeria’s fate is back on the world’s radar – and not a moment too soon.
On February 7, Algeria’s parliament approved a new package of constitutional reforms, which, among other things, limit presidents to two terms (President Abdelaziz Bouteflika, the last surviving leader of Algeria’s war of independence against France, has been in office since 1999) and recognize some fundamental freedoms.
These steps, in the making since 2011, aim to strengthen Algeria’s democratic standing; but they have been widely criticized as insufficient.
What is not in doubt is that the reforms come at a sensitive time, when Algeria is plagued by political and economic uncertainty.
The “consensus” that supposedly shapes Algerian politics has, in fact, paralyzed decision-making for many years now.
With the ailing Bouteflika not seen in public for more than a year, important questions have emerged about how the 2019 presidential election will play out.
Efforts over the last three years to curtail the power of the security and intelligence services – in September, Mohamed Mediene, who had been chief of the intelligence services since 1990, was forced to retire – are just one source and manifestation of domestic political tension.
Significant external challenges have exacerbated Algeria’s situation.
In particular, with the oil and gas industry accounting for fully 97% of Algeria’s export income, the sharp decline in oil prices since June 2014 has underscored the unsustainability of the country’s economic model.
Falling oil revenues mean that Algeria’s government cannot maintain the broad array of subsidies that traditionally served as a social balm, helping prevent protest.
The government has already had to increase some taxes, while raising prices for fuel, electricity, and gas.
If the price of oil does not rise soon, and Algeria’s leaders are forced to take more drastic measures, social stability could be jeopardized.
To be sure, some factors may help to stave off social unrest – namely, the population’s memories of the brutal civil war of the 1990s, in which more than 150,000 people were killed.
But, memories fade as time passes, and a new generation of young people lack the same fear of social strife that their parents and grandparents have.
In this social context, and if economic hardship persists, protests and even revolt may not be a distant prospect.
To avoid such an outcome, Algeria’s government must work fast to diversify the economy.
But such concerted action will be difficult in the current political environment, especially in view of the government’s increased focus on security challenges in Algeria’s neighborhood.
Given the revolution in Tunisia, the war in Libya, the rebellion of the Tuaregs in Mali, and, most important, the 2013 terrorist attack on Algeria’s large In Amenas gas plant, the country’s leaders are placing an increasingly high priority on regional security.
Although the constitution explicitly prohibits military intervention in other countries, Algeria has a clear interest – reflected in its foreign policy – in ensuring that its neighbors are stable and capable of dissuading extremist groups.
For example, in Libya, Algeria has defended a process of inclusive national reconciliation of all forces, in support of efforts by the United Nations to stabilize the country.
The United States and Europe have already recognized Algeria’s leadership and cooperation in anti-terror efforts in its neighborhood.
For the European Union, a further strengthening of ties with Algeria is particularly important, given both sides’ interest in the stability of nearby North Africa and the Sahel, as well as Algeria’s potential to help improve the EU’s energy security.
One key way Algeria can help improve security cooperation in its region would be to restore diplomatic relations with Morocco.
True, the countries have been at loggerheads for 40 years, owing to their sovereignty dispute over Western Sahara.
But the economic, commercial, and security-related dividends that renewed cooperation would provide should be enough to persuade them to reconsider this position.
If the two North African giants were to recognize their mutual interests and reestablish ties, they would disentangle relations in the Maghreb.
Algeria’s influence across Africa would also receive a boost.
Already, Algeria’s Africa-wide influence may be set to grow.
Some have suggested that an Algerian candidate could become Chair of the Commission of the African Union when the current term expires next July.
Here, Algeria’s consistent support for the AU and its commitment to regional security – exemplified in its role in the Mali peace agreement and its hosting of the Libya talks – would speak in its favor.
If successful, Algeria would become the first North African country to lead the AU.
The severe challenge posed by falling oil prices and a jittery regional context attest to the urgent need for change in Algeria.
But if the government acts to unblock the political system, diversify the economy, and ramp up diplomatic efforts, Algeria can emerge stronger and more influential than ever.
A Sunni-Shia Bridge Too Far
BAGHDAD – Iraq’s recent parliamentary election, the first since United States troops left the country in 2011, was held amid a rising tide of violence that is fast approaching the levels experienced during the 2005-2007 insurgency.
Can the new government restore order and address the many immense challenges that Iraq faces?
The challenges are indeed daunting.
The authorities must resolve fundamental constitutional questions (such as whether Iraq should be a federal state or a confederation), rebuild civil society, reform state institutions, reconstruct the economy, and end the waste and corruption in the oil sector.
But perhaps the most intractable challenge of all is bridging the sectarian rift between the country’s Shia and Sunni citizens.
These fissures are mirrored in other Arab countries (such as Syria, Lebanon, the Gulf countries, and Yemen) and, increasingly, in the wider Muslim world (including Pakistan, Malaysia, and Indonesia).
Is this a historical aberration, or are Islam’s two largest sects condemned to perpetual mutual hostility?
Certainly, there have been periods when the two communities have coexisted peacefully.
But what matters today is that Shia and Sunni relate to their past differently, and that this historical memory can be distorted – and even invented – to create mistrust and hate.
The overthrow of the first Muslim dynasty, the staunchly anti-Shia Umayyads, in the year 750, by the Abbasids, who traced their lineage to the Prophet Muhammad’s uncle, raised hopes, albeit short-lived, of a Sunni-Shia rapprochement.
The 500 years of Abbasid reign that followed provide many valuable illustrations of how these two communities subsequently related to each other.
In particular, there is much to be learned from the different legacies of the caliph al-Nasir (1180-1225) and the last Abbasid caliph, al-Musta’sim (1242-1258).
The rule of al-Nasir – who viewed the Shia as an intrinsic part of the Islamic community and sought to treat all of his subjects equally – was characterized by a marked decrease in sectarian tensions.
By contrast, Sunni-Shia clashes – including killings, arson, and other violence – were common during al-Musta’sim’s rule.
These examples demonstrate the importance of good leadership when communities that uphold different claims to the truth are subject to the same political authority – especially when these communities seek assurance that their survival is not threatened.
Iraq’s current political leaders need to learn from this past and ensure that none of the country’s communities face marginalization or discrimination – lessons that apply throughout the Muslim world.
In Pakistan, for example, there are sectarian killings almost daily; in Malaysia, the tiny Shia population is viewed as an existential threat; and incendiary language dominates discourse about rival sects in Wahhabi circles in Saudi Arabia and far beyond.
Politics and power struggles explain much of the violence and mistrust.
Fear of Iranian-led hegemony, for example, has focused Gulf leaders’ minds on their Shia population’s loyalty.
Malaysia’s political parties use anti-Shia animus to spread fear, helping to attract votes and consolidate power.
Syria and its regional allies are determined to protect a new regional balance of power that shifted in their favor following the US-led invasion of Iraq.
But political calculation cannot explain everything.
The fall of Saddam Hussein in 2003 provides a good example of how a political event, viewed through a sectarian lens, can be interpreted differently.
The US destruction of the Iraqi state brought about a precarious new order that sought to redress years of Sunni dominance by favoring the Shia.
However, the shock of sudden Sunni disempowerment generated a discourse, widely shared in the Muslim world, in which the Shia are guilty of collusion in the US occupation of the country – a view reinforced by events in Syria.
According to this thesis, the Shia simply reverted to their “historic” role as wreckers and fifth columnists.
Was it not the case, it is claimed, that the Shia also colluded with the Mongols in the fall of Baghdad in 1258, culminating in the death of the last Abbasid caliph and the destruction of the Abbasid Empire, the “universal state” of Muslims?